THE
H I S T 0 R Y

0 F
A M E R I C A.

V O L. I.
VOL. I.

Tb -

E

THE
H S T 0 R Y

F
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTORIOGRAPHER

to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.
VOLUME THE FIRST.

LONDON:
Printcd for W. STRATIAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand; and

J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXVII.

I/

# PREFACE.

P R E F A C E.

N- fhlfilling the engagement which I had come un-
der' to the Public with refpea to the History of

America, it was my intention not to have published
any part of it until the whole was completed. The
presen't fate of the Britifli Colonies has induced me to
alter that resolution. While they are engaged in civil
war with Great Britain, inquiries and speculations
concerning their ancient forms of policy and laws,
whkih 'exifi no longer, cannot be inteiefting. The at-
tention and expectation of mankind are now turned

towards their future condition. In whatevermanner this
unhappy conteff may terminate, a new order of things
muff arise in North America, and its affairs will a/Fume
another afpe&. I wait, with the solicitude of a good
citizen, until the ferment ubfide, and regular govern-
ment be re-established, and then I fliall return to this
part of my work, in which I had made some pro-
grcfs. That, together with the history of Portuguese

America,

America, and of the settlements made by the several
nations of Europe in the Weft India islands, will
complete my plan.

THE two volumes which I now publish, contain an

account -of the discovery of the New World, and of the
progress of the Spanish arms and colonies there. This
is not only the most splendid portion of the American
flory, but so much detached, that it forms a perfect
whole by itself, remarkable for the unity of the subject.
As the principles and maxims of the Spaniards in
planting colonies, which have been adopted in some
mcafure by every nation in Europe, are unfolded in this
part of my work; it will serve asa proper introducion
to the history of their eftabliflhment in America, and
convey such information concerning this important
article of policy, as may be deemed no less interesting
than curious.

IN dcfcribing the atchievements and institutions of the

Spaniards in the New World, I have departed in many
inflanccs from the accounts of preceding hiliorians,
;and have often related fads which feeml to have been
unknown to them. It is a duty 1 owe the Public, to
necntion the sources from. which I hvc derived such

intelligence,

intelligence, as juflifies me either in placing tranfaions
in a new light, or in forming any new opinion with
refped to their causes and effects. This duty I perform
with greater fatisfaaion, as it will afford an opportu-
nity of expressing my gratitude to those benefaAtors,
who have honoured me with their countenance and aid
in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to expect the mofR

important information, with regard to this part of my
work, I confidered it as a very fortunate circumstance
for me, when Lord Grantham, to whom I had the
honour of being personally known, and with whose
liberality of sentiment, and disposition to oblige, I was
well acquainted, was appointed ambassador to the
court of Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met with
such a reception as satisfied me, that his endeavours
would be employed in the most proper manner, in
order to obtain the gratification of my wilies; and I
am perfecdly sensible, that what progress I have made
in my inquiries among the Spaniards, ought to be
ascribed chiefly to their knowing how much his Lord-
ship interefled himfclf in their fucccfs.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord Grantham, than
his attention in engaging Mr. Waddilovc, the chaplail

8 of

of his embassy, to take the condu&i of my affai:rs in
Spain, the obligations I lie under would be yery great.
During five years, that gentleman has carried on re-
searches for my behoof, with such activity, perseverance,
and knowledge of the fubje&, to which his attention
was turned, as have filled ,me with no less aflonifhment
than satisfaction. He procured for me the greater part
of the Spaniih books, which I have consulted; and as
many them of were printed early in the sixteenth cen-
tury, and are become extremely rare, the collecting of
there was such an occupation, as, alone, required
much time and assiduity. To his friendly attention
I am indebted for copies of several valuable manu-
scripts, containing fads and details which I might have
searched for in vain, in works'that have been made
public. Encouraged by the inviting good-will with
which Mr. Waddilove conferred his favours, I transmit-
ed to him a set of queries, with refped both to the cuf-
toms and policy of the native Americans, and the na-
ture of several institutions in the Spanish settlements,
framed in such a manner, that a Spaniard might an-
fwer them, without disclosing any thing that was im-
proper to be communicated to a foreigner. He tranflat-
ed these into Spanifl, and obtained from various per-
sons who had resided in most of the Spanish colonies,
such replies as have afforded me much inflrution.

5 NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advantages with

which my inquiries were carried on in Spain, it is
with regret I am obliged to add, that the success with
which they have been attended, must be ascribed to
the beneficence of individuals, not to any communica-
tion by public authority. By a singular arrangement
of Philip II. the records of the Spanish monarchy, are
deposited in the Arcbhivoof Simancas, near Valladolid, at
the distance of a hundred and twenty miles from the feat
of government, and the supreme courts of julice. The
papers relative to America, and chiefly to that early pe-
riod of its hiflory, towards which my attention was
dircted, are so numerous, that they alone, according
to one account, fill the largest apartment in the
Archivo; and according to another, they compose
eight hundred and feventy-three large bundles. Con-
fcious of poffiefing, in some degree, the induitry which
belongs to an historian, the profpea of such a treasure
excited my most ardent curiosity. But the prospect of it,
only, is all that I have enjoyed. Spain, with an excess
of caution, has uniformly thrown a veil over her tranf-
actions in America. From strangers they are conccal-
ed with peculiar solicitude. Even to her own fubjccLs
the Archivo of Simancas is not opened without a par-
ticular order from the crown; and after obtaining
that, papers cannot be copied, without paying ees of

VOL. I. a office

office so exorbitant, that the expence exceeds what it
would be proper to beflow, when the gratification of
literary curiosity is the only object. It is to be hoped,
that the Spaniards will at last discover this fyflem of
concealment to be no less impolitic than illiberal. From
what I have experienced in the course of my inquiries,
I am satisfied, that upon a more minute scrutiny into
their early operations in the New World, however re-
prehenfible the ations of individuals may appear,
the conduct of the nation will be placed in a more
favourable light.

IN other.parts of Europe very different sentiments pre-

vail. Havingfearched, without success, in Spain, for a let-
ter of Cortes to Charles V. written soon after he landed ii
the Mexican empire, which has not hitherto been pu-
bliflled; it occurred to me, that as the emperor was set-
ting out for Germany, at the time when te messengers
from Cortes arrived inEurope, the letter with which they
were intrusted might possibly be preserved in the Imperial
Library of Vienna. I communicated this idea toSirRobcrt
Murray Keith, with whom I have long had the honour to
live in fricndflip, and I had oon the pleasure to learn,
that, upon his application, her Imperial Majefly had
been graciously pleased to issue an order, that not only
a copy of that letter (if it were found), but of any other

papers

papers in the library, which could throw light upon the
Hiitory of America, flould be transmitted to me. The
letter from Cortes is not in the Imperial Library, but an
authentic copy, attefled by a notary, of that written by
the magistrates of the colony planted by him at Vera
Cruz, which I have mentioned, Vol. ii. p. 32, having
been found; it was transcribed and sent to me. This,
no less curious, and as little known as the letter which
was the objec of my inquiries, did not come to my
hand till that part of the history to which it relates was
printed; but I have given some account of what is mofl
worthy of notice in it, at the end of Notes and Illuftra-
tions, vol. ii. Together with it, I received a copy of a
letter from Cortes, containing a long account of his ex-
pedition to Honduras, with refped: to which, I did not
think it neceflary to enter into any particular detail;
and likewise those curious Mexican paintings, which I
have described vol. ii. p. 284, &c.

MY inquiries at St. Pcterfburgh were carried on with

equal facility and fucccfs. In examining into the
nearefd communication between our continent and that

of America, it became of consequence to obtain authen-
tic information concerning the discoverics of theRuflians,
in their navigation from Kamchatka towards the coast

a of

of America. Accurate relations of their first voyage, in
1741, have been publifled by Muller and Gmelin. Se-
veral foreign authors have entertained an opinion, that
the court of Russia fludioufly conceals the progress
.which has been made by more recent navigators, and
suffers the Public to be arnufed with false accounts of
their route. Such condutt appeared to me unsuitable
to thofeliberal sentiments, and that patronage of science,
for which the present sovereign of RuIlia is eminent;
nor could I discern any political reason, that might
render it improper to apply for information concern-
ing the late attempts of the Ruffians to open a com-
munication between Asia and America. My inge-
nious countryman, Dr. Rogerfon, firfl physician to
the Empress, presented my request to her Imperial
Majesty, who not only disclaimed any idea of conceal-
ment, but instantly ordered the journal of Captain
Krenitzin, who conduccted the only voyage of discovery
made by public authority since the year 741, to be
translated, and his original chart to be copied for my
-lfe. By consulting them, I have been enabled to give a
more accurate view of the progress and extent of the
Ruffian discoveries, than has hitherto been communicat-
ed to the Public.

FROM

FROM other quarters I have received informationof great

utility and importance. Mi. Chevalier de le Pinto, the mi-
niflcr from Portugal to the court of Great Britain, who
commanded for several years at Matagroflo, a settlement
of the Portuguese in the interior part of Brasil, where the
Indians are numerous, and their original manners little
altered by intercourse with Europeans, was pleased to
end me very full answers to some queries concerning
tlie character and inflitutions of the natives of America,
which his polite reception of an application made to
him in my name, encouraged me to propose. These
satisfied me, that he had contemplated with discerning
attention the curious objecs which his situation pre-
sented to his view, and I have often followed him as one
of my befl inftruted guides.

M. SA.iRD, to whose elegant translation of the Hitory

of the Rcign of Charles V. I owe the favourable recep-
tion of that work on the continent, procured me an-
fwers to the fame queries from M. de Bougainville,.
who had opportunities of obfcrving the Indians both of
North and South America, and from M. Godin lc Jcune,
who rcfidcd fiftccn years among Indians in Quito, and
twenty years in Cayenne. The latter are more valuable
fiom having been examined by M. de la Condaminc,

:z/2, r 11~who,

who, a few weeks before 1-i death, made some short
additions to them, which ma' be confidered as the lafl
effort of that attention to science which occupied a
long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one region in Ame-

rica. Governor Hutchinson took the trouble of recom-

mending the consideration of my queries to Mr. Hawley
and Mr. Brainerd, two protestant mifiionaries, employ-
ed among the Indians of the Five Nations, who fa-
voured me with answers, which discover a considerable
knowledge of the people whose cufloms they describe.
From William Smith, Efq; the ingenious hiflorian of
New York, I received some ufefuLinformation. When I
enter upon the History of our Colonies in North Ame-
rica, I shall have occasion to acknowledge how much
I have been indebted to many other gentlemen of
that country.

FRoM the valuable Collection of Voyages made by

Alexander Dalrymple, Efq. with whose attention to' the
History of Navigation and Difcovcry the Public is well
acquainted, I have received some very rare books, par-
ticularly two large volumes of Memorials, partly ma-
nufcripr, and partly in print, which were presentcd to

the

the court of Spain during the reigns of Philip III and
Philip IV. From there I have learned many curious par-
ticulars with refpecl to the interior slate of the Spanifl
colonies, and the various schemes formed for their im-
provement. As this Collection of Memorials formerly
belonged to the Colbert Library, I have quoted them by
that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have consultec

with that attention, which the respect due from an Au-
thor to the Public required ; and by minute references to
them, I ha. e endeavoured to authenticate whatever I re-
late. The longer I reflect on the nature of hillorical com-
position, the more am convinced that this scrupulous ac-
curacy is necessary. The historian who records the events
of his own time, is credited in proportion to the opinion
which the Public entertains with refpeac to his means
of information and his veracity. He who delineates the
tranfations of a remote period, has no title to claim
asSent, unless he produces evidence in proof of his aer-
tions. Without this, he may write an amusing tale, but
cannot be said to have composed an authentic history.
In those sentiments I have been confirmed by the opinion
of an author , whom his indufiry, erudition, and dif-

Mr. Gibbon,

iern-

cernment, have deservedly placed in a high rank among
the most eminent hiflorians of the age. Emboldened
by a hint from him, I have published a catalogue of
the Spanish books which I have consulted. This prac-
tice was frequent in the last century, and confidered as an
evidence of laudable induiry in an author; in the pre-
sent, it may, perhaps, be deemed the effeat of otenta-
tion; but as many of these books are unknown in Great
Britain, I could not otherwise have referred to them as
authorities, without encumbering the page with an in-
fertion of their full titles. To any person who may
chufe to follow me in this path of inquiry, the cata-
logue must be very useful.

MY readers will observe, that in mentioning fums

of money, I have uniformly followed the Spanifhl
method of computing by pesos. In America, the peso
fuerte, or duo, is the only one known, and that is
always meant when any fum imported from America
is mentioned. The peso fucrte, as well as other
coins, has varied in its numerary value, but I have
been adviscd, without attending to such minute va-
riations, to confider it as equal to four shillings and
fix pence of our money. It is to be rememnbered,
hovwcvr, that in the fixtcenth century, the cflcc-

tive

tive value of a peso, i. e. the quantity of la-
bour which it represented, or of goods which it
would purchase, was five or fix times as much as
at present.

VOL. I. b CONTENTS.

# CONTENTS.

C N TE N T S.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

B 0 K I.
p ROGRESS of navigation among the ancients-View of

their discoveries as preparatory to those of the moderns-

Imperfeclion of ancient navigation and gcography-DocTrine
of the Zones-Farther discoveries checked by the irruption
of barbarous nations-Geographical knowledge fill preserved
in the EaJ7, and among the Arabians-Revival of commerce
and navigation in Europe-favoured by the Croifades-ex-
tended by travellers into the Eafl-promoted by the invention
of the mariner's compafs-Firfl regular plan of dicovety
formed by Portugal-State of that kingdom-Schemes of
Prince Ilenry-Early attempts feeble-Pirogrefi along the
.zvefernt coOaf of Africa-Hopes of discovering a new route to
the EqnJ fidies-Httem7pts to accomplif this-Profpejs of
Jfccefs.

B O O K I.

;Birt/h anzd edutcalion of Columbuc s-acquires naval f ill in the
ji-rvice of Por ttugal-cnceives hopes of reaching the East In-

b dies

dies by holding a weterly courfe-hisfyJlem fomded on the
ideas of the ancients, and knowledge of their navigation-and
on the discoveries of the Portuguzefe-His negociations witl
different courts-ObJfacles which he had tofurmount in Spain-
Voyiage of 'difcoery-dificulties-fucces-return to Spain-
4J1oni/hnment of mankind onthis dicovery ofa New World-Papal
grant of it-Second voyage-Colony fettled-Farther disco-
veries-War with the Indians-Fizf tax imposed on them--
Third aJoyage-He dcoverp the conttinent-State of the Spa-
izjh colony-Errors inrfJ fyJlem of colonizing-Voyage of the
Portuguese to the Eaf Indies by Cape of Good Hope-Effeds
of this-Difcoveries made- by private- adventurers in the
New World-Name of America given to it-Machinations
again7 Columbus-Difgraced andfent ichains to Europe-
_ ourth voyage . of CQlumbuis-His difcoveries--dif/afJers-
death.

B ' 0 K II.
State of the colony in Hifpaniola-New war with l.he' Indians-

Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal reguiations concerning the
condition of the Indians-Diminution of that people-DiJcove-
r ies andfettlements--FirJl colony planted on. the continent.-
ConqueJr of Cuba--Dicovery of Florida-of the South Sea-
Great expeltations raied by this-Caufes of dijizppointment
with refpecR to thef' for Jome time-Controverfy cncerniig
the treatment of the Indians-Contrary dcci ions-Zea/ of the
ecclefiafics, particularlsy of Las C/afzs-Singula) proceedin<s
of X'imenes-Nregroes imported inWi9 America-Las Cafs.'s
idea of a new colony-permitted to attelmpt it -nflicclJsfill-
D icovcries towardls the 1Jt l-Ycatan -Cnamz achy-N'lllu
Spain -Prtparatins for invading it.

A B 0 0 IK.

.B' 0 0 - K IV.
'iew of America rwhen fir discovered, and of the manners

and policy of its mnofl uncivilized inhabitants-VaJt extent of

lAmerica-Grandeur of the objects it presents to view-Its
nmountains--rivers-lakes-Itsform favourable to commerce-
Temperature-predominence of cold-Caufes of this-uncul-
tivated-unuholefome-its animals-foil-Inquiry how Ame-
rica was peopled-various theories--what appears mos
probable-Condition and :haraler of the Americans-All,
the Mexicans and Peruvians excepted, in the slate offavages_
Inquiry confined to the uncivilized tribes-Difficulty of obtain--
ing iformation-various causes of this-Method observed in
the enquiy-. The bodily conJfitution of the Americans con-
fidered-II. The qualities of their minds-II. Their domeflic

ate-IV. Their political fiate and iitutions-V. Their
fyJenz of war and public fecurity-VI. The arts with which
they were acquainted-VII. Their religious ideas and infJitu-
tions-VIII. Such singular and detached cuJfoms as are not re-
ducible to any of the former heads-IX. General review and
eflimate of their virtues and defeSs.

VOLUME TI-E SECOND.

BOO BOK

V.
Ijlory of the on quef of NLew Spain by Corts.

pai y CBO OKL

BO O K VI
Hijtory of the congtiefJt of Pera by Pizarra-and of the di/en-

flons and civilz wIws of the Spaniards i that country--Origin
-progrefi-and effes. of these.,

B 0 O K VIL.
View of inTfitutiols and manners of Mexicans, and Peruvians-

CivilizedJates in. compartfan of other Americans-Recent ori-
gin of the Mexicans-Fa s which pro.7,e their progress in
civilizationt-View of their policy in its various branches--
of their arts-Fads which indicate afniall progres in civiliza-
tion-WJhat opinion jould be formed on comparing thoe- con-
tradictory fads-Genius of their reliion--Peruvian monarchy
more ancient-Its policy founded on religiont-Singular effecis
of this-peculiar Jlate of property among the Peruvians-
Their public works and arts-roads-bridges-buildings-un-
warlike fpirit-View of other dominions of Spain in America-
Cinaloa and Sonora-California-ucatan and Honduras-
Chili-TTucunan--Kingdom of l'ierra Eirme-New King-
dom of Granada.

B 0 0 K VlL
View of the interior government, commerce, c'c. of the Spa-

?ZflJ colonies-Depopulation of America sis cffec' of their
fittlements-not the con1fquence of anmy fyjlem of policy-nor
to be imputed to religion-Numnber of /ldians.r/i/l remainig-

*]' lF)n daimcn tal

Fundamental maxims on which the SpanijJhfyjlem of coloniza-
tion isfounded-Condition of different orders of men in their
colonies-Chapetones--Creoles-N egroes-Indians-Eccleftaf-
ticalJlate and policy-Character offecular and regular clergy
-Smallprogrefs of Chrifianity among the natives- Mines chief
objecR of their attention-Mode of working these- their pro
duce-Effelts of encouraging this species of induJiry-Other
commodities of Spanish America-Firi effels of this new com-
nerce on Spain-Why the SpaniJh colonies have not been as
beneficial to the parent-flate as thoe of other nations-Errors
in her Jfyfem of regulating this commerce-confined to one
port-carried on by annual fleets-Contraband trade-Decline
of Spain both in population and wealth-Remedies proposed-
yiew of the wife regulations of the Bourbon Princes-A new
and more liberal fyiiem introduced-Beneficial effecs of this-
Probable confequences-Trade between Mexico and the Philip-
pines-Revenue of Spain fram America- ,whence it ariJis-to
what it amounts.

T E

# BOOK I.

T HE
H I S T O R Y

o F
A M E R I C A.

BOO K I
v - HE progress of men in discovering and peopling the B o o i:

various parts of the earth, has been extremely flow. ,
Several ages elapsed before they removed far from those slowly pe

mild and fertile regions where they were originally placed by pled.
their Creator. The occasion of their first general uifperfion is
known; but we are unacquainted with the course of their mi-
grations, or the time when they took poffeflion of the different
countries which they now inhabit. Neither hiflory nor tradi-
tion furnifi such information concerning those remote events,
as enables us to trace, with any certainty, the operations of the
human race in the infancy of society.

WVE may conclude, however, that all the early migrations Firi, migra

of mankind were made by land. The ocean, which every- il 1 .1.
where fulrrounds the habitable earth, as well as the various
arms of the fca vhich fparatc one region from another, though

VQ( L. I. B1 (leflincd

B O K destined to facilitate the communication between distant coun-

[.
----.' tries, seem, at firt, to be formed to check the progress of

man, and to mark the bounds of that portion of the globe
to which nature had confined him. It was long, we may be--
lieve, before men attempted to pass this formidable- barrier,
and became so skilful and adventrous as to commit themselves
to the mercy of the winds and waves, or to quit their native
flore in quell of remote and unknown regions.

First attempts NAVIGATION and ship-building are arts so nice and compli-
towards navi-
gation. cated, that they require the ingenuity, as well as experience of.

many successive ages to bring them to any degree of perfection..
From the raft or canoe, which first served to carry a savage
over the river that obftrutcd him in the chace, to the confAruc-
tion of a veflel capable of conveying a numerous crew with
fkfety to a distant coast, the progress in improvement is immense.
Many efforts would be made, many experiments would be-
tried, and much labour and invention would be employed,- be-
fore men could accomplish this arduous and-important under-
taking. The rude and imperfea state in which navigation is
still found among all nations which are not considerably civil-
ized, corresponds with this account of its progress, and demon-
frates thr,c, in early times, the art was not so far improved as
to enable men to undertake distant voyages, or to attempt re-
mote discoveries.

ntroiua'on As oon, however, as the art of navigation became known,
o Umimercc. a new species of correspondence among men took place. It is

from this ra, that we must date thecominencement of such an
intercourse betw.ecn nations as deserves the appellation of com-
merce. Men are, indeed, far advanced in improvement before

commerce

commerce becomes an object of great importance to them. B 0o0 K
They muff even have made ome considerable progress towards -
civilization, before they acquire the idea of property, and afcer-
tain it so perfeCtly, as to be acquainted with the most simple of
all contraCs, that of exchanging by barter one rude commodity
for another. But as oon as this important right is established,
and every individual feels that he has an exclusive title to pof-
fess or to alienate whatever he has acquired by his own labour
and dexterity, the wants and ingenuity of his nature suggest
to him a new method of increasing his acquisitions and enjoy-
ments, by disposing of what is fuiperfluous in his own flores, in
order to procure what is necessary or desirable in those of other
men. Thus a commercial intercourse begins, and is carried
on among the members of the fame community. By de-
grees, they discover that neighbouring tribes possess what
they want, and enjoy comforts of which they wish to partake.
In the fame mode, and upon the fame principles, that domestic
traffic is carried on within the society, an external commerce is
eftablilhcd with other tribes or nations. Their mutual interest
and mutual wants render this intercourse desirable, and imper-
ceptibly introduce the maxims and laws which facilitate its pro-
grefs and render it secure.' But no very extensive commerce can
take place between contiguous provinces, whose ibil and cli-
mate being nearly the fame, yield similar productions. Remote
countries cannot convey their commodities by land, to those
places, where on account of their rarity they are dcfired, and
become valuable. It is to navigation that men are indebted for
the power of transporting the superfluous flock of one part of
the earth, to supply the wants of another. The luxuries and
b!effings of a particular climate are no longer confined to
itself alone, but the enjoyment of them is communicated to te
mofl diflant regions.

J3 a INt

BOOI K IN proportion as the knowledge of the advantages derived
a__- from navigation and commerce continued to spread, the inter-

course among nations extended. The ambition of conquest, or
the necessity of procuring a new settlement, were no longer the
sole motives of visiting distant lands. The desire of gain
became a new incentive to activity, routed adventurers and ent
them forth upon long voyages in search of countries, whose
producs or wants might increase that circulation, which nou-
rifhes and gives vigour to commerce. Trade proved a great
source of discovery, it opened unknown eas, it penetrated into
new regions, and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring melt acquainted with the situation, the nature, and com-
modities of the different parts of the globe. But even after a
regular commerce was established in the world, after nations
were considerably civilized, and the sciences and arts were cul-
tivated with ardour and success, navigation continued to be so
imperfec, that it can hardly be said to have advanced beyond
the infancy of its improvement in the ancient world.

OfImperlafgi AMONG all the nations of antiquity the firudcure of their
among the vessels was extremely rude, and their method of working them
aacients.

no less defeCtive. They were unacquainted with ome of the
great principles and operations in navigation, which are now
confidered as the first elements on which that science is founded.
Though that property of the magnet, by which it attracs iron,
was well known to the ancients, its most important and amazing
virtue of pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their obfer-
vation. Destitute of this faithful guide, which now conducts
the pilot with so much certainty in the unbounded ocean, during
the darkness of night, and when the heavens are covered with
clouds, the ancients had no other method of regulating their

course

ceurfe than by obferving'the fun and stars. Their.navigation B 0 o K
was of consequence uncertain and timid. They durst seldom --
quit fight of land, but crept along the coast, exposed to all
the dangers, and retarded by all the obitrudions, unavoidable
in holding such an aukward course. An incredible length of
time was requisite for performing voyages, which are now
finished in a short space. Even in the mildest climates, and in,
seas the least tempestuous, it was only during the summer'
months that the ancients ventured out of their harbours. The
remainder of the year was loft in inactivity. It would have
been deemed most inconsiderate raflinefs to have braved the
fury of the winds and waves during the winter'.,.

WHILE both the science and practice of navigation conti-

nucd to be so defective, it was an undertaking of no finall diffi-
culty and danger to visit any remote region of the earth. Under
every disadvantage, however, the aive spirit of commerce ex-
erted itself. The Egyptians, oon after the establishment of Navigation

and cor-

their monarchy, are said to have opened a trade between the anerce of
Arabian Gulph or Red Sea, and the western coast of the great Egyptians°
Indian continent. The commodities which they imported from
the ealt, were carried by land from the Arabian Gulph to the
banks of the Nile, and conveyed down that river to the Me-
diterranean. But if the Fgyptians in early times applied them-
selves to commerce, their attention to it was of short durati6n.
The fertile foil and mild climate of Egypt produced the ne-
ccflarics and comforts of life with such profusion, as rendered
its inhabitants so independent of other countries, that it became
tin cflablifhed maxim among that people, whose ideas and

Vcgctius de Re milit. lib. iv.

inflitutions

B.o o0 K inffitutions differed in almost every point from those of other
A-.---_ _ ·nations, to renounce all.intercourfe with foreigners. In confe-

*quence of this, they never went out of their own country; they
held all sea-faring persons in .detestation, as impious and pro-
fane; a.ndfortifying their own harbours, they denied firangers
admittance into -them b; and it was in the decline of their
power, that they again opened their ports, and resumed any
communication with foreigners.

Of the Phe- I'HE characer and situation of the Phenicians.were as favour-
nicjans.

able to the spirit of commerce and discovery as those of the
Egyptians were adverse to -it. They had no diflinguiihing pe-
culiarity in their manners and institutions; they were not
addicted to any singular and unsocial form of superstition; they
could mingle with other nations without scruple or reluctance.
The territory which they possessed wats neither large nor fertile.
Commerce was the only source from which they could derive
opulence or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on by the
Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more extensive and enter-
prizing than that of any state in the ancient world. The ge-
nius of the Phenicians, asvwel! as the object of their policy and
the spirit of their laws, were entirely commercial. They were
a people of merchants who aimed at the empire of the ea, and
acQually possessed it. Their fllips not only frequented all the
ports in the Mediterranean, but they were the firsl who ven-
tured beyond the ancient boundaries of navigation, and pafling
the Strcights of Gadeb, visited the weflirn coafs of Spain and
Afiica. In many of the places to which they resorted, they
planted colonies, and communicated to the rude inhabitants

b Dind. Sicul. lib. i. p. 7. Ed. Wcffelingi. Amla. 176. S:iabo, lib. xvii.
p. 114-z. Ed. Anill. 1707.

- soime

Tfme knowledge of their arts and improvements. While they B 0 o K
extended their discoveries towards the north and the weft, they
did not neglect to penetrate into the' more.opulent and fertile
regions of the fbuth and east. Having, rendered themselves
.masters of several commodious harbours towards-the bottom of
the Arabian Gulph, they, after the example of the Egyptians,
eflablifhed a regular intercourse with Arabia and the continent
of India on the one hand, and with the.eaftern coast of Africa
on the other. From these countries they imported many valu-
able commodities, unknown to the reft of the world, and, dur-
ing a long period, engrossed that lucrative branch of commerce
without a rival '.

THE vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired by monopo- orfhe Jews.

lizing the trade carried on in the Red Sea, incited their neigh-
bours the Jews, under the prosperous reigns of David and So-
lomon, to aim at being admitted to some share of it. This
they obtained, partly by their conquest of Idumea, which
firetches along the Red Sea, and partly by their alliance with
Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon fitted out fleets, which, under
the direction of Phenician pilots, failed from the Red Sea to
Tarfliifh and Ophir, which it is probable were ports in In-
dia and Afiica that their conduc orss were accustomed to fre-
quent, and returned with such valuable cargoes as suddenly
difflbfd wealth and iplendour through the kingdom of li-acl
B3ut the singular inflitutions of the Jews, the obfervanc of
which was enjoined by their divine lcgiflator, with an inten-
tion of preserving. tlcm a fcparate people, uniniiftfcd by ido-

' See N O TE I. at the End of the Volume.
d MeinoiJe fur le Pays d'Opliir par M D'Anvillc RMjnm. de 'Acatlem. dcs In-
fcipt. c. oin. xxx. 83.

latry

13 00 K latry, formed a national haraater incapable of that open and
. .- .J liberal intercourse with firangers which commerce requires.

Accordingly, this unfoeial genius of the people, together with
'the disasters which besel the kingdom of Israel, prevented the
·commercial spirit which their monarchs laboured to introduce,
and to cherish, from fpreadirig among them. The Jews cannat
be numbered among the nations which contributed to improve
navigation, or to extend discovery.

CF the Car- :BUT though the instructions and example of the Pheniclans
thainians. were unable to mould the manners and temper of the Jews,. in

opposition to the tendency of their laws, they transmitted the
.commercial spirit with facility, and in full vigour, to their own
descendants the Carthaginians. The commonwealth of Car-
-thage applied to trade and to naval affairs, with no less ardour,
ingenuity, and success, than its parent state. Carthage early
rivalled, and soon surpassed Tyre, in opulence and power, btt
.sTems not to have aimed at obtaining any share in the commerce
wTith India. I he Phenicians had engrofled this, and had such
a command of the Red Sea as secured to them the exclusive pof-
feifion of that lucrative branch of trade. The commercial acti-
vity of the Carthaginians was exerted in another direction.
\Vithout contending for the trade of the east with their mother-
country, they extended their navigation chiefly towards the
wefl and north. Following the courfc which the Phenicians
had opened, they pated the Strcights of Gades, and pushing
their discoverics far beyond theirs, not only visited all the
coafni of Spain, but thofl of Gaul, and penetrated at last into
Britain. At the ifame time that they acquired knowledge of
new countries in this part of the globe, they gradually carried
their researches towards the South. They made considerable

9 progrcfs,

progress, by land, into the interior provinces of Africa, traded B o o K
with some of them, and fubjeaed others to their empire;. - ---
They failed along the western coast of that great continent,
almtoft to the tropic of Cancer, and planted several colonies, in
order to civilize the natives, and accustom them to commerce.
They discovered the Fortunate Islands, now known by the name
of the Canaries, the utmost boundary of ancient navigation in
the w-elern ocean .

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and Carthaginians

in their knowledge of the globe, owing entirely to the desire of
extending their trade from one country to another. Commerce
was followed by its usual effects among both these people It
awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and desires of men, and
incited them to bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, the
sole object of which was to discover new countries, and explore
unknown seas. Such, during the profpeious age of the Cartha-
ginian republic,. were the famous navigations of Hanno and
Himilco. Both their fleets were equipped by authority of the
senate, and at public expence. Hanno was directed to seer
towards the south, along the coast of Africa, and seems to have
advanced much nearer the equinotial line than any former na-
vigator '. Himilco had it in charge to proceed towards the
north, and to examine the weflern coafis of the European con-
tinent g. Of the fame nature was the extraordinary navigation
of the Phenicians round Africa. A Phenician fleet, we are
told, fitted out by Necho king of Egypt, took its departure

I'linii Nat. Hilt. b. vi. c. 37. edit. in ufum Delph. 4to, 168;.

f Plinii Nat. IHill. lil). . c. i. Hlannonis Pcriplus ap. Geograph. nm;norcs, cdit.
I-lIdfoni, vol. i. p. i.

C I'linii Nat. iliil. li. ii. c. 67. Fflus Avicnus apud Bochait. Gengr. racr. lib, i.

c. 6o. p. 652. Oper. vol. iii. L. [lat. 1707.
* VOL. C about

B1 0 K about fix hundred and four years before the Chriffian era,

-* ; * from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the southern promontory

of Africa, and, after a voyage of three years, returned by the
Streights of Gades, to the mouth of the Nile h. Eudoxus of
Cyzicus is said to have held the fame course, and to have accom-
plifhed the fame arduous undertaking'.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner which I have

related, may justly be reckoned the greatest effort of navigation
in the ancient world; and if we attend to the imperfeE state of
the art at that time, it is difficult to determine, whether we
should most admire the courage and sagacity with which the
design was formed, or the conduct and good fortune with which
it was executed. But unfortunately, all the original and au-
thentic accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whe-
ther undertaken by public authority, or in prosecution of their
private trade, have perished. The information which we receive
concerning them from the Greek and Roman authors, is not only
obscure and inaccurate, but, if we except a short narrative of
Hanno's expedition, is of suspicious authority k. Whatever ac-
quaintance with the remote regions of the earth the Phenicians
or Carthaginians may have acquired, was concealed from the reft
of mankind with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing relative
to the course of their navigation was not only a mystery of
trade, but a secret of state. Extraordinary fads are recorded
concerning their solicitude to prevent other nations from pe-
netrating into what they w.ished should remain undivulged '.
Many of their discoveries seem, accordingly, to have been.
scarcely known beyond the precincs of their own states. The-

h Hcrodot. lib. iv. c. 4. ' Plinii Nat. lift. lib. ii. c. 67.
k See N O T E II.
l Strab. Gcogr. lib. iii. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. I L ,.

navigation!

navigation round Africa, in particular, is recorded by the Greek B 0 0 K
and Roman writers, rather as a strange amusing tale, which -
they either did not comprehend, or did not believe, than as a
real transaction, which enlarged their knowledge and influenced
their opinion m. As neither the progress of the Phenician and
Carthaginian discoveries, nor the extent of their navigation,
were communicated to the reft of mankind, all memorials of
their extraordinary kill in naval affairs eem, in a great mea-
sure, to have perished, when the maritime power of the for-
mer was annihilated by Alexander's conquest of Tyre, and the
empire of the latter was overturned by the Roman arms.

LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous accounts of the Of the

Greeks.

Phenician and Carthaginian voyages to the curiosity and con-
jeaures of antiquaries, history must reft satisfied with relating
the progress of navigation and difcovcry among the Greeks and
Romans, which, though less splendid, is better ascertained.
It is evident that the Phenicians, who inflruaed the Greeks in
other useful sciences and arts, did not communicate to them
that extensive knowledge of navigation which they themfelvcs
possessed; nor did the Romans imbibe that commercial spirit and
ardour for discovery which distinguished the Carthaginians.
Though Greece be almost encompassed by the ea, which form-
ed many spacious bays and commodious harbours, though it be
surrounded by a vas number of fertile islands, yet, notwith-
fianding such a favourable situation, which feemned to invite
that ingenious people to apply themselves to navigation, it was
long before this art attained any degree of perfection among
them. Their early voyages, the objet of which was piracy
rather than commerce, were so inconsiderable, that the expcdi-

' Sec NOTE Il1.

C tion

B 0 0 c tion of the Argonauts from the coast of Thessaly to the Euxine
'----' sea, appeared such an amazing effort of skill and courage, as

entitled the condctors of it to be ranked among the demigods,
and exalted the velTel in which they failed to a place among the
heavenly constellations. Even at a later period, when the Greeks
erigaged in their famous enterprize against Troy, their know-
ledge in naval affairs seems not to have been much improved.
According to the account of Homer, the only poet to whom
history ventures to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous accu-
racy in describing the manners and arts of early ages, merits
this dillin&ion, the science of navigation, at that time, had
hardly advanced beyond its rudest state. The Greeks in the
heroic age were unacquainted with the use of iron, the most
serviceable of all the metals, without which no considerable
progress was ever made in the mechanical arts. Their vessels
were of inconsiderable burthen, and mostly without decks.
These had only one mast, which they ereced or took down at
pleasure. They were strangers to the use of anchors. All
their operations in failing were clumsy and unskilful. They
turned their observation towards flars, which were improper
for regulating their course, and their mode of obfcrving them
was inaccurate and fallacious. When they had finished a
voyage they drew their paltry barks ashore, as savages do their
canoes, and they remained on dry land until the season of re-
turning to sea approached. It is not then in the early or heroic
ages of Greece, that we can expea to observe the science of
navigation, and the spirit of discovery making any considerable
progress. During that period of difordcr and ignorance, a
thousand causes concurred in restraining curiosity and enter-
prize within very narrow bounds.

BUT

BUvT tfhe Greeks advanced with rapidity to a slate -of BO K

greater civilization and refinement. Government, in its inoft .-_ .
liberal and perfect form, began to be established in the com-
munities of Greece; equal laws and regular police were
gradually introduced; the sciences and arts that are useful
or ornamental in life were carried to a high pitch of improve-
ment, and several of the Grecian commonwealths applied to
commerce with such ardour and success, that they were con-
fidered, in the ancient world, as maritime powers of the firif
ia-nk. Even then, however, the naval victories of.the Greeks
mu'st be ascribed rather to the native spirit of the people, and
to that courage which the enjoyment of liberty inspires, than
to any extraordinary progress in the science of navigation. In
the Perlian war, those exploits which the eloquence of the Greek
historians have rendered so famous, were performed by
fleets, composed chiefly of vefels that were open, and without
decks "; the crews of which ruhecd forward with impetuous
valour, hut little art, to board those of the enemy. In the war
of Pcloponncfus, their ships seem still to have been of inconfi-
dcrable burthen and of finall force. The extent of their trade
was in proportion to this low condition of their marine. The
maritime states of Greece hardly carried on any commerce be-
yond the limits of the Mediterranean sea. Their chief inter-
course was with the colonies of their countrymen, planted in
the lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They sometimes visited the
ports of Egypt, of Gaul, and of Thrace, or passing through
the Hellespont, they traded with the countries situated around
the Euxine sea. Amazing inflances occur of their ignorance,
even of those countries, which lay within the narrow precincts

Thucyd. lib. i. c. 14.

3 to

B O0 0K ;to which their navigation was confined. When the Greeks
-*-- ' ;'had assembled their combined fleet against Xerxes at Egina,

·they thought. it unadvifable to fail to Samos, because they be-
lieved the distance between that island and Egina to be as great
:as the distance between Egina and the Pillars of Hercules °.
They were either utterly unacquainted with all the parts of
'the globe beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what knowledge
they had of them was founded on conjecure, or derived from
the informations of a few persons, whom curiosity and the love
of science had prompted to travel by land into the Upper Asia,
or by sea into Egypt, the ancient feats of wisdom and arts.
After all that the Greeks learned from them, they appear to
have been ignorant of the most important fads, on which an
accurate.and scientific knowledge of the globe is founded.

THE cxpedition of Alexander the Great into the east, confi-

derably enlarged the sphere of navigation and of geographical
knowledge among the Greeks. That extraordinary man, not-
withstanding the violent passions which incited him, at ome
times, to the wildest aions, and the most extravagant enter-
prises, possesed talents which fitted him not only to conquer,
but to govern the world. He was capable of framing those bold
and original Ichemes of policy, which give a new form to hu-
man affairs. The revolution in commerce, brought about by
the force of his genius, is hardly inferior to that revolution in
empire, occasioned by the success of his arms. It is probable,
that the opposition and efforts of the republic of Tyre, which
checked him so long in the career of his victories, gave Alex-
ander an opportunity of observing the vast resources of a mari-

o HIrodot. lib. viii. c. 132.

I time

rime power, a.. conveyed to him some idea of the immense B-o 1 K
wealth which the Tyrians derived from their commerce, efpe- '-----
cially that with the East Indies. As oon as he had accomplifl-
ed the deftruCion of that state, and reduced Egypt to subjec-
tion, he formed the plan of rendering the empire which he
proposed to establish, the centre of commerce as well as the feat
of dominion. With this view he founded a great city, which
he honoured with his own name, near one of the mouths of
the river Nile, that by the Mediterranean efa, and the neigh-
bourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it might command the trade
both of the east and wef P. This situation was chosen with
such discernment, that Alexandria oon became the chief com-
mercial city in the world. Not only during the subsistence of
the Grecian empire in Egypt and in the east, but amidst all the
fucceflive revolutions in those countries,. from the time of the
Ptolemies to the discovery of the navigation by the Cape of
Good Hope, commerce, particularly that of the East Indies,
continued to flow in the channel which the sagacity and fore-
fight of Alexander had marked out for it.

H-Is ambition was not satisfied with having opened to the

Greeks a communication with India by lea; he aspired to the so-
vereignty of those regions which.furnifhed the reft of mankind
with so many precious commodities, and conduced his army thi-
therby land. Enterprising, however, as he was, he may be said
rather to have discovered, than to have conquered that country.
He did not, in his progress towards the eafR, advance beyond the
banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus, which is now the.
western boundary of the vast continent of India. Amidst the

P Strab. Gcogr. lib. xvii. p. 1143. 1149.

wild

B 0 0 K wild exploits which diRtinguilh thi.s. part of his hitory, he

_
- - pursued measures that mark the superiority of his genius, as

well as the extent of his views. He had penetrated as far int
India as to confirm his opinion of its commercial iportance,
and to perceive that immense wealth might be derived from in-
tercourfe with a country, where the arts of elegance having
been more early cultivated, were arrived at greater perfection
than in any other part of the earth '. Full of this idea, he re-
folvedi to examine the course of navigation frolm the mouth, of
the. Indus to the bottoni of the Persian Gulf; an.d if it flould be
found pracaicable, to establish a regular communication between
them. In order to effect this, he proposed to. remove the cata-
rats, with which, the jealousy of the Persians, and their aversion
to correspondence with foreigners, had obftrutecl the entrance
into the Euphrates ; to carry the commodities of the eaf up
that river, and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the inte-
rior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while, by the way of
the Arabian Gulf, and the river Nile, they might be con-
veyed to Alexandria, and difributed to the reft of the world.
Nearchus, an officer of eminent abilities, was cntruftcd with the
command of the fleet fitted' out for this expedition. He per-
formed this voyage, which was deemed an enterprise ibf ardu-
ous and important, that Alexander reckoned it one of the most
extraordinary events which diftinguified his reign. Inconfi-
derable as it may now appear, it was, at that time, an under-
taking of no little merit and difficulty. In the prosecution of
it, itriking instances occur of the finall progrcfs which the
Greeks had made in naval knowledge'. I-aving never failed

' Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1036. Q. Curtiis, lib. xviii. c. 9.
Strab. Gcogr. lib. xvi. p. 1o75. ' Sec N O T 1 IV.

bcy-ond

beyond the bounds of the Mediterranean, where the ebb and B o0o K
flow of the sea are hardly perceptible, when they first observed * ,---
this phenomenon at the mouth of the Indus, it appeared to
them a prodigy, by which the gods testified the displeasure of
HIeaven against their enterprise '. During their whole course,
they seem never to have loft fight of land, but followed the
bearings of the coast so servilely, that they could not much
avail themselves of those periodical winds, which facilitate na-
vigation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no less
than ten months in performing this voyage, which, from the
mouth of the Indus to that of the Persian gulf, does not ex-
ceed twenty degrees. It is probable, that amidst the violent
.convulsions, and frequent revolutions in the East, occasioned
by the contests among the successors of Alexander, the naviga-
tion to India, by the course which Nearchus had opened, was
discontinued. The Indian trade carried on at Alexandria, not
only fubfifled, but was so much improved under the Grecian
monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a great source es the wealth
which distinguished that kingdom.

THE progress which the Romans made in navigation and Ofthe R-

discovery, was frill more inconsiderable than that of the Greeks. mans.
The genius of the Roman people, their military education,
and the spirit of their laws, concurred in eranging them from
commerce and naval affairs. It was the neceflity of opposing a
formidable rival, not the desire of extending trade, which first
prompted them to aim at maritime power. Though they oon
-perceived that in order to acquire the universal dominion after
which they aspired, it was necessary to render themselves mailers
of the ea, they still confidcrcd the naval service as a fubor-

' Sec N OT 'E V. . "Plin. Hiit. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.
VOL. I. D dinat

B 0 0 K dinate station, and reserved for it such citizens as were not of a

. -- ' rank to be admitted into the legions . In the hiflory of the

Roman republic, hardly one event occurs, that marks attention
to navigation any farther than as it was instrumental towards
conquest. When the Roman valour and discipline had subdued
all the maritime states known in the ancient world; when Car-
thage, Greece, and Egypt, had submitted to their power, the
Romaus did not imbibe the commercial spirit of the conquered
nations. Among that people of soldiers, to have applied to
trade would have been deemed a degradation of a Roman ci-
tizen. They abandoned the mechanical arts, commerce, and
navigation, to slaves, to freedmen, to provincials, and to ci-
tizens of the lower class. Even after the subversion of liberty,
when the severity and haughtiness of ancient manners began to
abate, commerce did not rife into high estimation among the
Romans. The trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other conquered
countries, continued to be carried on in their ancient chan-
nels, after they were reduced into the form of Roman provinces.
As Rome was the capital of the world, and the feat of govern-
ment, all the wealth and valuable produtions of the provinces
flowed naturally thither. The Romans, satisfied with this,
seem to have suffercd commerce to remain almost entirely in
the hands of the natives of the refpeaive countries. The ex-
tent, however, of the Roman power, which reached over al-
most the whole known world, the vigilant infpedion of the
Roman magiflrates, and the spirit of the Roman government,
no less intelligent than aivc, gave such additional security to
commerce, as animated it with new vigour. The union
among nations was never so entire, nor the intercourse so per-
seC, as within the bounds of this vafl empire. Commerce,

Polyb. I!b, v.

under

under their dominion, was not obftruEted by the jealousy of B O O K
rival states, interrupted by freciuent hostilities, or limited by ----
partial reftritions. One superintending power moved and re-
gulated the industry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits of
their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt this influence, and improved under it.

As soon as the Romans acquired a taste for the luxuries of
the East, the trade with India through Egypt was puflied
with new vigour, and carried on to greater extent. By
frequenting the Indian continent, navigators became acquainted
with the periodical course of the winds, which, in the ocean
that feparatcs Afiica from India, blow with little variation
during one half of the year from the cast, and during the
other half fix with equal steadiness in the weft. Encouraged
by observing this, they abandoned their ancient flow and dan-
gerous course along the coafl, and as soon as the weflern mon-
ibon set in, cook their departure fiom Ocelis, at the mouth of
the Arabian ,g'lf, and firetched boldly across the ocean Y.
The uniform direction of the wind, supplying the place of the
conpafs, and rendering the guidance of the flars less neccflary,
conduded them to the port of Mufiris, on the wcfcrn flhore
of the Indian continent. There thcy took on board their
cargo, and returning with the eaflern monsoon, finiflcd their
voyage to the Arabian gulf within the year. This part of
India, now known by the name of the MIhlalbar coast, seems to
have been the utmost limit of ancient navigation in tlat quar-
ter of the globe. What imperfect knowledge the ancients had
of the immense countries which firetch beyond this towards
the cal, they received from a fewv adventurers, vwho had visited
them y land. Their cxcurfions wcre not extenfivc, and it is
probable, that virile the Roman intcrcouric with India sub-

l'Un. Ilifi. N t. ;1). v c. ?

1) 2 iflC]d,

B 0 0K sifted, no traveller ever penetrated further than to the banks of

I.
\ ,-- -the Ganges . The fleets from Egypt which traded at Mufiris.

were loaded, it is true, with the spices and other rich commo-
dities of the continent and islands of the farther India; but
these were brought to that port, which became the staple of
-this commerce, by the Indians themselves, in canoes made of
one tree . The Egyptian and Roman merchants, satisfied with
acquiring these commodities in this manner, did not think it
necessary to explore unknown seas, and venture upon a dan-
gerous navigation, in quest of the countries which produced'
them. But though the discoveries of the Romans in India
were To limited, their commerce there was such as will appear
considerable, even to the present age, in which the Indian trade
has been extended far beyond the practice or conception of
any preceding period. We are informed by one author of cre-
dit b that the commerce with India drained the Roman empire
every year of more than four hundred thousand pounds; and
by another, that one hundred and twenty ships failed annually
from the Arabian gulf to that country '.

Difcoveriesof THE discovery of this new method of failing to India is the
he lancient moit considerable improvement in navigation made during the

continuance of the Roman power. But in ancient times, the
knowledge of countries was acquired more by land than by
lea d; and the Romans, from their peculiar disinclination to,
naval affairs, may be aid to have neglected totally the latter,
though a more easy and expeditious method of discovery.
The progress, however, of their victorious armies contributed.
greatly to extend discovery by land, and even opened the na-
vigation of new and unknown seas. Previous to the Roman

S Strab. Gcogr. lib. xv. p. 1006. iolo. See NOTE VI.
a. Plin. Nnt. Hill. lib. vi. c. 26. b Ibid.
Strab-Geogr. lib. ii. p. 179. d See NOTE VII.

ccnqucfls,

eonquefts, the civilized nations of antiquity had no communi- B o O K
cation with those countries in Europe, which now form its .---'
most opulent and powerful kingdoms. The interior parts of
Spain and of Gaul were little known. Britain, separated from
the reft of the world, had never been visited, except by its
neighbours the Gauls, and by a few Carthaginian merchants.
The- name of Germany had scarcely been heard of. Into all
these countries the arms of the Romans penetrated. They en-
tirely subdued Spain and Gaul; they conquered the greatef
and most fertile part of Britain; they advanced into Germany,
as far as the banks of the river Elbe. In Africa, they ac-
quired a considerable knowledge of the provinces, which stretch
along the Mediterranean ea, from Egypt westward to the
straits of Gades. In Asia, they not only fubjeted to their
power most of the provinces which composed the Persian and
Macedonian empires, but, after their victories over Mithridates -
and Tigranes, they seem to have surveyed the countries con-
tiguous to the Euxine and Caspian eas, more accurately than
they had been formerly, and to have carried on a more exten-
five trade than that of the Greeks with the opulent and com-
mercial nations, then eated around the Euxine ea.

FROM this fuccint survey of discovery and navigation, which Imperfcflion

I have traced from the earliest dawn of hiflorical knowledge to cf geographi-
the full enfablifhment of the Roman dominion, their progress ledgenmong

the ancients.

appears to be wonderfully flow. It fcems neither adequate to
what we might have expected from the ativity and enterprise
of the human mind, nor to what might have been performed
by the power of the great empires that fccefively governed
the world. If we reject accounts that arc fabulous and obfcurc;
if we adhere ftcadily to the light and information of authentic

history,

BOOK hiflory, without fubfituting in its place tle conjecures of
t'-----, fancy, or the dreams of etymologies, we mufl conclude, that

the knowledge which the ancients had acquired of the habitable
globe was extremely confined. In Europe, the extensive pro-
vinces in the caflern part of Germany were hardly known to
them. They were almost totally unacquainted with the vast
countries -which are now subjec to the kings of Denmark, Swe-
den, Prussia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire. The more bar-
ren regions, that firetch within the arCtic circle, were quite
unexplored. In Africa, their researches did not extend far
beyond the provinces lwhich border on the 1Mediterranean, and
t'hose situated on the wcflern shore of the Arabian gulf. In
Alia, they were unacquainted, as I formerly obfcrved, with all
the fertile and opulent countries eyond the Ganges, which
furnifl the nmoft valuable commodities that, in modern times,
have ben the great object of the European commerce with
India; nor do they fiemn to have ever penetrated into those
immenfc regions occupied by the wandering tribes, which they
called by the general name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and
now poflfieed by Tartars of various denominations, and by the
Asiatic fubjed:s of Ruflia.
A remn'l:able BUT there is one opinion, that universally prevailed among

f of the ancients, which conveys a more striking idea of the finall

progrcfs they had made in the knowledge of the habitable globe,
than can be derived from any detail of their difcovcries. They
supposed the earth to be divided into five regions, which they
diftinguihed by the name of zones. Two of there, which were
nearefl the poles, they termed fi-igid zones, and believed that
the extreme cold which reigned perpetually there, rendered
them uninhabitable. Another, feated under the line, and cx-

tending

tending on either fide towards the tropics, they called the torrid B 0 0 K
zone, and imagined it to be so burnt up with unremitting heat, _---.
as to be equally destitute of inhabitants. On the two other
zones, which occupied the remainder of the earth, they be-
flowed the appellation of temperate, and taught that these,
being the only regions in whiich life could subsist, were allotted
to man for his habitation. This wild opinion was not a
conceit of the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fiEcion of the
poets, but a system adopted by the most enlightened philofo-
phers, the most accurate hiflorians and geographers in Greece
and Rome. According to this theory, a vast portion of the
habitable earth was pronounced to be unfit for fuflaining the
human species. Tofe fertile and populous regions. within the
torrid zone, which are now known not only to yield their own
inhabitants the necessaries and comforts of life, with moit
luxuriant profusion, but to communicate their superfluous ftorcs
to thec reft of the world, were supposcd to be the mansion of
perpetual lterility and dcfolation. As all the parts of the globe,
which the ancients had discovercd, lay within the northern
temperate zone, their opinion that the other temperate zone
was filled with inhabitants, was founded on rcafoning and
conjecture, not on discovery. They even believed tlat, by the
intolcrable heat of the torrid zone, fclh an infuiperable barrier
was placed between the two temperate regions of the earth, as
would prevent for ever any intercourfc between their rcfpcclive
inhabitants. Thus this cxtravagant theory not only proves
that the ancients were unaclquainted with the true fate of the
globe, but it tended to render their ignorance of it perpetual,
by rclpt'ccnting all attempts towards opening a communication.
with the remote regions of the earth, as utterly impralicabLc '.

Sec NOTE Vlll.

7 1 T,.

B 0 0 K BUT, however imperfect or inaccurate the geographical
'.-----' knowledge which the Greeks and Romans had acquired may

appear, in refpea of the present improved state of that science,
their progress in discovery will seem considerable, and the ex-
tent to which they carried navigation and commerce must be
reckoned great, when compared with the ignorance of early
times. As long as the Roman empire retained such vigour as
to preserve its authority over the conquered nations, and to
keep them united, it was an objet of public police, as well as
of private curiosity, to examine and describe the countries
which composed this great body. Even when the other sciences
began to decline, geography, enriched with new observations,
and receiving some accession from the experience of every
age, and the reports of every traveller, continued to-improve.
It attained to the highest point of perfecion and accuracy to
which it ever arrived in the ancient world, by the industry

Improve- and genius of Ptolemy the philosopher. He flourifled in the
ments in geo-
graphy by second century of the Chriltian era, and published a defcrip-
Ptolemy. tion of the terrestrial globe, more ample and exact than that

of any of his predecessors.

The invalion BUT, soon after, violent convulsions began to shake the Ro-
of the Roman
empire by man fate; the fatal ambition or caprice of Constantine, by
brnbarous na- changing the feat of government, divided and weakened its

force; the barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as
*its inflruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the Roman
power, began to aflemnblc and to muster their armies on its
frontier; the empire tottered to its fall. During this decline
and old age of the Roman state, it was impossible that the
fcienccs ihould go on improving. 'he efforts of genius were,
at that period, as languid and feeble as those of government.

9 From

From the time of Ptolemy, no considerable addition seems to B 0 0 K
have been made to geographical knowledge; nor did any im- -.-
portant revolution happen in trade, excepting that Conflan-
tinople, by its advantageous situation, and the encouragement
of the eastern emperors, became a commercial city of the first
note.

AT length, the clouds which had been so long gathering Eefta, of

their con-

round the Roman empire, burt into a florm. The barbarous quefls on
natidns rushed in with irresistible impetuosity, and, in the ge- cnteou, .
neral wreck, occasioned by the inundation which overwhelmed
Europe, the arts, sciences, inventions and discoveries of the
Romans, perished and disappeared . All the various tribes,
which conquered and fettled in the different provinces of the
Roman empire, were uncivilized, firangers to letters, destitute
of arts, unacquainted with regular government, subordination,
or laws. The manners and institutions of some of them were
so rude and barbarous, as to be hardly compatible with a fate
of social union. Europe, when occupied by such inhabitants,
may be said to have returned to a second infancy, and had to
begin anew its career in improvement, science, and civility.
The first effect of the settlement of those barbarous invaders
was to dissolve the union by which the Roman power had ce-
mented mankind together. They parcelled out Europe into
many small and independent states, differing from each other
in language and customs. No intercourse fubfifled between the
members of those divided and holile communities. Accuflom-
ed to a simple mode of life, and avcrfe to induflry, they had
few wants to supply, and no superfluities to dispose of. The
names of Jranger and of enemy became once more words of

t Hill, of Charles V. vol. i. p. iP. 7.
VOL. I. E the

B 10 K the fame import. Cutfoms every-where prevailed, and even
.--.- laws were established, which rendered it disagreeable and dan-

gerous to visit any foreign country h. Cities, in which alone
an extensive commerce can be carried on, were few, incon-
fiderable, and destitute of those immunities which produce fe-
curity or excite enterprise. The sciences, on which geography
and navigation are founded, were not cultivated. The ac-
counts of ancient improvements and discoveries, contained in
the Greek and Roman authors, were negleted or mifunder-
stood. The knowledge of remote regions was loft, their situ-
ation, their commodities, and almost their names, were un-
known.

Commercial ONE circumstance prevented commercial intercourse with
k nowlviedge
ltill preserved distant nations from ceasing altogether. Conflantinople, though
n peEa"tern often threatened by the fierce invaders, who spread desolation

over the reft of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their de-
ftrutive rage. In that city, the knowledge of ancient arts and
discoveries was preserved; a taste for splendour and elegance
subsisted; the productions and luxuries of foreign countries
were in request; and commerce continued to flourilh there,
when it was extinct in every other part of Europe. The ci-
tizens of Constantinople did not confine their trade to the
islands of the Archipelago, or to the adjacent coasts of Aia;
they took a wider range, and following the course which the
ancients had marked out, imported the commodities of the
East Indies from Alexandria. When Egypt was torn from the
Roman empire by- the Arabians, the induflry of the Greeks
discovered a new channel, by which the productions of India
might be conveyed to Conflantinople. They were carried up

b Hilt. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 77. 327.

the

the Indus, as far as that great river is navigable; thence B 00 K
they were transported by land to the banks of the river Oxus, ---
and proceeded down its fiream to the Caspian sea. There they
entered the Volga, and failing up it, were carried by land to
the Tanais, which conducted them into the Euxine ea, where
veefels from Constantinople waited their arrival h. This extra-
ordinary and tedious mode of conveyance merits attention, not
only as a proof of the violent passion which the inhabitants of
Constantinople had conceived for the luxuries of the east, and
as a specimen of the ardour and ingenuity with which they
carried on commerce, but because it demonstrates, that, dur-
ing the ignorance which reigned in the reft of Europe, an ex-
tensive knowledge of remote countries was till preserved in the
capital of the Greek empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and knowledge broke in and among

t, ..->., the Arabians.

upon the east. The Arabians, having contracted ome relish
for the sciences of the people whose empire they had contri-
buted to overturn, translated the books of several of the Greek
philosophers into their own language. One of the first was
that valuable work of Ptolemy, which I have already men-
tioned. The fludv of geography became, of consequence, an
early object of attention to the Arabians. But that acute and
ingenious people cultivated chiefly the speculative and scientific
parts of geography. In order to ascertain the figure and dimen-
sions of the terrestrial globe, they applied the principles of ge-
ometry, they had recourse to altronomical observations, they
employed experiments and operations, which Europe, in more
enlightened times, has been proud to adopt and to imitate.
At that period, however, the fame of the improvements made

h Ramufic, vol. i. p. 372. F.

~E a~ by

B o0 K by the Arabians did not reach Europe. The knowledge of
i_
----- their discoveries was reserved for ages capable-of comprehend--

ing and of perfeting them.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities. and:defolation brought upon the-
commerce

p b cn

andnaviga- wellern provinces of the Roman empire by its barbarous con-
tion in Eu.
rope. querors, were forgotten, and in ome measure repaired. The

rude tribes which fettled there, acquiring insensibly ome idea.
of regular government, and ome relish for the funcions and.
comforts of civil life, Europe began to awake from its torpid
and unaaive state. The first fynyptoms- of revival were dif--
cerned in Italy. The northern tribes which took possession of.
this country, made progress in improvement with greater ra--
pidity than the people fettled in other parts of Europe. Va--
rious causes, which it is not the object of this work to enumerate
or explain, concurred in restoring liberty and independence to
the cities of Italy'. The acquisition of there roused industry,
and gave motion and vigour to all the aive powers of the hu-
man mind. Foreign commerce revived, navigation was at--
tended to and improved. Constantinople became the chief
mart to which the Italians resorted. There they not only met
with a favourable reception, but obtained such mercantile pri-
vileges as enabled them to carry on trade with great advan-
tage. They were supplied both with the precious commo-
dities of the eaf, and with many curious manufacures, the
product of the ancient arts and ingenuity that still fubfifled
among the Greeks. As the labour and expence of conveying
the productions of India to Constantinople by that long and in-
dired course which I have dcfcribcd, rendered them extremely
rare, and of an exorbitant price, thc indufry of the Italians

i ilif. of Charles '. vol .
i p. 33.

difcovcrcd

discovered other methods of procuring them in greater abund- B 0 0 K
ance, and at an easier rate. They sometimes purchased them --
in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other ports on the coast of Syria, to
which they were brought by a route not unknown to the an-
cients. They were conveyed from India by sea, up the Per-
fian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and Tigris, as far as
Bagdat; were carried by land across the Desert to Palmyra, and
from thence to the towns on the Mediterranean. But from the
length of the journey, and the dangers to which the caravans
were exposed, this proved always a tedious, and often a preca-
rious mode of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of Egypt,
having renewed the commerce with India in its ancient chan-
nel, by the Arabian Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwith-
standing the violent antipathy to each other with which Chri-
ftians and the followers of Mahomet were then possessed,
repaired to Alexandria, and enduring, from the love of gain,
the insolence and exactions of the Mahometans, established a
lucrative trade in that port. From that period, the commercial
spirit of Italy became active and enterprising. Venice, Genoa,
Pisa, rose from iconfiderable towns, to be populous and weal-
thy cities. Their naval power increased; their vefiels frc-
quented all the ports in the Mediterranean; they ventured
sometimes beyond the Streights; visited the maritime towns of
Spain, France, the Low Countries, and England; and, by
distributing their commodities over Europe, began to communi-
cate to its various nations ome knowledge of the valuable pro-
dutions of the east, as well as ome ideas of manufactures and
arts, with which they had hitherto been unacquainted.

WhVILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing in their career Thir pro-
of improvement, an event happened, the molt cxtraordinary gr.t(, fivoi.rt

y

lerha Cru-(5
I P.haps r,.k~,

B o1o K perhaps in the history of mankind, which, instead of retarding

_-- ---? the commercial progress of the Italians, rendered it more ra-

pid. The martial spirit of the Europeans, heightened and in-
flamed by religious zeal, prompted them to deliver the
Holy Land from the dominion of infidels. Vast armies,
composed of all the nations of Europe, marched towards Asia,
upon this wild enterprise. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Ve-
netians furnifled the transports which carried them thither.
They supplied them with provisions and military fores. Be-
fide the immense fums which they received on this account,
they obtained commercial privileges and efablifhments, of
great consequence in the settlements which the Crusaders made
in Paletine, and in other provinces of Asia. From those
sources, prodigious wealth flowved into the cities which I have
mentioned. A proportional increase of power accompanied
this, and by the end of the Holy War, Venice, in particular,
became a great maritime slate, possessing an extensive com-
merce, and ample territories . Italy was not the only coun-
try in which the Crusades contributed to revive and diffuse such
a spirit as prepared Europe for future discoveries. By their
expeditions into Asia, the other European nations became well
acquainted with remote regions, which formerly they knew
only by name, or by the reports of ignorant and credulous pil-
grims. They had an opportunity of observing the manners,
the arts, and the accommodations of people more polished
than themfclves. This intercourse between the east and weft
f£bfified alnoft two centuries. The adventurers, who returned
from Asia, communicated to their countrymen the ideas which
they had acquired, and the habits of life they had contraced
by visiting more refined nations. The Europeans began to be

Ei de I'Hifloire du Cimemcrce de Venife, p. 52, &.

8 sensible

sensible of wants with which they were formerly unacquainted; B OO K
new desires were excited; and such a tafle for the commodities -
and arts of other countries gradually spread among them, that
they not only encouraged the retort of foreigners to their har-
bours, but began to perceive the advantage and necessity of ap-
plying to commerce themselves '.

THIs communication, which was opened between Europe by the dicco-

veries of tra,-

and the western provinces of Asia, encouraged several persons velics by
to advance far beyond the countries in which the Cruladers land.
carried on their operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild fanaticifin,
which seems at that period to have mingled in all the schemes
of individuals, no less than in all the counsels of nations, first
incited men to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken from profpets of
commercial advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity. Ben-
jamin, a Jew of Tudela, in the kingdom of Navarre, pofiTcfed
with a superstitious veneration for the law of Moses, and soli-
citous to visit his countrymen in the ealt, whom he hoped to
find in such a tate of power and opulence, as might redound
to the honour of his fedt, set out from Spain in the year 160,
and travelling by land to Constantinople, proceeded through
the countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian eas, as
far as Chinese Tartary. From thence hc took his route towards
the south, and after traversing various provinces of the farther
India, he embarked on the Indian ocean, visited several of its
islands, and returned at the end of thirteen years, by the wayof
Egypt, to Europe, with much information concerning a large
distriCt of the globe, altogether unknown at that time to the

Ilit. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 25, &c.

weflcrn

B O0 OK western world m. The zeal of the head of the Ghriftian church
-,--' co-operated with the superstition of Benjamin the Jew, in dif-

.covering the interior and remote provinces of Asia. All Chris-
tendom having been alarmed with accounts of the rapid pro-
grefs of the Tartar arms under Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who
entertained most exalted ideas concerning the plenitude of his
.1246. power, and the submission due to his injunctions, lent father

John de Piano Carpini, at the head of a miflion of Franciscan
monks, and father Afcolino, at the head of another of Domi-
nicans, to exhort Kayuk Khan, the grandson of Zengis, who
was then at the head of the Tartar empire, to embrace the
Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the earth by his
arms. The haughty descendant of the greatest conqueror Asia
had ever beheld, aflonifhed at this strange mandate from an
Italian priest, whose name and power were alike unknown to
him, received it with the contempt which it merited, though
he dismissed the mendicants who delivered it with impunity.
But as they had penetrated into the country by different routes,
and followed for ome time the Tartar camps, which were
always in motion, they had an opportunity of visiting a great
part of Asia. Carpini, who proceeded by the way of Poland
and Russia, travelled through its northern provinces as far as
the extremities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have landed
fornewhere in Syria, advanced through its southern provinces,
into the interior parts of Persia .
123. NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed farther to-

wards extending the knowledge which the Europeans had be-
gun to acquire of those diflant regions. Some designing

" Bergcron Recucil dcs Voyages, &c. tom. i. p. i.
Hakluyt. i. 21. Bergeron, tom. i.

impostor,

impostor, who took advantage of the fender acquaintance of B 0 0 L
the Christians with the state and character of the Asiatic nations,
having informed him that a powerful Chan of the Tartars had
embraced the Christian faith, the monarch listened to the tale
with pious credulity, and instantly resolved to fend ambafladors
to this illustrious convert, with a view of inciting him to attack
their common enemy the Saracens on one quarter, while he fell
upon them on the other. As monks were the only persons in
that age who poffeired such a degree of knowledge as qualified
them for a service of this kind, he employed in it father
Andrew, a Jacobine, who was followed by father William de
Rubruquis, a Franciscan. With refpeat to the progress of the
former, there is no memorial extant. The journal of the lat-
ter has been published. He was admitted into the presence of
Mangu, the third khan in succession from Zengis, and made a
circuit through the interior parts of Asia, more extensive than
that of any European who had hitherto explored them °.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent forth to visit

Asia, succeeded others who ventured into remote countries,
from the profpet of commercial advantage, or from motives
of mere curiosity. The first and most eminent of these was
Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Having engaged i269.
early in trade, according to the cuitom of his country, his afpir-
ing mind wifled for a sphere of aCtivity more extensive than
was afforded to it by the eflablifhcd traffic carried on in those
ports of Europe and Asia, which the Venetians frequented.
This prompted him to travel into unknown countries, in expec-
tation of opening with them a commercial intcrcourfc, more
suited to the sanguine ideas and hopes of a young advcnturcr.

* H1:kl. i. 7 1. Recucil de Voyages par Bcrgcron, tom. i.
VOL.. I. F As

B 0 0 K As his father had already carried some European commodities-
A _-----. to the court of the great Chan of the Tartars, and had disposed

of them to advantage, he resorted thither. Under the protec-
tion of Kublay Chan, the molt powerful of all the successors of
Zengis, he continued his mercantile peregrinations in Asia up-
wards of twenty-fix years; and during that time advanced to-
wards the eafl, far beyond the utmost boundaries to which any
European traveller had ever proceeded. Instead of following
the course of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the vast unpeopled
plains of Tartary, he passed through the chief trading cities in
the more cultivated parts of Asia, and penetrated to Cambalu,
or Peking, the capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or Chi-
na, subject at that time to the successors of Zengis. He made
more than one voyage on the Indian ocean, he traded in many
of the islands, from which Europe had long received fpiceries
and other commodities, which it held in high etimation, though
unacquainted with the particular countries to which it was in-
debted for those precious productions; and he obtained infor-
mation concerning several countries, which he did not visit
in person, particularly the island Zipangri, probably the fame
now known by the name of Japan P. On his return, he
astonished his contemporaries with his dcfcrrptions of vast re-
gions, whose names had never been heard of in Europe, and
with such pompous accounts of their fertility, their populous-
ness, their opulence, the variety of their manufacures, and
the extent of their trade, as rose far above the conception of
an uninformed age.
132 ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Sir John Man-

deville, an Englillman, cncouraged by his example, visited

P Vi:iggi di Marco Polo. Ranmus, ii. . Bcrgeron, tom. ii.

I .10i

most of the countries in the east which he had described, and, B OIO K
like him, published an account of them on his return . The -
narrations of those early travellers abound with many wild in-
coherent tales, concerning giants, enchanters, and monsters.
But they were not, from that circumflance, less acceptable to
an ignorant age, which delighted in what was marvellous.
The wonders which they told, mostly on hearsay, filled the
multitude with admiration. The fads which they related from
their own obfcrvation, attracted the attention of the more dif-
cerning. The former, which may be confidered as the popu-
lar traditions and fables of the countries through which they
had pafied, were gradually disregarded as Europe advanced in
knowledge. The latter, however incredible some of them
may have appeared in their own time, havc been confirmed by
the obfcrvations of modern travellers. By means of both,
however, the curiosity of mankind was excited with rcfpe to
the remote parts of the earth, their ideas were cnlarged, and
they were not only insensibly dilpofed to attempt new difcove-
ries, but received such information as direded them to that
particular course in which they were afterwards carried on.

WVHILE this spirit was gradually forming in Europe, a for- and y the

tunate discovery was made, which contributed more than all i;n,'lIc('l
the efForts and ingenuity of preceding ages, to improve and CO'"i';'lj
to extend navigation. That wonderful praperty of the mag-
net, by which it commlunicates luch virtue to a llenler rod of
iron or needle, as to point towards the poles of the earth,
was obfirvcd. The ufc which might be made of this in dirct-
ing navigation was immediately perceived, and tlat mofi valu-
able, but now familiar inflrument, the marilers comayls, was

'i Voyages and 'ITrvcs, hy Sir Jolin Madcville.

1*' 2 formed.

B 0 formed. When; by means of it, navigators found that at all

I - seasons, and in every place, they could discover the north and

south with so much ease and accuracy, it became no longer
neceflary to depend merely on the light of the stars and the ob-
servation of the sea coast. They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the shore, ventured
boldly into the ocean, and relying on this new guide,
-could fleer in the darkest night, and under the most cloudy ky,
with a security and precision hitherto unknown. The compass
may be said to have opened to man the dominion of the sea,
and to have put him in full possession of the earth, by enabling
him to visit every part of it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi,
a town of considerable trade in the kingdom of Naples, was-
the author of this great discovery, about the year one thou-
sand three hundred and two. It hath been often the fate
of those illufirious benefactors of mankind, who have en-
riched science and improved the arts by their inventions,
to derive more reputation than benefit from the happy
efforts of their genius. But the lot of Gioia has been still
more cruel; through the inattention or ignorance of con-
terpporary historians, he has been defrauded even of the fame
to which he had such a just title. We receive from them no
information with refpea to his profession, his character, the
precise time when he made this important discovery, and the
accidents or inquiries which led to it: the knowledge of this
event, though producive of greater effets than any recorded
in the annals of the human race, is transmitted to us without
any of thofc circumstances, which can gratify the curiosity that
it naturally awakens . Though the use of the compass might
enable the Italians to perform the short voyages to which they

Col'inns & Trombcllus de Acus nautica Inventore. Infit. Acad. Bonon. tom. ii.
part iii. p. 372.

8 were

were accustomed, with greater security and expedition, its in- B 0 0 K
fluence was not so sudden or extensive, as immediately to '----
render navigation adventurous, and to excite a spirit of dii-
covery. Many causes combined in preventing this beneficial
invention from producing its full efFed inftantaneoully. Men
relinquish ancient habits slowly, and with reluctance. They
are averse to new experiments, and venture upon them with
timidity. The commercial jealousy of the Italians, it is pro-
bable, laboured to conceal the happy discovery of their coun-
tryman from other nations. The art of fleering by the com-
pass, with such kill and accuracy as to inspire a full confidence
in its direction, was acquired gradually. Sailors, long accuf-
tomed not to quit fight of land, durcf not launch out at once
and commit themselves to unknown eas. Accordingly, near
half a century elapsed, from the time of Gioia's difcovcry, be-
fore navigators ventured into any eas which they had not been
accuflomed to frequent.

THE first appearance of a bolder spirit may be dated from Snme, pnenr-

anceo a bold-

the voyages of the Spaniards to the Canary or Fortunate Islands. r pirit
By what accident they were led to the discovery of thoe frinall "navi."3 i).
iflcs, which lie near five hundred miles from the Spanilh coats,
and above a hundred and fifty miles from the coafi of Africa,
contemporary writers have not explained. But about the mid-
dle of the fourteenth century, the people of all the diflcrcnt
kingdoms into which Spain was then divided, were accuilonmcd
to make piratical excursions thither, in order to plunder the
inhabitants, or to carry them off as slaves. Clement VI. in
virtue of the right claimed by the holy fee to diflofe of all
countries poffefled by infidels, ereCed those isles into a
kingdom, in the year one thousand three hundred and
forty-four, and conferred it on Lewis de la Ccrda, descendcd

si o n

B 0 0 K from the royal family of Castile. But that unfortunate
-i,,---' prince, destitute of power to assert his nominal title, hav-

ing never ifited the Canaries, John de Bethencourt, a Nor-
man baron, obtained a grant of them from Henry III. of
Castile . Bethencourt, with the valour and good fortune
which diftinguiflhed the adventurers of his country, attempted
and effected the conquest, and the possession of the Ca:,aries
remained for some time in his family, as a fief held of the
crown of Castile. Previous to this expedition of Bethencourt,
his countrymen are said to have visited the coast of Africa, and
13j5. to have proceeded far to the south of the Canary islands. But

their voyages thither fecm not to have been undertaken in con-
sequence of any public or regular plan for extending navigation
and attempting new discoveries. They were either excursions
suggestcd by that roving piratical spirit, which descended to the
Normans from their ancestors, or the commercial enterprises of
private merchants, which attratcd so little notice, that hardly
any memorial of them is to be found in contemporary authors.
In a general furvcy of the progress of discovery, it is sufficient
to have mentioned this event; and leaving it among those of
dubious exiftcnce, or of finmall importance, we may conclude,
that though much additional information concerning the remote
regions ol the LEat had been received by travellers who visited
theml by lind, navigation, at the beginning of the fifteentli
ccntulry, ]l.ad not advanc d bc)ond the fiate to whilich it had
attainc bfrc thl e downil of thle Roman empire.

Firi rt ar A length tec period arrived, when Providcnce dcrccd tlhat
.,... cy men were to palsr the liinits vitlin whicl they had been so long

confined, and open to thcmlclvcs a mnore ample field wherein
to display their talents, their cntcrprilc, and courage. The

' Vicra y C1.! ijo Nu(ic. cl Ia Iilllor. dc Can ri.i, I. z, &c. Gli llii. c.
i .

fir ft

fi'rt considerable efforts towards this were not made by any of B 0 o K
the more powerful states of Europe, or by those who had ap-
plied to navigation with the greatelr afliduity and fucccfs.
The glory of leading the way in this new career was reserved
for Portugal, one-of the fmiallcfl and mofl inconsiderable of the f rmcdby the

I'uil u/u re.

European kingdoms. As the attempts of the Portugucfe to
acquire the knowledge of those parts of the globe with which
mankind were then unacquainted, not only improved and ex-
tended the art of navigation, but routed such a spirit of curio-
fity and enterprise, as led to the discovery of the New world of
which I propose to write the hiflory, it is necessary to take a
view of the rife, the progress, and fucccfs of their various naval
operations. It was in this fcllool that the discoverer of America
was trained; and unless we trace the steps by which his in-
ftruCtors and guides advanced, it will be impossible to compre-
hend the circumstances which suggested the idea, or facilitated
the execution of his great design.

VARIOUS circumflances prompted the Portuguese to exert Cicumflan-

ce which led

their ativity in this new direcion, and enabled them to ac- to thit.
complifh undertakings apparently superior to the natural force
of their monarchy. The kings of Portugal, having driven the
Moors out of their dominions, had acquired power, as well as
glory, by the fucccfs of their arms againfl tihe infidels. By
their 'ictories over them, tley had extended the royal autho-
rity beyond the narrow limits within vwhich it was originally
circumscribcd in l'ortugal, as well as in other feudal kingdoms.
They liad the cmmnnandl of the national force, could routi it to
aCt with united vigour, and, after the expullion of the Moors,
could employ it without dread of interruption f'rom any domeilic
enemy. By the perpetual houlilitics carried on for icveral centuries

against

B. . K againfl the Mahometans, the martial and adventurous spirit

---.' that diftinguilhed all the European nations during the middle

ages, was improved and heightened among the Portuguese. A
fierce civil war, towards the close of the fourteenth century,
occasioned by a disputed succession, augmented the military ar-
dour of the nation, and formed or called forth men of such
active and daring genius, as are fit for bold undertakings.
The situation of the kingdom, bounded on every fide by the
dominions of a more powerful neighbour, did not afford free
scope to the ativity of the Portuguese by land, as the firength
of their monarchy was no match for that of Castile. But Por-
tugal was a maritime slate, in which there were many commo-
dious harbours; the people had begun to make ome progress
in the knowledge and praice of navigation; and the Tea was
open to them, presenting the only field of enterprise in which
they could distinguish themselves.
Firlt attempt. SUCH was the slate of Portugal, and such the disposition of

the people, when John I. surnamed the Bafllard, obtained fe-
cure polfeffion of the crown by the peace concluded with
Caflile in the year one thousand four hundred and eleven.
He was a prince of great merit, who, by superior courage
and abilities, had opened his way to a throne which of
right did not belong to him. He instantly perceived that
it would be impossible to preserve public order, or domes-
tic tranquillity, without finding some employment for the
rceflefs spirit of his iubjeds. With this view, he affernbled
a numerous fleet at Lilbon, composed of all the fliips that he
could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many hired from
foreigners. This great armament was destined to attack the
41 Moors fettled on the coafi of Barbary. While it was equip-

pitg, a few vcefels were appointed to fail along the weflern

fiore

ore of Arica boundud uy the tlantic ocean, and to discover 0 K

the unknown countries situated there. From this inconsiderable _
attempt, we may date the commencement of that spirit of dif-
covery which opened the barriers that had so long shut out
mankind from the knowledge of one half of the terrestrial
globe.

AT the time when John sent forth there hips on this new

voyage, the art of navigation was still very imperfet. Though
Africa lay so near to Portugal, and the fertility of the coun-
tries already known on that continent invited men to make
farther discoveries, the Portuguese had never ventured to fail
beyond Cape Non. That promontory, as its name imports,
was hitherto confidered as a boundary which could not be
passed. But the nations of Europe had now acquired as much
knowledge, as emboldened them to disregard the prejudices
and to correc the errors of their ancestors. The long reign of
ignorance, the conflant enemy of every curious inquiry, and
of every new undertaking, was approaching to its period. The
light of science began to dawn. The works of the ancient
Greeks and Romans began to be read with admiration and
profit. The sciences cultivated by the Arabians were intro-
duced into Europe by the Moors fettled in Spain and Portugal,
and by the Jews, who were very numerous in both thece king-
doms. Geomctry, astronomy, and geography, the sciences on
which the art of navigation is founded, became objects of flu-
dious attention. The memory of the discoveries made by the
ancients was revived, and the progrcfs of their navigation and
commerce began to be traced. Some of the cautcs which,
during this century and the lafl, have obfltruled the cultivation
of fcicnce in Portugal, did not cxifl, or did not operate in the

Vol. I. G fame

B 0 0

. fa,
. manner, iln the fist.t. ccntury ; and the oru uefe

I. LUUC
--.- at that period, seem to have kept pace with other nations on

this fide of the Alps in literary pursuits.
Its success, As the genius of the age favoured the execution of that new

undertaking, to which the peculiar slate of their country in-
vited the Portuguese, it proved successful. The vessels sent on
the discovery doubled that formidable Cape, which had ter-
minated the progress of former navigators, and proceeded a-
hundred and- sixty miles beyond- it, to Cape Bojador. As its
rocky cliffs, which ftretched'a considerable way into the Atlan-
tic, appeared more dreadful than the promontory which they
had. pased, the Portuguese commanders durst not attempt to
fail round it, but returned to Lisbon, more satisfied with having
advanced so far., than.alhamed at having ventured no farther...

Pri,ce Henry INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it increased the pas-
the director of
he Portu- sion for discovery, which began to arise in Portugal. The ex-
rires. traordinary success of the king's expedition againfl the Moors
141. of Barbary, added fliength to the spirit of enterprise in the na-

tion, and pufied it on to new undertakings. In order to render
these successful, it was necefTary that they should be conduced
by a person who pocfficd abilities capable of discerning what
was attainable, who enjoyed' leisure to form a regular system
for prosecuting discovery, and' who was animated with ardour
that would. perfevcre in spite of obfaclcs and repulses. Hap-
pily for Portugal, sic found all' tllofe qualities in Henry duke
of Vilco, the fourth son of king John by Phlippa of Lancalter,
filler of Henry IV. king of England. That prince, in his early
youth, having accompanied his father in his expedition to Bar-

Sec N O.TE IX.

bary,

bary, diftinguilhed himself by many deeds of valour. To the n O O x
martial spirit, which was the charaderiftic of every man of
noble birth at that time, he added all the accomplishments of a
more enlightened and polished age. He cultivated the arts and
sciences, which were then unknown and despised by persons of
his rank. He applied with peculiar fondness to the fludy of
geography; and by the inftru&ion of able masters, as well as
by the accounts of travellers, he early acquired such knowledge
of the habitable globe, as discovered the great probability of
finding new and opulent countries, by failing along the coast of
Africa. Such an object was formed to awaken the enthusiasm
and ardour of a youthful mind, and he engaged with the ut-
molt zeal to patronize a dcfign that might prove as beneficial,
as it appeared to be splendid and honourable. In order that he
might pursue this great scheme without interruption, he retired
from court immediately after his return from Africa, and fixed
his residence at Sagres, near Cape St. Vincent, where the pro-
speCt of the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts continually to-
wards his favourite projec, and encouraged him to execute it.
In this retreat he was attended by ome of the moll learned men
in his country, who aided him in his researches. le applied
for information to the M\loors of Barbary, who were accustomed
to travel by land into the interior provinces of Africa, in
quetl of ivory, gold-dul, and other rich commodities. He
consulted the Jews fettled in Portugal. By promises, rewards,
and marks of refpcd', he allured into his fervicc several persons,
foreigners as well as Portuguefc, who were eminent for their
skill in navigation. In taking those preparatory fleps, the great
aibilities of the prince were seconded by his private virtues. His
integrity, his affability, his rcfped for religion, his zeal for
the honour of his country, engaged persons of all ranks to

G 2 applaud

B O I K applaud his design, and to favour the execution of it. His
A_
-- > schemes were allowed by his countrymen to proceed neither

from ambition, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow from the
warm benevolence of a heart eager to promote the happiness
of mankind, and which juRfly intitled him to assume a motto
for his device, that described the quality by which he wished to
be distinguished, the talent of doing good.

Dicovery of His sirs effort, as is usual at the commencement of any new
-orto Santo, undertaking, was extremely inconsiderable. He fitted out a

single ship, and giving the command of it to John Gonzalez
Zarco and Tristan Vaz, two gentlemen of his household, who
voluntarily offered to conduc the enterprise, he inftruded them
to use their utmoff efforts to double Cape Bojador, and thence
to fleer towards the south. They, according to the mode of
navigation whicl fill prevailed, held their course along the
shore; and by following that direcion, they mufl have en-
countered almost insuperable difficulties in attempting to pass
Cape Bojador. But fortune came in aid to their want of skill,
and prevented the voyage from being altogether fruitless. A
sudden squall of wind arose, drove them out to ea, and when
they expe&ed every moment to perish, landed them on an
unknown island, which from their happy escape they named
Porto Santo. In the infancy of navigation, the discovery of
this finall island appeared a matter of such moment, that they
inflantly returned to Portugal with the good tidings, and were
received by Henry with the applause and honou due to for-
tunate adventurers. This faint dawn of success filled a mind
ardent in the purfuiit of a favourite object with such sanguine
,419. hopes as were sufficient encouragement to proceed. Next year,

-lenry sent out three ships under the fame commanders, to
whom he joined Bartholomew Pcrcftrcllo, in order to take pol-

fclion

session of the island which they had discovered.. When they B o o K
began to fettle in Porto Santo, they observed towards the south -
a fixed spot in the horizon, like a small black cloud. By de-
grees, they were led to conjecture that it might be land, and ofMadeira.
steering towards it, they arrived at a considerable island, unin-
habited, and covered with wood, which on that account they
called Madeira '. As it was Henry's chief objet to render his
discoveries useful to his country, he immediately equipped a 1420.
fleet to carry a colony of Portuguese to these islands. By his
provident care, they were furnished not only with the feeds,
plants, and domeflic animals common in Europe; but as lie
foresaw that the warmth of the climate and fertility of the foil
would prove favourable to the rearing of other productions, he
procured flips of the vine from the island of Cyprus, the rich
wines of which were then in great request, and plants of the
sugar-cane from Sicily, into which it had been lately introduced.
These throve o prosperously in this new country, that the
benefit of cultivating them was immediately perceived, and the
sugar and wine of Madeira quickly became considerable articles
in the commerce of Portugal .

As soon as the advantages derived from this first settlement Double Cape

to the weft of the European continent began to be felt, the Bojador.
spirit of discovery appeared less chimerical, and became more
adventurous. By their voyages to Madeira, the Portuguese
were gradually accuflorned to a bolder navigation, and inficad
of creeping servilely along the coast, ventured into the open
tea. In consequence of taking this course, Gilianez, who

I-liflorical Relation of the firit Discovery of Madeira, translatcd fiom the Portuguere of
Fran. Alcararnno, p. 15, &c.

LuJ. Guicciarlini Dcfcritt, dc Paei Bafli, p. 18o, i.

commanded

B 0 0 commanded one of prince Henry's ships, doubled Cape Boja-

dor,-the boundary of the Portuguese navigation upwards of
.twenty years, and which had -hitherto been deemed unpaffable
1433. This successful voyage, which the ignorance of the age placed

on a level with the mnof famous exploits recorded in history,
opened a new sphere to navigation, as it discovered the vast
continent of Africa, fill washed by the Atlantic ocean, and
stretching towards the south. Part of this was soon explored;

Advace the Portuguese advanced within the tropics, and in the space
·i:hin the
'tropics. of a few years they discovered the river Senegal, and all the

coast extending from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Afonifhed at HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided in their dif-
-what they dif-
coveed there. coveries, or ercouraged to attempt them, by the light and

information which they received from the works of the ancient
.mathematicians and geographers. But, when they began to
enter the torrid zone, the notion which prevailed among
the ancients, that the exceflive heat, which reigned perpe-
tually there, was To fatal to life as to render it uninhabitable,
deterred them, for some time, from proceeding. Their own
observations, when they first ventured into this unknown and
formidable region, tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity
concerning the violent operation of the dire& rays of the fun.
As far as the river Senegal, the Portuguese had found the coast
of Africa inhabited by people nearly resembling the Moors of
Barbary. When they advanced to the south of that river, the
human form seemed to put on a new appearance. They be-
held men with kins black as ebony, with hort curled hair,
flat noes, thick lips, and all the peculiar features which are
now known to diflinguifh the race of negroes. This fur-
prifing alteration they naturally attributed to the influence of

heat,

heat, and if they should advance nearer to the line, they began B 00 K
to dread that its effects would be still more fatal. Those dan- -
gers were exaggerated, and many other objections- against.
attempting farther diicoveries were proposed by some of the
grandees, who, from ignorance, from envy, or from that cold
timid prudence which rejets whatever has the air of novelty
or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all prince Henry's
schemes. They represented, that it was altogether chimerical
to expet' any advantage from countries situated in that region.
which the wisdom and experience of antiquity had pronounced
to be unfit for the habitation of men; that their forefathers,
satisfied with cultivating the tcrnitory which Providence had
allotted them, did not wafe the flrength of the kingdom by
fruitless proje6s, in quef of new settlements; that Portugal
was already exhaufled by the expence of attempts to dicfover
lands which either did not exist, or. which nature deflined to
remain unknown ; and was drained of men, who might have
been employed in undertakings attended witlh more certain fuc-
cels, and productive of greater benefit.. But neither their appeal
to the authority of the ancients, nor tlcir reasonings concerning
tle interest of Portugal, made any impreflion upon the deter-
mined hilofophic mind of prince Henry. The dilcoveries
whliicl hc lihd already made convinced him that the ancients
had little more than a conjectural knowledge of the torrid zone.
I-Ie was no lets latisfied that the political arguments of his op-
ponents witl riec't to the interest of Portugal were malevolent
and ill-founded. In those fentimnnts he was flrcnuoufly fp-
ported by his brother Pcdro, who governed the kingdom as
guardian of their nephew Alphonfo.V. who had ftucceeded to 1.138.
the throne during his minority; and inftcad of flackcning iiis

Clluir ts

B Od K efforts, Henry continued to pursue his discoveries with fresh

_.--i ardour.

p.ipal grant 'BUT, in order to silence all the murmurs of opposition, he
to Portugal of
what coun- endeavoured to obtain the fandion of the highest authority in
tries it fliuld
dircovrr.u favour of his operations. With this view, he applied to the

Pope, and representcd, in pompous terms, the pious and un-
wearied zeal, with which lie had exerted himself during twenty
years, in discovering unknown countries, the wretched inha-
bitants of which were utter strangers to true religion, wander-
ing in heathen darkness, or led astray by the delusions of Ma-
homet. He besought the holy father, to whom, as the vicar
of Christ, all the kingdoms of the earth were subjet, to con-
ser on the crown of Portugal a right to all the countries possessed
by Infidels, which should be discovered by the industry of its
fubjets, and subdued by the force of its arms. He intreated
him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the highest penalties,
not to molest the Portuguese while engaged in this laudable
enterprise, and to prohibit them from fettling in any of the
countries which they fliould discover. He promised that, in
all their expeditions, it should be the chief objelc of the Por-
tuguefe to spread the knowledge of the Christian religion, to
establish the authority of the holy fee, and to increase the flock
of the univerlal pastor. As it was by improving with dexte-
rity every favourable conjuncture for acquiring new powers,
that the court of Rome had gradually extended its usurpations,
Elugenc IV. the pontiff to whom this application was made,
eagerly seizcd the opportunity that now presented itself. He
instantly perceived, that by complying with prince Henry's
request, he might exercise a prerogative no less flattering in its

9 own

own nature, than likely to prove beneficial in its consequences. B 0° K
A Bull was accordingly issued, in which, after applauding in '----
the strongest terms the past efforts of the Portuguese, and ex-
horting them to proceed in that laudable career on which they
had entered, he granted them an exclusive right to all the coun-
tries which they should discover, from Cape Non to the conti-
nent of India.

EXTRAVAGANT as this donation, comprehending such a

large portion of the habitable globe, would now appear even in
Catholic countries, no person in the fifteenth century doubted
that the pope, in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had a
right to confer it. Prince Henry was soon sensible of the ad-
vantages which he derived from this tranfaation. His fchemcs
were authorired and ianCified by the bull approving of them.
The spirit of discovery was connedted with zeal for religion,
which, in that age, was a principle of such acivity and vigour,
as to influence tlhe conduc of nations. All Christian princes
were deterred fiom intruding into those countries wlicl the
Portuguese had discovered, or fiom interrupting the progress
of their navigation and conquefis .

THE fame of the Portuguese voyages soon spread over Eu- S,.i c

rope. Men, long accustomed to circumfcriec the activity and ji.,I'..f
knowledge of the human mind within the limits to which they s'c '; "-
ha1d been hitherto confined, were afloniflied to bclold the
fpliere of navigation bo suddenly enlarged, and a profpeic
opened of visiting regions of the globe, the cxiftence of wlicl
was unknown in former times. The learned and fpcculative
reasoned and formed theories concerning those unexpelcecd
discoverics. The vulgar inquired and wondered ; and cntcr-

Sce N O'lI X.
VOL. I. II prilsng

BO o K prifing adventurers crouded from every part of Europe, so-
-_- --v liciting prince Henry to employ them in this honourable service.

Many Venetians and Genoese, in particular, who'were, at that
time, superior to all other nations in the science of naval affairs,
entered aboard the Portuguese ships, and acquired a more per-
seCt and extensive knowledge of their profession in that new
school of navigation. In emulation of there foreigners, the
Portuguese exerted their own talents. The nation seconded
the designs of the prince. Private merchants formed corn-
1446. panies, with a view to search for unknown countries. The

Cape de Verd islands, which lie off the promontory of that
x449. name, were discovered, and soon after, the isles called Azores.

As the former of these are above three hundred miles from the
African coast, and the latter nine hundred milesfrom any con-
tinent, it is evident, by their venturing so boldly into the open,
seas, that the Portuguese had, by this time, improved greatly
in the art of navigation.

Death of WHILE the passion for engaging in new undertakings was
kHeny. thus warm and active, it received an unfortunate check by the

z163. death of prince Henry, whose superior knowledge had hitherto

direced all the operations of the discoverers, and whose patro-
nage had encouraged and protcted them. It is true, that du-
ring his life, the Portuguese, in their utmost progrcfs towards
the south, did not advance within five degrees of the equinocial
line; and, after their continued exertions for half a century,.
hardly fifteen hundred miles of the coast of Africa were disco-
vered. To an age acquainted with the efforts of navigation in.
its state of maturity and improvement, those cffays of its early

From 1.12 years muff necessarily appear feeble and unskilful. But, incon-
tO 1463. fiderable as they may appear, they were sufficient to turn the

curiosity

curiosity of the European nations into a new channel, to excite 0 o K
an enterprising spirit, and to point the way to future disco- -.
veries.

ALPHONSO, who possessed the throne of Portugal at the time The patron

death, w s much ed s . for discovery

of prince Henry's death, was so much engaged in upporting languines
his pretensions to the crown of Castile, or i carrying on his for ome
expeditions against the Moors in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he could not
prosecute the discoveries in Africa with ardour. He committed
the conduct of them to Fernando Gomez, a merchant in Lisbon,
to whom he granted an exclusive right of commerce with all
the countries of which prince Henry had taken poffeflion. Un-
der the restraint and oppression of a monopoly, the spirit of
discovery languished. It ceased to be a national object, and be-
came the concern of a private man, more attentive to his own
gain, than to the glory of his country. Some progress, however,
was made. The Portuguese ventured at length to cross the '471.
line, and, to their astonishment, found that region of the torrid
zone, which was fppofed to be scorched with intolerable heat,
to be not only habitable, but populous and fertile.

JOIN II. who succeeded his father Alphonfo, poTfeffed ta- 14
lents capable both of forming and executing great designs. As Rcives tvil

. . . ,-additional

part of his revenues, while prince, had arifcn fron duties on ardour.
the trade with the newly difcovcred countries, this naturally
turned his attention towards them, and satisfied liiri with re-
Ipct to their utility and importance. In proporti., as his
knowlcdge of these countries cxtcndcd, the poiltiion of tlich
.Ippearcd to be of greater confequcnce. Vhile the )ortug,. i
proceeded along the coast of Africa, from Cape Non to the

-I 2 river

B 0 K, river of Senegal, they found all that extensive traa to be sandy,
·> :-- - ,barren, and thinly inhabited by a wretched people, professing

the Mahometan religion, and subjed to the vast empire of Mo-
rocco. But to the south of that river, the power and religion
cf the Mahometanswere unknown. The country was divided
into finall independent principalities, the population was confi-
derable, the foil fertiley, and the Portuguese soon discovered
that it produced ivory, rich gums, gold, and'other valuable
commodities. By the acquisition of these, commerce was en-
larged; and became more adventurous. Men, animated and
rendered active by the certain prospect of gain, pursued disco-
very with greater eagerness, than when they were excited only
by curiosity and hope.
Its progrcfs. Tllis spirit derived no small reinforcement of vigour from

the countenance of such a monarch.as John. He declared
Limfelf the patron of every attempt towards discovery, and
promoted it with all the. ardour of his grand-uncle prince
i4s4. Henry, and with superior power. The effeEts of this were

immediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out, which,
after discovering the kingdoms of Benin and Congo, ad-
vanced above fifteen hundred miles beyond the line, and
the Portuguese, for the first time, beheld a new heaven, and
obfcrved the stars of another hemisphere. John was not only
solicitous to discover, but attentive to secure the poffefflon of
those countries. IIe built forts on the coast of Guinea; he
sent out colonies to fettle there; he ctabliflcd a commercial
intercourse with the more powerful kingdoms ; he endeavoured

y Navigntio Aloyfii Cnlaimufi npud Novum Orbcn Grynari, p. 2. iS. Navignt. all
If'la dt San ome pcr un pil!lto l'ortugh. Rtinufio. . 115.

tO,

to render such as were feeble or divided, tributary to the crown B 00 K
of Portugal. Some of the petty princes voluntarily acknow- _
ledged themselves his vassals. Others were compelled to do so
by force of arms. A regular and well digefled system was
formed with refpeac to this new object of policy, and by firmly
adhering to it, the Portuguese power and commerce in Africa
were eftablifled upon a solid foundation.

BY their constant intercourse with the people of Africa, the I-opesordir-

Portuguese gradually acquired some knowledge of those parts wrl i
of that country which they had not visited. The information the l'.ft in-

dies.

which they received from the natives, added to what they had
observed in their own voyages, began to open profpeds more cx-
tensive, and to fuggefl the idea of schemes more important, than'
those which had hithcrto allured and occupied them. They
had detected the error of the ancients concerning the nature of
the torrid zone. They found, as they proceeded southwards,
that the continent of Africa, in.tead of extending in breadth,
according to the dotrine of Ptolemy , at that time the oracle
and guide of the learned in the study of geography, appeared
sensibly to contract itself, and to bend towards the cast. This
induced them to give credit to the accounts of the ancient Phc-
nician voyages round Africa, which had long been deemed fa-
bulous, and led them to conceive hopes that by following the
fame route, they might arrive at the East Indies, and engrols
that commerce, which has becii the source of wealth and powcr
to every nation polflclid of it. The comprehcnfivc genius of
prince I-Icnry, as we m..y conjecure from the words of the
pope's bull, had early formed ome idea of'this navigation.
All the Portuguese pilots and mathematicians now concurred in

' ViJc Nov. Oibis 'Tabul. Gegr.in'l. Secund. Ptolem. Aml. 1730.

rcprefcnting'

B O repreienting it as practicable. The ing entered with warmth

into their sentiments, and began to concert measures for this
arduous and important voyage.

Schemes for BEFORE his preparations for this expedition were finished,
accomniplfih-
ino this. accounts were transmitted from Africa, that various nations

along the coast had mentioned a mighty kingdom situated on
their continent, at a great diflance towards the east, the king
of which, according to their description, professed the Christian
religion. The Portuguese monarch immediately concluded, that
this muff be the emperor of Abyssinia, to whom the Europeans,
seduced by a mistake of Rubruquis, Marco Polo, and other tra-
vellers to the east, absurdly gave the name Prester or Presbyter
John; and as he hoped to receive information and affiflance
from a Christian prince, in prosecuting a scheme that tended to
propagate their common faith, he resolved to open, if possible,
some intercourse with his court. With this view, he made
choice of Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo de Payva, who were
perse& masters of the Arabic language, and sent them into
the cast, to search for the residence of this unknown potentate,
and to make him proffers of friendship. They had it in charge,
likewise, to procure whatever intelligence the nations which
they visitcd could supply, with refpec to the trade of India, and
the course of navigation to that continent '.

Voyage of WHILE John made this new attempt by land, to obtain
B.rLholnlmcw some knowledge of the country, which he wiflcd so ardently

to ifcover, he did not neglct the prosecution of this great dc-
5486. sign by sea. 'he conduct of this voyage, the molt arduous

and important which the Portugucfe liad ever projcccd, was

a Faija y Soua. Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. Lafitau Dccouv. de Port. i. 6.

corn mitted

committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whose sagacity, ex- B 00
perience, and fortitude rendered him equal to the undertaking. '--.--'
He firetched boldly towards the south, and proceeding beyond 14S.
the utrioft limits to which his countrymen had hitherto advanc-
ed, discovered near a thousand miles of new country. Neither-
the danger to which he was exposed, by a fucceflion of violent
tempests in unknown seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he suffered from los-
ing his store-ship, could deter him from prosecuting his enter-
prise. In recompence of his labours and perseverance, he at
last descried that lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the
south. But to descry it, was all that was in his power. The
violence of the winds, the shattered condition of his lhips, and
the turbulcnt spirit of his sailors, compelled him to return,.
after a voyage of sixteen months, in which he discovered an
extent of country far greater than any preceding navigator.
Diaz had called the promontory which terminated his voyage
Cato Tormentofo, or the flormy Cape; but the king, his master,.
as he now entertained no doubt of having found the long de-
fired route to India, gave it a name more inviting, and of bet-
ter omen, 1The CGpe of Good Hope'.

THOSE sanguine expecations of success were confirmed by Mare certain

the intelligence which John received over land, in consequence fuccf s.
of his embassy to Abyssinia. Covillam and Payva, in obedi-
ence to their mafler's inflrutions, had repaired to Grand Cairo.
From that city, they travelled along with a caravan of Egyp-
tian merchants, and croWed over to Aden, on the Red Sea.
'I here they separatcd; Payva failed dire&ly towards Abyflinia;
Covillam embarked for the East Indies, and having visited Ca-

h Falia y Sousa Port. Aiia, ol. i. p. 6.

3 Iccut,

B o -K 'lecut, Goa, and other cities on the Malabar-coaft, returned tQ

- ' Sofala, on the east fide of Africa, and thence to Grand Cairo,

which Payva and he had fixed upon as their place of rendez-
vous. Unfortunately the former was cruelly murdered in
Abyssinia, but Covillam' found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews,
whom John, whose provident sagacity attended to every cir-
cumftance that could facilitate the execution of his schemes,
had dispatched after them, in order to receive a detail of their
proceedings, and to communicate to them new inftrutions.
By one of there Jews, Covillam transmitted to Portugal a jour-
nal of his travels by sea and land, his remarks upon the trade
of India, together with exac maps of the coasts on which he
had touched; and from what he himself had observed, as well
as from the information of skilful seamen in different countries,
he concluded, that by failing round Africa, a passage might
he found to the East Indies '.

Preparations THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion and report,
for another
voyage. with the discoveries which Diaz had lately made, left hardly

any shadow of doubt with refpet 'to the possibility of failing
from Europe to India. But the vail length of the voyage, and
the furious forms which Diaz had encountered near the Cape
of Good Hope, alarmed and intimidated the Portuguese to
such a degree, although by long experience they were now be-
come adventurous and skilful mariners, that ome time was
requifitc to prepare their minds for this dangerous and extra-
ordinary voyage. The courage, however, and authority of
the monarch, gradually dilpelled the vain fears of his fubjeds,
or made it nccefiary to conceal them. As John thought himnlelf
now upon the eve of accomplishing that great design, which

c Faiia y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 27. Lafitau Decouv. i. .8.

had

aad been the principal object of his reign, his earnestness in B °1 i;
prosecuting it became so vehement, that it occupied his thoughts ----
by day, and bereaved him of sleep through the night. While
he was taking every precaution that his wisdom and experience
could suggest, in order to ensure the success of the expedition,
which was to decide concerning the fate of his favourite pro-
jec, the fame of the vast discoveries which the Portuguese had
already made, the reports concerning the extraordinary intelli-
gence which they had received from the east, and the profpeEt The attention

of mankind

of the voyage which they now meditated, drew the attention of fixed upon it.
all the European nations, and held them in fufpence and expec-
tation. By some, the maritime skill and navigations of the
Portuguese were compared with those of the Phenicians and
Carthaginians, and exalted above them. Others formed con-
jeaures concerning the revolutions which the success of their
schemes might occasion in the course of trade, and the political
state of Europe. The Venetians began to be difquicted with
the apprehension of losing their Indian commerce, the mono-
poly of which was the chief source of their power as well as
opulence, and the Portuguese already enjoyed in fancy, the
wealth of the EaR. But, during this interval, which gave
such scope to the various workings of curiosity, of hope and
of fear, an account was brought to Europe of an event no lets Suddenly

tuirned to a

extraordinary than unexpcted, the discovery of a New World nl1evobjet.
situated in the weft, and the eyes and admiration of mankind
urned immcdLatcly towards that great olbjct.

V^, l. B )O K

# BOOK II.

T H E
THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R C A.

B O O II.

MONG the foreigners whom the fame of the discoveries B o o K
made by the Portuguese had allured into their service,

_ Ir
was Christopher Columbus, a subjec of the republic of Genoa. Birth and e-

ducation of

Neither the time nor place of his birth are known with cer- Columbus.
tainty ; but he was descended of an honourable family, though
reduced to indigence by various misfortunes. His anceflors
having betaken themselves for subsistence to a eafaring life,
Columbus discovered, in his early youth, the peculiar characer
and talents which mark out a man for that profession. His
parents, inflead of thwarting this original propcnfity of his
mind, fcem to have encouraged and confirmed it, by the edu-
cation which they gave him. After acquiring Iome knowledge
of the Latin tongue, the only language in which fcicnce was
taught at that time, lie was inftrutcd in geomctry, cofino-

a See NOTE XI.

z graplhy

B 00 K grapl1y, aflronomy, and the art of drawing. Toothefe he ap-
----'-- jlicd with such ardour and predilection, on account of their

connetion with navigation, his favourite objet, that he ad-
vanced with rapid proficiency in the fludy of them. Thus
,461. qualified, he went to sea at the age of fourteen, and began his

career on that element which conducted him to so much glory.
His early voyages were to those ports in the Mediterranean
which his countrymen the Genoese frequented. This being a
1467. sphere too narrow for his active mind, he made an excursion to

the northern eas, and visited the coasts of Iceland, to which
the English and other nations had begun to retort on account
of its filhery. As navigation, in every direcion, was now
become enterprising, he proceeded beyond that island, the
Thule of the ancients, and advanced several degrees within the
polar circle. Having satisfied his curiosity by a voyage which
tended more to enlarge his knowledge of naval affairs, than to
improve his fortune, he entered into the service of a famous
fea-captain, of his own name and family. This man com-
manded a small squadron, fitted out at his own expence, and
by cruising ometimes against the Mahometans-, ometimes
againit the Venetians, the rivals of his country'in trade, had
acquired both wealth and reputation. With him Columbus
continued for several years, no less diflinguifhed for his cou-
rage, than for his experience as a sailor. At length, in an
obstinate engagement, off the coast of Portugal, with some
Venctian caravels, returning richly laden from the Low Coun-
tries, the vessel on board which he served took fire, together
with one of the enemy's hips, to which it was fafi grappled.
In this dreadful extremity his intrepidity and pretence of mind
did not forsake him. He threw himself into the ea, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and his dexterity in

swimming,

fwinmng, he reached the hiore, though above two leagues B 0 K.
distant, and saved. a life reserved for great undertakings b.

As soon as he recovered strength for the journey, he repaired He enters into

to Lisbon, where many of his countrymen were fettled. They g'te lfortu-
to Lisbon, where many of his countrymen were ettled.. They guefe service.
soon conceived such a favourable opinion of his merit, as well.
as talents, that they warmly solicited him to remain in that
kingdom, where his naval kill and experience could not fail of
rendering him conspicuous. To every adventurer, animated
either with curiosity to visit new countries or with ambition to
diflinguil hlimfelf, the Portuguese service was at that time ex-
tremely inviting. Columbus listened with a favourable ear to
the advice of his. friends, and having gained the esteem of a
Portuguese lady, whom he married, fixed his residence in
Lisbon. This alliance, instead of detaching him from a sea-
faring life, contributed to enlarge the sphere of his naval know-
ledge, and to excite a desire of extending it still farther. His
wife was a daughter of artholomew Pereftrello, one of the
captains employed by prince Henry in his early navigations,
and who, under his protection, had discovered and planted the
islands of Porto Santo and Madeira. Columbus got possession
of the journals and charts of this experienced navigator, and
from them he learned the course which the Portuguese had held
in making their discoverics, as well as the various circumstances
which guided or encouraged them in their attempts. The
study of there gratified and inflamed his favourite passion; and
while he contemplated the maps, and read the descriptions of
the new countries. which Perefrello had seen, his impatience to
visit them became irresistible. In order to indulge it, he made
a voyage to Madeira, and continued during several years to

b Lie of Columbus, c. v,

trade

RB OOn tr trade with that ifiand, with the Canaries, the Azores, the set-
,-- - tlements in Guinea, and all the other places which the Portu-

guefe had discovered on the continent of Africa c.

The effas of BY the experience which Columbus acquired, during such a
their disco-
eries upcn variety of voyages to almost every part of the globe with which,
h:m. at that time, any intercourse was carried on by ea, he was now

become one of the most skilful navigators in Europe. But, not
satisfied with that praise, his ambition aimed at something
more. The successful progress of the Portuguese navigators had
awakened a spirit of curiosity and emulation, which set every
man of science upon examining all the circumstances that led to
the discoveries which they had made, or that afforded a prospect
of succeeding in any new and bolder undertaking. The mind
of Columbus, naturally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection,
and turned to speculations of this kind, was so often employed
in revolving the principles upon which the Portuguese had
founded their schemes of discovery, and the mode in which
they had carried them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of accompliihing dif-
coveries which hitherto they had attempted in vain.

iHe frms the To find out a passage by sea to the East Indies, was the great
idnr o a new objeEt in view at that period. From the time that the Portu-
cou. fc o In-.
d3a. guefe doubled Cape deVerd, this was the point at which they

aimed in all their navigations, and, in comparison with it, all
their discoveries in Africa appeared inconsiderable. The ser-
tility and riches of India had been known for many ages; its
spices and other valuable commodities were in high request
throughout Europe, and the vast wealth of the Venetians,

Life of Colun bus, c. iv. v.

arising

arising from their having engrossed this trade, had raised the B K
envy of all nations. But how intent soever the Portuguese -
were upon discovering a new route to those desirable regions,
they searched for it only by fleering towards the south, in hopes
of arriving at India, by turning to the east, after they had failed
round the farther extremity of Africa. This course, however,
was still unknown, and, even if discovered, was of such im-
mense length, that a voyage from Europe to India must have
appeared an undertaking extremely arduous, and of very un-
certain issue. More than half a century had been employed
in advancing from Cape Non to the equator; a much longer
space of time might elapse before the more extensive navigation
from that to India could be accomplished. These reflections
upon the uncertainty, the danger and tediousness of the course
which the Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus
to confider whether a shorter and more direlc passage to the
East Indies- might not be found out. And, after revolving
long and seriously every circumstance suggested by his superior
knowledge in the theory as well as praaice of navigation, after
comparing attentively the observations of modern pilots with
the hints and conjecures of antient authors, he at last con-
cluded, that by failing directly towards the weft, across the
Atlantic ocean, new countries, which probably formed a part
of the vast continent of India, must infallibly be discovered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, and derived The pr;nci-

plea on which

from different sources, induced him to adopt this opinion, histheory wa
seemingly as chimerical as it was new and extraordinary. The found"e
spherical figure of the earth was known, and its magnitude
afccrtained with ome degree of accuracy. From this it was
evident, that the continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa,

4 fornmedc

o

^ rmed out a inalii portion of the terraqueous globe. It was

f--,- *suitable to our ideas concerning the wisdom and beneficence of
,the Author of Nature, to believe that the vait space, still unex-
iplored, was not covered entirely by a waste uinprofitable ocean,
ibut occupied by countries fit for the habitation of man. It
.appeared likewise extremely probable, that the continent, on
*this fide of the;globe, was balanced by a;proportional quantity
-of land in the other henifphere. These conclusions concerning
-the exifience of another continent, drawn from the figure and
ItruCure of the globe, were confirmed by the observations and
:conjedtures of modern navigators. A Portaguefe pilot, having
t-retched farther to the weft than was ufuail at that time, took
?up a piece of timber artificially carved, floating upon the sea.;
and as it was driven towards him by a westerly wind, he con-
.cluded that it came from some unknown land., situated in that
*quarter. Columbus's brother-in-law had found, to the weft of
the Madeira isles, a piece of tiimber fashioned in the fame man-
.ner, and brought by the fame wind; and had seen like-
*wife canes of an enormous size floating upon the waes,
which referbled those defcrihed by Ptolemy as produaions pe-
culiar to -the East Indies . After a course of westerly windsa
trees, torn pjp.by the roots, were often driven upon the coaits of
the Azores, and at .one time the dead bodies of two men, with
.singular features, which resembled neither the ihabi.tarts of
Europe nor of Africa, were cafl aflore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising from theoretical

principles and praaical observations, led Columbus to expe&
the discovery of new couwtries. in the Western Ocean, other
.reasons induced him to believe that these must be conneced

Lib. i. c. 7.

1 witll

with the continent of India. Though the ancients had hardly B o O K
ever penetrated into India farther than the banks of the --,--
Ganges, yet some Greek authors had ventured to describe the
provinces beyond that river. And, as men are prone, and at
liberty, to magnify what is remote and unknown, they repre-
sented them as regions of an immense extent. Ctefias affirmed
that India was as large as all the reft of Asia. Oneficritus,
whom Pliny the naturalist follows ', contended that it was equal
to a third part of the habitable earth. Nearchus aflerted, that
it would take four months to march from one extremity of it
to the other, in a firaight line . The journal of Marco Polo,
who travelled into Alia in the thirteenth century, and who had
proceeded towards the East far beyond the limits to which any
European had ever advanced, seemed to confirm these exag-
gerated accounts of the ancients. By his magnificent descriptions
of the kingdoms of Cathay and Cipango, and of many other
countries, the names of which were unknown in Europe, India
appeared to be a region of vast extent. From these accounts,
which, however defeCtive, were the most accurate tLat the people
of Europe had at that period received, with refpea to the remote
zparts of the East, Columbus drew a just conclusion. He con-
tended, that in proportion as the continent of India firetched out
towards the East, it mut, in consequence of the spherical figure
of the earth, approach nearer to the islands which had lately
been discovered to the weft of Africa; that the ditance from
the one to the other was probably not very considerable; and
that the most direct, as well as fllortelt course, to the remote
regions of the East, was to be found by failing due we ".

o Nat. Hifl. lib. vi. c. 17. Strab. Gcogr. lib. xv. p. irol.
g Sco NOTE XII.
VOL. I. K This

B u0 K This notion concerning the vicinity of India to the weitern
----.-. parts of our continent, was countenanced by some eminent

writers among the ancients, the fandion of whose authority
was necessary, in that age, to procure a favourable reception to
any tenet. Ariflotle thought it probable that the Columns of
Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not far removed from
the East Indies, and that there might be a communication by
sea between them h. Seneca, in terms ill more explicit, as-
firms, that, with a fair wind, one might fail from. Spain to
India in a few days '. The famous Atlantic iand described
by Plato, which many supposed to be a real country, beyond
,which a vast unknown continent was situated, is represented by
him as lying at no great distance from Spain; After weighing
all these particulars, Columbus, in whose character the modesty
and diffidence of true genius was united with the ardent en-
hufiafin of a projector, did not reft with such absolute assurance
either upon his own arguments, or upon the authority of the
ancients, as not to consult such of his contemporaries as were
capable of comprehending the nature of the evidence which he
produced in support of his opinion. As early as the year one
thousand four hundred and feventy-four, he communicated his
ideas concerning the probability of discovering now countries,
by failing weflwards, to Paul, a physician of Florence, emi-
nent for his knowledge of cosmography, and who, on account
both of the learning and candour whichl he discovers in his
reply, appears to have been well intitled to the confidence which
Columbus placed in him. lie warmly approved of his plan,
suggested several faes in confirmation of it, and cncouraged
hiln to perfevcre in an undertaking so laudable, and which must.

k Ariflot. de Coelo, lib. ii. 4. . edit. D Val, Par. 1629, vol. i. p. 472.
J Scucc. Q.ault. Natur. lib. ; in proctm.

X rcdbund

redound o much to the honour of his country, and the benefit B 0 K.
of Europe. k

To a mind less capable of forming and of executing great Hs chemes

designs than that of Columbus, all these reasonings, and obfer- fn'txcarryit
vations, and authorities, would have served only as the foun- tion.
dation of some plausible and fruitless theory, which might have
furnished matter for ingenious discourse, or fanciful conjecture.
But with his sanguine and enterprising temper, speculation led
direaly to aion. Fully satisfied himself with refpet to the
truth of his fyltem, he was impatient to bring it to the test of
experiment, and to et out upon a voyage of discovery. The
first ftep towards this was to secure the patronage of ome of
the considerable powers in Europe, capable of undertaking
such an enterprise. As long absence had not extinguished the
affection which he bore to his native country, he wished that it
should reap the fruits of his labours and invention. With this
view, he laid his scheme before the senate of Genoa, and making rie appl;e t
his country the first tender of his service, offered to fail under the Ce"ocfC,
the banners of the republic, in quell of the new regions which
he expeced to discover. But Columbus had resided for so many
years in foreign parts, that his countrymen were unacquainted
with his abilities and character; and, though a maritime people,
they were so little accuflomed to diflant voyages, that they
could form no just idea of the principles on which he founded
his hopes of success. They inconsiderately rejected his pro-
pofal, as the dream of a chimerical projecor, and lofl flor ever
the opportunity of rcftoring their commonwealth to its ancient
fplcndour '.

k I ife of Columlnis, c. viii.
llcrrcia 1111. de las Indliab Occid. Dec. i, lib. i. c. .

K 2 tI.VINGr

B 0 RK HAVING performed what was due to his country, Colurnbus,
-.-j-- was so little discouraged by the repulse which he had received,
to the king cf
Portugal; that, instead of relinquishing his undertaking, he pursued it

with fresh ardour. He made his next overture to John II.
kiirg of Portugal, in whose dominions he had been long efta-
bli'fled, and whom he confidered, on that account, as having
the second claim to his service. Here every circumstance feerm-
ed to promise him a more favourable reception. He applied to,
a monarch of an enterprising genius, no incompetent judge in
naval affairs, and proud of patronising every attempt to disco-
ver new countries. His fubjets were the most experienced
navigators in Europe, and the least apt to be intimidated either
by the novelty or boldness of any maritime expedition. In
Portugal, Columbus's skill i his profession, as well as his per-
fonal good qualities, were thoroughly known; and as the
former rendered it probable that his scheme was not altogether
chimerical, the latter exempted him from the suspicion of any
sinister intention in proposing it. Accordingly, the king
listened to him in the most gracious manner, and referred the
consideration. of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bithop of Ceuta, and
two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers, whom he was
accustomed to consult in matters of this kind. As in Genoa,
ignorance had opposed and disappointed Columbus; in Lisbon,
lie had to combat with prejudice, an enemy no less formidable.
The persons, according to whose decision his scheme was to be
adopted or rejected, had been the chief directors of the Portu-
guefe navigations, and had advised to search for a passage to,
India, by fleering a course direCtly opposite to that which Co-
lumbus recommended as florter and more certain. They could
not, therefore, approve of his proposal, without submitting to
the double mortification, of condemning their own theory,

8 and

and of acknowledging his superior sagacity. After teasing B 0o K
him with captious questions, and starting innumerable objec- ----
tions, with a view of betraying him into such a particular is deived.
explanation of his fyflem, as might draw from him a full dil-
covery of its nature, they deferred passing a final judgment
with refpet to it. In the mean time, they conspired to rob
him of the honour and advantages which he expeaed from the
success of his scheme, advising the king to dispatch a vessel,
secretly, in order to attempt the proposed discovery, by follow-
ing exactly the course which Columbus seemed to point out.
John, forgetting on this occasion the sentiments becoming a
monarch, meanly adopted this perfidious counsel. But the
pilot, chosen to execute Columbus's plan, had neither the ge-
nius, nor the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds arose,
no fight of approaching land appeared, his courage failed, and
he returned to Lisbon, execrating the project as equally extra-
vagant and dangerous"

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranfaaion, Columbus T lecaes
felt the indignation, natural to an ingenuous mind, and in the vi,"g :.l r'

b °'- rcpa irs r ,.:

warmth of his resentment determined to break off all intcr- courr of
course with a nation capable of such flagrant treachery. lHe
intfantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain to-
wards the close of the year one thousand four hundred
and eighty-four. As he was now at liberty to court the
proteaion of any patron, whom he could engage to ap-
prove of his plan, and to carry it into execution, he resolved to
propose it in person, to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that
time governed the united kingdoms of Caflile and Aragon.
But, as he had already experienced the uncertain iflue of appli- s.,,l hi b,,.

Illci itll.i
" Life of Columbus, c. xi. Ierrera, dccad. . lib. i. c. 7. I;lil

cations

B rO K cations to'kings and ministers, he took the precaution of fenci-
- - mg1 ing into England his brother Bartholomew, to whom he had

fully communicated his ideas, in order that he might negociate,
at the fame time, with HenryVII. .who was reputed one of
the mos .sagacious as well as opulent princes in Europe.

'bl'acles to IT was not without reason that Columbus entertained doubts
his success in
Spai, s and fears with refpea to the reception of his proposals in the

Spanish court. Spain was, at that juncure, engaged in a dan-
gerous war with Granada, the last of the Moorish kingdoms
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was not formed
to relish bold and uncommon designs. Isabella, though more
generous and enterprising, was under the influence of her hus-
band in all her ations. The Spaniards had hitherto made no
efforts to extend navigation beyond its ancient limits, and had
beheld the amazing progress of discovery among their neigh-
bours the Portuguese, without one attempt to imitate or to
rival them. The war with the Infidels afforded an ample field
to the national activity and love of glory. Under circumstances
so unfavourable, it was impoflible for Columbus to rmake rapid
progress with a nation, naturally flow and dilatory in forming
all its resolutions. His character, however, was admirably
adapted to that of the people, whose confidence and protetion
he solicited. He was grave, though courteous in his deport-
ment; circumfpc in his words and actions; irreproachable in
his morals; and exemplary in his attention to all the duties
and functions of religion. By qualities so rcfpecable, he not
only gained many private friends, but acquired fch general
efleem, that, notwithftanlding the plainncfs of his appearance,
suitable to the mediocrity of his fortune, he was not confidercd
as a mere adventurer, to whoim indigence hiad fuggeflcd a vili-

onary

onary projec, but was received as a erfon to whose propofi- B K
tions serious attention was due,

FERDINAND and Isabella, thougi fully occupied by their His scheme

operations against the Moors, paid so much regard to Column- mki'ful by
bus, as to remit the consideration of his plan to the queen's judges,
confessor, Ferdinand de Talavera. He consulted' such of his
countrymen, as were supposed. befl' qalified to decide with re-
fpet to a fubjcdt of this kind.. But true science had, hitherto,
made fo-little progress in Spain, that those pretended pilofo-
phers, feleded to judge in a matter of fich moment, did not
comprehend.the firfi principles, upon whlich Columbus founded
his conjectures and hopes. Some of them, from miflaken no-
tions concerning the dimensions of the globe, contended that a
voyage to those remote parts of the east, which Columbus cx-
pected to difeover, could not be performed in lcis than tlrce
years. Others concludecd, that citier he would lind the ocean
to be of infinite extent, according to te opinion. of some an-
cient philolophers; or, if he ihould pcriifl in flering towards
the wefi beyond a certain point, that the convex figure of tle.
globe would prevent his return, and that he mull inevitably
prifih, in the vain attempt, to open a communication between
the two opposite. liemifphercs, wlhich nature had for ever dlif-
joined. Even without (eigning to enter into any particular
difcuilfion, some rcjcted thle flhceme in general, upon the credit
of a maxim, under wlhich the ignorant and Lmuentcrprifing
flielter thcmficlvcs in every ag-e, " That it is plrcfunllptuous ill
any pcrfon, to fupp oi: tliat lhe alone pofl'cles knowledge f-
peilor to all lthe rcf: of mankind united."' They maintain-
cd, that if there were really any luell countries as Columlius
lprctcndcd they could not have remained f long concealed,

nlOr:

B 0 0 K nor would the wisdom and sagacity of former ages have left

II.

x_,-- the glory of this invention to an obscure Genoese pilot.

who make an IT required all Columbus's patience and address to nego-
unfavourable
report con- ciate with men capable of advancing such firange propositions.

cernig He had to contend not only with the obstinacy of ignorance,

but with what is still more intraCtable, the pride of false know-
ledge. After innumerable conferences, and wafting five years
in fruitless endeavours to inform and to satisfy them, Talavera,
at last, made such an unfavourable report to Ferdinand andIfa-
bella, as induced them to acquaint Columbus, that until the
war with the Moors should be brought to a period, it was im-
poflible for them to engage in any new and expensive enter-
prise.

WHATEVER care was taken to soften the harshness of this

declaration, Columbus confidered it as a final rejection of his
proposals. But happily for mankind, that superiority of ge-
nius, which is capable of forming great and uncommon de-
signs, is usually accompanied with an ardent enthusiasm, which
can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped by disappointment.
Columbus was of this sanguine temper. Though he felt
deeply the cruel blow given to his hopes, and retired immedi-
ately from a court, where he had been amused so long with
vain expetations, his confidence in the juitnefs of his own system
did not diminish, and his impatience to demonflrate the truth
of it by an atual experiment became greater than ever. Hav-
ing courted the protection of sovereign fiates without success,
he applied, next, to persons of inferior rank, and addressed
successively the dukes of Medina Sidonia, and Medina Celi,
who, though fubjcs, were possessed of power and opulence

more

cnore than equal to the enterprise which he projeaced. His BOO K
negociations with them proved as fruitless, as those in which ---
he had been hitherto engaged; for these noblemen were either
as little convinced by Columbus's arguments as their superiors,
or they were afraid of alarming the jealousy, and offending the
pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a scheme, which he had
rejcted ".

AMID the painful sensations occasioned by such a fuccef- Negociation

of his brother

sion of disappointments, Columbus had to futfain the additional in England.
distress, of having received no accounts of his brother, whom
he had ent to the court of England. In his voyage to that
country, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate as to fall into
the hands of pirates, who having stripped him of every thing,
detained him a prisoner for several years. At length, he made
hlis escape, and arrived in London, but in such extreme indi-
gence, that he was obliged to employ himself during a confi-
derable time, in drawing and felling maps, in order to pick up
as much money as would purchase a decent dress, in which he
might venture to appear at court. He then laid before the
king the proposals, with which he had been entrufsed by his
brother, and, notwithstanding Henry's excessive caution and
parsimony, which rendered him averse to new and expensive
undertakings, he received Columbus's overtures, with more
approbation, than any monarch to whom they had hitherto
been presented.

MEANWITILE, Columbus being unacquainted with his bro- Columlbus
ther's fate, and having now no profpc( of encouragement in :,' r,,of

tncoul .ge-
Life of CoIlrnb. c. 13. IHcrrer, dec. i. lib. i. c, 7. Ilt-lt il

Spain.
VOL. . L Spain,

B oI0 K Spain, reroiv to viit the court of England in person, ir
--u-=. hopes of meeting with a more favourable reception there. He

had already made preparations for this purpose, and taken
measures for the disposal of his children during his absence,
when Juan Perez, the Prior of the monastery of Rabida, near
Palos, in which they had been educated, earnestly solicited him
to defer his journey for a short time. Perez was a man ofcon-
fiderable learning, and of some credit with Queen Isabella, to
whom he was known personally. He was warmly attached to
Columbus, with whose abilities as well as integrity he had
many opportunities of being acquainted. Prompted by curio-
fity or by friendship, he entered upon an accurate examination
of his fyltem, in conjunction with a physician fettled in the
neighbourhood, who was a considerable proficient in mathema-
tical knowledge. This investigation satisfied them so tho-
roughly, with refpe'd to the solidity of the principles on
which Columbus founded his opinion, and the probability of
success in executing the plan which he proposed, that Perez, in
order to prevent his country from being deprived of the glory
and benefit, which mufl accrue to the patrons of such a grand
enterprise, ventured to write to Iabella, conjuring her to con-
fider the matter anew, with the attention which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a person whom she re-

fpeaed, Isabella desired Perez to repair immediately to the vil-
lage of Santa F, in which, on account of the siege of Gra-
nada, the court resided at that time, that fhle might confer with
him upon this important subje&a. The first effect of their in-
terview was a gracious invitation of Columbus back to court,
accompanied with the present of a small fum to equip him for
the journey. As there was now a certain profpe&, that the

y7,'~~ ~war

war with the Moors would speedily be brought to an happy B 0 0 K
issue by the reduction of Granada, which would leave the na- --
tion at liberty to engage in new undertakings; this, as well as
the mark of royal favour, with which Columbus had been
lately honoured, encouraged his friends to appear with greater
confidence than formerly in support of his scheme. The chief
of these, Alonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the finances in
Cafiile, and Luis de Santangel, receiver of the ecclesiastical
revenues in Aragon, whose meritorious zeal in promoting this
great design, entitles their names to an honourable place in
history, introduced Columbus to many persons of high rank,
and interested them warmly in his behalf.

BUT it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdinand with is nain dif-

favourable sentiments. His cold distrustful prudence fill re- ppointed
garded Columbus's project as extravagant and chimerical,
and in order to render the efforts of his partizans ineffecual,
he had the address to employ in this new negociation with him,
some of the persons who had formerly pronounced his scheme
to be impracticable. To their astonishment, Columbus appeared
before them with the fame confident hopes of success as for-
merly, and insisted upon the fame high recompence. He pro-
posed that a small fleet hould be fitted out, under his command,
to attempt the discovery, and demanded to be appointed perpe-
tual and hereditary admiral and viceroy of all the seas and lands
which he ilould lifcovcr, and to have the tenth of the profits
arising from them, fettlcd irrevocably upon himself and his
dcfcendants, At the fame time, he offered to advance the
eighth part of the um nccefllry for accompliifling his dclign,
on condition that he should be entitled to a proportional hare
of benefit fron the adventure. If the enterpriflc hould

L 2 totally

B 00o K totally miscarry, he made no stipulation for any reward or
\,-,-- emolument whatever. Instead of viewing this condua as the

clearest evidence of his full persuasion with refped to the truth
of his own system, or being itruck with that magnanimity,
which, after so many delays and repulses, would stoop to no-
thing inferior to its original claims, the persons with whom
Columbus treated, began meanly to calculate the expence of
the expedition, ad the value of the reward which he de-
manded. The expence, moderate as it was, they represented
to be too great for Spain, in the present exhausted slate of its
finances. They contended, that the honours and emoluments
claimed by Columbus, were exorbitant, even if he should per-
form the utmost of what he had promised; and if all his fan-
guine hopes ihould prove illusive, such vait concefions to anr
adventurer would be deemed not only inconsiderate, but ridi-
culous. In this imposing garb of caution and prudence, their
opinion appeared so plausible, and was so warmly Supported by
Ferdinand, that Isabella declined giving any countenance to Co-
lumbus, and abruptly broke off the negociation with him which
she had begun.

THIS was more mortifying to Columbus than all the difap-

pointments which he had hitherto met with. The invitation
to court from Isabella, like an unexpeaed ray of light, had
opened such profpets of success, as encouraged him to hope
that his labours were at an end; but now darkness and uncer-
tainty returned, and his mind, firm as it was, could hardly
support the shock of such an unforeseen reverse. He withdrew
in deep anguish from court, with an intention of prosecuting
his voyage to England, as his last resource.

ABOUT

ABOUT that time Granada surrendered, and Ferdinand and B 0 0 K

I[.
Isabella, in triumphal pomp, took possession of a city, the re- I-

Proves at aft

duCtion of which extirpated a foreign power from the heart of fuccefsula.
their dominions, and rendered them matters of all the provinces, 149z'
extending from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of
Portugal. As the flow of spirits which accompanies success
elevates the mind, and renders it enterprising, Quintanilla and
Santangel, the vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus,
took advantage of this favourable situation, in order to make
one effort more in behalf of their friend. They addressed
themselves to Isabella, and, after expressing ome surprise, that
'he, who had always been the munificent patroness of gene-
rous undertakings, hould hesitate so long to countenance the
most splendid scheme that had ever been proposed to any mo-
narch, they represented to her, that Columbus was a man of a
found understanding and virtuous character, well qualified, by
his experience in navigation, as well as his knowledge of
geometry, to form just ideas with refpeat to the structure of
the globe and the situation of its various regions; that, by of-
fering to rifl his own life and fortune in the execution of his
scheme, he gave the most satisfying evidence both of his inte-
grity and hope of success; that the fumn requisite for equipping
fich an armament as he demanded was inconsiderable, and the
advantages which might accrue from his undertaking were im-
mense; that he demanded no recompence for his invention and
labour, but what was to arise from the countries which he
flould discover; that, as it was worthy of her magnanimity to
make this noble attempt to extend the sphere of human know-
ledge, and to open an intcrcourfe with regions hitherto un-
known, so it would afford the highest fatisfaiion to her piety
and zeal, after rc-eflablifhing the Chriflian faith in those pro-

vi nces
3

B OO K vinces of Spain from which it had been long banished, to dif-
v -- - cover a new world, to which he might communicate the light

1492' and blessings of divine truth; that if now she did not decide

instantly, the opportunity would be loft irretrievably; that
Columbus was on his way to foreign countries, where some
plince, more fortunate or adventurous, would close with his
proposals, and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timidity
which had excluded her from the glory and advantages that
the had once in her power to have enjoyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons of such autho-

rity, and at ajuncure so well chosen, produced the desired es-
fe&. They dispelled all Isabella's doubts and fears; she ordered
Columbus to be instantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting the low state
of her finances, generously offered to pledge her own jewels,
in order to raise as much money as would be needed in making
preparations for the voyage. Santangel, in a transport of gra-
titude, kissed the queen's hand, and in order to save her from
having recourse to such a mortifying expedient for procuring
money, engaged to advance immediately the fum that was
requisite °.

The condi- COLUMBUS had proceeded ome leagues on his journey,
tions of is
agrcncmcr.t when the messenger fiom Isabella overtook him. Upon re-
witI Spain. ceiving an account of the unexpected revolution in his favour,

he returned direcly to Santa Fc, though some remainder of
diffidence flill mingled itself with his joy. But the cordial re-
ception which he met with from Isabella, together with the
near profpea of setting out upon that voyage which had so long
been the objcC of his thoughts and wifles, soon effaced te

E Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8,

remembrance

remembrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, during eight B 0 K
tedious years of solicitation and suspense. The negotiation now _-.
went forward with facility and dispatch, and a treaty or capi- 492'
tulation with Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of April,
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two. The chief articles
of it were, I. Ferdinand and Isabella, as sovereigns of the
ocean, constituted Columbus their high admiral in all the seas,
illands, and continents which flould be discovered by his in-
duftry; and stipulated, that he and his heirs for ever should
enjoy this office, with the fame powers and prerogatives
which belonged to the high admiral of Castile, within the
limits of his jurifdidcion. 2. They appointed Columbus
their viceroy in all the ilands and continents which he should
discover; but if, for the better adminifiration of. affairs, it
should hereafter be- necessary to establish a separate governor
in any of those countries, they authorised Columbus to name
three persons, of whom they would chufe one for that office;
and the dignity of viceroy, with all its immunities, was like-
wife to be hereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
granted to Columbus and his heirs for ever the tenth of the
free profits accruing from the produtions and commerce of the
countries which he should discover. 4. They declared, that if
any controversy or law-suit hall arise with refpe& to any mer-
cantile transaction in the countries which should be discovered,
it fiould be determined by the sole authority of Columbus, or
ofjudges to be appointed by him. 5. They permitted Columbus
to advance one-eighth part of what should be expended in pre-
paring for the expedition, and in carrying on commerce with
the countries which he fliould discover, and intitlcd him, i.
return, to an eighth part of the profit .

r Life of Colu bus, c. S1. Ilerrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. 9.

Ti-toxicG 1

B OOK T HOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears conjoined with that
AI-- _ of Isabella in this transaCtion, his distrust of Columbus was still

.149 so violent, that he refused to take any part in the enterprise,- as

king of Aragon. As the whole expence of the expedition was
to be defrayed by the crown of Castile, Isabella reserved for her
fubjeds of that kingdom an exclusive right to all the benefits
which might redound from its success.

The prepa- As oon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, by her attention
rations fr his
voyage. and activity in forwarding the preparations for the voyage,

endeavoured to make ome reparation to Columbus for the
time which he had loft in fruitless solicitation. By the twelfth
of May, all that depended upon her was adjusted; and Colum-
bus waited on the king and queen, in order to receive their
final instructions. Every thing refpeaing the destination and
conduct of the voyage, they committed implicitly to the disposal
of his prudence. But, that they might avoid giving any just
cause of offence to the king of Portugal, they ftrialy enjoined
him not to approach near to the Portuguese settlements on the
coast of Guinea, nor in any of the other countries to which
they claimed right as discoverers. Isabella had ordered the
ships, of which Columbus was to take the command, to be fit-
ted out in the port of Palos, a small maritime town in the pro-
vince of Andalusia. As the prior Juan Perez, to whom Co-
lumbus had already been so much indebted, rcfided in the
neighbourhood of this place, he, by the influence of that good
cccleliaftic, as well as by his own connection with the inha-
bitants, not only raised among them what he wanted of the
fum that he was bound by treaty to advance, but engaged
several of them to accompany him in the voyage. The chief
of thcfe affociatcs were three brothers of the name of Pinzon,

of

of considerable wealth, and of great experience in naval as- B 0 K
fairs, who were willing to hazard their lives and fortunes in A
the enterprise. 1492.

BUT, after all the endeavours and efforts of Isabella and

Columrbus, the armament was not fuitabie either to the dignity
of the nation by which it was equipped, or to the importance of
the service for which it was deflined. It confilfed of three vef-
fels only. The largefi, a hip of no considerable burden, was
commanded by Columbus, as admiral, who gave it the name
of Santa Maria, out of refpe& for the Blessed Virgin, whom
he honoured with singular devotion. Of the second, called the
Pinta, Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother Francis pilot.
The third, named the Nigna, was under the command of Vin-
cent Yanez Pinzon. These two were light vessels, hardly
superior in burden or force to large boats. This squadron, if
it merits that name, was vitualed for twelve months, and had
on board ninety men, moflly ailors, together with a few ad-
venturers who followed the fortune of Columbus, and some
gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom the appointed to accompany
him. Though the expence of the undertaking was one of the 1492.
circumstances that chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and re-
tarded so long the negotiation with Columbus, the fum em-
ployed in fitting out this fluadron did'not exceed four thousand
pounds.

As the art of shipbuilding in the fifteenth century was ex-

tremely rude, and the bulk and conftrudion of venlels were
accommodated to the hort and easy voyages along the coast
wvhich they were accuflomed to perform, it is a proof of
the courage as well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that

VOL. I. M he

B 0 0 K lie ventured, with a fleet o unfit for a distant navigation, to

II.
- ----' explore unknown seas, where he had no chart to guide him,

)49 ' no knowledge of the tides and currents, and no experience of

the dangers to which he might be exposed. His eagerness to
accomplish the great design which had so long engrossed his
thoughts, made him overlook or dif egard every circumtance
that would have intimidated a mind less adventurous. He
pushed forward the preparations with such ardour, and was
seconded so effetually by the persons to whom Isabella com-
mitted the superintendence of this business, that every thing
Was foori in readiness for the voyage. But as Columbus was
deeply impressed with sentiments of religion, he would not set
out upor an expedition so arduous, and of which one great
objec was to extend tle knowledge of the Christian faith,
without imploring publickly the guidance and protection of
Heaven. With th"s view, he, together with all the persons
under his command, marched in solemn procession to the mo-
naftery of Rabida. After confessing their fins, and obtaining
absolution from them, they received the holy sacrament from
the hands of the prior, hllo joined his prayers to theirs for the
success of an enterprise which he had so zealously patronized.

His departure NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of AuguR, in
fromt Spain.

the year one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, Columbus
set fail, a little before sun-rise, in presence of a vafl crowd of
fpe&ators, who sent up their supplications to Heaven for the
prosperous iffiue of the voyage, which they wished, rather than
expected. Columbus freered diredly for the Canary Islands,
Auguf 13. and arrived there without any occurrence that would have de-

served notice on any other occasion. But, in a voyage of fucll
expectation and importance, every circumstance was the objct

of

of attention. The rudder of the Finta broke loose, the day B K
after they left the harbour, and that accident alarmed the crew, --
no less superstitious than unskilful, as a certain omen of the 149z'
unfortunate defliny of the expedition. Even in the short run
to the Canaries, the ihips were found to be so crazy and ill ap=
pointed, as to be very improper for a navigation which was
expected to be both long and dangerous. Columbus refitted
them, however, to the belt of his power, and having supplied
himself with fresh provisions, he took his departure from
Gomera, one of the most westerly of the Canary Islands, on
the .ixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly be said to begin; The course

for Columbus holding his course due weft, left immediately the hih he
usual tract of navigation, and stretched into unfrequented and
unknown eas. The firfl day, as it was very calm, he made
but little way; but on the fccond, he loft fight of the Cana-
ries; and many of the ailors, dejected already and dismayed,
when they contemplated the boldness of the undertaking, be-
gan to beat their breasts, and to fled tears, as if they were
never more to behold land. Columbus comforted them with
aflurances of success, and the profpet of vait wealth, in those
opulent regions whither he was conduCting them. This early
dilcovery of the spirit of his followers taught Columbus, that
he muff prepare to firuggle, not only with the unavoidable dif-
ficulties which might be expected from the nature of his under-
taking, but with such as were likely to arise from the ignorance
and timidity of the people under his command; and he per-
ccived that the art of governing the minds of men would be no
less requisite for accomplifling the discoveries which lie had in
view, than naval skill and an enterprising courage. Happily

M 3 for

B °00 K for himself, and for the country by which he was employed;

_-- -- he joined to the ardent temper and inventive genius of a pro-
1t92. jecor, virtues of another pecies, which are rarely united with

them. He possessed a thorough knowledge of mankind, an
insinuating address, a patient perseverance in executing any
plan, the perseEt government of his own passions, and the ta-
lent of acquiring the direcion of those of other men. All these-
qualities, which formed him for command, were accompanied
with that superior knowledge of his profeflion, which begets

Vigilance and confidence in times of difficulty and danger. To unskilful
attention of
Columbus. Spanish sailors, accuflomed only to coasting voyages in the

Mediterranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the fruit of
thirty years experience, improved by an acquaintance with all
the inventions of the Portuguese, appeared immense. As soon
as they put to ea, he regulated every thing by his sole autho-
rity ;. he superintended the execution of every order; and al-
lowing himself only a few hours for sleep, he was at all other
times upon deck. As his course lay through eas which had
not formerly been visited, the founding-line, or instruments
for observation, were continually in his hands. After the ex-
ample of the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to the motion:
of tides and currents, watched the flight of birds, the appear-
ance of fishes, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that floated on
the waves, and entered every occurrence, with a minute exat-
ness, in the journal which he kept. As the length of the
voyage could not fail of alarming sailors habituated only to
short excursions, Columbus endeavoured to conceal from them
the real progress which they made. With this view, though they
run eighteen leagues on the second day after they left Gomera,
he gave out that they had advanced only fifteen, and he uni-
formly employed the fame artifice of reckoning short during

the

thie whole voyage. By the fourteenth of September, the fleet B 0 K
was above two hundred leagues to the weft of the Canary Isles, ---
at a greater ditfance from land than any Spaniard had been Apprehen-
before that time. There they were firuck with an appearance sons and a-
no less astonishing than it was new. They observed, that the crew.
magnetic needle, in their compasses, did not point exactly to
the polar flar, but varied a degree towards the weft; and as
they proceeded, this variation increased. This appearance,
which is now familiar, though it still remains one of the myfte-
ries of nature, into the cause of which the sagacity of man
hath not been able to penetrate, filled the companions of Co-
lumbus with terror. They were now in a boundless unknown
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation; nature itself
seemed to be altered, and the only guide which they had left
was about to fail them. Columbus, with no less quickness
than ingenuity, invented a reason for this appearance, which,
though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to them,
as dispelled their fears, or silenced their murmurs-

IIE still continued to steer due weft, nearly in the fame lati-

tude with the Canary Islands. In this course he came within
the sphere of the trade wind, which blows invariably from eafl
to wept, between the tropics and a few degrees beyond them.
He advanced before this fleady gale with such uniform rapidity,
that it was fcldom nceflary to lhift a fail. When about four
hundred leagues to the weft of the Canaries, he found the sea
so covered with weeds, that it had a resemblance to a meadow
of vast extent; and in ome places they were so thick, as to
retard the motion of the vcffcls. This firange appearance oc-
cafioned new alarm and disquiet. The sailors imagined that
they were now arrived at the utmost boundary of the navigable

2 ocean ;

B 0 K ocean; that there floating weeds would obftru& their farther

IL
_.- progress, and concealed dangerous rocks, or some large tra:

1492. of land, which had funk, they knew not how, in that place.

Columbus endeavoured to persuade them, that the appearance
which had alarmed, ought rather to have encouraged them,
and was to be confidered as a sign of approaching land. At
the fame time, a brisk gale arose, and carried them forward.
Several birds were seen hovering about the hip q, and dired-
ing their flight towards the weft. The desponding crew re-
fumed some degree of spirit, and began to entertain fresh
hopes.

There in- UPON the first of October they were, according to the ad-
crease. miral's reckoning, seven hundred and eventy leagues to the

weft of the Canaries, but left his men hould be intimidated by
the prodigious length of the navigation, he gave out that they
had proceeded only five hundred and eighty-four leagues; and,
fortunately for Columbus, neither his own pilot, nor those of
the other ships, had fiill sufficient to correc this error, and
discover the deceit. They had now been above three weeks at
sea; they had proceeded far beyond what former navigators
had attempted or deemed possible; all their prognostics of disco-
very, drawn from the flight of birds and other circumftanccs,
had proved fallacious; the appearances of land, with which
their own credulity or the artifice of their commander had from
time to time flattered and animfcd them, had been altogether
illusive, and their prof pcat of fucccfs fcemced now to be as dif-
tant as ever. These reflcclions occurred often to men, who
had no other objec& or occupation, than to rcafon and (lifcotirf
concerning the intention and circumnfances of their expedition.

See NOTE XIII.

Tlcy

They made imprefion, at sirs, upon the ignorant and tilmid, B K
and extending, by degrees, to such as were better informed I
or more resolute, the contagion frcad at length from flip to '4')'
ship. From fecrct whispers and murmurings, they proceeded
to open cabals and public complaints. They taxed their fove-
reign with inconsiderate credulity, in paying such regard to the
vain promises and rafl conjecures of an indigent foreigner, as
to hazard the lives of so many of her own fubjeds, in prose-
cuting a climerical fchcme. They affirmed that they had fully
performed their duty, by venturing so far in an unknown and
hopclefs course, and could incur no blame for refusing, at last,
to follow a desperate adventurer to certain deftrudion. They
contended, that it was necefTary to think of returning to Spain,
while their crazy veftels were fill in a condition to keep the
sea, but expressed their fears that the attempt would prove vain,
as the wind, which had hitherto been so favourable to tleir
course, must render it impossible to fail in the opposite direcion.
All agreed that Columbus flould be compelled by force to adopt
a measure on which their common safety depended. Some of
the more audacious proposed, as the mosr expeditious and cer-
tain method for getting rid at once of his rcmonitrances, to
throw him into the sea, being pcrfuaded that, upon their return
to Spain, the death of an unfucccflful projcctor would excite
little concern, and be inquired into with no curiosity.

COLUMBUS was fully sensible of his perilous situation. lie The addreI

of Coll m ils

had observed, with great concern, the fatal operation of igno- ,, tl sing
rance and of fear in producing difafl'clion among his crew, and h"'"I.
saw tlat it was now ready to burst out into open mutiny. He
retained, however, pcrfeLc prtcence of mind. He afcdte(l to
seem ignorant of their machinations. Notwitllanding the

3 agitation

B o0 K agitation and solicitude of his own mind, he appeared with a

, ---_. cheerful countenance, like a man satisfied with the progress
.149z. which he had made, and confident of success. Sometimes he

employed all the arts of insinuation to soothe his men. Some-
times he endeavoured to work upon their ambition or avarice,
by magnificent descriptions of the fame and wealth which they
were about to acquire. On other occasions, he assumed a tone
of authority, and threatened them with vengeance from their
sovereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour, they should defeat
this noble effort to promote the glory of God, and to exalt the
Spanish name above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious ailors, the words of a man whom they had been ac-
customed to reverence, were weighty and persuasive. They
not only restrained them from those violent excesses, which
they meditated, but prevailed with them to accompany their
admiral for some time longer.

Their fears As they proceeded, the indications of approaching land
a~etun.

seemed to be more certain, and excited hope in proportion.
The birds began to appear in flocks, making towards the
south-west. Columbus, in imitation of the Portuguese navi-
gators, who had been guided, in several of their discoveries, by
the motion of birds, altered his course from due weft towards
that quarter whither they pointed their flight. But, after
holding on for several days in this new diretion, without any
better success than formerly, having seen no object, during
thirty days, but the sea and the fly, their hopes subsided
fafler than they had risen; their fears revived with additional
force; impatience, rage, and despair, appeared in every coun-

Danger of a tenance. All sense of subordination was loft: the officers, who
Lutily. had hitherto concurred with Columbus in opinion, and sup-

ported

ported his authority, now took part with the men; they as- B '0 0
fembled tumultuously on the deck, expoftulated with their corn- -----
mander, mingled threats with their epoftulations, and re-
quired him instantly to tack about and return to Europe. Co-
lumbus perceived that it would be of no avail to have recourse
to any of his former arts, which having been tried so often,
had loft their effecs; and that it was impoflible to rekindle
any zeal for the success of the enterprise among men, in whose
breasts fear had extinguished every generous sentiment. He
saw that it was no less vain to think of employing either gentle Dirrrrs of

C ', ;'JU:-.

or revere measures, to quell a mutiny so general and so violent.
It was necessary, on all these accounts, to footlhepaffions wiich
he could no longer command, and to give way to a tor-
rent too impetuous to be checked. He promised solemnly to
his men that he would comply with their request, provided
they would accompany him, and obey his commands for three
days longer, and if, during that time, land were not dilco-
vered, he would then abandon the enterprise, and direct his
course towards Spainr.

ENRAGED as the ailors were, and impatient to turn their Ellcour.g;n

faces again towards their native country, this proposition did o'fucctls.
not appear to them unreasonable. Nor did Columbus hazard
much in confining himself to a term so short. The presages
of discovering land were now so numerous and promising, that
he deemed them infallible. For ome days the founding line
reached the bottom, and the foil which it brought up indicated
land to be at no great distance. The flocks of birds incrcafed,
,and were compoed not only of sea fowl, but of such land

r Ovicdo, Ilifl. ap. Ramus. vol. iii. p. 8r. E.
VrOL. . N birds

B 0 0 K bulrus as could not be supposed to fly ar from the fmore.
,-P-v- The crew of the Pinta observed a cane floating, which feemned

to have been newly cut, and likewise a piece of timber artifi-
cially carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna took up the branch
of a tree with red berries, perfectly fresh. The clouds around
the etting fun assumed a new appearance; the air was more
mild and warm, and, during night, the wind became unequal
and variable. From all there symptoms, Columbus was so con-
sident of being near land, that on the evening of the eleventh
of Oober, after public prayers for success, he ordered the
fails to be furled, and the ships to lie by, keeping ftrid watch,
left they hould be driven afhote in the night. During this
interval of fufpence and expectation, no man ihut his eyes,
all kept upon deck, gazing intently towards that quarter
where they expeted to discover the land, which had been so
long the object of their withes.

Land disco- ABOUT two hours before midnight, Columbus, standing or
wered. the forecastle, observed a light at a distance, and privately

pointed it out to Pedro Guttierez, a page of the queen's ward-
robe. Guttierez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comptroller
of the fleet, all three aw it in motion, as if it were carried
from place to place. A little after midnight, the joyful found
of land, land, was heard from the Pinta, which kept always
a head of the other ships. But, having been so often deceived
by fallacious appearances, they were now become flow of be-
lief, and waited, in all the anguish of uncertainty and impa-

Friday, tience, for the return of day. As soon as morning dawned,
oaiL Z. their doubts and fears were dispelled, they beheld an island

about two leagues to the north, whose flat and verdant fields,.
well florcd with wood, and watered with many rivulets, prc-

a2 sented

sented to them the asped of a delightful country. The crew B o 0 K
of the Pinta instantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn of thanks- '
giving to God, and were joined by those of the other hips,
with tears of joy and transports of congratulation. This office
of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an act ofjuftice to their
commander. They threw themselves at the feet of Columbus,
with feelings of felf-condemnation mingled with reverence.
They implored him to pardon their ignorance, incredulity, and
insolence, which had created him so much unnecessary disquiet,
and had so often obltruCted the prosecution of his well-concerted
plan; and passing, in the warmth of their admiration, from
one extreme to another, they now pronounced the man, whom
they had so lately reviled and threatened, to be a person infpir-
ed by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude more than human,
in order to accomplish a design, so far beyond the ideas and
conception of all former ages.

As oon as the fun arose, all the boats were manned and Sirs inter-

armed. They rowed towards the island with their colours dif- view with the
played, warlike music, and other martial pomp; and as they
approached the coalt, they saw it covered with a multitude of
people, whom the novelty of the fpecacle had drawn together,
and whose attitudes and geflures cxprefTed wonder and aflonifh-
ment at the itrange objects which presentcd themselves to their
view. Columbus was the first European who set foot in the
New World which lie had difcovcrcd. He landcd ina rich dress,
and with a naked sword in his hand. His men followed, and
kneeling down, they all kissed the ground which they had so
long desired to fee. They next ereled a crucifix, and pro-
firating themselves before it, returned thanks to God for con-
lducing their voyage to such an happy iiue. They then took

N folcmn

B o I0 solemn poffeflion of the country for the crown of Castile and
L-c-_--' Leon, with all the formalities which the Portuguese were ac-

customed to observe in ats of this kinzd, in. their new disco--
v.eries .

Their mutual THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were surrounded by
aftoniflment.

many of the natives, who gazed, in silent admiration,, upon,
acions which they could not comprehend, and of which they,
did.not. foresee the consequences. The dress of the Spaniards,
the whiteness of their skins, their beards,- their arms, appeared
flrange and surprising.. The vafl machines in which they had
traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon the waters with
wings, and uttered a dreadful found refembliog thunder, ac-
companied with lightning and smoke, struck them with such
terror, that they began to refpeQt their new guests as a superior
order of beings, and concluded that they were children of the.
Sun, who had descended to visit the earth,

THE Europeans. were hardly less amazed at the scene now.-

before them. Every herb, and shrub, and tree, was different
from those which flourished in Europe. The foil seemed to be
rich, but bore. few marks of cultivation. The climate, even
to Spaniards, felt warm, though extremely delightful. The
inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence of nature, en-
tirely naked. Their black hair, long and uncurled, floated
upon their shoulders, or was bound in trefles around their
heads. They had no beards, and every part of their bodies
was perfectly smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky cop-
per colour, their features singular, rather than difagrecable,,
their aspet gentle and timid. Though not tall, they were

Life of Columbus, c. 22, z3. 1-Ierrero, dec. . lib, i. c. 13.

',vell

well haped, and active. Their faces, and other parts of their B K
body,. were fantastically painted with glaring colours. They i .-
were hy at first through fear, but oon became familiar with.
the Spaniards, and with transports of jy received from them
hawks-bells, glass beads, and other baubles, in return for
which they gave such. provisions as they had, and ionic
cotton yarn, the only commodity of value that they could
produce. Towards evening, Columbus returned to his ships,.
accompanied by many of the islanders in their boats, which
they called canoes, and though rudely formed out of the trunk.
of a ingle tree, they rowed them with surprising dexterity.
Thus, in the first interview between the inhabitants of the old.
and new worlds, every thing was conducted amicably, and to
their mutual fatisfaCion. 'he former,, enlightened and am-
bitious, formed already vast ideas with refped to the advantages
which they might derive from those regions that began to open
to their view. The latter, simple and undifcerning, had no
foresight of the, calamities and desolation which were, now ap-
proaching their country.

COLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and authority of Clunmbus a-'

admiral and viceroy, called the island which he had discovered title of ad-
San Salvador. It is better known by the name of Cuanahaniz, Inir'l and

viceroy.

which the natives gave to it, and is one of that large clutfer
of islands called the Lucaya or Bahama isles. It is situated
above three thousand miles to the weft of Gomera, from which
the squadron took its departure, and only four degrees to the
south of it; so little had Columbus deviated from the weflerly
course, whlicli he had chosen as the mofl proper.

COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting the coafis of Proceed, to.
(the island ; and from the univcrfal poverty of the inhabitants, vfoi, tilC

lhe.

B 00 K he perceived that this was not the rich country for which he

_-_-,- fought. But, conformably to his theory concerning the dif-

covery of those regions of Asia which firetched towards the eafi,
he concluded that San Salvador was one of the isles which
geographers described as situated in the vafi ocean adjacent to
India '. Having observed that most of the people whom he
had seen wore small plates of gold, by way of ornament, in
their nostrils, he eagerly inquired where they got that precious
metal. They pointed towards the south, and made him com-
prehend by signs, that gold abounded in countries situated in
that quarter. Thither he immediately determined to direc his
course, in full confidence of finding there those opulent regions
which had been the object of his voyage, and would be a re-
compence for all his toils and dangers. He took along with
him seven of the natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring
the Spanifl language, they might serve as guides and inter-
preters; and those innocent people confidered it as a mark of
diftinCion when they were feleaed to accompany him.

Dicovers Cu- HE saw several islands, and touched at three of the largefl,
ba. on which he bellowed the names of St. Mary of the Conception,

Fernandina, and Isabella. But as their foil, producaions, and
inhabitants, nearly resembled those of San Salvador, he made
no flay in any of them. He inquired every where for
gold, and received uniformly for answer, that it was brought
from the south. Ile followed that course, and oon disco-
vered a country of vast extent, not perfectly level, like
thoie which he had already vilitcd, but so diversified with
riLing grounds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that he was
uncertain whether it might prove an illand, or part of the con-

t ret. Malt. cpi!?. 135.

tincnt.

tinrnt. The natives of San Salvador, whom he had on board, B O 00 1
called it Cuba; Columbus gave it the name of Juanna. He
entered the mouth of a large river with his squadron, and' all
the inhabitants fled to the mountains as he approached the shore.
But as he resolved to careen his ships in that place, he ent some
Spaniards, together with one of the people of San Salvador, to
view the interior parts of the country. They, having advanced
above frxty miles from the hore, reported, upon their return,
that the foil was richer and more cultivated than any they
had hitherto discovered; that, betides many scattered cot-
tages, they had found one village, containing above a thou-
sand inhabitants; that the people, though naked, feerncd to be
more intelligent than those of San Salvador, but had treated
them with the fame refpe&ful attention, killing their feet, and
honouring them as sacred beings allied to Heaven; that they
had given them to eat a certain root, the taste of which refem-
bled roasted chefnuts, and likewise a singular species of corn
called maize, which, either when roasted whole or ground into
meal, was abundantly palatable; that there seemed to be no
four-footed animals in the country, but a species of dogs, which
could not bark, and a creature resembling a rabbit, but of a
much maller size; that they had observed some ornaments of
gold among the people, but of no great value ".

THESE messengers had prevailed with ome of the natives to i conec
accompany them, who informed Columbus, that the gold of tures with r--

gard to it..

which they made their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By
this word they meant the middle or inland part of Cuba; but
Columbus, being ignorant of their language, as well as unac-
cuflomed to their pronunciation, and his thoughts running con-

" Life of Columbus, c. 24-z8. Herrcra, dec. . lib. i. c. 14.

tiually

B OO 0 K tinually upon his own theory concerning the discovery of the
a3,-,_ *'tEaft Indies, he was led, by the resemblance of found, to sup-

-pose that they spoke of the Great Khan, -and imagined that the
opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by Marco Polo, was not
very remote. This induced him to employ some time in view-
ing the country. He visited almof.every harbour, from Porto
del Principe, on the north coast of Cuba, to the eastern extre-
mity of the island; but, though delighted with the beauty of
the scenes, hich every where presented themrelves, and
.amazed at the luxuriant fertility of the foil, both which, from
their novelty, made a more lively impression upon his imagi-
nation , 'he did not find gold in such quantity as was sufficient
to satisfy either the avarice of his followers, or the expectations
of the court to which he was to return. The natives, as much
aflorifhed at his eagerness in quest of gold, as the Europeans
were at their ignorance and simplicity, pointed towards the east,
where an island which they called Hayti was situated, in which
that metal was more abundant than among them. Columbus or-
dered his squadron to bend its course thither; but Martin Alonfo
Pinzon, impatient to be the first who hould take possession of
the treasures which this country was supposed to contain, quit-
ted his companions, regardless of all the admiral's signals to
flacken fail, until they ihould come up with him.

Discovers the COLUMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, did not reach
nijlirpa Hayti till the sixth of December. He called the port where

he firit touched St. Nicholas, and the island itself Efpagnola,
in honour of the kingdom by which he was employed; and it
is the only country, of those he had yet discovered, which has
retained the name that he gave it. As he could neither meet

S See NOTE XIV.

with

'with the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the inhabitants, B 0 K
who fled in great conflernation towards the woods, he soon --
quitted St. Nicholas, and failing along the northern coast of the 49Z.
island, he entered another harbour, which he called Concep-
tion. Here he was more fortunate; his people overtook
a woman who was flying from them, and after treating
her with great kindness, dismissed her with a present of
such toys as they knew were most valued in those countries.
The description which he gave to her countrymen of the hu-
manity and wonderful qualities of the strangers; their admira-
tion of the trinkets, which she fliewed with exultation; and
their eagerness to participate of the fame favours; removed all
their fears, and induced many of them to repair to the harbour.
The strange objects which they beheld, and the baubles which
Columbus bellowed upon them, amply gratified their curiosity
and their wishes. They nearly resembled the people of Guana-
hani and Cuba. They were naked like them, ignorant, and
iimple; and seemed to be equally unacquainted with all the
arts which appear most necessary in polished societies; but
they were gentle, credulous, and timid, to a degree which
rendered it easy to acquire the ascendant over them, especially
as their exceflive admiration led them into the fame error
with the people of the other islands, in believing the Spa-
niards to be more than mortals, and descended immediately
from Heaven. They pofilefed gold in greater abundance
than their neighbours, which they readily exchanged for
bells, beads, or pins; and, in this unequal traffic, both
parties were highly pleased, each confidering themfclves as
gainers by the tranfaclion. Here Columbus was visited by a
prince or cazique of the country. He appeared with all the
pomp known among a fimpie people, being carried in a fort

VOL. I. 0 of

.B 00 K of palanqnin upon the houlders of four men, and attended by

_--.-.- many of his tubjecls, who served him with great refpeQ.
-4z , -His deportment was grave and stately, very reserved towards

his own people, but 'with Columbus and the Spaniards ex-
tremely courteous. He gave the admiral rome thin plates of
gold, and a girdle of curious workmanship, receiving in return
presents of small value, but highly acceptable to him Y.

COLUMBUS, still intent on discovering the mines which

yielded gold, continued to interrogate all the natives with whom
he had any intercourse concerning their situation. They con-
curred in pointing out a mountainous country, which they
called Cibao, at some diflance from the sea, and farther towards
the east. Struck with this found, which appeared to him the
fame with Cpango, the name by which Marco Polo, and
other travellers to the east, diftinguiihed the islands of Japan,
he no longer doubted with refpet to the vicinity of the coun-
tries which he had discovered to the remote parts of Asia; and,
in full expecation of reaching oon those regions which had
been the object of his voyage, 'he directed his course towards the
east. He put into a commodious harbour, which he called St.
Thomas, and found that diftrit to be under the government of
a powerful cazique, named Gacanahari, who, as he after-
wards learned, was one of the five sovereigns among whom the
whole iand was divided. He immediately ent messengers to
Columbus, who, in his name, delivered to him the prefcnt of a
nmafk curiously faflhioned, with the cars, note, and mouth f
beaten gold, and invited him to the place of his rclidence, near
the harbour now called Cape Francois, some leagues towards
the east. Columbus dispatched some of his officers to visit this
prince, who, as he behaved with greater dignity, seemed to

L.ife ofColaubur., C.32. Ilerrcra, dec. r. lib. i. c. 15, &c.

claitm

claim more attention. They returned, with such favourable B o° K
accounts. both of the country and of the people, as made Co- -
lumbus impatient for that interview with Guacanahari to which 4-9Z.
he had been invited.

HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on the twenty- ole of lis

fourth of December, with a fair wind, and the sea perfea'ly lhips lo0t.
calm; and as, amidst the multiplicity of his occupations, he
had not shut his eyes for two days, he retired at midnight, in
order to take some repofc, having committed the helm to the
pilot, with ftrid injuncions not to quit it for a moment. The
pilot, dreading no danger, carelessly left the helm to an un-
experienced cabin-boy, and the flip, carried away by a current,
was dafled against a rock. The violence of the shock awakened
Columbus. I-Ie ran up to the deck. There, all was confusion
and despair. He alone retained presence of mind. He ordered
some of the sailors to take a boat, and carry out an anchor
aflern; but, initead of obeying, they made off towards the
N'gna, which was about half a league diflant. He then com-
manded the malfs to be cut down, in order to lighten the ilip;
but all his endeavours were too late; the veficl opened near the
keel, and filled so fall with water, that its loss was inevitable.
The finoothnefs of the fca, and the timely afiflance of boats
from theNigna, enabled the crew to iave their lives. As soon as
the islanders heard of this difafier, they crowded to the shore,
with their prince Guacanahari at their head. Irltead of taking
advantage of the diflrels in which they beheld the Spaniards,
to attempt any thing to their detriment, they lamented their
misfortune with tears of sincere condolance. Not atisficd with
this unavailing exprefflon of their fynmpathy, they put to fca
a vafl number of canocs, and, under the direction of the

O? Spaniards,

BOO I Spaniards, affifled in saving whatever could be got out of the

---- wreck; and by the united labour of so many hands, almost
1495. every thing of value was carried ashore. As fast as the goods

were landed, Guacanahari in person took charge of them. By
his orders, they were all deposited in one place, and armed
centinels were polled, who kept the multitude at a distance,
in order to prevent them not only from embezzling, but
from infpeding too curiously what belonged to their guests .
Next morning this prince visited Columbus, who was now on
board the Nigna, and endeavoured to console him for his loss,
by offering all that he possessed to repair it .

Dilnres of THE condition of Columbus was such, that he flood in need
Colunbus. of consolation. He had hitherto procured no intelligence of

the Pinta, and no longer doubted but that his treacherous afro-
ciate had set fail for Europe, that he might have the merit of
carrying the firfl tidings of the extraordinary discoveries which
they had made, and might so far pre-occupy the ear of their so-
vereign, as to rob him of the glory and reward to which he was
jufly intitled. There remained but one vessel, and that the
fnialleft and most crazy of the squadron, to traverse such a vail
ocean, and carry so many men back to Europe. Each of those
circumfiances was alarming, and filled the mind of Columbus
with the utmost solicitude. His desire of overtaking Pinzon,
and of effacing the unfavourable impressions which his mifre-
presentations might make ii Spain, made it necessary to return

leave a part thither without delay. The difficulty of taking such a number
tl hcilde in of persons aboard the Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which

the fertility of the country, and the gentle temper of the people,
had already induced him to form. He resolved to leave a part

See NOTE XV. a IIcrrera, dec. . lib.i c. 18.

3o~~ of

of his crew in the island, that, by residing there, they might B K
learn the language of the natives, study their disposition, exa-
mine the nature of the country, search for mines, prepare for 1492.
the commodious settlement of the colony, with which he pro-
posed to return, and thus secure and facilitate the acquisition of
those advantages which he expected from his discoveries. When
he mentioned this to his men, all approved of the design; and
from impatience under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the
levity natural to ailors, or from the hopes of amassing vast
wealth in a country which afforded such promising specimens
of its riches, many offered voluntarily to be among the num-
ber of those who hould remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the execution of this Obtains the

fcheine, but to obtain the content of Guanacahari; and his un- coentie of lh
suspicious simplicity oon presented to the admiral a favourable
opportunity of proposing it. Columbus having, in the best
manner he could, by broken words and signs, expressed ome
curiosity to know the cause which had moved the islanders to
fly with such precipitation upon the approach of his flips, he
informed him that the country was much infelted by the in-
curfions of certain people, whom he called Carribeas, who
inhabited several islands to the south east. These he described
as a fierce and warlike race of men, who delighted in blood,
and devoured the fleflh of the prisoners who were so unhappy
as to fall into their hands; and as upon the first appearance of
the Spaniards, they were supposed to be Carribeans, whom the
natives, however numerous, durst not face in battle, they had
recourse to their usual method of securing their safety, by fly-
ing into the thickest and mofl impenetrable woods. Guaca-
rnahari, while feaking of those dreadful invaders, discovered

ftlcl

B OI K such ymptoms of terror, as well as such consciousness of the

L----/ inability of his own people to refifl them, as led Columbus to
4+93. conclude that he would not be alarmed at the proposition of

any scheme which afforded him the profpeq of an additional
security against their attacks. He instantly offered him the
affitlance of the Spaniards to repel his enemies; he engaged to
take him and his people under the protecion of the powerful
monarch whom he served, and offered to leave in the island
such a number of his men, as should be sufficient, not only to
defend the inhabitants from future incursions, but to avenge
their past wrongs.
Builds a fort. THE credulous prince closed eagerly with the proposal, and

thought himself already safe under the patronage of beings
sprung from Heaven, and fperior in power to mortal men.
The ground was marked out for a finall fort, which Columbus
called Navidlad, because he had landed there on Christmas day.
A deep ditch was drawn around it. The ramparts were forti-
sied with pallifades, and the great guns, saved out of the ad-
miral's ship, were planted upon them. In ten days the work
was finished; that simple race of men labouring with incon-
fiderate assiduity in ereing this first monument of their
own servitude. During this time Columbus, by his caresses
and liberality, laboured to increase the high opinion which the
natives entertained of the Spaniards. But while he endea-
voured to inspire them with confidence in their disposition to
do good, he wished likewise to give them some striking idea of
their power to punifl and destroy such as were the objeCts of
their just indignation. With this view, in pretence of a vast
assembly, he drew up his men in order of battle, and made an
ofclntatious but innocent display of the flarpncfs of the Spanish

4 swords,

-swords, f the force of their spears, and the operation of their B 0 0o
cross-bows. These rude people, firangers to the use of iron, _-
and unacquainted with any hoflile weapons, but arrows of 149Z'
reeds pointed with the bones of fishes, wooden swords, and
javelins hardened in the fire, wondered and trembled. Before
-this surprise or fear had time to abate, he ordered the great
-guns to be fired. The sudden explosion struck them with such
'terror, that they fell flat to the ground, covering their faces
xvith their hands; and when they beheld the astonishing effec
of the bullets, they concluded that it was impoflible to resist
men, who had the command of such defhrudive inf-ruments,
and who came armed with thunder and lightning against their
enemies.

AFTER giving flich impressions both of the beneficence and His intlruc-

tions to thore

power of the Spaniards, as might have rendered it easy to pre- he left in t.
serve an ascendant over the minds of the natives, Columbus
appointed thirty-eight of his people to remain in the island.
He entrusted the command of there to Diego de Arada, a gen-
tleman of Cordova, investing him with the fame powers which
he himself had received fiom their Catholic Majeflies; and
furnished him with every thing rcquifite for the fubfifience or
defence of this infant colony. He ftridly enjoined them to
maintain concord among thenmfelves, to yield an unreserved
obedience to their commander, to avoid giving offence to the
natives by any violence or cxaation, to cultivate the friendflip
of Guacanihari, but not to put themfclvcs in his power by
flraggling in finall parties, or marching too far from the fort.
-TIc promilfd to revilit them soon, with fch a reinforcement
of frcngth as might enable thcm to take full poffcffion of the
country, and to reap all the fruits of their difcovrics. In the

ine; n

B 0 0 K mean time, he engaged to mention their names to the king

--- and queen, and to place their merit and services in the moat
49,.' advantageous light b

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the security

of the Colony, he left .Navidad on the fourth of Janu-
t493. ary, one thousand four hundred and ninety-three, and steer-

ing towards the east, discovered, and gave names to most
of the harbours on the northern coast of the ifand. On the
sixth, he descried the Pinta, and soon came up with her, after
a reparation of more than fix weeks. Pinzon endeavoured to
juflify his condut, by pretending that he had been driven from
his course by stress of weather, and prevented from returning
by contrary winds. The admiral, though no firanger to his
perfidious intentions, or the frivolity as well as falsehood of
what he urged in his defence, was so sensible that this was not
a proper time for venturing upon any high strain of authority,
and felt such fatisfaaion in this junction with his consort,
which delivered him from many disquieting apprehensions,
that lame as Pinzon's apology was, he admitted of it without
difficulty, and restored him to favour. During his absence
from the admiral, Pinzon had visited several harbours in the
island, had acquired ome gold by trafficking with the natives,
but had made no discovery of any importance.

Rcfolves to FROM the condition of his sips, as well as the temper of his
return to Eu- men, Columbus now found it necessary to halten his return to
rope. Europe. The former, having suffered much during a voyage

of such unusual duration, were extremely leaky. The latter

b Oviedo p. Ramufio, iii. p. 8-. E. Ierrera, dec. . lib. i. c, 20. Life of Co-
lumbus, c. 3+.

expre flcd

expressed the utmost impatience to revisit their native country, B K
from which they had been so long absent, and where they had
things so wonderful and unheard-of to relate. Accordingly, 4T'
on the sixteenth of January, he directed his course towards the
north east, and oon loft fight of land. He had on board some
of the natives, whom he had taken from the different islands
which he discovered; and besides the gold, which was the
chief object of research, he had colleCted pecimens of all the
productions which were likely to become fubjeds of commerce
in the fcvcral countries, as well as many unknown birds,
and other natural curioftics, which might attraCt the attention
and excite the wonder of the people. The voyage was pro-
fperous to the fourteenth of February, and they had advanced
near five hundred leagues across the Atlantic Ocean, when the A violent

storm aries.

wind began to rife, and continued to blow with increasing rage,
which terminated in a furious hurricane. Every expedient that
the naval skill and experience of Columbus could devise was
employed, in order to save the hips. But it was impoflible to
withitand the violence of the storm, and as they were fill far
from any land, deftruCion seemed inevitable. The sailors had
recourse to prayers to Almighty God, to the invocation of
faints, to vows and charms, to every thing that religion dic-
tates, or fuperflition suggests to the affrighted mind of man.
No profped of deliverance appearing, they abandoned them-
selves to despair, and expetecd every moment to be wallowed
up in the waves. Betides the pafions which naturally agitate
and alarm the human mind in fich awful ituations, when cer-
tain death, in one of his most terrible forms, is before it, Co-
lumbus had to endure feelings of dilfrefs peculiar to himself.
He dreaded that all knowledge of the amazing discoveries The condutA
which he had made was now to perifi; mankind were to be "Columbu3.

VOL. I. P deprived

B 0oo K deprived of every benefit that might have been derived from the

-- _ happy success of his schemes, and his own name would defccnd

to posterity as that of a rash deluded adventurer, instead of be-
ing transmitted with the honour due to the author and con-
ductor of the most noble enterprise that had ever been under-
taken. These refcaicons extinguished all sense of his own per-
fonal danger. Less affected with the loss of life, than solicitous
to preserve the memory of what he had attempted and atchiev-
ed, he retired to his cabbin, and wrote, upon parchment, a
short account of the voyage which he had made, of the course
which he had taken, of the situation and riches of the countries
which he had discovered, and of the colony that he had left
there. HIaving wrapt up this in an oiled cloth, which he in-
closed in a cake of wax, he put it into a calk carefully flopped
up, and threw it into the sea, in hopes that some fortunate
accident might preserve a deposit of so much importance to the
world .

Takes shelter AT length Providence interposed, to save a life reserved for
intheAzores. other services. The wind abated, the sea became calm, and on

the evening of the fifteenth they discovered land; and though
uncertain what it was, they made towards it. They soon
knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores or western isles, sub-
ject to the crown of Portugal. There, after a violent contelf
with the governor, in which Columbus displayed no Icfs spirit
than prudence, lie obtained a supply of frefli provisions, and
whatever clfe he needed. One circumfiance, however, greatly
disquietcd him. The Pinta, of which he had loft fight on the
lirfi day of the hurricane, did not appear; he dreaded for some
time that fie had founldered at sea, and that all her crew had

Lc ifc of Coluinbur, c. 37. Ilcrrcza, dec. i. lib. ii . c , z. Sec N 0 T . X.

4 periflied:

perilhed: afterwards, his former suspicions recurred, and hle B 0 0 K
became apprehensive that Pinzon had borne away for Spain, --~
that he might reach it before him, and by giving the firr ac-
count of his discoveries, might obtain some share of his
fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores as oon as the SeI. 24.

Arnves at

weather would permit. At no great diifance from the coast of Lijbo.
Spain, when almost at the end of his voyage, and beyond the
reach of any disaster, another storm arose, little inferior to the for-
mer in violence; and after driving before it during two days and
two nights, he was forced to take shelter in the river Tagus.
Upon application to the king of Portugal, he was allowed to March 4.
come up to Lisbon; and, notwithfianding the envy which it was
natural for the Portuguese to feel, when they beheld another
nation entering upon that province of discovery which they
had hitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and in its first
essay, not only rivalling but eclipsing their fame, Columbus was
received with all the marks of diflindion due to a man who
had performed things so extraordinary and unexpeded. The
king admitted him into his presence, treated him with the
highest refipcc, and listened to the account which he gave of
his voyage with admiration mingled with regret. While Co-
lumbus, on his part, enjoyed the fatisfadion of dcfcribing the
importance of his discoveries, and of being now able to prove
the solidity of his schemes to those very persons, who, with an
ignorance disgraceful to themselves, and fatal to their country,
had lately rejected them as the projects of a visionary or de-
signing adventurer .

i Life of Columbus, c. .o, 41. I-errcrn, dec. . lib. ii. c. 3.

P 2 COLUMnrus

B 0 0 K COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to Spain, that he re-

_---- mained only five days in Lisbon. On the fifteenth of March

Return93to he arrived in the port of Palos, seven months and eleven days
Spain. from the time when he set out thence upon his voyage. As

soon as his ship was discovered approaching the port, all
the inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly to the shore, in order
to welcome their relations and fellow-citizens, and to hear
tidings of their voyage. When the prosperous issue of it
was known, when they beheld the fIrange people, the un-
known animals, and singular producions brought from
the countries which had been difccvered, the effusion of
joy was general and unbounded. The bells were rung, the
cannon fired; Columbus was received at landing with royal
honours, and all the people, in solemn procession, accom-
panied him and his crew to the church, where they re-
turned thanks to Heaven, which had so wonderfully conducted
and crowned with success, a voyage of greater length and of
more importance, than had been attempted in any former
age. On the evening of the fame day, he had the fatisfaaion
of feeing the Pinta, which the violence of the tempest had
driven far to the north, enter the harbour.

His recep. THE first care of Columbus was to inform the king and
tion.

queen, who were then at Barcelona, of his arrival and success.
Ferdinand and Isabella, no less astonished than delighted with
this unexpected event, returned an answer in terms the most
relpedful and flattering to Columbus, requesting him to repair
immediately to court, that from his own mouth, they might
receive a full detail of his extraordinary services and discoveries.
During his journey to Barcelona, the people crowded from the
adjacent country, following him every where with admiration

5 and

and applause. His entrance into the city was conduced, by B 0 K
order of Ferdinand and Isabella, with pomp suitable to the ----'
great event, which added such distinguishing lustre to their 1493'
reign. The people whom he brought along with him from
the countries which he had discovered, marched first, and by
their singular complexion, the wild peculiarity of their sea-
tures, and uncouth finery, appeared like men of another
species. Next to them were carried the ornaments of gold,
fashioned by the rude art of the natives, the grains of gold
found in the mountains, and dufft of the fame metal gathered
in the rivers. After these appeared the various commodities of
the new discovered countries, together with their curious pro-
duCtions. Columbus himself closed the procession, and attracted
the eyes of all the fpecators, who gazed with admiration on the
extraordinary man, whose superior fagacityand fortitude had con-
duted their countrymen, by a route concealed from pafl ages, to
the knowledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella received
him clad in their royal robes, and feated upon a throne, under a
magnificent canopy. When he approached they flood up, and
raising him as he kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him
to take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and to give a
circumstantial account of his voyage. He delivered it with
a gravity and composure no less suitable to the disposition of the
Spanish nation, than to the dignity of the audience in which
he spoke, and with that modest simplicity which charaCterises
men of superior minds ; who, satisfied with having performed
great actions, court not vain applause by an ofientatious diifplay
of their exploits. When he had finished his narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up solemn thanks to
Almighty God for the discovery of those new regions, from

which

B o IK which they expeCled so many advantages to flow in upon the
- ---- . kingdoms subjet to their government . Every mark of ho-

493 our that gratitude or admiration could suggest was conferred

upon Columbus. Letters patent were iflued, confirming to
him and to his heirs all the privileges contained in the capitula-
tion concluded at Santa Fe; his family was ennobled; the king
and queen, and, after their example, the courtiers, treated him,
on every occasion, with all the ceremonious refped paid to per-
sons of the highel rank. But what pleased him most, as it
gratified the enterprising activity of his mind, bent continually
upon great objects, was an order to equip, without delay, an
armament of such force, as might enable him not only to take
poffefior of the countries which he had already discovered; but
to go in fcarch of those more opulent regions, which he till
confidently expected to find '.

Afonifl!ment 'WHILE preparations were making for this expedition, the
cf mankind at
his dirco- fame of Columbus's filccefsful voyage spread over Europe, and
yerises. excited general attention. The multitude, firuck with amaze-

ment when they heard that a new world had been found,
could hardly believe an event so much above their concep-
tion. Men of science, capable of comprehending the na-
ture, and of discerning the effects, of this great discovery,
received the account of it with admiration and joy. They
spoke of it with rapture, and congratulated one another
upon their felicity, in having lived at the period when, by
this extraordinary event, the boundaries of human know-
lcdge were so much extended, and ifch a new field of inquiry

See NOTE XVIr.
r Iifc of ColIinlbuL, c. 4, 3j. -Hcrrcra, dec . . lib. ii. c. 3.

and

and observation opened, as would lead mankind to a perfect B 0 0 K
acquaintance with the ftrulture and produCtions of the habitable
globe . Various opinions and conjectures were formed con-
cerning the new-found countries, and what division of the
earth they belonged to. ColumLus adhered tenaciously to his
original opinion, that they iould be reckoned a part of those
vast regions in Asia, comprehended under the general name of
India. This sentiment was confirmed by the observations which
he made concerning the productions of the countries which he
had discovered. Gold was known to abound in India, and he
had met with such prorifing famplcs of it in the ilands which
he visited, as led himn to believe tlat rich mines of it might be
found. Cotton, another production of the East Indies, was
common there. The pimento of the islands he imagined to be
a species of the Eaft-Indian pepper. He mistook a root, some-
what rclembling rhubarb, for that valuable drug, which was
then fiippofcd to be a plart peculiar to the East Indies . The
birds which he had brought home were adorned with the fame
rich plumage that diltinguifhes those of India. The alligator
of the one country appeared to be the fame with the crocodile
of the other. After weighing all thcfe circumfiances, not only Di!;nuinlcd
the Spaniards, but the other nations of Europe, tem to have byth,'..^".
adopted the opinion of Columbus. The countries which Idict.
he had ifcovercd were confidered as a part of India. In
corlcqiiquco -. of this notion, the name of Indies is given to
tlicm by Ferdinand and Itabcllia, in a ratification of their
former agreement, which was granted to Columbus upon his
return `'. Even after te rrl-or whlich gave rife to this opinion
was dtcted, and the true polition of the New world was alccr-

r. .irr. cill. 1 3, 13 , i ;, . S<.' N O'11TE XVIII.

i llcrrera, d'c. I. lib. i. c. C

u. .ill;l. I , . -. '
k Lilf ol Culuinbus, C. 4.!.

taiacd,,

D ° ii0 tained, the name has remained, and the appellation of Wjef
<- ---S- Indies is given by all the people of Europe to the country, and

1493- that of Indians to its inhabitants.

Preparations THE name by which Columbus diflinguiflhed the countries
for a second
Voyagfe.on which he had discovered was so inviting; the specimens of their

riches and fertility, which he produced, were so considerable;
and the reports of his companions, delivered frequently with
the exaggeration natural to travellers, so favourable; that they
excited a wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spaniards.
Though little accustomed to naval expeditions, they were im-
patient to set out upon another voyage. Volunteers of every
rank solicited to be employed. Allured by the vast profpeds
which opened to their ambition and avarice, neither the length
nor danger of the navigation intimidated them. Cautious as
Ferdinand was, and averse to every thing new or adventurous,
he seemed to have catched the fame spirit with his fubjeds.
Under its influence, preparations for a second expedition were
carried on with a rapidity unusual among the Spaniards, and
to an extent that would be deemed not inconsiderable in the
present age. The fleet consisted of seventeen hips, ome of
which were of good burden. It had on board fifteen hundred
persons, among whom were many of noble families, who had
served in honourable tfations. The greater part of there being
destined to remain in the country, they were furnished with every
thing requisite for conquest or settlement, with all kinds of
European domestic animals, with such feeds and plants as were
most likely to thrive in the climate of the Weft Indics, with
utensils and instruments of every fort, and with such artificers
as might be moss useful in an infant colony '.

' errera, dec. . lib. ii. c. . Life of Columbus, c. 4.

BUT,

BUT, formidable'and well provided as this fleet was, Ser- B 0 K

dinand and Isabella. did not reft their title to the possession of ---
the newly-difcovered countries upon its operations alone. The The rightof
example of the Portuguese, as well as the fuperflition of the "Sain to the

New World

age, made it necefTary to obtain from the Ronan pontiff a confirmed by
grant of thole territories which they wished to occupy. The P
Pope, as the vicar and representative of Jesus Christ, was sup-
posed to have a right of dominion over all the kingdoms of the
earth. Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime that
disgraces humanity, filled the papal throne at that time. As
he was born Ferdinand's subjet, and very solicitous to secure the
protection of that monarch, in order to facilitate the execution
of his ambitious schemes in favour of his own family, he in-
ltantly complied with his request. By an ad of liberality which
cost him nothing, and that served to efablifh the jurifdidion
and pretcnfions of the papal fee, he bestowed on Ferdinand and
Isabella all the countries inhabited by Infidels, which they had
discovered, or should discover; and in virtue of that power
which he derived from Jesus Christ, he vested in the crown of
Castile a right to vast regions, to the possession of which he
hinmelf was so far from having any title, that he was unac-
quainted with their situation, and even with their existence.
As it was necessary to prevent this grant from interfering with
that formerly made to the crown of Portugal, he appointed that
a line, fippofed to be drawn from pole to pole, a hundred
leagues to the westward of the Azores, should serve as the limit
between them; and, in the plenitude of his power, conferred
all to the east of this imaginary line upon the Portuguese, and
all to the weft of it upon the Spaniards m. Zeal for propagating
the Chriflian faith was the confidcration employed by Ferdinand in

- Herreia, dc. . lib. ii. c. 4. Torqucinada Mon. Ind. lib, xi. c. 3.
VOL. I. Q soliciting

B. . i cluc;llg this bull, and is mentioned by ltaiinder as his chief

A _

._ motive for issuing it. In order to manifest some concern for
'493. this laudable object, several friars, under the diretion of Fa-

ther Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great reputation, as apotlo-
lical vicar, were appointed to accompany Columbus, and to
devote themselves to the inftrudion of the natives. The Indians
whom Columbus had brought along with him, having received
forne tin6cure of Chriflian knowledge, were baptized with
much solemnity, the king himself, the prince his son, and the
chiefperfons of his court, flanding as their godfathers. Those
first fruits of the New World have not been followed by such an
increase as pious men wished, and had reason to expect.

Second voy- FERDINAND and Isabella having thus acquired a title, which
age of Co-
Jlubus.° was then deemed completely valid, to extend their discoveries,,

and to eftablif their dominion over such a vat portion of the
globe, nothing now retarded the departure of the fleet. Co-
lumbus was extremely impatient to revisit the colony which
he had left, and to pursue that career of glory upon which he
had entered. He set fail from the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-
fifth of September, and touching again at the island of Gomera,
he freered farther towards the south than in his former voyage.
By holding this course, he enjoyed more Readily the benefit of
the regular winds, which reign within the tropics, and was
carried towards a large cluster of islands, situated considerably
to the eart of those which he had already discovered. On the
twenty-fixth day after his departure from Gomera, he made
Nov. a. land . It was one of the Caribbee or Leeward islands, to,

which he gave the name of Defeada, on account of the impa-
tience of his crew to discover some part of the New world.

X Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. 85. B.
z After

After this he visited successively Dominica, Marigalante, Gua- B O0O It
dalupe, Antigua, St. John de Porto Rico, and several other ----
islands, cattered in his way as he advanced towards the north- 1493.
weft. All there he found to be inhabited by that fierce race of
people whom Guacanahari had painted in such frightful co-
lours. His descriptions appeared not to have been exaggerated.
The Spaniards, as often as they landed, met with such a re-
ception as convinced them of their martial and daring spirit;
and they discovered in their habitations the relics of those hor-
rid feasts which they had made upon the bodies of their enemies
taken in war.

BuT as Columbus was eager to know the ate of the colony Arrives at

which he had planted, and to supply it with those necef- Nov. z.
saries of which he supposed it to be in want, he made
no flay in any of those islands, and proceeded direcly to
Hispaniola °. When he arrived off Navidad, the station in
which he had left the thirty-eight men under the command of
Arada, he was astonished that none of them appeared, and
expected every moment to fee them running with transports of
joy to welcome their countrymen. Full of solicitude about
their safety, and foreboding in his mind what had befallen
them, he rowed instantly to land. All the natives from whom
he might have received information had fled. But the fort
which he had built was entirely demolished, and the tattered
garments, the broken arms and utensils scattered about it, left
no room to doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the garrison '.

° P. Martyr, dec. p. ; .

18. Ilcir a, den. . lib. ii. c. 7. Life of Columbus,
c. 46, &co r lI-if. de Cur de los Palacios. MS.

Q9 2 Whilc

oB °o° While the Spaniards were shedding tears over those fad memo-

II.

A _»--«. rials of their fellow-citizens, a brother of the cazique Gua-

The fae of canahari arrived. From him Columbus received a particular
home he left detail of what had happened after his departure from the island.
there. The familiar intercourse of the Indians with the Spaniards

tended gradually to diminish the superstitious veneration with
which their first appearance had inspired that simple people.
By their own indiscretion and ill conduct, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impressions, and soon convinced the
natives, that they had all the wants, and weakieffes, and pas-
sions of men. As soon as the powerful restraints which the
presence and authority of Columbus imposed was withdrawn,
the garrison threw off all regard for the officer whom he had
invested with command. Regardless of the prudent inftruc-
tions which he had given them, every man became indepen-
dent, and gratified his desires without controul. The gold,
the women, the provisions of the natives, were all the prey of
those licentious oppressors. They roamed in finall parties over -
the island, extending their rapacity and insolence to every cor-
ner of it. Gentle and timid as the people were, those unpro-
voked injuries at length exhaufled their patience, and rouzed
their courage. The cazique of Cibao, whose territories the
Spaniards chiefly insertcd on account of the gold which they
contained, surprised and cut o leveral of them, while they
straggled in as perfec security as if their condu had been al-
together inoffcnfivc. Hc then aernblcd his subjects, and si,-
rounding the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were
killcd in defending it, the rclt pcriffed in attempting to make
their escape by crosling an arm of the sea. Guacanahari, whora
all their exalions had not alienated from the Spaniards, took

3 arms

arms in their behalf, and in endeavouring to protect them, had B O O K
received a wound, by which he was still confined. t.

1493.

THOUGH this account was far from removing the suspicions Iis prudent

which the Spaniards entertained with refpe&2 to the fidelity of
Guacanahari, Columbus perceived so clearly that this was not
a proper juncture for inquiring into his condurt with fcrupu-
lous accuracy, that he rejctled the advice of fcveral of his offi-
cers, who urged him to fcize the person of that prince, and to
revenge the death of their countrymen by attacking his subjects.
IIe reprcfentcd to them the neceflity of feciu ing the ricndfhip
of some potentate of the country, in order to fhcilitate the set-
tlement which they intended, and the danger of driving the
natives to unite in some desperate attempt againfl theim, by fich
an ill-timed and unavailing exercise of rigour. Instead of waft-
ing his time in punishing past wrongs, he tock precautions for
preventing any future injury. Witli this view, he made choice
of a situation more healthy and commodious than that of Navi-
dad. He traced out the plan of a town in a large plain near
a spacious bay, and obliging every person to put his hand to a
work on which their common safety depended, the houses and
ramparts were soon so far advanced by their united labour, as
to aord them iheltcr and security. This rising city, the first
that the Europeans founded in the New world, he named Isabella,
in honour of his patrone s the queen of Caflile .

IN carrying on this neccfary work, Columbus had not only Difconrent of

to sustain all tle hardflips, and to encounter all the diffculties, hi fr'llWv5.

q P. Mai yr, decad. p. zz, &c. Ilcrrcra, dec . lib. ii. c. 7. . Life of Colum-
bus, c. .19, o. ' Lfe of tolumbu:, c. 51. llcricra, dec, i. 1b. ii. c. 1o.

tO

B 0 O K to which infant colonies are exposed when they fettle in an un-

I[. ----' cultivated country, but he had to contend with what was more

1493. insuperable, the laziness, the impatience, and mutinous disposition

of his followers. By the enervating influence of a hot climate,
the natural inaaivity of the Spaniards seemed to increase.
Many of them were gentlemen, unaccustomed to the fatigue of
bodily labour, and all had engaged in the enterprise with the
sanguine hopes excited by the splendid and exaggerated de-
scriptions of those who returned with Columbus from his first
voyage, or by his own mistaken idea that the country which he
had discovered was either the Cipango of Marco Polo, or the
Ophir r, from which Solomon imported those precious com-
modities which suddenly diffused such extraordinary riches
through his kingdom. But when, instead of that golden har-
vest which they had expected to reap without toil or pains, the
Spaniards saw that their profped of wealth was remote as well
as uncertain, and that it could not be attained but by the flow
and persevering efforts of induflry, the disappointment of those
chimerical hopes occasioned such dejecion of mind as bordered
on despair, and led to general discontent. In vain did Colum-
bus endeavour to revive their spirits by pointing out the fertility
of the foil, and exhibiting the specimens of gold daily brought
in from different parts of the island. They had not patience
to wait for the gradual returns which the former might yield,
and the latter they despised as scanty and inconsiderable. The
spirit ofdifaffeflion fprcad, and a conspiracy was formed, which
might have been fatal to Columbus and the colony. Happily
he discovered it, and fcizing the ringleaders, punished ome of
thcm, ent others prisoners into Spain, whither he dispatched

r P. Martyr. dec. p. 9.

twelve

twelve of the ships which had served as transports, with an B 0 K
earnest request for a reinforcement of men and a large supply _--
of provisions '.

MEANWHILE, in order to banish that idleness which, by x 1494.
allowing his people leisure to brood over their disappointment, into the nate

of the coun-

nourished the spirit of discontent, he planned several expeditions try.
into the interior part of the country. He sent a detachment,
under the command of Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enter-
prifing officer, to visit the difirit of Cibao, which was said to
yield the greatest quantity of gold, and followed him in person March I2,
with the main body of his troops. In this expedition, he dif-
played all the pomp of military magnificence that he could ex-
hibit, in order to strike the imagination of the natives. He
marched with colours flying, with martial music, and with a
small body of cavalry that paraded sometimes in the front and
sometimes in the rear. As those were the firit horses that ap-
peared in the New World, they were objets of terror no less
than admiration to the Indians, who having no tame animals
themselves, were unacquainted with that vast accefion of power,
which man hath acquired by subjecting them to his dominion.
They imagined them to be rational creatures, that formed but
one animal with their riders. They were afloniflcd at their
speed, and confidered their impetuosity and strength as irre-
fiftible. But while Columbus endeavoured to inspire the na-
tives with a dread of his power, he did not neglect the arts of
gaining their love and confidence. I-Ie adhered scrupulously to
the principles of integrity and juflice in all his tranfadions witl
them, and treated them, on every occasion, not only with hu-

d HI-Ixcra, dec. . lib..ii. c. o1, I 1.

nanity,

B 0 0 K manty. but with indulgence. The dilri- of Cibao answered the
- --» description given of it by the natives. It was mountainous and
494P' uncultivated, but in every river and brook gold was gathered

either in duff or in grains, some of which were of considerable
size. The Indians had never opened any mines in search of
gold. To penetrate into the bowels of the earth, and to refine
the rude ore, were operations too complicated for their talents
and indufiry, and they had no such high value for gold as to
put their ingenuity and invention upon the firetch in order to
obtain it'. The small quantity of that precious metal which
they possessed, was either picked up in the beds of the rivers,
or washed from the mountains by the heavy rains which fell
within the tropics. But, from those indications, the Spaniards
could no longer doubt that the country contained rich treasures
in its bowels, of Jvhich they hoped oon to be mailers . In
order to secure the command of this valuable province, Colum-
bus erected a small fort, to which he gave the name of St.
Thomas, by way of ridicule upon some of his incredulous fol-
lowers, who would not believe that the country produced gold,
until they saw it with their own eyes, and touched it with their
hands "

The distress T-HE account of those promising appearances of wealth in the
and difific-
tion of the country of Cibao came very seasonably to comfort the despond-
colony in- ing colony, which was affeded with dili'reffcs of various kinds.
crease.

The flock of provisions which had been brought from Europe
was moilly consumed ; what remained was so much corrupted
by the heat and inoifture of the climate, as to be almost unfit

Oviedo, lib. ii. p. 9o. A. M P. Martyr, dec. p. 3z.
w Ilerrcja, dec. i. lib. ii. c. Iz. Life ofColumnbus, c. 52.

for

for use; the natives cultivated so finall a portion of ground, B 00 l
and with so little skill, that it hardly yielded what was sufficient t_-
for their own fubfiftance; the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto '494.
neither time nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap any con-
fiderable fruits of their own industry. On all these accounts,
they became afraid of perishing with hunger, and were reduced
to live already at short allowance. At the fame time, the dif-
eases predominant in the torrid zone, and which rage chiefly in
those uncultivated countries, where the hand of industry has
not opened the woods, drained the marfies, and confined the
rivers within a certain channel, began to spread among them.
Alarmed at their violence and unusual symptoms, they exclaim-
ed against Columbus and his companions in the former voyage,
who, by their splendid but deceitful descriptions of Hispaniola,
had allured them to quit their native country for a bar-
barous uncultivated land, where they must either be cut off
by famine, or die of unknown diflempcrs. Several of the offi-
cers and persons of note, instead of checking, joined in those
seditious complaints. Father Boyl, the apoftolical vicar, was one
of the most turbulent and outrageous. It required all the au-
thority and addrcfs of Columbus to re-establish subordination
and tranquillity in the colony. Threats and promilcs were
altcrnatcly employed for this purpose; but nothing contributed
more to sooth the malcontents than the profpedt of finding, in
the mines of Cibao, such a rich ftorc of treasure as would be a
recompence for all their fuflcrings, and efface the memory of
former disappointments.

W\VrIN, by his unwearied endeavours, concord and order Colubllus

lwere so far reforcd, that he could venture to leave the inandl, J-jitenio, .'
Collumbus rleblvcd to pursue his difcovcries, that lie night be

VrOL I. . t able

B o0 Is able to acertain whether those new countries with which lie-

---- had opened a communication, were conneted with any region,

of the earth already known, or whether they were to be confi-
dered as a separate portion of the globe, hitherto unvisited. He
appointed his brother Don Diego, with the assistance of a coun-
cil of offcers, to govern the iand in his absence; and gave
the command of a body of soldiers to Don Pedro Margarita,
with which he was to visit the different parts of the island,
and endeavour to eflabliih the authority of the Spaniards among
the inhabitants. Having left them very particular infRrudions
with refped to their conduc, he weighed anchor on the twen-
ty-fourth of April, with one sip and two finall barks under
his command. During a tedious voyage of full five months,
he had a trial of almost all the numerous hardships to which
persons of his profeflion are expocfd, without making any dif-
covery of importance, except the island of Jamaica. As he
ranged along the southern coast of Cuba , he was entangled in
a labyrinth formed by an incredible number of small islands,
to which he gave the name of the Queen's Garden. In this
unknown course, among rocks and shelves, he was retarded by
contrary winds, aaulted with furious forms, and alarmed with
the terrible thunder and lightning which is often almost incef-
sant between the tropics. At length his provisions fell short;
his crew, exhaufled with fatigue as well as hunger, murmured
and threatened, and were ready to proceed to the most dcfpe-
rate extremities against him. B1cfet with danger in such va-.
rious forms, lh was obliged to keep continual watch, to ob-
serve every occurrence with his own eyes, to iflue every order,
and to ftiperintend the execution of it. On no occasion, was
the extent of his kill and experience as a navigator so much

' See NOTE XIX.

tried.,

tried. To these the squadron owed its safety. But this unre- B 0 O
mitted fatigue of body and intense application of mind, over- -- --i
powering his conflitution, though naturally vigorous and rolufi, ''4"
brought on a feverith disorder, which erinatcd in a lethargy,
that deprived him of fenfc and niminory, and had almolt proved
fatal to his life '.

BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the sudden emotion of joy Sept. 27.

Oi his re-

which he felt upon meeting with his brother Barthclemciv at ii, fii hi
Isabella, occasioned such a flow of ltirits as contributed greatly t^'I,1er,,2ta
to his recovery. It was now thirteen years since the two bro- 1sl;'ia.
thers, whom finiilarity of talents united in close fricndihip,
had separated from c::ch other, and during that long period
there had been no intercourc between theln. Bartlhlcmcw,
after finishing his negoci-ttion in the court of England, had
set out for Spain by the way of France. At Paris lie received
an account of the extraordinary discoverics which his brother
had made in his firi voyage, and that he was then preparing
to embark on a fecund cxpedition. Though this naturally in-
duced him to pursue his journey with the uttnofi dilpatcl, Co-
lumbus had failcd for -liifpaliola before lie reached Spain. Ser-
dinand and Iabclla receiveid him with the refpcc- due to the
brother of a man wholie merit and 'frviccs rendered him tIi b
cornfpicuous; and as thcy knew what consolation his prlncc
would as'ord to Coltmibus, they pcrfuiadcd him to take the
co1mmand of thrc. ships, which they lhad appointed to carry
provilions to tle colony at flabella "

I Life or ColUnilml :, c r.1, &c. IITrrcr.i, dec 1. lil). ii. c. 13, I . r. \:)yr.
tlc. p. C.4, &c. ' Ilcrrcra, dec. i. lib. ii. ,' S

R 2 IIE

B o K HE could not have arrived at any juncture when Columrbu

11.

--J itflood more in need of a friend capable of assisting him with his
Thelindians counsels, or of dividing with him the cares and burden of go-
tlakearms vernment. For although the provisions now brought from
Spaiaids. Europe, afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards from

the calamities of famine, the supply was not in such quantity
as to support them long, and the island did not hitherto yield
what was sufficient for their sustenance. They were threatened
with another danger, fill more formidable than the return of
scarcity, and which demanded more immediate attention. No
sooner did Columbus leave the island on his voyage of discovery,
than the soldiers under Margarita, as if they had been set free
from discipline and ubordination, scorned all restraint. In-
stead of conforming to the prudent inftruaions of Columbus,
they dispersed in straggling parties over the island, lived at dif-
cretion upon the natives, wafted their provisions, seizcd their
women, and treated that inoffensive race of men with all the
insolence of military oppression .

As long as the Indians had any profpc( that their fufRer-

ings might come to a period by the voluntary departure of
the invaders, they fbmitted in silence, and diLlembled their
sorrow; but they now perceived that the yoke would be as
permanent as it was intolerable. The Spaniards had built a
town, and surrounded it with ramparts. They had erected
forts in different places. They had inclosed and fowln i'e-
vcral fields. It was apparent that they came not to vilit the
country, but to fettle in it. Though the number of thoSe
Iirangers was not confidcrablc, the slate of cultivation among

: IP. Ma lyr, dC . . 7.

this

tis rude people was so imperfet, and in such exact propor- B 0 0 K
tion to their own consumption, that it was with difficulty they ----
could afford fubfiftance to their new guests. Their own mode 494'
of life was so indolent and inative, the warmth of the climate
ib enervating, the constitution of their bodies naturallyfo feeble,
and so unaccustomed to the laborious exertions of indufiry,
that they were satisfied with a proportion of food amazingly
finall. A handful of maize, or a little of the insipid bread made
of the caflada-root, was sufficient to support men, wvhofe
firength and spirits were not exhausted by any vigorous efforts
either of body or mind. The Spaniards, though the mol ab-
ftcmious of all the European nations, appeared to them exccf-
lively voracious. One Spaniard consumed as much as everal
Indians. This keenness of appetite surprised them so much,
and fccmcd to them to be bo inlatiable, that they fppofed the
Spaniards had left their own country, because it did not produce
as much as was requisite to gratify their immoderate dcfirc of
food, and had come among them in quefl of nourifiment '.
Self-prefervation prompted them to willi for the departure of
guelfs who walfed so fait their slender stock ofprovifions. The
injuries which they fiffcred, added to their impatience for this
event. They had long cxpected that the Spaniards would rc-
tire of their own accord. They now perceived that, in order
to avert the dcflruction with which they were threatened, ci-
ther by the flow confimption of famine, or by the violence of
tlheir oppreflors, it was neccffary to aflilme courage, to attack
thole formidable invaders with united force, and drive them
fiom the fcttlcments of which they had violently taken pof-
fcfi on.

b Ilcrre ra, dec, i. lit. ii. c. 17,

Sci c.

B o0 OK SucH were the sentiments which universally prevailed among

.-.-- the Indians, when Columbus returned to Isabella. Inflamed by

War itllt the unprovoked outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of
tlien, rage of which their gentle natures, formed to fiffer and submit,

seemed hardly susceptible, they waited only for a signal from
their leaders to fall upon the colony. Some of the caziques
had already surprised and cut off several of the stragglers. The
dread of this impending danger united the Spaniards, and re-
established the authority of Columbus, as they saw no profped:
of safety but in committing themselves to his prudent guidance.
It was now necessary to have rccourfe to arms, the employing
of which againfl the Indians, Columbus had hIitherto avoided
with the greatest solicitude. Unequal as the conflia may seem,
between the naked inhabitants of the New '\orld, armed with
clubs, flicks hardened in the fire, wooden swords, and arrows
pointed with bones or flints; and troops accustomed to the difci-
pline, and provided with the inrruments of deftru-ion known
in the European art of war, the situation of the Spaniards was
far from being exempt from danger. The vast superiority of
the natives in number, compensated many defets. An handful
of men was about to encounter a whole nation. One adverse
event, or even any unforcfeen delay in determining the fate of
the war, might prove fatal to the Spaniards. Conscious that
success depended on the vigour and rapidity of his operations,
-495. Columbus inflantly assemblcd his forces. They were reduced

to a very finall number. Diseases, engendered by the warmth
and humidity of the country, Ihad raged among them with
much violence; experience had not yet taught them the art
either of curing tlicfc, or he precautions rcquilite for guarding
against them; two-thirds of the original adventurers were dead,

and

and many of those who survived were incapable of service . B 0 0 K
The body which took the field consisted only of two hundred -. J
foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; and how strange March2.4
soever it may seem, to mention the last as composing part of a
military force, they were not perhaps the least formidable and
deftrudtive of the whole, when employed againfl naked and
timid Indians. All the caziques of the island, Guacanahari ex-
cepted, who retained an inviolable attachment to the Spaniards,
were in arms to oppose Columbus, with forces amounting, if
we may believe the Spanifhi hiflorians, to a hundred thousand
men. Inflead of attempting to draw the Spaniards into he
faitneies of tlhe woods and mountains, they were so imprudent
as to take their flation in the Vega Real, the moi open pli.iln
in the country. Columbus did not allow them time to perci ve
their error, or to alter their position. 1-e attacked them dn :
the night, when undisciplincd troops are Icaft capable '

;'

with union and concert, and obtained an easy and hi,
viclory. The consternation with which the Indians wver, I
by the noise and havoc made by the fire-arms, by t;: ii,
tuous force of the cavalry, and the fierce onfct of tl:..
was so great, that they threw down their waitnoi)l,
fled without attempting rcefflancc. AMany vwcre Iti in;;
wvcre taken prisoners, and reduced to tbrvi`ttllc'; aIl i
roughly were the refl intimidated, that '!;ln tIat i'n1' } :,
abandoned tlhemfclvcs to defpailr, rclinq inlli i .

;.i '

.
contending with lag.rcnors ,lwhom they dcucmed il.viln ii

Co LU MB S cmplO)ycd fcvcral months in marching; :.
island, and iln libjceling it to the Spanilih govc: . ...

Iif -c:fCo!,]!i' v*, c. 6Ci I See NOTE '
..

B °0 0 out meeting with any opposition. He imposed a tribute upon
A-_vJ all the inhabitants above the age of fourteen. Each person
1495- who lived in those districts where gold was found, was obliged

to pay quarterly as much gold dufft as filled a hawk's bell; from
those in other parts of the country, twenty-five pounds of cot-
ton were demanded. This was the first regular taxation of the
Indians, and served as a precedent for exactions still more in-
tolerable. Such an heavy imposition was extremely contrary
to those maxims which Columbus had hitherto inculcated with
refpet to the mode of treating them. But intrigues were car-
rying on in the court of Spain at this juncture, in order to
undermine his power and discredit his operations, which con-
strained him to depart from his own system of administration.
Several unfavourable accounts of his conduct, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted to Spain.
Margarita and Father Boyl were now at court; and in order
to justify their own conduc, or to gratify their resentment,
watched with malevolent attention for every opportunity of
spreading insinuations to his detriment. Many of the courtiers
viewed his growing reputation and power with envious eyes.
Fonseca, the archdeacon of Seville, who was intruflcd with
the chief direcaion of Indian affairs, had conceived such an
unfavourable opinion of Columbus, for ome reason which
the contemporary writers have not mentioned, that he listened
with partiality to every invecive against him. It was not
easy for an unfriended franger, unpraaifed in courtly arts,
to counteraa the machinations of so many enemies. Co-
lumbus saw that there was but one method of upporting is
own credit, and of lilencing all his alveiries. He nuit
produce such a quantity of gold, as would not only juflify

whlat

what he had reported with refpecl to the richness of the coun- B O O K
try, but encourage Ferdinand and Isabella to persevere in pro- -
fecuting his plans. The neceflity of obtaining it, forced him

ii 9

not only to impose this heavy tax upon the Indians, but to exact
payment of it with extreme rigour; and may be pleaded in ex-
cufe for his deviating on this occasion from the mildness and hu-
manity with which he uniformly treated that unhappy people .

THE labour, attention, and foresight which tlie Indians were Fa'al efffs

obliged tQ employ in procuring the tribute demanded of tem, h

,,e.

appeared tle most intolerable of all evils, to men accustomed to
pass their days in a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable of fucl a regular and persevering exertion of
induflry, and felt it such a grievous restraint upon their liberty,
that they had recourse to an expedient for obtaining deliverance
from this yoke, which demonstrates tle excess of their impa-
tience and despair. They formed a scheme of flarving those
oppressors whom they dur-f not attempt to expel; and from
the opinion which they entertained with refped to the voracious
appetite of the Spaniards, they concluded the execution of it
to be very practicable. With this view, they fuflended all the
operations of agriculture; they sowed no maize, they pulled
up tle roots of the manioc which were planted, and retiring
to the molt inaccessible parts of the mountains, left the ucul-
tivated plains to their enemies. This delierate rcfolution pro-
duced ome part of the flcc s whlicl they expeCted. The Spa-
niards were reduced to extreme want; but they rcccived such
seasonable supplics of provisions from Europe, and found o
many resources in their own ingenuity and indufiry, that they
suffered no great loss of men. The wretched Indians were tle

lerrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.
VOL. I. S viaimn

B 0 K vicims of their own ill-concerted policy. A vast mnuliitude.

II.
.-- -- ' shut up among barren mountains, without any food but the'
95 spontaneous produtions of the earth, soon felt the utmost'

difireffes of famine. This brought on contagious diseases;
and, in the course of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the iland periflled, after experiencing misery
in all its various forms f.

Incrtstilrs BUT while Columbus was thus successfully eftablilihng
aganlti: Cn-
luibiusii i th te foundations of the Spanilh grandeur in the New World,
Court o. his enemies laboured with unwearied afliduity to deprive him

of the glory and rewards to which his services and sus-
ferings intitled him. The hardships unavoidable in a new
settlement, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy cli-
mate, the disasters attending a voyage in unknown seas,
were all represented as the fruits of his restless and incon-
fiderate ambition. His prudent attention to preserve difci-
pline and subordination was denominated excess of rigour;
the punishments which he inflicted upon the mutinous and
disorderly were imputed to cruelty. These accusations gained
such credit in a jealous court, that a commissioner was ap-
pointed to repair to Hispaniola, and to infpet into the con-
duct of Columbus. By the recommendation of his enemiest
Aguado, a groom of the bed-chamber, was the pcrfon to whom
this important trust was committed. But in this choice they
seem to have been more influenced by the obsequious attachment
of the man to their interest, than by his capacity for the fta
tion. Puffed up with such fuddcn elevation, Aguado displayed,
in the exercise of this office, all the frivolous felf-importance,

f lerrcra, dec. i. lib. xi. c. S1. Life of Columbu , c. 6i. Ovicdo, lib. iii. p. 93
D. Benzon 1ifi. Novi Orbis. lb. . c. 9. P. Maltyr, dec. p. .8.

*. and

and acd with all the difgufling insolence, which are natural B 0 0 K
to little minds, when raised to unexpected dignity, or cm- -,--
ployed in fundcions to which they are not equal. By listening 495"
with eagerness to every accusation against Columbus, and encou-
raging not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even the Indians,
to produce their grievances, real or imaginary, he fomented the
spirit of difiention in the island, without establishing any regu-
lation of public utility, or that tended to redress the many
wrongs, with the odium of which he wiflaed to load the admi-
ral's administration. As Columbus felt sensibly how humili-
ating his situation mufl be, if he should remain in the country
while such a partial infpecqor obfcrved his motions, and con-
trouled his jurifiicdtion, he took the resolution of returning to
Spain, in order to lay a full account of all his tranfadions, par-
ticularly with refpecl to the points in dispute between him and
his adversaries, before Ferdinand and Iabella, from whose jus-
tice and discernment he expeded an equal and a favourable
decision. IHe committed the administration of affairs, during
his absence, to Don Bartholomew, his brother, with the title 1496.
of Adelantado, or Lieutenant-Governor. By a choice less for-
tunate, and wlich proved the source of many calamities to
the colony, he appointed Francis Roldan chief jullice, witl
very extensive powers .

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course lifFerent Rt,,rs to

from that which he had taken in his former voyage. He fleered sl';i"
almost due cast fiom Hispaniola, in the parallel of twenty-two
degrees of latitude; as experience had not yet difcovcrcd the
more certain and expeditious method of stretching to the north,
in order to fall in with the fouth-wcft winds. By this ill-

c -Herrcra, dec. . lib. i.' L:iB. Lb. iii. c. .

S z adviscd

B 00o K advised choice, which, in the infancy of navigation between

_.----. the New and Old Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the ad-
'ut'6. miral as a defeC in naval skill, he was exposed to infinite fa-

tigue and danger, in a perpetual firuggle with the trade-winds,
which blow without variation from the east between the tropics.
Notwithstanding the almost inubperable difficulties of such a
navigation, he persisted in his course with his usual patience
and firmness, but made so little way, that he was three months
without feeing land. At length, his provisions began to fail,
the crew was reduced to the scanty allowance of fix ounces of
bread a-day for each person. The admiral fared no better than
the meanest sailor. But, even in this extreme distress, he re,
tained the humanity which distinguishes his character, and
refused to comply with the earnest solicitations of his crew,
some of whom- proposed to feed upon the Indian prisoners
whom they were carrying over, and others insisted to throw
them over-board, in order to leflen the consumption of their
finall flock. He represented, that they were human beings,
reduced by a common calamity to the fame condition witIh
themselves, and intitled to share an equal fate. His autho-
rity and remonstrances dissipated those wild ideas suggested
by despair. Nor had they time to recur, as he came soon within
fight of the coast of Spain, and all their fears and sufferings
ended h

rTi eccption COLUMBUS appeared at court with the modefI but deter-
there.

mined confidence of a man conscious not only of integrity,
but of having performed great services. Ferdinand and Isabella,
aflamed of their own facility in lending too favourable an ear
to frivolous or ill-founded accusations, received him with

h IIcrrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. . Life of Columbus, c. 64.

such

such diflinguifecd marks of respect, as covered his enemies B 0 0 K
with Lhame. Their ccnfu-es and calumnies were no more .

-

heard of at that jundure. The gold, the pearls, the cotton,
and other commodities of value which Columbus produced,
feermed fully to refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpet to the poverty of the country. By reducing the
Indians to obedience, and imposing a regular tax upon them, he
had secured to Spain a large accefion of new fubjeds, and the
eflablifhment of a revenue that promised to be considerable.
By the mines which he had found out and examined, a source
of wealth still more copious was opened. Great and unex-
pected as those advantages were, Columbus represented them
only as preludes to future acquisitions, and as the earnest of
more important dilcoveries, which he still meditated, and to
which those he had already made would condut him with eafc
and certainty .

THE attentive consideration of all those circunm fances made A pn form.-

cd fbr il,c

such imprefflon, not only upon Iabella, who was flattered with c,,o .r ,Iar
the idea of being the patrooefs of all Columbus's entcrprifes, but ' tl'il'll.'lnt

o a coloty.

even upon Ferdinand, who having originally expreflcd his dif-
approbation of his fchcmes, was fill more apt to doubt of their
success, that they resolvcd to supply the colony in I-ifpaniola
with every thing that could render it a permanent eflabliflhment,
and to furnifn Columbus with fucl a fleet, that he might pro-
ceed to search for those new countries, of whole cxiflence lic
seemed to be confident. The mcafrrcs molt proper for accom-
plifling both there designs were concerted with Columbus.
Discovery had been the sole objet of the firfl voyage to the
New World; and though, in the second, settlement had becil.

t Life of Columbus, c. 6 . Illrrcra, dcc. i. lib. iii. c, r.

proposecd,

B OO K proposed, the precautions taken for that purpose had either beea
---.---_ insufficient, or were rendered ineffectual by the mutinous spirit

of the Spaniards, and the unforeseen calamities arising from
various causes. Now a plan was to be formed of a regular
colony, that might serve as a model in all future eflablifhments.
Every particular was confidered with attention, and arranged
with a scrupulous accuracy. The precise number of adven-
turers who hould be permitted to embark was fixed. They.
were to be of different ranks and profeflions; and the propor-
tion of each was established, according to their ufcfiuliefs and
the wants of the colony. A suitable number of women was to
be chosen to accompany these new feltlers. As it was the first
objecl to raise provisions in a country where scarcity of food
had been the occasion of so much diflrefs, a considerable body
of husbandmen was to be carried over. As the Spaniards had
then no conception of deriving any benefit from those produc-
tions of the New World which have since yielded such large
returns of wealth to Europe, but had formed magnificent ideas,
and entertained sanguine hopes with refpet to the riches con-
tained in the mines which had been discovered, a band of work-
men, skilled in the various arts employed in digging and re-
fining the precious metals, was provided. All there emigrants
were to receive pay and fubfitence for some years, at the
public expence .
dcreftinit. THus far the regulations were prudent and well adapted to

the end in view. But as it was forcfeen that few would engage
voluntarily to fettle in a country, whose noxious climate had
been fatal to so many of their countrymen, Columbus propoced
to transport to Hispaniola such malefators as had been con-

Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii, c. z.

viacd

wialed of crimes, which, though capital, were of a less atrocious B 00 K
nature; and that for the future a certain proportion of the of- I- .
fenders usually sent to the gallies, Ihould be condemned to
labour in the mines which were to be opened. This advice,
given without due refleeion, was as inconsiderately adopted.
The prisons of Spain were drained, in order to collect mernbers-
for the intended colony;. and the judges were inflruled to re-
cruit it by their future sentences. It is not, however, with:
such materials, tlat the foundations of a society, defined to be
permanent, should be laid. Indufiry, sobriety, patience, and
mutual confidence are indispensably rcquifite in an infant fettle--
ment, where purity of morals mufl contribute more towards-
eftablifling order than the operation or authority of laws. But.
when such a mixture of what is corrupt is admitted into the
original conflitution of the political body, the vices of thofc.
unfound.and incurable members will probably infect the whole,.
and muff certainly be produive of violent and unhappy effecls.
This the Spaniards fatally experienced; and the other European
nations having fucceffivcly imitatcd their practice in this parti-
cular, pernicious consequences have followed in their fettle-
ncnts, which can be-imputed to no other cause'.

TrioucGi Columblus obtained, with great facility and dli- r,:pc:cl

patch, the royal approbation of every Incafure and regulation 'U'ly.
that hcl proposed, his endeavours to carry them into execution
were so long rctarded, as mufft have tired out the paticnce of
any man, lcfs accuflomcd to encounter difficulties and to fur-
mount them. Tllole delays were occa(ioncd partly by that tc-
6lious formality and spirit of procrastination, with which the
' lIcrrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. z. Touron Ilii. Gcncr. dc I'Anmcriquc, i. r. 5r.

Spaniards

B 0 K Spaniards conduC business; and partly by the exhaufled state

II.
t_--- - of the treasury, which was drained by the expence of celebrat-

149' ing the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's only son with

Margaret of Austria, and that of Joanna, their second daughter,
with Philip archduke of Austria ; but must be chiefly imputed
to the malicious arts of Columbus's enemies. Astonished at
the reception which he met with upon his return, and overawed
by his presence, they gave way, for some time, to a tide of
favour too strong for them to oppose. Their enmity, however,
was too inveterate to remain long inative. They resumed
their operations, and by the afliflance of Foufeca, the minifler
for Indian affairs, who was now promoted to the bishopric of
Badajos, they threw in so many obflacles to protract the pre-
parations for Columbus's expedition, that a year elapsed before
he " could procure two ships to carry over a part of the supplies
destined for the colony, and almost two years were spent before
the finall squadron was equipped of which he himfelfwas to take
the command .

1498. TiHIS squadron confifed of fix ships only, of no great bur-
!tirdo ,,.. den, and but indifferently provided for a long or dangerous

navigation. The voyage which he now meditated was in a
course different from any he had undertaken. As he was fully
perfiladed that the fertile rcgions of India lay to the fouth-wcft
of those countries which he had discovered, he proposed, as the
most certain method of finding out there, to fland direcly
south from the Canary or Cape de Vcrd islands, until he came"
under the equinoctial line, and then to firetch to the weft be-
fore the favourable wind for such a course, which blows invari-
:'*.t!. ably between the tropics. With this idea he fct fail, and

m P. Martyr, pilf. i,8S. "Life of Colhubus, c. 6j.
F Herrera. dcc. . lib, iii. 9.

8 touched

touched first at the Canary, and then at the Cape de Verd B O K
islands. From the former he dispatched three of his ships with '.--.-
a supply of provisions for the colony in Hispaniola: with the 49
other three, he continued his voyage towards the south. No
remarkable occurrence happened until they arrived within five
degrees of the line. There they were becalmed, and at the fame July 19.
time the heat waxed so excellive, that many of their wine casks
burfi, the liquor in others owered, and their provisions cor-
rupted P. The Spaniards, who had never ventured so far to
the fo4th, were afraid that the ships would take fire, and be-
gan to apprehend the reality of what the ancients had taught
concerning the destructive qualities of that torrid region of the
globe. They were relieved, in some measure, from their fears
by a seasonable fall of rain. This, however, though so heavy
and unintermitting that the men could hardly keep the deck,
did not greatly mitigate the intenseness of the heat. The ad-
miral, who with his usual vigilance had directed every opera-
tion in person, from the beginning of the voyage, was so much
exhausted by fatigue and want of sleep, that it brought on a
violent fit of the gout, accompanied with a fever. All there
circumflances confirained him to yield to the importunities of
his crew, and to alter his course to the north weft, in order to
reach some of the Carribee islands, where he might refit, and
be supplied with provisions.

ON the firfl of Augufl, the man flationed in the round top Dicovcrs tic

surprised them with the joyful cry of land. They flood to- Ceoticat o
wards it, and discovered a considerable island, which the ad-
miral called Trinidad, a name it flill retains. It lies on the

P P. Martyr, dec. p. 70.
VOL. . T coals

B 0o K coast of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,

i.
.-..->-. though a river only of the third or fourth magnitude in the

New World, far furpaffies any of the fireams that water our
hemisphere. It rolls towards the ocean such a vast body
of water, and rushes into it with such impetuous force, that
when it meets the tide, which on that coaf rites to an uncom-
mon height, their collision occasions a swell and agitation of
the waves no less surprising than formidable. In this conflit,
the irresistible torrent of the river so far prevails, that it freshens
the ocean many leagues with its flood . Columbus, before he
could perceive the danger, was entangled among those adverse
currents and tempestuous waves, and it was with the utmost
difficulty that he escaped through a narrow strait, which ap-
peared so tremendous, that he called it La 'ioca del Drago.
As oon as the consternation which this occasioned permitted
him to reflect upo the nature of an appearance so extraordi-
nary, he discerned in it a source of comfort and hope. Hejuftly
concluded, that such a vast body of water as this river contain-
ed, could not be supplied by any island, but,mut flow through
a country of immense extent, and of consequence, that he was
now arrived at that continent which it had long been the obje6t
of his wishes to discover. Full of this idea, he flood to the
weft along the coast of those provinces which are now known
by the names of Paria and Cumana. He landed in fevoral
places, and had ome intercourse with the people, who re-
femblcd those of I-lifpaniola in their appearance and man-
ner of life. They wore, as ornaments, small plates of gold,
and pearls of considerable value, which they willingly ex-
changed for European toys. They seemed to possess a better

1 Gumilla lill. de l'Orcnoquc, tomi. i. p. 14.

5 understanding,

understanding, and greater courage, than the inhabitants of B3 0 K
the islands. The country produced four-footed animals of fe-
veral kinds, as well as a great variety of fowls and fruitsr.
The admiral was so much delighted with its beauty and fertility,
that with the warm enthusiasm of a discoverer, he imagined it
to be the paradise described in Scripture, which the Almighty
chore for the residence of man, while he retained innocence
(hat rendered him worthy of such a habitation '. Thus Co-
lumbus had the glory not only of discovering to mankind the
existence of a New World, but made considerable progress to-
wards a perfect knowledge of it; and was the first man who
conducted the Spaniards to that vast continent which has been
the chief feat of their empire, and the source of their treasures
in this quarter of the globe. The shattered condition of his
ships, scarcity of provisions, his own infirmities, together with
the impatience of his crew, prevented him from pursuing his
discoveries any farther, and made it necessary to bear away for
Hispaniola. In his way thither he discovered the islands of
Cubagua and Margarita, which afterwards became remarkable
for theirpearl-fifhery. When he arrived at Hispaniola, he was Aug. 3o
wafted to an extreme degree with fatigue and sickness; but found
the affairs of the colony in such afituation, as afforded him no pro-
fpet of enjoying that rcpofe of which he flood so much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that country during his State of H-is-

paniola on

abfcnce. His brother, the Adelantado, in consequence of an his arrival
advice which the admiral gave before his departure, had re- tlhcrc
moved the colony from Isabella to a more commodious flation,
on the oppolite fide of the ifand, and laid the foundation of

Herrcrn, dec. . lib. iii. c. 9, Io, . Iire of Columbus, c. 66-73.
llerrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. i2. Gonliara, c. 8-. See NOTE XXI.

T 2 St.

B 0 0 K St. Domingo ', which was long the most considerable European
t --^--J town in the New World, and the feat of the supreme courts

4 in the Spanish dominions there. As oon as the Spaniards

were established in this new settlement, the adelantado, that
they might neither languish in inactivity, nor have leisure to
form new cabals, marched into those parts of the island which
his brother had not yet visited or reduced to obedience. As the
people were unable to resist, they submitted everywhere to the
tribute which he imposed. But they soon found the burden to
be so intolerable, that, overawed as they were by the fu-
perior power of their oppressors, they took arms againfi
them. Those infurredions, however, were not formidable. A
conflict with timid and naked Indians was neither dangerous
nor of doubtful issue.
Mutiny of BUT while the adelantado was employed against them in the

olda. field, a mutiny, of an asped far more alarming, broke out among

the Spaniards. The ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom
Columbus had placed in a flation which required him to be the
guardian of order and tranquillity in the colony. A turbulent
and inconsiderate ambition precipitated him into this desperate
measure, so unbecoming his rank. The arguments which he
employed to seduce his countrymen were frivolous and ill-
founded. He accused Columbus and his two brothers of arro-
gance and severity; he pretended that they aimed at eflablifh-
ing an independent dominion in the country; he taxed them
with an intention of cutting off part of the Spaniards by hun-
ger and fatigue, that they might more easily reduce the re-
mainder to fubjedion; he represented it as unworthy of Cafti-

* P. Mnrtyr, dec. p. 56.

a lians,

lians, to remain the tame and passive slaves of three Genoese B OC0 K
adventurers. As men have always a propensity to impute the --..--_
hardships of which they feel the pressure, to the miFcffdu of 1498
their rulers; as every nation views with a jealous eye the power
and exaltation of foreigners, Roldan's insinuations made a deep
impression on his countrymen. His character and rank added
weight to them. A considerable number of the Spaniards made
choice of him as their leader, and taking arms agaiuft the ade-
lantado and his brother, seized the king's magazine of provi-
sions, and endeavoured to surprise the fort at St. Domingo.
This was preserved by the vigilance and courage of Don Diego
Columbus. The mutineers were obliged to retire to the pro-
vince of Xaragua, where they continued not only to disclaim
the adelantado's authority themselves, but excited the Indians.
to throw off the yoke ".

SUCH was the ditfraaced slate of the colony when Columbus

landed at St. Domingo. He was altonifhed to find that the
three ships which he had dispatched from the Canaries were not
yet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, and the vio-
lence of currents, they had been carried a hundred and sixty
miles to the weft of St. Domingo, and forced to take shelter
in a harbour of the province of Xaragua, where Roldan and
his seditious followers were cantoned. Roldan carefully con-
cealed from the commanders his infurretion against the ade-
lantado, and employing his utmost address to gain their confi-
dence, persuaded them to set on shore a considerable part of
the new settlers whom they brought over, that they might
proceed by land to St. Domingo. It required but few argu-

w Hecrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 5-8. Life of Columbus, c. 74-77. Gomara, c. 23.
P. Martyr, p. 78.

ments.

B 0 0 K ments to prevail with those men to espouse his cause. They

II.
'-- ' were the refuse of the jails of Spain, to whom idleness, licen-
498 tioufnefs, and deeds of violence were familiar; and they re-

turned eagerly to a course of life nearly resembling that to
which they had been accustomed. The commanders of the
flips perceiving, when it was too late, their imprudence in dif-
embarking so many of their men, flood away for St. Domingo,
and got safe into the port a few days after the admiral; but
their stock of provisions was so wafted during a voyage of such
long continuance, that they brought little relief to the co-
lony .

Compoed BY this jun&ion with a band of such bold and desperate
by te pru-
dent' condut associates, Roldan became extremely formidable, and no less ex-
ofColumbus. travagant in his demands. Columbus, though filled with re-

fentment at his ingratitude, and highly exasperated by the
insolence of his followers, made no haste to take the field. He
trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames of a civil war,
in which, whatever party prev'ailed, the power and strength of
both must be so much wafted, as might encourage the common
enemy to unite and complete their deftrudion. At the fame
time, he observed, that the prejudices and passions which incited
the rebels to take arms, had so far infected those who fill ad-
hered to him, that many of them were adverse, and all cold to
the service. From such sentiments, with relfpec to the public
interest, as well as from this view of his own situation, lie
chore to negociate rather than to fight. By a seasonable procla-
mation, offering free pardon to luch as fliould merit it by re-
turning to their duty, he made impreflion upon ome of the

l lierrcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. rz. Life of Colunmbs, c. 7', 79.

malcontents.

malcontents. By engaging to grant such as should desire it B 0 0 K
the liberty of returning to Spain, he allured all those unfor- -
tunate aventurers, who, from sickness and disappointment, 1498.
were disgusted with the country. By promising to re-establish
Roldan in his former office, he oothed his pride; and by
complying with most of his demands in behalf of his followers,
he satisfied their avarice. Thus, gradually and without blood-
shed, but after many tedious negociations, he dissolved this
dangerous combination which threatened the colony with ruin;
and restored the appearance of order, regular government, and
tranquillity Y.

IN consequence of this agreement-with the mutineers, lands A new mode

of settlement

were allotted them in different parts of the island, and the In- established.
dians fettled in each difiria were appointed to cultivate a cer-
tain portion of ground for the use of those new mailers. The 1499.
performance of this work was substituted in place of the tribute
formerly imposed; and how necessary soever such a regulation
might be in a sickly and feeble colony, it introduced among the
Spaniards the Repartimientos, or distributions of Indians efa-
blifhed by them in all their settlements, which brought num-
berlefs calamities upon that unhappy people, and fubjeded
them to the most grievous oppreflion . This was not the only
bad effect of the infurretion in Hispaniola; it prevented Co-
lumbus from prosecuting his discoveries on the continent, as
felf-prefervation obliged him to keep near his person his bro-
ther the adelantado, and the ailors whom he intended to have
employed in that service. As soon as his affairs would per-
mit, he sent some of his ships to Spain with a journal of the

r ITTrcl.l, dec. . . ib. iii. . 13, 14. Life of Columbus, c. 80, &c.
· Hcilcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. li4, &c.

voyage

B OJo Ki voyage which he had made, a description of the new countries
'--y--_ which he-had discovered, a chart of the coast along which he

'499' had failed, and specimens of the gold, the pearls, and other

curious or valuable productions which he had acquired by traf-
sicking with the natives. At the fame time he transmitted an
account of the infurredion in Hispaniola ; he accused the mu-
tineers nor only of having thrown the colony into such violent
convulsions as threatened its dissolution, but of having ob-
ftruded every attempt towards discovery and improvement, by
their unprovoked rebellion against their superiors, and pro-
posed several regulations for the better government of the
island, as well as the extinction of that mutinous spirit, which,
though fuppreed at present, might oon burst out with addi-
tional rage. Rbldan and his associates did not neglect to convey
to Spain, by the fame hips, an apology for their own condut,
together with their recriminations upon the admiral and his
brothers. Unfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the
happiness of Columbus, the latter gained most credit in the
court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and produced unexpeted
effets .

The voyage BUT, previous to these, events had happened which merit at-
fama to the tention, both on account of their own importance, and their
Eall Indies, connection with the hiflory of the New World. While Co-
by the Cape
of Good lumbus was engaged in his successive voyages to the weft, the
op(C. ffpirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal, the kingdom

where it first acquired vigour, and became cnterprifing. Self-
condemnation and regret were not the only sentiments to which
the fuccels of Columbus, and refletion upon their own impru-

a Hcrrcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. 14. Bnzon. Hili. Nov. Orb. lib. i. c. 2.

dence

dence in rejecing his proposals, gave rife among the Portuguese. B 0 0 K

II.

They excited a generous emulation to surpass his performances, '-
and an ardent desire to make some reparation to their country '499
for their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who in-
herited the enterprising genius of his predeceflors, perfiifed in
their grand scheme of opening a passage to the East Indies by
the Cape of Good Hope; and soon after his accession to the
throne, equipped a squadron for that important voyage. He
gave the command of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of noble
birth, possessed of virtue, prudence, and courage, equal to
the station. The squadron, like all those fitted out for dif-
covery in the infancy of navigation, was extremely feeble,
consisting only of three vessels, of neither burden nor force ade-
quate to the service. As the Europeans were at that time al-
together unacquainted with the course of the trade-winds and
periodical monsoons, which render navigation in the Atlantic
ocean, as well as in the sea that separates Africa from India, at
some seasons easy, and at others not only dangerous, but almost
impracticable, the time chosen for Gama's departure was the
most improper during the whole year. He set fail from Lisbon
on the ninth of July, and sanding towards the south, had to 1497.
struggle for four months with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their violence began to Nov. 20.
abate; and during an interval of calm weather, Gama doubled
that formidable promontory, which had so long been the boun-
dary of navigation, and dirccted his course towards the north-
caff, along the African coast. He touched at fcveral ports ; and
after various adventures, which the I'ortuguefe historians re-
late with high but just encomiums upon his conduCt and intre-
pidity, hecame to anchor before the city of Mclii(la. Through-
out all the vail countries xwhich extend along the coast of Africa,

VOL. I. U from

B o o K from the river Senegal to the confines of Zanguebar, the Por-

IV

-..- tuguefe had found a race of men rude and uncultivated, ftran-
1499. gers to letters, to arts and commerce, and differing from the

inhabitants of Europe no less in their features and complexion,
than in their manners and institutions. As they advanced from
this, they observed, to their inexpressible joy, that the human
form gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic features began
to predominate, marks of civilization appeared, letters were
known, the Mahometan religion was established, and a com-
merce, far from being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time several vessels from India were in the port of Melinda.
Gama now pursued his voyage with almost absolute certainty
of success, and, under the conduEt of a Mahometan pilot, ar-
rived at Calecut, upon the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-
second of May' one thousand four hundred and ninety-eight.
What he beheld of the wealth, the populousness, the cultivation,
the indufiry and arts of this highly civilized country, far fur-
pafled any idea that he had formed, from the imperfect ac-
counts which the Europeans had hitherto received of it. But
as he possessed neither sufficient force to attempt a settlement,
nor proper commodities with which he could carry on commerce
of any consequence, he haflened back to Portugal, with an ac-
count of his success in performing a voyage the longest, as well
as most difficult, that had ever been made since the first inven-
tion of navigation. Ile landed at Lisbon on the fourteenth
of September one thouland four hundred and ninety-nine, two
ycars, two months, and five days, from the time he left that port..

THUs, during the course of the fifteenth century, mankind
made greater progress in exploring the Rate of the habitable

Ramufio , vol. i. 11 , D.

2 globe,

globe, than in all the ages which had elapsed previous to that B1 00 K
period. The spirit of discovery, feeble at firi and cautious,
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made its efforts with '9'
hesitation and timidity. Encouraged by fuccef-, it became ad-
venturous, and boldly extended its operations. In the course
of its progreffon, it continued to acquire vigour, and advanced
at length with a rapidity and force which burst through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hitherto circum-
fcribed the ativity of the human race. Almost fifty years were
employed by the Portuguese in creeping along the coast of
Africa from Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of which
lies only twelve degrees to the ibuth of the former. In less than
thirty years, they ventured beyond the equinoctial line into
another hemisphere, and penetrated to the southern extremity
of Africa, at the distance of forty-nine degrees from Cape de
Verd. During the last seven years, a New World was dif-
covered in the weft, not inferior in extent to all the parts of
the earth with which mankind were at that time acquainted.
In the east, unknown seas and countries were found out, and
a communication, long desired, but hitherto concealed, was
opened between Europe and the opulent regions of India. In
comparison with events so wonderful and unexpected, all that
had hitherto been deemed great or splendid, faded away and
disappeared. Vast objcts now presented themfclves. The
humian mind, rouzed and intcrcfled by the profpe, engaged
with ardour in purlfit of them, and exerted its active powers
in a new dirc(iovn.

Tir s spirit of enterprise, though but newly awakened in DifcoIries
Spain, began oon to operate cxtenfively. All the attempts ",,,i.,lo, i

OJ)i!) by pri.
towards difiovery made in that kingdom, had hitherto been v;it: ,!c,.

2 carried

B o0 K carried on by Columbus alone, and at the expence of the so-

'I.
A _--- vereign. But now private adventurers, allured by the magni-

49 ficent descriptions he gave of the regions which he had

visited, as well as by the specimens of their wealth which he
produced, offered to fit out squadrons at their own risk, and to
go in quest of new countries. The Spanish court, whose scanty
revenues were exhausted by the charge of its expeditions to the
New World, which, though they opened vast profpets of fu-
ture benefit, yielded a very sparing return of present profit,
was extremely willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon
its fubjeds. It seized with joy an opportunity of rendering the
avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of projectors, instrumental
in promoting designs of certain advantage to the public,, though

Ojeda the of doubtful success with refpe to themselves. One of the first
firt of there.

propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo de Ojeda, a gal-
lant and ative officer, who had accompanied Columbus in his
second voyage. His rank and characer procured him such
credit with the merchants of Seville, that they undertook to
equip four hips, provided he could obtain the royal licence,
authorising the voyage. The powerful patronage of the bishop
of Badajos easily secured success in a suit so agreeable to the
court. Without consulting Columbus, or regarding the rights
and jurifdiCion which he had acquired by the capitulation in
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, Ojeda was per-
mitted to et out for the New World. In order to dired his
course, the bishop communicated to him the admiral's journal
of his last voyage, and his charts of the countries which he had
May. discovercd. Ojeda struck out into no new path of navigation,

but adhering servilely to the route which Columbus had taken,.
arrived on the coalt of Paria. He traded with the natives, and
sanding to the weft, proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and

ranged

ranged along a considerable extent of coast beyond that on which B 0- K
Columbus had touched. Having thus ascertained the opinion _
of Columbus, that this country was a part of the continent, 1499'
Ojeda returned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some Oaober.
reputation as a discoverer, but with little benefit to those who
bad raised the funds for the expedition b.

AMERIGO VESPUCCr, a Florentine gentleman, accompanied I; accompa.

nied by A-

Ojeda in this voyage. In what station he served, is uncertain; nierigo Vc-
but as he was an experienced ailor, and eminently skilful in pucci.
all the sciences subservient to navigation, he seems to have ac-
quired such authority among his companions, that they wil-
lingly allowed him to have a chief share in directing their ope-
rations during the voyage. Soon after his return, he tranf-
mitted an account of his adventures and discoveries to one of
his countrymen; and labouring with the vanity of a traveller
to magnify his own exploits, he had the address and confidence
to frame his narrative, so as to make it appear that he had the
glory of having first discovered the continent in the New World.
Amerigo's account was drawn up not only with art, but with
some elegance. It contained an amusing history of his voyage,
and judicious observations upon the natural produdions, the
inhabitants, and the customs of the countries which he had
visited. As it was the first description of any part of the New
World that was published, a performance so well calculated to
gratify the passion of mankind for what is new and marvellous,
circulated rapidly, and was read with admiration. The coun-
try of which Amerigo was supposed to be the difcovercr, came From wlinm

the npameof

gradually to be called by his name. The caprice of mankind, r,,,ra,;.,,
often as unaccountable as unjust, has pcrpetuated this error. I'tv:,' Wo''l

b. Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. , z, 3.

I3y

B o0 K By the universal consent of nations, AMERICA is the name

^-,j bestowed on this new quarter of the globe. The bold preten-

49 sions of a fortunate impostor have robbed the discoverer of the

New World of a diitindion which belonged to him. The name
of Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbu ; and mankind
may regret an a of injuflice, which, hlaving received the
fandion of time, it is now too late to redrc ci.

Voyage of DURING the fame year, another voyage of discovery was
Alonlb Nig-
no. undertaken. Columbus not only introduced the spirit of naval

cnterprife into Spain, but all the first advcnturers who diflin-
guifhed themlelves in this new career, were formed by his in-
firutions, and acquired in his voyages the iidll and informa-
tion which qualified them to imitate his example. Alonfo
Nigno, who had served under the admiral in his last expedition,
fitted out, in conjunction with Christopher Guerra, a merchant
of Seville, a single ship, and failed to the coast of Paria. This
voyage seems to have been conduEted with greater attention to
private emolument, than to any general or national object.
Nigno and Guerra made no dilcoveries of any importance; but
they brought home such a return of gold and pearls, as in-
flamed their countrymen with the dcfire of engaging in similar

adventures d

Ioo. SOON after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the admiral's

j.lluuary 3.
Of \ iccnt companions in his hfiri voyage, failed from Palos with four
Yanez in-
-i1.], t Ihips. I-e flood boldly towards the foutl, and was the irlt

Spaniard who ventured to cross the cquinoctial line; but he
teems to have landed on no part of the coast beyond the mouth

See NOTE XX[[.
d I'. Maltyr, dec. . 87. lIcrrcrn, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 5.

of

of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons. All there navi- B 0 0 K
.gators adopted the erroneous theory of Columbus, and believed .--
that the countries which they had discovered were part of the 1500'
vafi continent of India .

DURING this first year of the sixteenth century, that fertile The Portu-

pucfe dfco-

diftrid of America, on the confines of which Pinzon had flopt cr Staii.
hiort, was more fully discovered. The successful voyage of
Gama to the East Indies, having encouraged the king of Por-
tugal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to carry on trade,
but to attempt conquefi, he gave the commznd of it to Pedro
Alvarez Cabral. In order to avoid the coast of Africa, where
he was certain of meeting with variable breezes, or frequent
calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral flood out to sea, and kept
so far to the weft, that, to his surprise, he found himself upon
the shore of an unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond
thc line. He imagined, at firfi, that it was some island in the
Atlantic ocean hitherto unoblerved; but, proceeding along its
coast for 'everal days, he was led gradually to believe, that a
country so extensive formed a part of ome great continent.
This latter opinion was well founded. The country with which
he fell in belongs to that province in South America now known
by the name of rafil. I-Ie landed ; and having formed a very
high idca of the fertility of the foil, and agreeablencfs of the
climate, he took poffeflion of it for the crown of Portugal, and
dispatchcd a ship to Lisbon with an account of this event, which
appeared to be no Iefs important than it was unexpedcc '.
Columbus's dicovery of tie New World was the effort of an
acdive genius, enlightened by Icicncc, guided by experince,

· llerrern, dec. . lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.
t llcrrcra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 7.

and

B 0-0 IK and aing upon a regular plan, executed with no less courage

11. '-c-- than perseverance. But from this adventure of the Portuguese,
5 0c. it appears that chance might have accomplilhed that great de-

sign, which it is now the pride of human reason to have formed
and perfected. If the sagacity of Columbus had not conducted
mankind to America, Cabral, by a fortunate accident, might
have led them, a few years later, to the knowledge of that ex-
tensive ,continent .

Maclinations WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those successive
againlt Co-
lumbus. voyages, were daily acquiring more enlarged ideas of the extent

and opulence of.that quarter of the globe which Columbus had
made known to them, he himself, far from enjoying the tran-
quillity and honours with which his services fihould have been
recompenfed, was firuggling with every difirefs in which the
envy and malevolence of the people under his command, or the
ingratitude of the court which he served, could involve him.
Though the pacification with Roldan broke the union and
weakened the force of the mutineers, it did not extirpate the
feeds of discord out of the ifiand. Several of the malcontents
continued in arms, refusing to submit to the admiral. He
and his brothers were obliged to take the field alternately, in
order to check their incursions, or to punish their crimes. The
perpetual occupation and disquiet which this created, prevented
him from giving due attention to the dangerous machinations
of his enemies in the court of Spain. A good number of those
who were most dissatisfied with his administration, had em-
braced the opportunity of returning to Europe with the ships
which he dispatched from St. Domingo. The final disappoint-
ment of all their hopes inflamed the rage of these unfortunate

He-rrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. .

adventurers
7

adventurers against Columbus to the utmost pitch. Their po,- 0 K
verty and distress, by exciting companion, rendered their ac- '---- '
cufations credible, and their complaints interesting. They Is '
teazed Ferdinand and Isabella incessantly with memorials, eon-
taining the detail of their own. grievances, and the articles of
their charge against Columbue. Whenever either the king or
queen appeared in public, they frrounded them in a tumul-
tuary manner, insisting with. importunate clamours for payment
of the arrears due to them, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their sufferings. They insulted the admiral's
sons wherever they met them, reproaching them as the off-
spring of the projetcor, whose fatal curiosity had discovered
those pernicious regions which drained Spain of its wealth, and
would prove the grave of its people. Those avowed endeavours
of the malcontents from America to ruin Columbus, were fe-
conded by the secret, but more dangerous insinuations of that
party among the courtiers, who had always thwarted his
chemes, and envied his success and credit .

FERDINAND was disposed to liften, not only with a willing, Theirin-

but with a partial ear, to there accusations. Notwithstanding fier^ilnlo
the flattering accounts which Columbus had given of the an1 lfabclla.
riches of America, the remittances from it had hitherto been
so scanty, that they fell far short of defraying the cxpencc of
the armaments fitted out. The glory of the discovery, toge-
ther with the profpcd of remote commercial advantages, was
all that Spain had yet received in return for the efforts which
she had made. But time had already diminished the firt l'ln-
fations of joy which the discovery of a New World occasioned,
and fame alone was not an objct to satisfy the cold intercllcd

h life or Colu rbus, c. 85.
VoL. . X mind

B 0 .0 K mind of Ferdinand. The nature of commerce was then so little

II.
--v-,-. understood, that, where immediate gain was not acquired, the

1 0.' hope of distant benefit, or of flow and moderate returns, was

totally disregarded. Ferdinand confidered Spain, on this ac-
count, as a loser by the enterprise of Columbus, and imputed
it to his mifcondu& and incapacity for government, that a
country abounding in gold had yielded nothing of value to its
conquerors. Even Isabella, who, from the favourable opinion
which she entertained of Columbus, had uniformly protected
him, was haken at length by the number and boldness of his
accusers, and began to fufpe& that a difaffeaion so general
muff have been occasioned by real grievances, which called for
redress. The bishop of Badajos, with his usual animosity
against Columbus, encouraged there suspicions, and confirmed
them.

Fatal effeas As soon as the queen began to give way to the torrent of
o£ this.

calumny, a resolution fatal to Columbus was taken. Francis
de Bovadilla, a knight of Calatrava, was appointed to repair
to Hispaniola, with full powers to inquire into the conduct of
Columbus, and, if he found the charge of mal-adminiifration
proved, to supersede him, and assume the government of the
island. It was impossible to escape condemnation, when this
preposterous commission made it the interest of the judge to find
the person whom he was ent to try, guilty. Though Colum-
bus had now composed all the disTentions in the island; though
he had brought both Spaniards and Indians to submit peaceably
to his government; though he had made such effeaual provi-
sion for working the mines, and cultivating the country, as
would have secured a considerable revenue to the king, as well
as large profits to individuals, Bovadilla, without deigning to

attend

attend to the nature or merit of those services, discovered, from B13 O K
the moment that he landed in Hispaniola, a determined pur- --.
pose of treating him as a criminal. He took possession of the 50'
admiral's house in St. Domingo, from which he happened at
that time to be absent, and seized his effeds, as if he had been
already convicted; he rendered himself master of the fort and
of the king's stores by violence; he required all persons to ac-
knowledge him as supreme governor; he set at liberty the
prisoners confined by the admiral, and summoned him to ap-
pear before his tribunal, in order to answer for his conduct;
transmitting to him, together with the summons, a copy of the
royal mandate, by which Columbus was enjoined to yield
implicit obedience to his commands.

COLUMBUS, though deeply affe&ed with the ingratitude Columnbus

feat in chains

and injustice of Ferdinand and Isabella, did not hesitate a mo- to Spain.
ment about his own conduct. He submitted to the will of his
sovereigns with a refpecful silence, and repaired directly to the
court of that violent and partial judge whom they had autho-
riced to try him. Bovadilla, without admitting him into his
presence, ordered him inflantly to be arrefled, to be loaded with
chains, and hurried on board a hip. Even under this humi- Oalobcr.
liating reverse of fortune, the firmness of mind which diftin-
guifhes the character of Columbus, did not forsake him. Con-
fcious of his own integrity, and solacing himself with reclcc-
ing upon the great things which he had atchieved, he endured
this insult offered to his character, not only with composure,
but with dignity. Nor had he the consolation of sympathy to
mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had already rendered him-
self so extremely popular, by granting various immunities to
the colony, by liberal donations of Indians to all who applied

X 2 for

B O K for them, and by relaxing the reins of discipline and govern-

I- ment, that the Spaniards, who were moflly adventurers, whom
'00 - their indigence or crimes had impelled to abandon their native

country, expressed the most indecent fatisfadion with the dif-
grace and imprisonment of Columbus. They flattered them-
selves, that now they hould enjoy an uncontrouled liberty,.
more flitable to their disposition and former habits of life.
Among persons thus prepared to censure the proceedings, and
to asperse the characer of Columbus, Bovadilla collected ma-
terials for a charge against him. All accusations, the moPe
improbable as well as inconsistent, were received. No in-
former, however infamous, was rejeced. The result of this
inquest, no less indecent than partial, he transmitted to Spain.
At the fame time, he ordered Columbus, with his two brothers,
to be carried tlhither in fetters; and, adding cruelty to insult,
he confined them in different ships, and excluded them from
the comfort of that fiiendly intercourse which might have
toothed their common distress. But while the Spaniards in
-Iifpaniola viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedings of
Bovadilla with a general approbation, which refieds dishonour
upon their name and ccuntry, one man fill retained the me-
mory of the great ations which Columbus had performed, and
was touched with the entiments of veneration and pity due to.
his rank, his age, and his merit. Alonfo de Vallejo, the cap-
tain of the vcffel on board which the admiral was confined, as-
soon as he was clear of the island, approached his prisoner with,
great refipc, and offered to release him from the fetters with
which he was unjustly loaded. " No," replied Columbus, with
a generous indignation, " I wear these irons in consequence of
an order from my overeigns. They lhall find me as obedient
to this as to their other injuncions. By their command I

8 have

,have been confined, and their command alone hall set me at B 0 K
.iberty i."

1500.

FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was extremely short. Nov. 2.
As soon as Ferdinand and Isabella were informed that Colum- sbt at eb.',t',

bi deprived

bus was brought home a prisoner, and in chains, they perceived cf all autho-
at once what universal aftonifliment this event must occasion,
and what an impression to their disadvantage it muff make.
All Europe, they foresaw, would be filled with indignation at
this ungenerous requital of a man who had performed acions
worthy of the highest recompence, and would exclaim against
the injustice of the nation, to which he had been such an emi-
nent benefadtor, as well as against the ingratitude of the
:princes whose reign he had rendered illustrious. Ahamed of
their own conduct, and eager not only to make some reparation
for this injury, but to efface the stain which it might fix upon
their character, they inflantly issued orders to set Columbus at Dec. 7;
.liberty, invited him to court, and remitted money to enable
Aim to appear there in a manner suitable to his rank. When
-he entered the royal presence, Columbus threw himself at the
feet of his sovereigns. He remained for some time silent; the
various paflions which agitated his mind suppressing his power
.of utterance. At length he recovered himself, and vindicated:
his conduc in a long discourse, producing the most satisfying
proofs of his own integrity as well as good intention, and evi-
dence, no less clear, of the malevolence of his enemies, who,
not satisfied with having ruined his fortune, laboured to de-
prive him of what alone was now left, his honour and his fame.
Ferdinand received him with decent civility, and Isabella with.

i Life of Columbus, c. 86. I-Ierrcra, dec. . lib. iv. c. 8.-it. Gomara H-it.
c. 23. Ovicdo, lib..iii. c. 6.

B 0 0 tenderness and refpea. They both expressed their sorrow for
.-.---' what had happened, disavowed their knowledge of it, and joined

15C0. in promising him protetion and future favour. But though

they instantly degraded Bovadilla, in order to remove'from
themselves any suspicion of having authorised his violent pro-
ceedings, they did not restore to Columbus his jurifdition and
privileges as viceroy of those countries which he had discovered.
Though willing to appear the avengers of Columbus's wrongs,
that illiberal jealousy which prompted them to invest Bovadilla
with such authority as put it in his power to treat the admiral
with indignity, still subsisted. They were afraid to trust a man
to whom they were so highly indebted, and retaining him at
court under various pretexts, they appointed Nicholas de Ovan-
do, a knight of the military order of Alcantara, governor of
Hispaniola .

COLUMBUS was deeply affected with this new injury, which

came from hands that seemed to be employed in making repa-
ration for his past sufferings. The sensibility with which great
minds feel every thing that implies any suspicion of their inte-
grity, or that wears the asped of an affront, is exquisite. Co-
lumbus had experienced both from the Spaniards; and their
ungenerous conduct exasperated him to such a degree, that he
could no longer conceal the sentiments which it excited.
Wherever he went, he carried about with him, as a memorial
of their ingratitude, those fetters with which he had been
loaded. They were conflantly hung up in his chamber, and
he gave orders that when he died they flould be buried in his
grave '.

k Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. io.- 2. Life of Colubus, c. 87.
z Life of Counibus, c. S6. p. 577.

MEANW IILE,

I

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, notwithilanding the B 0 0 K

severe check which it received by the ungenerous treatment of
the man, who first excited it in Spain, continued ative and vi- Progres of
gorous. Roderigo di Baftidas, a person of ditintion, fitted out discovery.
two hips in co-partlery with John de la Cosa, who having January.
served under the admiral in two of his voyages, was deemed the
most kilful pilot in Spain. They fleered directly towards the
continent, arrived on the coast of Paria, and proceeding to the
weft, discovered all the coast of the province now known by the
name of Terra Firma, from Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien.
Not long after Ojeda, with his former associate Amerigo Ve-
fpucci, set out upon a second voyage, and being unacquainted
with the destination of Baflidas, held the fame courte, and'
touched at the fame places. The voyage of Baftidas was pro-
fperous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unfortunate. But both
tended to increase the ardour of discovery; for in proportion as
the Spaniards acquired a more extensive knowledge of the Ame-
rican continent, their idea of its opulence- and fertility in-
creased ".

BEFORE these adventurers returned from their voyages, a Ovando p.
fleet was equipped, at the public expcnce, for carrying over poi"ted go-

veraor of

Ovando, the new governor, to Hispaniola. His presence there IlifJaniol..
was extremely requisite, in order to flop the inconsiderate ca-
reer of Bovadilla, whose imprudent adiniiftration threatened
the settlement with ruin. Concfious of the violence and ini-
quity of his proceedings against Columbus, he continued to
make it his sole object to gain the favour and support of his
countrymen, by accommodating limfelf to their passions and

l Ilerrcrn, dec . li. il. i. c I .

prcj udices

B OI k prejudices. With this view, he established regulations, in
_,--_-- every point the reverse of those which Columbus deemed effen-

. tial to the prosperity of the colony. Inflead of the severe dif-

cipline, necessary in order to habituate the dissolute and cor-
rupted members of which the society was composed, to the
restraints of law and subordination, he suffered them to enjoy
such uncontrouled licence, as encouraged the wildest excesses.
Instead of protecing the Indians, he gave a legal fanaion to
the oppression of that unhappy people. He took the exad
number of such as survived their pall calamities, divided them
into diflinL classes, distributed them in property among his
adherents, and reduced the whole island to a tate of complete
servitude. As the avarice of the Spaniards was too rapacious
and impatient to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this servitude became as grievous as it
was unjufl. The Indians were driven in crowds to the moun-
tains, and compelled to work in the mines by matters, who
imposed their tails without mercy or discretion. Labour, so
disproportioned to their strength and former habits of life;
wafted that feeble race of men, with such rapid consumption, as
must have soon terminated in the utter extincion of the ancient
inhabitants of the island "

Nev regula- TiHE necessity of applying a speedy remedy to those difor-
tibljn's - ders, haflened Ovando's departure. IHe had the command of

the most rcfp)cable armament hitherto fitted out for the New
World. It confiited of thirty-two ships, on board of which two
thousand five hundred persons embarked, with an intention of
fettling in the country. Upon the arrival of the new governor

IIlerrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. I1, &c. Ovicdo Ilil. lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Bcnzon.
I ill. lib. i. c. 12. p. i.

with

with this powerful reinforcement to the colony, Bovadilla re- °o ° K
signed his charge, and was commanded to return instantly to --
Spain, in order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, and the 1502.
other ringleaders of the mutineers who had been molt acive in
opposing Columbus, were required to leave the island at the
fame time. A proclamation was issued, declaring the natives to
be free fubjeds of Spain, of whom no service was to be exacted
contrary to their own inclination, and without paying them an
adequate price for their labour. With refpe& to the Spaniards
themselves, various regulations were made, tending to suppress
the licentious spirit which had been so fatal to the colony, and
to establish that reverence for law and order on which society
is founded, and to which it is indebted for its increase and
fRability. In order to limit the exorbitant gain which private
persons were supposed to make by working the mines, an ordi-
nance was publiihed, directing all the gold to be brought to a
public fmelting-houfe, and declaring one half of it to be the
property of the crown .

WHILE these steps were taking for securing the tranquillity The dira-

greable firu-

and welfare of the colony which Columbus had planted, he ation ofCo-
himself was engaged in the unpleasant employment of solicit-
ing the favour of an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding
all his merit and services, he solicited in vain. IHe de-
manded, in terms of the original capitulation in one thousand
four hundred and ninety-two, to be reinflated in his office of
viceroy over the countries which he had difcovcred. By a
flrange fatality, the circumstance which he urged in support of
his claim, determined a jealous monarch to reject it. The

o Soloizano Polilica Indiana, lib. i. . . Ilerrcra, dec. . lib. iv. c. z.
VOL. I. Y greatne r

B °0 K greatness of his discoveries, and the profped of their increasing

11.

_

--- value, made Ferdinand confider the concessions in the capitula-
jOZ.' tion as extravagant and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting

a subjed with the exercise of a jurifdicion that now appeared to
be so extremely extensive, and might grow to be no less formid-
able. He inspired Isabella with the fame suspicions; and under
various pretexts, equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all
Columbus's requisitions to perform that which a solemn treaty
bound them to accomplish. After attending the court of Spain
for near two years, as an humble suitor, he found it impossible
to remove Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and per-
ceived, at length, that he laboured in vain, when he urged
a claim of justice or merit with an interested and unfeeling
prince.

He forms BUT even this ungenerous return did not discourage him from
new fchmes
ofdifcovery. pursuing the great objet which first called forth his inventive

genius, and excited him to attempt discovery. To open a
new passage to the East Indies was his original and favourite
scheme. This fill engrossed his thoughts; and either from his
own observations in his voyage to Paria, or from ome obscure
hint of the natives, or from the accounts given by Baftidas and
de la Cosa, of their expedition, he conceived an opinion that,
beyond the continent of America, there was a sea which ex-
tended to the East Indies, and hoped to find ome flrait or nar-
row neck of land, by which a communication might be opened
with it and the part of the ocean already known. By a very
fortunate conjeCture, he supposed this trait or isthmus to be
situated near the gulf of Darien. Full of this idea, though
he was now of an advanced age, worn out with fatigue, and
broken with infirmities, he offered, with the alacrity of a

2 youthful

youthful adventurer, to undertake a voyage which would afcer- B 0 0 K
tain this important point, and perfed: the grand scheme which ,-- ---
from the beginning he proposed to accomplish. Several cir- '°'
cumfiances concurred in disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to
lend a favourable ear to this proposal. They were glad to
have the pretext of any honourable employment for removing
from court a man with whose demands they deemed it impo-
litic to comply, and whose services it was indecent to neglet.
Though unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not insen-
fible of his merit, and from their experience of his skill and
conduc, had reason to give credit to his conjectures, and to
confide in his success. To these considerations, a third must
be added of still more powerful influence. About this time
the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral, arrived from the Indies;
and, by the richness of its cargo, gave the people of Europe a
more perfec idea, than they had hitherto been able to form,
of the opulence and fertility of the east. The Portuguese had
been more fortunate in their discoveries than the Spaniards.
They had opened a communication with countries where in-
duftry, arts, and elegance flourished; and where commerce had
been longer established, and carried to greater extent than in
any region of the earth. Their first voyages thither yielded
immediate, as well as vail returns of profit, in commodities
extremely precious and in great request. Lisbon became im-
mediately the feat of commerce and of wealth; while Spain
had only the expectation of remote benefit, and of future gain,
from the weltcrn world. Nothing, then, could be more ac-
ceptable to the Spaniards than Columbus's offer to conduct theml
to the east, by a route which he expeCted to be shorter, as well
as less dangerous, than that which the Portuguese had taken.

Y a Even

B o0 K Even Ferdinand was routed by such a prospeCt, and warmly
t --.- approved of the undertaking.

1502.

His fourth BUT, interesting as the objeCt of this voyage was to the na-
voyage. tion, Columbus could procure only four small barks, the largest

of which did not exceed seventy tons in burden, for performing
it. Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in arduous
undertakings with inadequate force, he did not hesitate to ac-
cept the command of this pitiful squadron. His brother Bar-
tholomew, and his second son Ferdinand, the historian of his
actions, accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz on the ninth
of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary Islands; from
thence he purposed to have flood direCtly for the continent;
but his largest vessel was so clumsy and unfit for service, as con-
firained him to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchan-
ging her for tome ship of the fleet that had carried over Ovando.
June 29. When he arrived off St. Domingo, he found eighteen of

there ships ready loaded, and on the point of departing for
Spain. Columbus immediately acquainted the governor with
the destination of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requested permission to
enter the harbour, not only that he might negociate the ex-
change of his ship, but that he might take shelter during a
violent hurricane, of which he discerned the approach from
various prognostics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to observe. On that account, he advised him like-
wife to put off for ome days the departure of the fleet bound
for Spain. But Ovando refused his request, and despised his
counsel. Under circumstances in which humanity would have
afforded refuge to a stranger, Columbus was denied admittance

6 into

into a country of which he had discovered the existence, and B OK
acquired the poffeflion. His salutary warning, which might _-,-
have been attended to without any inconveniency, was regarded ' 50'
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arrogantly pretended
to predia an event beyond the reach of human foresight. The
fleet et fail for Spain. Next night the hurricane came on with
dreadful impetuosity. Columbus, aware of the danger, took
precautions against it, and saved his little squadron. The fleet
destined for Spain met with the fate which the rashness and
obstinacy of its commanders merited. Of eighteen ships two
or three only escaped. In this general wreck perished Bova-
dilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those who had been the
most ative in persecuting Columbus, and oppressing the In-
dians. Together with themselves, all the wealth which they
had acquired by their injustice and cruelty was swallowed up.
It exceeded in value two hundred thousand peJo's; an immense
fum at that period, and sufficient not only to have foreened them
from any fevcre scrutiny into their condu&, but to have fe-
cured them a gracious reception in the Spanish court. Among
the ihips that escaped, one had on board all the effects of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck of his
fortune. Historians, firuck with the exaCt discrimination of
charaters, as well as the just distribution of rewards and
punishments, conspicuous in those events, universally attri-
bute them to an immediate interposition of divine Providence,
in order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man, and to punish
the oppressors of an innocent people. Upon the ignorant and
superstitious race of men, who were witnesses of this occurrence,
it made a different impression. From an opinion, which vulgar
admiration is apt to entertain with refped to persons who have
diflinguiflled themselves by their sagacity and. inventions, they

believed:

B o0 K believed Columbus to be poffefled of supernatural powers, and

It.

'-- ' imagined that he had conjured up this dreadful florm by
')02. magical art, and incantations, in order to be revenged of his

enemies P.

July 14. COLUMBUS soon left Hispaniola, where he had met with such

Searches in
van forapar- an inhospitable reception, and flood towards the continent.
,dian to han After a tedious and dangerous voyage, he discovered Ouanaia,

an island not far distant from the coaff of Honduras. There
he had an interview with some inhabitants of the continent,
who arrived in a large canoe. They appeared to be a people
more civilized, and who had made greater progress in the
knowledge of useful arts, than any whom he had hitherto dif-
covered. In return to the inquiries which the Spaniards made,
with their usual eagerness, concerning the places where they
got the gold which they wore by way of ornament, they di-
rected them to countries situated to the weft, in which, ac-
cording to their description, gold was found in such profusion,
that it was applied to the moif common uses. Inflead of leer-
ing in quest of a country so inviting, which would have con-
duded them along the coafl of Yucatan to the rich empire of
Mexico, Columbus was so bent upon his favourite scheme of
finding out that strait which communicated with the Indian
ocean, that he bore away to the east towards the gulf of Da-
rien. In this navigation he discovered all the coast of the con-
tinent, from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbour which, on
acccount of its beauty and iccurity, he called Porto Bello. He
searched, in vain, for the imaginary strait, through which he
expected to make his way into an unknown sea; and though
he went on flore several times, and advanced into the country,
P Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. I-Icrrra, dec. i. lib. v. c. , 2. Life of Columbus, c. 88.

he

he did not penetrate so far as to cross the narrow isthmus which B K
separates the gulf of Mexico from the great southern ocean.
He was so much delighted, however, with the fertility of the 1502.
country, and conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that he resolved to
leave a finall colony upon the river Belem, in the province of
Veragua, under the command of his brother, and to return
himself to Spain, in order to procure what was requisite for 1503-
rendering the establishment permanent. But the ungovernable
spirit of the people under his command, deprived Columbus of
the glory of planting the first colony on the continent of Ame-
rica. Their insolence and rapacioufines provoked the natives
to take arms, and as they were a more hardy and warlike race
of men than the inhabitants of the islands, they cut off part of
the Spaniards, and obliged the reft to abandon a ation which
they were unable to maintain q'

THs repulse, the first that the Spaniards met with from any Shipwrecked!

of the American nations, was not the only misfortune that Of Jhe coaat
besel Columbus; it was followed by a succession of all the dif-
alters to which navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes,
with violent forms of thunder and lightning, threatened his
leaky vessels with deflrudion; while his discontented crew,
exhausted with fatigue, and destitute of provisions, was unwil-
ling or unable to execute his commands. One of his sHips
perified; he was obliged to abandon another, as unfit for ser-
vice; and with the two which remained, he quitted that part of
the continent which in his anguish he named the Coafl of
Vexation ', and bore away for Hispaniola. New diftrcfies

HIerrcra, dec. . lib. v. c. 5, &c. Life of Columbus, c. 89, &c. Oviedo,
lib. iii. c. 9. La colla de Io conLraltes.

awaited;

B 0 0 K awaited him in this voyage. He was driven back by a violent

_ ---.. tempest from the coast of Cuba, his hips fell foul of one another,

'5°03 and were tb much hattered by the shock, that with the utmost
June z4. diffieulty they reached Jamaica, where he was obliged to run

them aground, to prevent them from finking. The measure
of his calamities seemed now to be full. He was cast ashore
upon an island at a considerable distance from the only fettle-
ment of the Spaniards in America. His ships were ruined
beyond the possibility of being repaired. To convey an account
of his situation to Hispaniola, appeared impracticable; and
without this it was vain to expet relief. His genius, fertile in
resources, and most vigorous in those perilous extremities when
feeble minds abandon themselves to despair, discovered the only
expedient which afforded any profped of deliverance. He had
recourse to the~hofpitable kindness of the natives, who confider-
ing the Spaniards as beings of a superior nature, were eager, on
every occasion, to minister to their wants. From them he ob-
tained two of their canoes, each formed out of the trunk of a
single tree, hollowed with fire, and so mis-shapen and aukward
as hardly to merit the name of boats. In these, which were fit
only for creeping along the coast, or crofing from one bay to
another, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a Genoese, two
gentlemen particularly attached to Columbus, gallantly offered
to et out for Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above thirty
leagues '. This they accomplished in ten days, after surmount-
ing incredible dangers, and enduring such fatigue, that several
of the Indians who accompanied them funk under it, and died.
The attention paid to them by the governor of Hispaniola was
neither such as their courage merited, nor the distress of the
persons from whom they came, required. Ovando, from a

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9.

mean

mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allowing him to set B 0 0 K
his foot in the island under his government. This ungenerous ---
passion hardened his heart against every tender sentiment, which
reflection upon the services and misfortunes of that great man,
or compassion for his own fellow-citizens, involved in the fame
calamities, must have excited. Mendez and Fiefchi spent eight
months in soliciting relief for their commander and associates,
without any profpec of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various passions agitated the mind of His ditfref

Columbus, and his companions in adversity. At first the ex- thedrering
petation of speedy deliverance, from the success of Mendez
and Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of the most desponding.
After some time the more timorous began to suspect that they
had miscarried in their daring attempt. At length, all con- 1504.
cluded that they had perished. The ray of hope which had
broke in upon them, made their condition appear now more
dismal. Despair, heightened by disappointment, fettled in
every breast. Their last resource had failed, and nothing re-
mained but to end their miserable days among naked savages,
far from their country and their friends. The seamen, in a
transport of rage, rose in open mutiny, threatened the life of
Columbus, whom they reproached as the author of all their
calamities, seized ten canoes, which he had purchased fiom the
Indians, and dcfpifing his remonflrances and entreaties, made
off with them to a diflant part of the island. At the fame time,
the natives murmured at the long residence of the Spaniards in
their country. As their industry was not greater than that of
their neighbours in Hispaniola, like them, they found the bur-
den of supporting so many strangers to be altogether intolerable.
They began to bring in provisions with rcluetance, they fur-

VOL. 1. Z nilhcd

B 0°° 0K nifned them with a sparing hand, and threatened to withdraw

II.
-<--- those supplics altogether. Such a resolution must quickly have

been fatal to the Spaniards. Their safety depended upon the
good-will of the Indians; and unlcfs they could revive the ad-
miration and reverence with which that simple people had at
first beheld them, deitr-uion was unavoidable. Though the
licentious proceedings of the mutineers had, in a great measure,
effaced those impressions which had been so favourable to the
Spaniards, the ingenuity of Columbus suggested a happy arti-
fice, that not only restored but heightened the high opinion
which the Indians had originally entertained of them. By his
skill in atronomy, he knew that there was flortly to e a total
eclijfe of the moon. He assembled all the principal persons of
the difirid around him on the day before it happened, and,
after reproaching them for their fickleness in withdrawing their
affection and afliflance from men whom they had lately revered,
he told them, that the Spaniards were servants of the Great
Spirit who dwells in heaven, who made and governs the
world; that he, offended at their refuting to support men who
were the objects of his peculiar favour, was prcparing to punish
this crime with exemplary severity, and that very night the
moon should withhold her light, and appear of a blo:,dy hue,
as a sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem of the vengeance
ready to fall upon them. To this marvellous prcdilion some
of them lifncned with the carelels inidiffercnce peculiar to the
people of America; others, with the credtllolus flilifillmcnt
aatural to barbarians. But when the moon began gradually to
be darkened, and at length appeared of a red co.lour, all w\crc
flruck witl terror. They run with con lcrnation to thcir hoitlls,
and returning inflantly to Column'rls loaded with proviionls,
threw them at his feet, *conljuring' hli to icrcede wnith tlhe

t: ( r. at t

Great Spirit to avert the deflrution with which they were' 0O0 K
threatened. Columbus, seeming to be moved by their en- _-.
treaties, promised to comply with their delire. The cclipfe 150+'
weCnt ofF, the moon recovered its splendour, and from that day
the Spaniards were not only furnished profusely with provisions,
but the natives, with fuperlitious attention, avoided every
thing that could give them offence'

DURING those tranfations, the mutineers had made repeated A cruel nidi-

t on c them.

attempts to pass over to iiifpaniola in the canoes which they had t th
seized. But, from their own mifcondud, or tle violence of the
winds and currents, their efforts were all unsuccessful. Enraged
at this difappointnent, they marched towards that part of the
island where Columbus remained, threatening him with new
danger and insults. Whlile they wcre advancing, an event
happened, more cruel and afllicing than any calamity which
he dreaded from them. The governor of IIiipaniola, whose
mind was flill filled with ome dark suspicions of Columbus,
Icnt a small bark to Jamaica, not to deliver his dillrcflcd coun-
trymen, but to spy out their condition. Left the fympatliy of
thole whom lie employed fliould afford them relief, contrary to
his intention, lie gave the command of this vencl to Efcobar,
an inveterate enemy of Columbus, who adliering to his infiruc-
tions with malignant accuracy, cafl anchor at some distance
from the illand, approached tle flore in a fall boat, obfcrved
thle wretched plight of the Spaniards. delivered a letter of empty
compliment to the admniral, received his antiwer, and departed.
WVhen the Spaniards iirfl dfclericd the veffl flanding towards
the illand, every heart exulted, as it lthe long-expelcd hour of

' .ife o C9lumllbus, c. :03. IIclecia, ecc. i. lib. i. c. 5, 6. Bcnzon, lilt. lib. i.
c. l.|.

Z 2 their

B OK their deliverance had at length arrived ; but when it disappeared'

11.

- o suddenly, they funk into the deepest dejeaion, and all their
1504. hopes died away. Columbus alone, though he felt most fen-

sibly this wanton insult which Ovando added to his paRl negle&,
retained such composure of mind, as to be able to cheer his
followers. He assured them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had
reached Hispaniola in safety; that they would speedily procure
lhips to carry them off; and as Efcobar's vessel could not take
them all on board, that he had refused to go with her, because
he was determined never to abandon the faithful companions
of his diflrefs. Soothed with the expectation of speedy de-
liverance, and delighted with his apparent generosity in at-
tending more to their preservation than to his own afety, their
spirits revived, and he regained their confidence .

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have refilled the

mutineers, who were now at hand. All his endeavours to
reclaim those desperate men had no effeC but to increase their
frenzy. Their demands became every day more extravagant,
and their intentions more violent and bloody. The common
safety rendered it necessary to oppose them with open force.
Columbus, who had been long afflicted with the gout, could
not take the field. His brother, the Adelantado, marched
M:y o. againfi them. They quickly met. The mutineers rejected

with scorn terms of accommodation, which he once more of-
sered them, and rushed on boldly to the attack. They fell not
upon an enemy unprepared to receive them. In the firfl llock,
several of their most daring leaders were slain. Tili Adlclan-
tado, whose ftrcngth was equal to his courage, closcd with their

Life of Columbus, c. o,. I-lcrrcra, dec. .. lib, vi. c. .

captai,,

captain, wounded, disarmed, and took him prisoner . At fight B K

1I.

of this, the reft fled with a dafiardly fear, suitable to their for-
mer insolence. Soon after, they ulbmittcd in a body to Co-
}urnbus, and bound themselves by te mot solemn oaths to
obey all his commands. Hardly was tranquillity re-eflablilhed,
when the ships appeared, whose arrival Columbus had promised
with great address, though he could foresee it with little cer-
tainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards quitted an illand
in which the unfeeling jealousy of Ovando had suffered them
to languifl above a year, exposed to misery in all its various
forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the governor, with the Aug. 13.

I-s delivcr-

mean artifice of a vulgar mind, that labours to atone for insolence ance, and ar-
by servility, fawned on the man whom he envied, and had at- ripanjl'i"
tempted to ruin. He received Columbus with the most fitdicd
respect, lodged him in his own house, and distinguished him
with every mark of honour. But, amidst those over-acted
demonstrations of regard, he could not conceal the hatred and
malignity latent in his heart. lie set at liberty the captain of
the mutineers, whom Columbus had brought over, in chains,
to be tried for his crimes, and threatened such as had adhered
to the admiral with proceeding to a judicial inquiry into their
conduct. Columbus submitted in silence to what he could not
redrcls; but dlilcovercd an extreme impatience to quit a country
tnder the juritkliclion of a mnan who had treated hiim, on every
occasion, with inhumanity and ijullicc. His preparations
wcrc son0 finilhcd, and lie fct I:il ior Spain witl two fllpR. Sel . .
Dilflcrs ftimilar to tllolbe which had accompanied him tllrough

Lifc of Colunmbus, c. o-. Illcrcra, dec. r. lib. i. c. .

I life

B r 0 K life continued to pursue him to the end of his career. One of

If.

his vessels being disabled, was soon forced back to St. Domingo;

1504. the other, fiattered by violent storms, failed even hundred
December. leagues with jury-mafts, and reached with difficulty the port

of St. Lucar Y.

Death of Ifa- THERE he received the account of an event the most fatal
bclla.

Nov. 9. that could have befallen him, and which completed his mif-

fortunes. This was the death of his patroness queen Isabella,
in whose justice, humanity, and favour, he confided as his aft
rcfource. None now remained to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his ervices and sufferings, but Ferdinand, who
had so long opposed and so often injured him. To iblicit a
prince thus prejudiced againit him, was an occupation no less
irksome than hpelefs. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon as his health
was in some degree re-eflabliflied, he repaired to court; and
though lie was received there with civility barely decent, he
plied Ferdinand with petition after petition, demanding the
puniflment of his opprcfrors, and the refitution of all the pri-
vileges )belowcd upon him by the capitulation of one tliouind
fou r hundred and ninety-two. Ferdinand amued him with
fair words and unmeaning promises. Inftcad of granting his
claimns, lie proposcd expedicnts in order to elude them, and
ipLun out the affair with such apparent art, as plainly difcovcrcd
his itntntion that it Ihould never be terminated. The declining
licalth of- Columbus lattcrcd Ferdinand with the hopes of beilg
soon dclivcred from an importunlate suitor, and encouragcd him
to pcrlkvcre in tils illiberal plan. Nor was he deceived in his

r Life of Colunibus, c. oS. Ilel-era, dec. i. lib. vi, c. c .

cxpcdlations.

expecations. Difgufled with the ingratitude of a monni-ch c O Is
-whom he had served with such fidelity and success, exhaiiflcd with _---_ i
the fatigues and hardships which he had endured, and broken '°
with the infirmities which these brought upon him, Columbus
ended his life at Valladolid on the twentieth of IMay one thou- Deith of Co-
sand five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninth year of his age.
He died with a composure of mind suitable to the magnanimiy
which distinguished his character, and with fentimcnts of piety
bccoming that supreme refpcS' for religion, which lie mani-
fcfted in every occurrence of his life '.

Life of Cclumbus, c. ioS. Iteerr., c'e. i. lib. . c. 13, 1 A, z-

'V . i '.

# BOOK III.

T H E
H I S T O R Y

THE

O F
A M E R IC A.

B O O K IIl.
W /JH I L E Columbus was employed in his aft voyage, o o

fcveral events worthy of notice happencd in Hifpa- ill
niola. The colony there, the parent and nurse of all the sub- I;,.4.

State o the

sequent eflabliflments of Spain in the New \Vorld, gradually co,,y iln
acquired the form of a regular and prosperous focicty. Tlhe ifp;n1"'"'i'
humane solicitude of Isabella to protect tle Indians from op-
prefflon, and particularly the proclamation, by which the Spa-
niards were prolibited to comrpel them to work, retarded, it is
true, for omnc time, the progrcfs of imlprovement. The na-
tives, who conlidercd exemption from toil as lifpreme felicity,
fcoirncd every allurement and reward by which tlley were in-
vited to laboulr. Tlie Spaniards had not a llflicient number of
hands itlicr to work tlle niines or to cultivate the foil. Several
of tle firfl colonits, wlio hlad been accuflonced to the service of
the Indians, quitted the illa:nd, when deprived of thofc infiru-
mncnts withlout whlici they knlew not how to carry on anly ope-

VoL. 1. A a ration.

B 0 0K ration. Many of those who came over with Ovando, were
.---. seized with the distempers peculiar to the climate, and in a

l'5+ ilhort pace above a thousand of them died. At the fame time,

the demand of one half of the produEt of the mines as the royal
share, was found to be an exaction so exorbitant, that no
adventurers would engage to work them upon such terms.
In order to save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to re-
1505. lax the rigour of the royal edits. He made a new diftribu-

tion of the Indians among the Spaniards, compelling them to
labour, for a stated time, in digging the mines, or in cultivat-
ing the ground; but, in order to screen himself from the im-
putation of having fubjeaed them again to servitude, he en-
joined their matiers to pay them a certain fum, as the price of
their work. He reduced the royal share of the gold found ir
the mines from the half to the third part, and loon after low-
ered it to a fifth, at which it long remained. Notwithstanding
Isabella's tender concern for the good treatment of the Indians,
and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve the royal revenue, Ovan-
do persuaded the court to approve of both these regulations a,
War with the BUT the Indians, after enjoying respite from oppression,

s. though during a short interval, now felt the yoke of bondage

to be so galling, that they made several attempts to vindicate
their own liberty. This the Spaniards confidered as rebellion,
and took arms in order to reduce them to fubjedion. When
war is carried on between nations whose state of improvement
is in any degree similar, the means of defence bear ome pro-
portion to those employed in the attack; and in this equal
contest such efforts must be made, such talents are difplayeda

Herrcra, dec. I. lib. v. c. 3.

a and

4I

and uch passions routed, as exhibit mankind to view in a situ- B 00 K
ation no less striking than interefling. It is one of the noblest --.-.
functions of history, to observe and to delineate men at a junC-
ture when their minds are most violently agitated, and all their
powers and pailions are called forth. Hence the operations of
war, and the struggles between contending flates, have been
deemed by historians, ancient as well as modern, a capital and
important article in the annals of human aions. But in a
contest between naked savages, and one of the most warlike of
the European nations, where science, courage, and discipline on
one fide, were opposed by timidity, ignorance, and disorder on
the other, a particular detail of events would be as unpleasant
as' uninftrudive. If the simplicity and innocence of the In-
dians had inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had softened
the pride of superiority into compafion, and had induced them
to improve the inhabitants of the New World, instead of op-
pressing them, ome sudden ats of violence, like the too rigo-
rous chaflifements of impatient inftruCors, might have been
related without horror. But, unfortunately, this confcioufiiefs
of superiority operated in a different manner. The Spaniards
were advanced so far beyond the natives of America in improve-
ment of every kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be beings of an inferior na-
ture, who were not intitled to the rights and privileges of men.
In peace, they fubjeded them to servitude. In war, they paid
no regard to those laws, which, by a tacit convention between
contending nations, regulate hostility, and et ome bounds to
its rage. They confidered them not as men fighting in defence
of their liberty, but as slaves, who had revolted against their
maflers. Their caziqucs, when taken, were condemned, like
the leaders of banditti, to the imoft cruel and ignominious pu-

A a 2 niflments;

B °0 K punishments; and all their fubjeds, without regarding the di-
,-t iltflindion of ranks eflablifhed among them, were reduced to the
1°C5' fame state of abject slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments

were hoflilities carried on against the cazique ofHigucy, a pro-
vince at the eastern extremity of the island. This war was
occasioned by the perfidy of the Spaniards, in violating a treaty
which they had made with the natives, and it was terminated
by hanging up the cazique, who defended his people with bra--
very so far superior to that of his countrymen, as intitled
him to a better fate

The cruel THE conduct of Ovando, in another part of the island, was
and treache-
rouls coniuet ill more treacherous and cruel. The province anciently nam-
cfOvando. ed Xaragua, which extends from the fertile plain where Leo-

gane is now situated, to the western extremity of the island,
was subje&t to a female cazique, named Anacoana, highly re-
fpedted by the natives. She, from that partial fondness with
which the women of America were attached to the Europeans,
(the cause of which shall be afterwards explained) had always
courted the friendflhip of the Spaniards, and loaded them with.
good offices. But ome of the adherents of Roldan having
fettled in her country, were so much cxafierated at her endea-
vouring to restrain their excesses, that they accused her of hav-
ing formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to eterminate
the Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew well how little cre-
dit was due to such profligate men, marched, without furthar
inquiry, towards Xaragua, with three hundred foot and fcventy
horsemen. To prevent the Indians from taking alarm at this
hoflile appearance, he gave out that his sole intention was to

lcrleera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 9, o.

1 -iit

visit Anacoana, to whom his countrymen had been so much B Cl K
indebted, in the most rcfpeaful manner, and to regulate with .----
her the mode of levying the tribute payable to the king of ' -
Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive this illuflrious guest with
due honour, acmbled the principal men in her dominions, to
the number of three hundred, and advancing at the head of
these, accompanied by a vast cro'id of persons of inferior rank,
the welcomed Ovando with songs and dances, according to the
mode of the country, and conduted him to the place of her
residence. There he was feasted, for some days, with all the
kindness of simple hospitality, and amused with the games and
spectacles usual among the Americans upon occasions of mirth
and feltivity. But, amidrt the security which this in)ircd,
Ovando was meditating the defirutfion of his unfufpicious en-
tertainer and her fubjeds ; and the mean perfidy with which
he executed this scheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it.
Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians the parade of an Eu-
ropean tournament, he advanced with his troops, in battle
array, towards the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs
who attended her were assembled. The infantry took posses-
sion of all the avenues which led to the village. The horsemen
encompafed the houfc. Thcfe movements were the obje of
admiration without any mixture of fear, until, upon a signal
which had been concerted, the Spaniards suddenly drew their
swords, and rushed upon the Indians, defencelcfs, and afto-
nified at an a of treachery which exceeded the conception of
undesigning men. In a moment Anacoana was kcured. All
her attendants were seizcd and bound. Fire was fct to the
houl ; and, witlout examination or convicion, all lthlc u-
happy persons, the molt illUntriotns ill their own cotu ntry, were
confilmed in the flames. Anacoana was relcrvcld for a more

ignoini ious

B 0 K ignominious fate. She was carried in chains to Saint Domingo,

Ill.
-.- aand, after the formality of a trial before Spanish judges, she
1'5' was condemned upon the evidence of those very men who had

betrayed her, to be publicly hanged c.

Rcduaion of OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious treatment of
ald its effes6. their princes and nobles, who were objects of their highest re-

verence, the people in all the provinces of Hispaniola submit-
ted, without farther resistance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon
the death of Isabella, all the regulations tending to mitigate
the rigour of their servitude were forgotten. The small gra-
tuity paid to them as the price of their labour was withdrawn;
and at the fame time the talks imposed upon them were in-
So6.- created. Ovando, without any restraint, distributed Indians

among his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to whom the
queen had left by will one half of the revenue arising from the
settlements in the New World, conferred grants of a similar
nature upon his courtiers, as the least expensive mode of re-
warding their services. They farmed out the Indians, of
whom they were rendered proprietors, to their countrymen
fettled in Hispaniola; and that wretched people, being com-
pelled to labour in order to satisfy the rapacity of both, the
exations of their oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But,
barbarous as their policy was, and fatal to the inhabitants of
Hispaniola, it produced, for some time, very considerable es-
feds. By calling forth the force of a whole nation, and exa
erting it in one diredion, the working of the mines was carried
on with amazing rapidity and success. During several years,
the gold brought into the royal fmelting-houfes in Hispaniola

C Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Icerrera, dcc. i. lib. vi. c .1. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. iz.
Relacion d dclll yc. de las Indias, par Bart. de las Cafils, p. 8.

amounted

amounted annually to four hundred and sixty thousand pesos, B O O K
above a hundred thousand pounds flerling; which, if we at- --.
tend to the great change in the value of money since the I o6.
beginning of the sixteenth century to the present times, muit
appear an immense fum. Vast fortunes were created, ofa fud-
den, by some. Others dissipated in ostentatious profusion,
what they acquired with facility. Dazzled by both, new ad-
venturers crouded to America, with the most eager impatience,
to {hare in those treasures which had enriched their country-
men; and, notwithstanding the mortality occasioned by the
unhealthiness of the climate, the colony continued to increase d

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom and justice, Progress of

not inferior to the rigour with which he treated the Indians. the colony'
He etablifhed equal laws, and, by executing them with impar-
tiality, accustomed the people of the colony to reverence them.
He founded several new towns in different parts of the island,
and allured inhabitants to them, by the concession of various
immunities. He endeavoured to turn the attention of the Spa-
niards to some branch of industry more useful than that of
searching for gold in the mines. Some flips of the sugar-cane
having been brought from the Canary islands by way of expe-
riment, they were found to thrive with such increase in the
rich foil and warm climate to which they were transplanted;
that the cultivation of them oon became an object of commerce.
Extensive plantations were begun; fugar-works, which the
Spaniards called ingenio's, from the various machinery em-
ployed in them, were ereaed, and in a few years the manu-
faure of this commodity was the great occupation of the

d Ierrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 18, &c,

ilnhabitantao

B 0 0 K inhabitants of Hispaniola, and the moil considerable source of
----- their wealth c.

15c6.

Polir;cal THE prudent endeavours of Ovandn, to promote the welfare
oft'r'lniand. of the colony, were powerfully seconded by Ferdinand. The

large remittances which he received from the New World,
opened his eyes, at length, with respeCt to the importance of
those discoveries, which he had hitherto affeded to under-
value. Fortune, and his own address, having now extricated
him out of those difficulties in which he had been involved by
s507. the death of his queen, and by his disputes with his fon-in-law

about the government of her dominions ', he had full leisure
to turn his attention to the affairs of America. To his provi-
dent sagacity, Spain is indebted for many of those regulations
.,b81, rA,,.r 11., ...,1

nho

n1',,rl-,rn ,f'r,,,n

11 n,,t ,s

F ns olo,,

-h ' 1 f 1~ 11 11 e t

policy, by which he governs her dominions in the New World.
HIe ereEted a court, diftinguiflied by the title of the Casa de Con-
fratacion, or Board of Trade, composed of persons eminent for
rank and abilities, to whom he committed the adminifiration of
American affairs. This board afiembled regularly in Seville, and
was invcfled with a diftinc and extensive jurifdicion. He gave
a regular form to ecclesiastical government in America, by nomi-
nating archbilhops, biflops, deans, together with clergymen of
iubordinate ranks, to take charge of the Spaniards eflablifhcd
there, as well as of the natives, whio should embrace the Chiri-
11iarn ftitli. But, lotwitliltanding tlhe o1)lc(quioIs devotion of
the Spaniilh court to the Pa pal See, inch was ;Ferlinalnd's fb-
iicituc to prevent any iorcign power rom claiming jurrtlic-
tion, or acquiring influence, in his new dominions, that he

()'vi d'o, lib. iv. c. i. i lill. of the Rdgn of Charles V. vol. ii.
p. (, &\:.

rccrvcd

reserved to the crown of Spain the sole right of patronage to B K
the benefices in America, and tfipulated that no papal bull l-.
or mandate hould be promulgated there, until it was pre- 1506
vioufly examined and approved of by his council. With the
fame spirit of jealousy, he prohibited any goods to be ex-
ported to America, or any person to fettle there, without a fpc-
cial licence from that council .

BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the police and wel- The number

of the Indians

fare of the colony, a calamity impended which threatened its diminishea
dissolution. The original inhabitants, on whose labour the fa(t.
Spaniards in Hispaniola depended for their prosperity, and even
their existence, wafted so fast, that the extintion of the whole
race seemed to be inevitable. When Columbus discovered His-
panioia, the number of its inhabitants was computed to be at
least a million h. They were now reduced to sixty thousand in
the space of fifteen years. This consumption of the human
species, no less amazing than rapid, was the effect of several
concurring causes. The natives of the American islands were
of a more feeble constitution than the inhabitants of the other
hemisphere. They could neither perform the fame work, nor
endure the fame fatigue with men whose organs were of a more
vigorous conformation. The inacive indolence in which they
delighted to pass their days, as it was the effed of their debi-
lity, contributed likewise to increase it, and rendered them, from
habit as well as constitution, incapable of hard labour. The
food on which they subsisted, afforded little nourishment,
and they were accuflomed to take it in small quantities, not
sufficient to invigorate a languid frame, and render it equal to

. Ilcrrern, dec. . lib. vi. c, 19, 2o. ' Ibid. dec, i. lib. x. c. z.
VOL. . 13 b the

B 0 0 K the efforts of industry. The Spaniards, without attending to

I -- those peculiarities in the constitution of the Americans, im-
50o6. posed tasks upon them so disproportioned to their strength, that

many funk under the fatigue, and ended their wretched days.
Others, prompted by impatience and despair, cut short their
own lives with a violent hand. Famine, brought on by com-
pelling such numbers to abandon the culture of theirlands, in
order to labour in the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases
of various kinds, ome occasioned by the hardships to which
they were exposed, and others by their intercourse with the
Europeans, completed the desolation of the island. Being
thus deprived of the infiruments which they were accustomed
to employ, the Spaniards found it impossible to extend their
improvements, or even to carry on the works which they had

o ~ialeady begun. T remedy
.o. already begun. In ordr to provide an immediate remedy for

an evil so alarming, Ovando proposed to transport the inha-
bitants of the Lucayo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence
that they might be civilized with more facility, and infiruaced
to greater advantage in the Christian religion, if they were
united to the Spanifl colony, and under the immediate infpec-
tion of the miftionaries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by
this artifice, or willing to connive at an a of violence which
policy represented as necessary, gave his assent to the proposal.
Several veftels were fitted out for the Lucayos, the com-
manders of which informed the natives, with whose language
they were now well acquainted, that they came from a delicious
country, in which their departed anceflors rcfided, by whom
they were ent to invite them to resort thither, to partake of
the bliis which they enjoyed. That finple people liflencd
with wonder and credulity; and, fond of visiting their rela-
tions and friends in that happy region, followed the Spaniards

4 with

with eagerness. By this artifice, above forty thousand were B o o K
decoyed into Hispaniola, to hare in the sufferings which were
the lot of the inhabitants of that island, and to mingle their 50
groans and tears with those of that wretched race of men '.

THE Spaniards had, for ome time, carried on their opera- Ncw dirco-

tions in the mines of Hispaniola with such ardour as well as ftliesands.
success, that they seemed to have engrossed their whole atten-
tion. The spirit of discovery languished; and, since the last
voyage of Columbus, no enterprize of any moment had been
undertaken. But as the decrease of the Indians rendered it
impossible to acquire wealth in that island with the fame rapi-
dity as formerly, this urged them to search for new countries,
where their avarice might be gratified with more facility.
Tuan Ponce de Leon, w.,ho com..anded und. r Ovando iin te

-....... urLLLur L.~- LILI .,V uUI1 LU

eastern diftrid of Hispaniola, pafled over to the island of St.
John de Porto Rico, which Columbus had difcovcred in his
second voyage, and penetrated into the interior part of the
country. As he found the foil to be fertile, and expected,
from some symptoms, as well as from the information of the
inhabitants, to discover mines of gold in the mountains, Ovan-
do permitted him to attempt making a cttlement in the
island. This was cafily effctecd by an olficcr eminent for con-
ducCt no less than for courage. In a few years Porto Rico was
fubjeded to the Spanifl government, the natives were reduced
to servitude ; and, being trcated with the fame inconsiderate ri-
gour as their neighbours in Hispaniola, the race of original
inhabitants, worn out with fatigue and sufferings, was oon
exterminated k

i eriera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, I;b. iii. c. . Gomara Tlif. . .1.
k I lcrrera, dcc. . lib. vii. c. -.4. Gomnala lill. c. .1. Relacion tdc i. de lI3
Ca;as, p. o.

13 b 2 ABOUT

B o K ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in conjunction

III. .,-.e with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of Columbus's original com-
o0- ' panions, made a voyage to the continent. They held the fame

course which Columbus had taken, as far as to the island of
Guanaios; but, standing from thence to the weft, they dif-
covered a new and extensive province, afterwards known by
the name of Yucatan, and proceeded a considerable way along
the coast of that country '. Though nothing memorable oc-
curred in this voyage, it deserves notice, because it led to dif-
coveries of greater importance. For the fame reason, the
voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo must be mentioned. By the
command of Ovando, he failed round Cuba, and firit dif-
covered, with certainty, that this country, which Columbus
once supposed to be a part of the continent, was a large
island m

Diego Co- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the last occurrences
lurnbus ap-
pointed go- under the adminiitration of Ovando. Ever since the death of
vernor of

,fpaniola. Columbus, his son Don Diego had been employed in oliciting

Ferdinand to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other immunities and
profits which descended to him by inheritance, in consequence
of the original capitulation with his father. But if there dig-
nities and revenues appeared o considerable to Ferdinand, that,
at the expence of being deemed unjust as well as ungrateful, he
had wrested them from Columbus, it is not surprising thali he
should be unwilling to confer them on his son. Accordingly,
Don Diego wafted two years in inceflant but fruitlcs impor-
tunity. Weary of this, he endeavoured at length to obtain by
a legal fcntcncc, what he could not procure from the favour of

' errcra, d( c. . lil). vi. c. 17. - Ibid. lib. vii. c. i.

5 an

an interested monarch. He commened a suit against Ferdi- B 0o IK

Ill.

nand before the council that managed Indian affairs, and that -.-
court, with integrity which reflects honour upon its proceed- ISoS.
ings, decided against the king, and fuflained Don Diego's claim
of the vice-royalty, and all the other privileges stipulated in
the capitulation. Even after this decree, Ferdinand's repug-
nance to put a subjea in possession of such extensive rights,
might have thrown in new obflacles, if Don Diego had not
taken a ftep which interested very powerful persons in the fuc-
cess of his claims. The sentence of the council of the Indies
gave him a title to a rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent,
that he found no difficulty in concluding a marriage with
Donna Maria, daughter of Don. Ferdinand de Toledo, great
commendator of Leon, and brother of the duke of Alva, a
grandee of the rril rank, and nearly related to the king. The
duke and his family espoused so warmly the cause of their new
ally, that Ferdinand could not refill their solicitations. He i..
recalled Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his successor,
though, even in conferring this favour, he could not conceal
his jealousy; for he allowed him to assume only the title of go-
vernor, not that of viceroy, which had been adjudged to belong
to him".

HE oon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by his brother, his IHe repairs to

uncles, his wife, whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honoured Hipaiola.
with the title of vice-queen, and a numerous retinue of persons
of both sexes, born of good families. He lived with a fplen-
dour and magnificence hitherto unknown in the New World;
and the family of Columbus feeemd now to enjoy the honours
and rewards due to his inventive genius, of which he himnflf
had been cruelly defrauded. The colony itfclf acquired new

"llerrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. ., &Ec.

lulre

B o O K lustre by the accession of so many inhabitants, of a different

IIl.

- rank and character from most of those who had hitherto mi-
1509. grated to America, and many of the most illustrious families

in the Spanish settlements are descended from the persons who
at that time accompanied Don Diego Columbus .

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from this change

of governors. Don Diego was not only authorised by a royal
edict to continue the repartiientos, or distribution of Indians,
but the particular number which he might grant to every per-
son, according to his rank in the colony, was specified. He
availed himself of that permifilon; and oon after he landed at
St. Domingo, he divided such Indians as were still unappro-
priated, among his relations and attendants P.

Pearl fishery THE next care of the new governor was to comply with an
of Cubagua. inrution which he received from the king, about fettling a

colony in Cubagua, a small island which Columbus had dif-
covered in his third voyage. Though this barren spot hardly
yielded subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quantities
of those oifters which produce pearls were found on its coast,
that it did not long escape the inquisitive avarice of the Spa-
niards, and became a place of considerable retort. Large for-
tunes were acquired by the fishery of pearls, which was carried
on with extraordinary ardour. The Indians, cpecially those
from the Lucayo islands, were compelled to dive for them ; and
this dangerous and unhealthy employment was an additional
calamity, which contributed not a little to the cxtinCio of
that devoted race '.

o Ovicdo, lib. iii. . . P Rccopilacion de Lcycs, lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. , 2.

Herrcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. o. 1 Ilcrlra, dec. . lib. vii. c. 9. Comara
hill. c. 78.

ABO U T

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pinzon set out, B O O I

Ill.

in conjunction, upon a econd voyage. They flood directly
south, towards the equinotial line, which Pinzon had for- Newvoyages.
merly crofled, and advanced as far as the fortieth degree of
southern latitude. They were aflonifhed to find that the con-
tinent of America stretched, on their right hand, through all
this vast extent of ocean. They landed in different places, to
take possession in name of their sovereign; but though the
country appeared to be extremely fertile and inviting, their
force was so small, having been fitted out rather for discovery
than making settlements, that they left no colony behind them.
Their voyage served, however, to give the Spaniards more
exalted and adequate ideas with respeCt to the dimensions of
this new quarter of the globe .

THOUGH it was above ten years since Columbus had dif- A ettlement

on te conti-

covered tle main land of America, the Spaniards had hitherto nent attept--
made no settlement in any part of it. What had been so long ed.
neglected was now seriously attempted, and with considerable
vigour, though the plan for this purpose was neither formed
by the crown, nor executed at the expence of the nation, but
carried on by the entcrprifing spirit of private adventurers.
This scheme took its rife from Alonfo de Ojeda, who had al-
ready made two voyages as a difcovercr, by which he acquired
conliderable reputation, but no wealth. But his charatcer for
intrepidity and conduct eaily procured him aflbciates, who
advanced the money requilite to defray tle charges of the ex-
pedition. About the fame time, Diego de Nicuefla, who had
acquired a large fortuiec in HI-ilaniola, formed a finmilar design.
lerdinand encouraged both ; and though lie rcfillcd to advance

r !elcr, dec. . ib. vii. c. .

tlhlc

B I0 K the smallest um, was extremely liberal of titles and patents.
'- , , He erected two governments on the continent, one extending

1509' from Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the other from

that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The former was given to Ojeda,
the latter to Nicueffa. Ojeda fitted out a hip and two brigan-
tines, with three hundred men; Nicueflfa, fix vessels, with
seven hundred and eighty men. They failed about the fame
time from St. Domingo for their refpedive governments. In
order to give their title to those countries ome appearance of
validity, several of the most eminent divines and lawyers in
Spain were employed to prescribe the mode in which they
hould take possession of them '. There is not in the history of
mankind any thing more singular or extravagant than the form
which they devised for this purpose. They inftruaed those
invaders, as soon as they landed on the continnt, to declare
to the natives the principal articles of the Christian faith; to
acquaint them, in particular, with the supreme jurisdiction of
the Pope over all the kingdoms of the earth; to inform them
of the grant which this holy pontiff had made of their country
to the king of Spain; to require them to embrace the docrines
of that religion which they made known to them; and to sub-
mit to the sovereign whose authority they proclaimed. If they
refused to comply with this requisition, the terms of which
must have been utterly incomprehensible to an uninflruaed
Indian, then Ojeda and Nicuefa were authorised to attack them
with sword and fire; to reduce them, their wives and children,,
to a slate of servitude; and to compel them by force to recognize
the jurifdiaion of the church, and the authority of the mo-
snarch, to which they would not voluntarily subjed themselves '.

' I-Irrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. I. t Sec NOTE XXIII.

As

As the inhabitants of the continent could not at once yield B 0 K
assent to doctrines too refined for their uncultivated underltand-

x ;09.

ings, and explained to them by interpreters imperfeCtly ac- The dirfters
quainted with their language; as they did not conceive how a attend'ng it.
foreign priest, of whom they had never heard, could have any
right to dispose of their country, or how an unknown prince
should claim jurisdiCtion over them as his fubjecs; they fiercely
opposed the new invaders of their territories. Ojeda and Ni-
cueffa endeavoured to effect by force what they could not ac-
complifh by persuasion. The contemporary writers enter into
avery minute detail in relating their transaCtions; but as they
made no discovery of importance, nor eltablifhed any permanent
ettlement, their adventures are not intitled to any considerable
place in the general history of a period, where romantic va-
lour, struggling with incredible hardlhips, diflinguifi every
effort of the Spanish arms. They found the natives in those
countries of which they went to assume the government, to
be of a character very different from that of their countrymen
in the islands. They were fierce and warlike. Their ar-
rows were dipped in a poison so noxious, that every wound
was followed with certain death. In one encounter they
cut off above seventy of Ojeda's followers, and the Spa-
niards, for the first time, were taught to dread the inha-
bitants of the New World. Nicueffa was opposed by people
equally resolute in defence of their possessions. Nothing could
soften their ferocity. Though the Spaniards employed every
art to soothe them, and to gain their confidence, they rcfufcd
to hold any intcrcourfe, or to exchange any fiicndly office, with
men whose refidcnce among them they confidered as fatal to o.
their liberty and independence. This implacable enmity of
the natives, though it rendered i. extremely difficult as well'as

VOL. I. C c dangerous

B 0 dlan1gerous to eflablinf a fettlcment in their country, might have

ll. 0
-- - been surmounted at length by the perseverance of the Spaniards,

I';51. by the superiority of their arms, and their flill in the art of

war. But every difafler which can. be accumulated upon the
unfortunate, combined to complete their ruin. The loss of
their ships. by various accidents upon an unknown coast, the
diseases peculiar to a climate the most noxious in all America,.
the want of provisions, unavoidable in a country imperfetly
cultivated,. dissention among themselves, and the incessant hofti-
lities of the natives, involved them in a succession of calamities,.
the bare recital of which firikes one. with horror. Though they
received two confilerable reinforcements from. Hispaniola,. the.
_ -'-atcr. part of those who had engaged.in this unhappy expe-
dition, perifhed,"in less- than a year, in the most extreme, misery.
A few who survived, fettled as a feeble colony at Santa Maria.
el Antigua, on the gulf of Darien, under the. command of
Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, who, in the most desperate exigencies,
displayed such courage and conduct, as first gained. the confi-
dence of. his countrymen, and marked him.out as their leader
in more splendid and .successful. undertakings. Nor was he the
only adventurer in this expedition who will appear. with lustre
in more important scenes.. Francis Pizarro was one. of Ojeda's
companions, and in this school of adversity acquired or im-
proved the talents which fitted.him for the extraordinary actions
which he after.wards performed. Ferdinand Cortes, whose
name became flill more famous, had engaged.early in this en-
terprife, which rou7,ed all the aive. youth of Hispaniola to
arms; but the good fortune which accompanied him in his
subsequent adventures, interposed to save him from the disasters
t which his.companions were exposed. Ile was taUke ill at

St

St. Domingo before the departure of the fleet, and detained B E
there by that indisposition. u*

1510.

NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate iiTue of this expedition, Corquft oF

the Spaniards were not deterred from engaging in new schemes
of a similar nature. 'When wealth is acquired gradually by the
persevering hand of industry, or accumulated by the flow opera-
tions of regular commerce, the means employed are so propor-
tioned to the end attained, that there is nothing to strike the
imagination, and little to urge on the acive powers of the mind
to uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes were created
almost instantaneously; when gold and pearls were procured
in exchange for baublcs; when the countries which produced
there rich commodities, defended only by naked favagcs, might
be seized by the filft bold invader; obje2cs o singular and al-
luring rouzed a wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spa-
niards, who rushcd with ardour into this new path that was
opened to wealth and diflintion. While this spirit continued
warm and vigorous, every attempt cither towards discovery or
conquest was applauded, and adventurers engaged in it with
emulation. The paflion for new undertakings, which cha-
raCtcrifes the age of' discovery in the latter part of the fifteenth
and beginning of the fixtccnth century, would alone have
been fuflicient to prevent the Spaniards from flopping fliort
in their career. But circumflances peculiar to Hispaniola at
this junciure concurred with it in extending their naviga-
tion and conquells. The rigorous treatment of the inla-
bitants of that island having almost extirpated the race, many
of the Spanish plantcrs, as I have already olctrvcd, iiind-

" I-errcr, dec. . li). vii. c. 11, &c. Go I:ara li. . , 8. ;. Bclezon. IIll1.
!ib. i. c. i'.-23. P. Martyr, dccad. 122.

C C 2 ing

B 0 0 K ing it impossible to carry on their works with the fame vigour
I-- --, and profit, were obliged to look out for settlements in some

country whose people were not yet wafted by oppreflion.
Others, with the inconsiderate levity natural to men upon
whom wealth pours in with a sudden flow, had squandered, in
thoughtless prodigality, what they acquired with ease, and were
driyen by neceflity to embark in the most desperate schemes, in
s151 . order to retrieve their affairs. From all these causes, when Don

Diego Columbus proposed to conquer the ifand of Cuba, and
to eflablifh a colony there, many persons of chief diftindion in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the measure. He gave
the command of the troops destined for that service to Diego.
Velasquez, one of his father's companions in his second voyages.
and who, having, been long fettled in Hispaniola, had acquired
an ample fortune, with such reputation for probity and pru-
dence, that he seemed to be well qualified for conducting an
expedition of importance. Three hundred men were deemed
sufficient for the conquest of an island above seven hundred
miles in length, and filled with inhabitants. But they were
of the fame unwarlike charaCer with the people of Hifpa-
niola. They were not only intimidated by the appearance of
their new enemies, but unprepared to resist them. For though,
from the time that the Spaniards took possession of the adjacent
island, there was reason to expea a descent on their territories,.
none of the finall communities into which Cuba was divided,
had either made any provision for its own defence, or had
formed any concert for their common safety. The only ob-
firution the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey, a cazique,
who had fled from Hispaniola, and taken pofcffion of the
caftern extremity of Cuba. He flood upon the defenlive at
their firfr landing, and endeavoured to drive them back to their

Ihips.
8

ships. His feeble troops, however, were oon broken and B 0O K
dispersed; and he himself being taken prisoner, Velasquez, ac- a---
cording to the barbarous maxim of the Spaniards, confidered 1511;
him as a slave who had taken arms against his malfer, and con-
demned him to the flames. When Hatuey was faflened to the
flake, a Franciscan friar labouring to convert him, promised
him immediate admittance into the joys of heaven, if he would
embrace the Chriflian faith. " Are there any Spaniards," fays
he, after some pause, " in that region of bliss which you de-
scribe?" " Yes," replied the monk, " but only such as are
worthy and good.' " The bell of them," returned the indig-
nant cazique, " have neither worth nor goodness; I will not
go to a place where I may meet with one of that accursed racc.
This dreadful example of vengeance flruck the people of Cuba
with such terror, that they scarcely gave any opposition to the
progress of their invaders; and Velasquez, without the loss of
a man, annexed this extensive and fertile island to the Spanish
monarchy .

THE facility with which this important conquest was corn- Discovery of

pleted, served as an incitement to other undertakings. Juan
Ponce de Leon, having acquired both fame and wealth by the
reduction of Porto Rico, was impatient to engage in some new
enterprise. He fitted out three ships at his own expence, for 151z.
a voyage of discovery, and his reputation oon drew together
a refpedable body of followers. He dircted his course to-
wards the Lucayo islands; and after touching at fevcral of
them, as well as of the Bahama ifes, he flood to the south-west,
and discovered a country hitherto unknown to the Spaniards,

2 B. de las Casas, p. 40. Herrera, dec. . lib..ix. c. 2, 3, &c. Ovicdo, lib,
xvii. c. 3. p. 179.

wlhich

B 0 0 X which he called Florida, either because .he fell in -with it oa

II.
>---,--j Palm Sunday, or on account of its gay and beautiful.appear-

iL' ance. He attempted to land in different places, but met with

such vigorous opposition from the natives, who were fierce and
warlike, as convinced him that an increase of force was requi-
site to effea a settlement. Satisfied with having opened a com-
munication with a new country, of whose value and importance
he conceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to Porto Rico.,
through the channel now known by the name of the Gulf of
Florida.

IT was not merely the passion of searching -for new countries

that prompted Ponce de Leon to undertake this voyage, he was
influenced by oe of those visionary ideas, which at that time
often mingled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among the natives of
Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bimini, one of .the Lucayos,
there was a fountain of such wonderful virtue as to renew the
youth, and recal the vigour of every person who bathed in its
.salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand restorative,
Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged through the islands,
Searching, with fruitless solicitude and labour for the fountain,
-which was the chief object of their expedition. That a tale so
-fabulous flould gain credit among simple uninflrudcd Indians
-is not surprising. That it flould make any impression upon
.an enlightened people appears, in the present age, altogether
incredible. The fact, however, is certain; and the mofl au-
.thentic Spanish hiflorians mention this extravagant sally of their
.credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that period, were en-
gaged in a career of activity which gave a romantic turn to their
.magination, and daily presented to them frange and nrmrvel-

lous

Tbus oljeas. A New World was opened to their view. 'They E o

O K

visited illands and continents of whose existence mankind in for- - -
mer ages had no conception. In those delightful countries nature 151-Z
seemed to assume another form; every tree and plant and animal
was different from those of the ancient hemisphere. They seemed
to be transported to enchanted ground; and, after the wonders
which they hadfeen, in the warmth and novelty of their admi-
ration, nothing appeared to them so extraordinary as to be be
yond belief. If the rapid fuccefilon of new and firiking scenes
'made such imprefflon even' upon the found understanding of
'Columbus, that he boasted of having found the feat of Paradise,
it will not appear strange that Ponce de Leon should dream of
discovering the fountain of you-th..

SO'ON after the expedition to Floxida, a discovery of much P:oere's of'

I lboa i

greater importance was made in another part of America. Bal- L,1,e n,
boa having been raised to the government of the finall colony
at Santa Maria in Darin, by the voluntary fuifrage of his afro-
ciates, was so extremely desirous to obtain from the crown a
confirmation of their elecion, that he lifpatchcd one of his
officers to Spain, in order to solicit a royal commiflion, which
might invest him with a legal title to the supreme command.
Conscious, however, that he could not exped fucccfs from the
patronage of Ferdinand's Ininilfcrs, with whom lie was uncou-
nicced, or from negociating in a court to the arts of wlhich le
was a firanger, he endeavourcd to merit the dignity to whic.h lie
afpirced, and aimed at performing forne signal fervicc tlat
would fccure him the prefcrcnce to every comTpetitor. I'L'llof

P1'. Mar':rr, cndcad p.. 2. Enfa!o Chionol. paia Ia Ilill. de 1:1 FIJ i., pr

1) (ab. Ca:ldll n;s, p. . vicdo, Ilb. >vi. c. j . Ileirera, dec. z. lib. ix. c. 5.
.'1 il. lc la Conpq. dc la Florida, par G .ac tic la Vega, lib. . c. 3.

thllis

B 0 0K Rthis idea, he made frequent inroads into the adjacent country,

,

-- -I subdued several of the caziques, and colleced a considerable
'Is'Z quantity of gold, which abounded more in that part of the

continent than in the islands. In one of those excursions, the
Spaniards contended with such eagerness about the division of
some gold, that they were at the point of proceeding to ats of
violence against one another. A young cazique, who was pre-
sent, astonished at the high value which they set upon a thing
of which he did not discern the use, tumbled the gold out of
the balance with indignation; and, turning to the Spaniards,
(C Why do you quarrel (ays he) about such a trifle? If you
are so passionately fond of gold, as to abandon your own coun-
try, and to disturb the tranquillity of distant nations for its
fake, I will conduct you to a region where the metal which
leems to be the chief objea of your admiration and desire, is so
common that the meanest utensils are formed of it." Tranf-
ported with what they heard, Balboa and his companions in-
quired eagerly where this happy country lay, and how they
might arrive at it. He informed them that at the distance of
fix funs, that is of fix days journey towards the south, they
should discover another ocean, near to which this wealthy
kingdom was situated; but if they intended to attack that pow-
erful slate, they muff assemble forces far superior in number
and strength to those with which they now appeared .

The lrchemes TIIIS was the firfl information which the Spaniards receive
which lie concerning the great southern ocean, or the opulent and exten-
form lls.

five country known afterwards by the name of Peru. Balboa
had now before him objecls suited to his boundless ambition,

I-erccra, dec. r. lib. ix. c. . Comara, c. 6o. P. Martyr, Decad. p. 149.

and

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He immediately B O I K
concluded the ocean which the Cazique mentioned, to be that ---
for which Columbus had searched without success in this part of '5'2.
America, in hopes of opening a more direa communication with
the East Indies; and he conjectured that the rich territory
which had been described to him, must be part of that vast and
opulent region of the earth. Elated with the idea of performing
what so great a man had attempted in vain; and eager to accom-
plifh a discovery which he knew would be no lcfs acceptable to
the king than beneficial to his country, he was impatient until he
could set out upon this enterprize, in comparison of which all
his former exploits appeared inconsiderable. But previous ar-
rangement and preparation were requisite to cnfure success. I-Ie
began with courting and securing the friendihip of the neigh-
bouring Caziques. He ent ome of his officers to Hispaniola
with a large quantity of gold, as a proof of his past success,
and an earnest of his future hopes. By a proper difiribution
of this, they secured the favour of the governor, and allured
volunteers into the service. A considerable reinforcement from
that iflandjoined him, and he thought himself in a condition
to attempt the discovery.

THE isthmus of Darien is not above sixty miles in Difiicu!ty of

breadth, but this neck of land, which binds together the con- 'xcu"':g it.
tinents of North and South America, is flicngtihenct by a chain
of lofty mountains firetching through its whole extent, which
render it a barrier of solidity fufimcicnt to relill the impullc of
two opposite oceans. The mountains are covered with foreIls
almolt inaccefliblc. The valleys in that moillt climate, where
it rains during two thirds of the year, are marflly, and b
firequently overflowed, that the inhabitants find it neceflTary,

VOL. I. D d in

B K in many places, to build their houses upon trees, in order to be

Ill.
_- elevated at some diflance from the damp foil, and the odious

reptiles ingendered in the putrid waters b. Large rivers rush
down with an impetuous current from the high grounds. In a
region thinly inhabited by wandering savages, the hand of in-
duftry had done nothing to mitigate or corre& those natural
disadvantages. To march across this unexplored country, with
no other guides but Indians, whose fidelity could be little
trusted, was, on all there accounts, the boldest enterprise on
which the Spaniards had hitherto ventured in the New World.
But the intrepidity of Balboa was such as distinguished him
among his countrymen, at a period when every adventurer was
1513. conspicuous for daring courage. Nor was bravery his only me-

rit, he was prudent in condut, generous, affable, and possessed
of those popular talents which, in the most desperate undertak-
ings, inspire confidence and secure attachment. Even after the
juntion of the volunteers from Hispaniola, he was able to.
mulltr only an hundred and ninety men for his expedition.
But they were hardy veterans, inured to the climate of Ame-
rica, and ready to follow him through every danger. A thou-
sand Indians attended them to carry their provisions; and to
complete their warlike array, they took with them several of
tliofe fierce dogs, which were no less formidable than deftruc-
tive to their naked enemies.
Discovers the BALBOA set out upon this important expedition on the firm:

of September, about the time that the periodical rains began to.
abate. I-Ie proceeded by ea, and without any difficulty, to,
the territories of a cazique whose friendflip he had gained;
but no sooner did he begin to advance into the interior part of

b P. Martyr, decad. p. 158.
8 the

the country, than he was retarded by every obstacle, which he B O O 1

II[.

had reason to apprehend, from the nature of the territory, or -
the disposition of its inhabitants. Some of the caziques, at his 'sl3
approach, fled to the mountains with all their people, and car-
ried off or destroyed whatever could afford subsistence to his
troops. Others collected their fubjet:s, in order to oppose his
progress, and he quickly perceived what an arduous undertak-
ing it was, to conduCt such a body of men through hostile na-
tions, across swamps and rivers, and woods, which had never
been passed but by straggling Indians. But by sharing in
every hardship with the meanest soldier, by appearing the
foremost to meet every danger, by promising confidently to
his troops the enjoyment of honour and riches superior to
the most successful of their countrymen, he inspired them
with such enthufiaflic resolution, that they followed him
without murmuring. When they had penetrated a good
way into the mountains, a powerful cayique appeared in
a narrow pass, with a numerous body of his subjects to
obftrut their progress. But men who had surmounted o
many obflacles, despised the opposition of such feeble ene-
mies. They attacked them with impetuosity, and having
dispersed them with much ease and great slaughter, continued
their march. Though their guides had rcprefented the breadth
of the iimus to e only a journey of fix clays, they had
already fpcnt twenty-five in forcing their way through the
woods and mountains. l\any of thenm wCer ready to finlc
under fucl uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry climate, fivcral
were seizcd with the diseases peculiar to the country, and all
became impatient to reach the period of tlcir labours and sus-
ferings. At length the Indians alfired them, that from the

i) d 2 topl

B o o K top of the next mountain they should discover the ocean which
----'-J was the object of their wishes. When, with infinite toil, they

1513.

3 had climbed up the greater part of that steep ascent, Balboa

commanded his men to halt, and advanced alone to the fum-
mit, that he might be the first who hould enjoy a fpedacle
which he had so long desired. As soon as he beheld the South
Sea stretching in endless profpet below him, he fell on his
knees, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to
God, who had conducted him to a discovery so beneficial to his
country, and so honourable to himself. His followers, obferv-
ing his transports of joy, ufhed forward to join in his wonder,
exultation and gratitude. They held on their course to the
shore with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing up to the
middle in the waves with his buckler and sword, took possession
of that ocean in the name of the king his master, and vowed to
defend it, with these arms, against all his enemies c.

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean, which

Balboa first discovered, fiill retains the name of the Gulf of St.
Michael, which he gave to it, and is situated to the east of Pa-
nama. From several of the petty princes, who governed in
the diftrids adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provisions and
gold by force of arms. Others sent them to him voluntarily.
To there acceptable presents, ome of the caziques added a con-
fiderable quantity of pearls; and he learned from them, with
much fatisfadion, that pearl oysters abounded in the sea which
he had newly discovered.

c Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. , &c. Gomara, c. 6z, &c. P. Martyr, dcad.
p. 205, &c.

TOGETHER

TOGETIER with the acquisition of this wealth, which served B o O K

IIl.

to soothe and encourage his followers, he received accounts -
which confirmed his sanguine hopes of future and more exten- ,e rceives
five benefits from the expedition. All the people on the coast cinforniaion

concerning a

of the South Sea, concurred in informing him that there was a Inoreopulent
mighty and opulent kingdom situated at a considerable distance
towards the eafr, the inhabitants of which had tame animals to
carry their burdens. In order to give him an idea of there,
they drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas or sheep, as-
terwards found in Peru, which the Peruvians had taught to
perform such services as they described. As the Llama, i its
form, nearly resembles a camel, a beafl of burden deemed pecu-
liar to Asia, this circumitance, in conjunction with the disco-
very of the pearls, another noted production of that country,
tended to confirm the Spaniards in their mistaken theory with
refped to the vicinity of the New World to the Eat Indies .

BUT though the information which Balboa received from the obliged to

return.

people on the coast, as well as his own conjectures and hopes,
rendered him extremely impatient to visit this unknown coun-
try, his prudence reflrained him from attempting to invade it
with an handful of men, exhauited by fatigue, and weakened
by diseases . HIe determined to lead back his followers, at
present, to their settlement atSanta Maria in Darien, and to rc-
turn next season with a force more adequate to such an arduous
enterprize. In order to acquire a more extensive knowledge of
the isthmus, he marched back by a different route, which lie
found to be no less dangerous and difficult than that which lec
had formerly taken. But to men elated with success, and ani-

d Herrcra, dec .. lib, x. c.. Sec NOTE XXIV.

i11aiile

B OI I mated with hope, nothing is unsurmountable. Balboa returned

-_, _ to Santa Maria, from which he had been absent four months,

with greater glory and more treasure than the Spaniards had
1514. acquired in any expedition in the New World. None of Bal-

boa's officers diffinguifhed himself more in this service than
Francisco Pizarro, or aifted with greater courage and ardour
in opening a communication with those countries, in which he
afterwards ated such an illustrious part '.

Pedrarias ap. BALBOA'S first care was to fend information to Spain of the
pointed go-
vernorof important discovery which he had made; and to demand a re-
Darien. inforcement of a thousand men, in order to attempt the con-

quest of that opulent country, concerning which he had received
such inviting intelligence. The firtf account of the discovery
of the New World hardly occasioned greater joy than the un-
expected tidings, that a paflage was at last found to the great
southern ocean. The communication with the East Indies, by
a course to the westward of the line of demarkation, drawn by
the Pope, seemed now to be certain. The vast wealth which
ilowed into Portugal from its settlements and conquefis in that
country, excited the envy and called forth the emulation of
other tfatcs. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for a hare in
this lucrative commerce, and in his eagerness to obtain it, was
willing to make an elffort beyond what Balboa required. But
even in this exertion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal
antipathy of Foufeca, now biflop of Burgos, to every man o£
incrit who diflinguiihcd himself in the New \Vorld, were con-
p)icuous. Notwithtanding Balboa's recent services, which
mlarked him out as the molt proper pcrfon to finifl that great

"lliler:l, dec. . io. . -6. (om;lr , c. 6.1. P. Martyr, dec. p. zzg, &c.

undertaking

undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was so ungenerous B O O IK

Ill.

as to overlook these, and to appoint Pedrarias Davila governor -
of Darien. He gave him the command of fifteen flout vessels, s1''4
and twelve hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at the pub-
lic expence, with a liberality which Ferdinand had never dif-
played in any former armament deltined for the New World; and
such was the ardour of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a leader
who was about to conduc them to a country, where, as fame
reported, they had only to throw their nets into the ea and
draw out gold g, that fifteen hundred embarked on board the
fleet, and if they had not been refirained, a much greater
number would have engaged in the service .

PEDRARIAS reached the gulf of Darien without any remark-

able accident,. and immediately lent ome of his principal offi-
cers afliore, to inform Balboa of his arrival, with the king's
commission, to be governor of the colony. To their aonifl-
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great exploits they had
heard o much, and of whose opulence they had formed fucl
high ideas, clad in a canvas jacket, with shoes made of pack-
thread; employed, together with ome Indians, in thatching
his own hut with reeds. Even in this simple garb, which cor-
responded so ill with the expecations and wifhcs of his new
guests, Balboa received them with dignity. The fame of his
discoverics had drawn so many adventurers fiom the illands,
that he could now muller four hundred and liFty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than a match for
the forces which Pedrarias brought with him. But though his
troops murmured loudly at the injullice of the king in super-

c HIcrrra, dec. . lib. x. c. I,[. Ibid, dec. l il,. x c. 6, 7. P. M:-
tyr, dec. p. 177. 256.

fe i 1n

B 0 0 K feding their commander, and complained that firangers would
-- .,--_ now reap the fruits of their toil and success, Balboa ubmitted

5s'4' with implicit obedience to the will of his sovereign, and re-

ceived Pedrarias with all the deference due to his character '.

Difrention NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Balboa, to whicli
between him
and B.lboa. Pedrarias owed the peaceable possession of his government, he

appointed a judicial inquiry to be made into his condut, while
under the command of Nicueffa and Encifo, and imposed a con-
fiderable fine upon him, on account of the irregularities of
which he had then been guilty. Balboa felt sensibly the mor-
tification of being fubjeted to trial and to punishment in a place
where he had so lately occupied the first station. Pedrarias
could not conceal his jealousy of his superior merit; so that the
resentment of the one, and the envy of the other, gave rife to
dissentions extremely detrimental to the colony. It was threat-
ened with a calamity still more fatal. Pedrarias had landed in
July. Darien at a most unlucky time of the year, about the middle

of the rainy season, in that part of the torrid zone where the
clouds pour down such torrents as are unknown in more tem-
perate climates k. The village of Santa Maria was feated in a
rich plain, environed with marshes and woods. The conflitu-
tion of Europeans was unable to withstand the pestilential in-
fluence of such a ituation, in a climate naturally so noxious,
and at a season so peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and de-
firuEtive malady carried off many of the soldiers who accomr
panicd Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity of provisions augmented
this diflrefs, as it rendered it impoflible to ind proper refrefil-

1 ilrlr.l, dec. . lib. x. C. 13, 14.
Rl c liard Hilt. Naturclle ie l'Air, tom. i.. 2o,..

ment

ment for the sick, or the necessary fuflenance for the healthy'. B 0 0 I
In the space of a month, above fix hundred persons pcrifled in ' -'
the utmost misery. Dejetion and dcefair spread t!hrouth the 51'
colony. Many principal persons solicited their difiniflion, and
were glad to relinquifl all their hopes of wealth, in order to
escape from that pernicious region. Pedrarias endeavoured to
divert those who remained from brooding over their misfor-
tunes, by finding them employment. Vith this view, he sent
several detachments into the interior parts of the country, to
levy gold among the natives, and to fearcl for the mines in
which it was produced. Tlofe rapacious adventurers, more
attentive to present gain than to the means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without distinCtion wherever they
marched. Regardless of the alliances which Balboa had made
with several of the caziques, they firipped them of every thing
valuable, and treated them, as well as their fuljeis, with the
utmolt insolence and cruelty. By their tyranny and exactions,
which Pedrarias, either from want of authority or of inclina-
tion, did not refirain, all the country from the gulf of Darien
to the lake of Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spaniards were
inconsiderately deprived of the advantages which they might
have derived from the fiicndfhip of the natives, in extending
their conquests to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with con-
cern that fiich ill-judged proceedings retarded the execution
of his favourite scheme, ent violent remonf irances to Spain
againlt the imprtident government of Pcdrarias, which hal
ruined a happy and flourishing colony. Pccdrarias, on the
other hand, accused him of having deceived the king, by nma.,-

i l rrrcra, dcc. . lib. x. c. P. Mat , dec. . 22.
Vo . 1. Ec nifiilg

B 0 0 K nifying his own exploits, as well as by a false representation
--.-- of the opulence and value of the country "'.

1514.

Violent pro- FERDrNAND became sensible at length of his imprudence in
ceedings a-
gaino Balboa. superseding the most aive and experienced officer he had in

the New World, and, by way of compensation to Balboa, ap-
pointed him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive privileges and
authority. At the fame time he enjoined Pedrarias to support
Balboa in all his enterprises, and to consult with him concerning
i'5s every measure which he himself pursued. But to effed such a

sudden transition from inveterate enmity to perfec confidence,
exceeded Ferdinand's power. Pedrarias continued to treat his
rival with neglect; and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by
the payment of his fine, and other exaEions of Pedrarias, he
could not make suitable preparations for taking possession of
his new government. At length, by the interposition and ex-
hortations of the bishop of Darien, they were brought to a
reconciliation; and, in order to cement this union more firmly.,
Pedrarias agreed to give his daughter in marriage to Balboa.
.'6. The first effed of their concord was, that Balboa was permitted

to make several small incursions into the country. These he con-
duded with such prudence, as added to the reputation which lie
had already acquired. Many adventurers resorted to him, and,
with the countenance and support of Pedrarias, he began to pre-
pare for his expedition to the South Sea. In order to accomplifl
this, it was necessary to build veflels capable of conveying his
troops to those provinces which lie purposed to invade. After

" Ilcrrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 15. dec. 2. c. , &c. Gomara, c. 66. P. Martyr,
dec. 3. c. 1o. Rclacion dc B. de las Caat, p. 12.

1 surmounting

surmounting many obstacles, and enduring a variety of those B o o K
hardships which were the portion of the conquerors of America, - -
he at length finished four fiall brigantines. I these, with three 1E17.
hundred chosen men (a force superior to that with which Pi-
zarro afterwards undertook the fame expedition), he was ready
to fail towards Peru, when he received an unexpeced message
from Pedrarias ". As his reconciliation with Balboa had never
been cordial, the progress which he made revived his ancient
enmity, and added to its rancour. He dreaded the prosperity
and elevation of a man whom he had injured so deeply. He
fufpeaed that success would encourage him to aim at inde-
pendence upon his jurifdiaion; and so violently did the pas-
sions of hatred, fear, andjealoufy, operate upon his mind, that,
in order to gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to defeat an
enterprise of the greatest moment to his country. Under pretexts
which were false, but plausible, he desired Balboa to postpone
his voyage for a short time, and to repair to Acla, in order that
he might have an interview with him. Balboa, with the un-
suspicious confidence of a man conscious of no crime, instantly
obeyed the summons ; but as soon as he entered the place, he
was arrested by order of Pedrarias, whose impatience to satiate
his revenge did not fiffer him to languish long in confinement.
fudges were immediately appointed to proceed to his trial. An
accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of an intention to re-
volt against the governor, was preferred against him. Sentence
of death was pronounced ; and though the judges who passed it,
fcconded by the whole colony, interceded warmly for his par-
don, Pedrarias continued inexorable; and, to their aonilh-
mcnt and sorrow, the Spaniards beheld the public execution

n Ieircr.l, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. I i. i3. 21.

Ee c of

B I0 K of a man whom they universally deemed more capable than
.--,--- any who had borne command in America, of forming and ac-
1517' complifhing great designs °. Upon his death, the expedition

which he had planned was relinquished. Pedrarias, notwith-
standing the violence and injustice of his proceedings, was not
only screened from punishment by the powerful patronage of
the bishop of Burgos and other courtiers, but continued in
power. Soon after, he obtained permiflion to remove the co-
lony from its unhealthy station at Santa Mlaria to Panama, on
the opposite ide of the isthmus; and though it did not gain
much in point of healthfulncfs by the change, the commodious
situation of this new fettlemcnt contributed greatly to facilitate
the subsequent conquests of the Spaniards in the vast countries
lituated upon the Southern Ocean '.

e1511s. DURING these tranfa&ions in Darien, the hiflory of which

New disco-
veries. it was proper to carry on in an uninterrupted tenour, several

important events occurred with refpet to the discovery, the
conquest, and government of other provinces in the New World.
Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a communication with
the Molucca or Spice Islands by the weft, that, in the year one
thousand five hundred and fifteen, he fitted out two ships at his
own expence, in order to attempt such a voyage, and gave the
command of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, who was deemed the
moll kilful navigator in Spain. He flood along the coast of
South America, and on the first of January one thousand fiyc
hundred and fixtecn, entered a river, which he called Janeiro,
where an extensive commerce is now carried on. From thence
he proceeded to a spacious bay, which he fuppoled to be the
entrance into a firait that communicated with the Indian ocean;

erincra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c zl, 22. P Ibid. lib. iv. c. .

but

but upon advancing farther, he found it to be the mouth of Rio B o o K
de Plata, one of the vast rivers by which the southern continent I-
of America is watered. In endeavouring to make a descent in 1517.
this country, De Solis and several of his crew were slain by the
natives, who, in fight of the ships, cut their bodies in pieces,
roafled and devoured them. Discouraged with the loss of their
commander, and terrified at this shocking fpcaacle, the fur-
viving Spaniards ife t ail fur Europe, without aiming at any
farther discovery . Though this attempt proved abortive, it
was not without benefit. It turned the attention of ingenious
men to this course of navigation, and prepared the way for a
more fortunate voyage, in which, a few years posterior to this
period, the great design that Ferdinand had in view was ac-
complillied.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus atively employed in ex- State of the

tending their discoveries and settlements in America, they still parlcola.
confidered Hispaniola as their principal colony, and the feat of
government. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither inclination
nor abilities to have rendered the members of this colony, who
were most immediately under his jurifdiion, prosperous and
happy. But lie was circumifcribcd in all his operations by the
suspicious policy of Ferdinand, who on every occasion, and
under pretexts the most frivolous, retrenched his privileges,
and encouraged the trcafurcr, the judges, and other fubordi-
nate officers, to counterad his meafires, and to difputc his
authority. The most valuable prerogative which the governor
poffcfned, was that of distributing Indians among the Spaniards
fettled in the illand. The rigorous fcrvitude of thole unhappy
men having been but little mitigated by all the regulations in

Icirera, dec. 2. lib. i. 7. . . Martyr, dcad. p. 317.

5 their

B OO oK their favour, the power of parcelling out such necessary inftru-

illr.

a _,,i ments of labour at pleasure, secured to the governor great in-
'517' fluence in the colony. In order to strip him of this, Ferdinand

created a new office, with the power of difiributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a relation of Za-
pata, his confidential minister. Mortified with the injustice, as
well as indignity, of this invasion upon his rights, in a point
so essential, Don Diego could no longer remain in a place where
his power and consequence were almost annihilated. He re-
paired to Spain with the vain hopes of obtaining redress r. Al-
buquerque entered upon his office with all the rapacity of an
indigent adventurer, impatient to amass wealth. He began
with taking the exaCt number of Indians in the island, and
found, that from,fixty thousand, who, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eight, survived after all their sufferings, they
were now reduced to fourteen thousand. These he threw into
separate divisions or lots, and befiowed them upon such as were
willing to purchase them at the highest price. By this arbi-
trary distribution, several of the natives were removed from
their original habitations, many were taken from their ancient
masters, and all of them subjected to heavier burdens, and to
more intolerable labour, in order to reimburse their new pro-
prietors. Those additional calamities completed the misery,
and hastened on the extinction of this wretched and inno-

cent race of men .

Controveify TIIE violence of those proceedings, together with the fatal
with iCp a confcqucnces which attended them, not only excited complaints
to tile trelt-
Ilnnt 1 te among such as thought themselves aggrieved, but touched
Indians.

I- eirc!a, dec. i. lib. ix, c. 5, lib. x. c. z:. r Ibid. dec. . lib. x. c. 12.

the

the hearts of all who retained any sentiments of humanity. B K

1

From the time that Ecclefiaifics were sent into America to in-
ftrud and convert the natives, they perceived that the rigour 15:7.
with which the Spaniards treated them, rendered their ministry
altogether fruitless. The missionaries, in conformity to the
mild spirit of that religion which they were employed to pub-
lifl, early remonstrated against the maxims of their country-
men with respect to the Americans, and condemned the repar-
timientos, or distributions, by which they were given up as
slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to natural justice
and the precepts of Christianity, than to found policy. The
Dominicans, to whom the inftruaion of the Americans was
originally committed, were most vehement in teltifying againlt
the repartimientos. In the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, Montefino, one of their most eminent preachers, in-
veighed against this practice in the great church at St. Domingo,
with all the impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don Diego
Columbus, the principal officers of the colony, and all the
laymen who had been his hearers, complained of the monk to
his superiors; but they, inflead of condemning, applauded his
doCtrine, as equally pious and seasonable. The Franciscans,
influenced by the spirit of opposition and rivallhip which sub-
sifts between the two orders, discovered some inclination to take
part with the laity, and to espouse the defence of the repal ti-
iien/tos. But as they could not with decency give their avowed
approbation to a system of oppreflion, so repugnant to the fpi-
rit of religion, they endeavoured to palliate what they could
not juflify, and alleged, in excuse for the conduct of their
countrymen, that it was impoilible to carry on any improvc-
ment in the colony, unless the Spaniards possesscd such do-

miniion.

B o0 K minion over the natives, that they could compel them to

' -.-- labour '.
1517.

Contrary de- THE Dominicans, regardless of such political and interested
ciflons con-
eerning this considerations, would not relax in any degree the rigour of

poin. their sentiments, and even rcfufed to absolve, or admit to the

facramcnts, such of their countrymen as held the natives in
servitude . Both parties applied to the king for his decision in
a matter of such importance. Ferdinand empowered a com-
mittee of his privy-council, aifled by some of the most eminent
civilians and divines in Spain, to hear the deputies ent from
H-ispaniola, in support of their respective opinions. After a
long difcuflion, the speculative point in controversy was deter-
mined in favour of the Dominicans, the Indians were declared
to be a free people, intitled to all the natural rights of men;
but, notwithstanding this decision, the repartimientos were con-
tinued upon their ancient footing . As this determination
admitted the principle upon which the Dominicans founded
their opinion, it was not calculated either to filcnce or to con-
vince them. At length, in order to quiet the colony, which
was alarmed by their remonstrances and cenfurcs, Ferdinand
issucd a decree of his privy-council, declaring, that after ma-
ture consideration of the Apostolic Bull, and other titles by
xi ;. which the crown of Cafiile claimed a right to its poflcffions in

the New World, the servitude of the Indians was warranted
both by the laws of God and of man ; that unlcs they were lil)-
jeded to the dominion of the Spaniards, and compelled to re-
fide under their infpeccion, it would be imlpofiblc to reclaim
t I-errcrn, dec. i. lib. viii. c. r. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p 7, " Ovicdo, ibid.

l-crlcra, dec. i. lib. viii. c. 13. lib. ix. c. i.

them

them from idolatry,' or to infiruat them in the principles of the B o 0 K,

11I.

Christian faith; that no farther cruple ought to be entertained _
concerning the lawfulness of the epartinientos, as the king 7
and council were willing to take the charge of that upon their
own consciences; and that therefore the Dominicans, and monks
of other religious orders, should abstain, for the future, from
those invectives, which, from an excess of charitable, but ill-
formed zeal, they had uttered against that praaice .

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree might be

fully understood, Ferdinand conferred new grants of Indians
upon several of his courtiers . But, in order that le might
not seem altogether inattentive to the rights of humanity, he
published an edia, in which he endeavoured to provide for the
mild treatment of the Indians under the yoke to which he sub-
jeeted them; he regulated the nature of the work which they
should be required to perform, he prescribcd the nmode in
which they hould be clothed and fed, and gave dirctions
with refl ea to their inflrucion in the principles of Chrifli-
anity .

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their exper:ince of what F.P.? of

was pafl-, judged COnCCerling the future, fbon perccivcd the tlcl.'
inefficacy of tofe provi(ions, and loretold, that as long as it
was the intcrcft of individuals to treat the Indians with rigour,
no public rcrgulaltions could rendcr theiir fkrvitiude mild or
tolirable. 'FTicv confidered it as vain to wvale their own tiime
and firength in attenimpting to coinllltillicate the Itilbliine trillhs
of ireligion to men, lwhofe fpi)lits were broken, ad thicir l.cuil-

Y -Hcrrcrn, dec. . lbx. ix. c. i. Sce ; N ()'I' XXV.

a I lcrrcr., ibid.
VOL. L. Lr l tics

B 0 0 K ties impaired by oppression. Some of them, in despair, re-

II.
.---.-- quested the permiflion of their superiors to remove to the con-

tinent, and to pursue the objea of their mission, among fuclh
of the natives as were not hitherto corrupted by the example
of the Spaniards, or alienated by their cruelty from the Chri-
ltian faith. Such as remained in Hispaniola continued to re-
monftrate, with decent irmnefs, against the servitude of the
Indians.

n.,, !: ,!'n.v Ti-in violent operations of Albuquerque, the new difrilbutor
cc hi, Ca`-.s

arp ir. i of Indians, revived the zeal of the Dominicans againfl the re-
t,'" 'ic of pan-tiicltos, and called forth an advocate for that oppresscd

people, who poilTfcd all the courage, the talents, and aivity
requilite in supporting such a dcefecrate cause. This was Bar-
tholonmcw de las Casas, a native of Seville, and one of the
clergymen sent out with Columbus in his second voyage to
Ilifpaniola, in order to fettle in that island. He early adopted
the opinion prevalent among ecclefiaflics, with respect to the
unlawfulness of reducing the natives to servitude; and that he
might demonflrate the sincerity of his conviation, he relinquished
all the Indians who had fallen to his own share in the divilion of
the inhabitants among their conquerors, declaring that he mhould
ever bewail his own misfortune and guilt, in having exercised
for a moment this impious dominion over his fellow-creatures '.
From that time, he was the avowed patron of the Indians;
and by his bold interpositions in their behalf, as well as by tlhe
rcrfpcc dlue to his abilities and characr, lhe had often the me-
rit of Cttiung folne bounds to the excesses of his countrymen.

b II rrcra, dec. i. 1l!. ix. c. .t. Tl oron. I-I'l. Gencr. de I'Ameiluc, tom. i.

p. 22z. c ir. :\ u'. I);ivl, PatI l. Ililt. dc la I undicion de In l'rovincia de
St. Jlgo (! c exico, ., 3 . lclrrcr;il, dec. z. lib. .
C. 12.

lIe

He did not fail to remonflrate wnarmly againfi the proceedings B 0 K
of Albuquerque, and, though e soon found that attention ----
to his own interest rendered him deaf to admonition, he did '''
not abandon the wretched people whose cause he had espoused.
He instantly set out for Spain, with the moit sanguine hopes
of opening the eyes and softening the heart of Ferdinand, by
that friking picture of the opprcflion of his new ubjects, which
he would exhibit to his view .

HE easily obtained admittance to the king, whom he found T 16.

..S ]icit~ ti:c;r

in a declining slate of health. \Vith much freedom, and no caiue in tc
leit eloquence, he reprcfented to himn all the fatal ecAts of the s,.,i,.
rzpnartimientos in the New \\orld, boldly charging him with
the guilt of having autlorifed this impious measure , which had
bronght misery and deflru6Lion upon a lnumerous and innocent
race of men, whom Providence had placed under his protclion.
Ferdinand, whose mind as well as body was much cnfeeblcd
by his diflempcr, was greatly alarmed at this charge of im-
piety, which at another jundur e

he would have defifecld. I-Ie

listencd with deep compunion to the dielourfe of i.as Casas,
and promised to take into attentive confiderationl the means
of redrcffing tle evil of' wicl hle complained. 13ut dcath
prevented him from executing his rcfolution. Charles of
Aufiria, to whlom all his crowns devolved, resided at that
time in his paternal dIomiinions in te Iow C untries. Ias
Cafias, with his ufu;il ardour, pi-ep:tIrd Iiilncdiitcly to ULt out
for Slanders, in order to occupy tle car ot{ thlic yorrg inmionaicli,
\vhcn cardinal Ximcnccs, \wio, ns regent, afliimcd! the reis of
gov\ernC ent in Callile, cminaiindei liim to dclfi si ,m tllh jojr-
ney, and enga ed to hear hiis conplaints i perloi

' JIcrcra, dcC. 1. libl . . C. 12. I)rc'. . l).. . 1 I., l. I1, II i.' . Hlp. . 3
, (.

F ?_ I l:

B 0 0 L HE accordingly weighed the matter with attention equal

to its importance; and as his impetuous mind delighted

TIe rgula- in schemes bold and uncommon, he soon fixed upon a plan
di.0al Xi-Ca which aftonilhed the ministers, trained up under the formal and
ientKs. cautious adminifiration of Ferdinand. 'Vithout regarding ei-

ther the rights of Don Diego Columbus, or the regulations
establishcd by the late king, he resolved to fend three persons
to America as superintendents of all the colonies there, with.
authority, after examining all circunflances on the spot, to
decide finally with refpe& to the point in question. It was a
matter of deliberation and delicacy to chute men qualified
for such an in;portant fiation. As all the laymen fettled in
America, or who had been consulted in the administration of
that department, had given their opinion that the Spaniards
could not keep poffefiion of their new fcttlements, unless they
were allowed to retain their dominion over the Indians, he saw
that he could not rely on their impartiality, and determined to
commit the trufl to ecclefiaflics. As the Dominicans and Fran-
cilcans had already espoused opposite fides in the controversy,
he, from the fame principle, excluded both these fraternities
from the commiiion. He confined his choice to the monks of
St. Jerome, a small, but rcfpedable order in Spain. With the
affifance of their general, and in concert with Las Casas, he
soon pitched upon three persons whom he deemed equal to the
charge. To them he joined Zuazo, a private lawyer of dif-
tinguifhed probity, with unbounded power to regulate all judi-
cial proceedings in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to
accompany them with the title of Protector of the Indians c.

Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

To

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might at once over- B 0 K

Ill.

turn the fyflem of government established in the New World, '.---.
in four persons, who, from their humble condition in life, Thie ,nicr
were little intitled to poflefs this high authority, appeared to i" hi: til'h
Zapata, and other ministers of the late king, a measure so wild' cutJ.
and dangerous, that they refused to issue the dispatches necef-
fary for carrying it into execution. But Ximenes was not of
a temper patiently to brook opposition to any o his schemes.
LHe sent for the refracory miniflers, and addrecfd them in such
a tone, that in the utmost conltcrnalion they obeyed his or-
ders '. The superintendents, with their aflociate Zuazo, and
Las Casas, failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival, tc
irlt at of their authority was to set at liberty all the Indians
who had been granted to the Spaniflh courtiers, or to any per-
son not rcfiding in America. This, together with the infor-
mation which had been received from Spain concerning the
olijed of the commiflion, spread a general alarm. The colonics
concluded that they were to be deprived at once of the hands
with which they carried on their labour, and that, of confc-
qucnce, ruin was unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome
proceeded with fucl caution and prudence, as ioon diflipated
all their fears. They discovered, in every flcp of their con-
dul, a knowledge of the world, and of affairs which is ldoiii
acquired in a cloister; and displaycd a moderation and gentle-
ness fill more rare, among persons trained up in the foliludc
and auflerity of monastic life. Their cars were open to infor-
mation from every quarter, they compared tle difflcrcnt ;ac-
counts which they rcccived, and, after a mature cnlideratitll
of the wholc, they were fully latisficd that the late of the

f Icrrera, dlcc. z. lib. ii. c. 6.

colony

B o K colony rendered it impossible to adopt the plan proposed by

1II.
_ -..-. Las Casas, and recommended by the cardinal. They plainly

';'7* perceived that the Spaniards fettled in America were so few in

number, that they could neither work the mines which had
been opened, nor cultivate the country; that they depended
for both upon the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they muff inftantly'relinquifh their conquests, or give up all the
advantages which they derived from them; that no allurement
was so powerful as to surmount the natural avcrfion of the In-
dians to any laborious effort, and that nothing but the autho-
rity of a mafler could compel them to work; and if they were
not kept confantly under the eye and discipline of a superior,
so great was their natural liftlefinefs and indifference, that they
would ncitlier.attcnd to religious intfrucion, nor observe thole
rites of Cliriflianity which they had been already taught.
Upon all thoCe accounts, they found it necefTary to tolerate the
r',, arlinilZic;tos, and to suss'er the Indians to remain under sub-
jcc'ion to their Spanifli masters. They uscd their utmon endea-
vours, however, to prevent the fatal effects of this eftablifl-
mient, and to secure the Indians the consolation of the befl
treatment compatible with a slate of servitude. For this pur-
pofc, they revived former regulations, they prescribed new
ones, they neglected no circurnflancc that tended to mitigate
the rigour of the yoke; and by their authority, their examnple,
;,!d their exh'ortations, they laboured to inspire their country-
incn vwitli cntinents of equity anld gcntlcnefs towards the tn-
hji py pe)c upIIon whlofe idiltlry tlcy dlepended. Z,.axzo, in
hlis dlc!artmnilc, fccon dcd the endeavours o the lfuperi ntc lndenlts.
IIe refrmlned the courts ofjuflice, in fucl a mannerl as to ren-
der their dccilfios e(lIlitale as vell as expeditious, and intro-
duiied various r ullltions wliiici greatly iproved tlie interior

police

police of the colony. The fatisfaElion with his conduclt, and B 0 0 K
that of the superintendents, was now universal among the Spa-
niards fettled in the New WVorld, and all admired the boldness 'l'
of Ximenes, in having departed from the ordinary path of bu-
finess in forming his plan, as well as his sagacity in pitching
upon persons, whose wisdom, moderation, and difinterclc.ednefs
rendered them worthy of this high trust G

LAS CAsAS alone was diffhtisfied. The prudential confider- r 'S cirn

d ilb,.d

ations which influenced the superintendents, made no implref- witi> icl.
lion upon im. I-le regarded their idea of accommodatilng
their conduct to the htate of the colony, as the maxim of an
unhallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was unjutf, be-
cause it was beneficial. He contended, that the Indians were
by nature free, and, as their prote'tor, he required the i;uper-
intendents not to bereave them of the common privilege of
humanity. They received his most virulent remonflrances
without emotion, but adhered firmly to their own systen. The
Spaniflh planters did not bear with him so patiently, and w cre
ready to tear him in pieces for insisting in a requisition o odi-
ous to them. Las Casas, in order to fIreen himiblf from their
rage, found it necefary to take shelter in a convent ; and per-
ceiving that all his efforts in America were fruillefs, he ioon
set out for Europe, with a fixed relolulion not to abandon the
protc'lion of a people whom he deeme to be cruelly op-
pressed .

HIAD Ximenes retained that vigour of mind witl which he I
icI.; .

i. It,

U ihl

usually alppliedl to bufiiefs, Las CaflIs minus: ave met witI o

n ,:,.
,,io

...ic~ v'

c Ilcrrcla, dcc. z. Ii!,. i:. . I. Rcnicfal. Ilifi. Gcnc'r. lib. 2. c. 1 , 1;, 1
1' liclrcra, dcc. 2. l.b. ii. c. i.

¥riy

B r° K very gracious reception upon his return to Spain. But e

_Lu- -:found the cardinal languishing under a mortal diflemper, and

preparing to resign his authority to the young king, who was
daily expected from the Low Countries. Charles arrived, took
possession of the government, and, by the death of Ximenes,
loft a minister, whose abilities and integrity intitled him to
direct his affairs. Many of the Fiemifh nobility had accom-
panied their sovereign to Spain. From that warm predilection
to his countrymen, which was natural at his age, he consulted
them with refpea to all the tranfadions in his new kingdom,
and they, with an indiscreet eagerness, intruded themselves
into every -business, and seized almost every department of ad-
ministration h. The direction of American affairs was an ob-
jea too alluring to escape their attention. Las Casas observed
their growing influence, and though projecors are usually too
sanguine, to condut their schemes with much dexterity, he
poflefIed a buffling indefatigable activity, which sometimes
accomplishes its purposes with greater success, than the most
exquisite difLernment and address. He courted the Flemifll
mriiniRcrs with assiduity. He represented to them the absurdity
of all the maxims hitherto adopted with refped to the govern-
imcnt of America, and particularly the defects of that arrange-
inent which Ximenes had introduced. The memory of Ferdi-
nand was odious to the Flemings. The superior virtue and
abilities of Ximenes had long been the obje&t of their envy.
They fondly wiihecl to have a plausible pretext for conderning
the meaflircs, both of the monarch and of the minitfer, and of
rcflecing some diicrcdit on their political wisdom. The friends
of Don Diego Columbus, as well as the Spanifl courtiers, who

l' Iifl. of Charles V. vo!. ii. p. 3.

had

had been dissatisfied with the cardinal's adminifiration, joined Las BE O O I

lit.

Casas in censuring the scheme offending fuperintendants to Ame- -
rica. This union of so many interests and pafions was irrefift- Is .'
ible; and, in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Jerome, and their
associate Zuazo, were recalled. Roderigo de Figueroa, a law-
yer of some eminence, was appointed chiefjudge of the island,
and received inftruaions, in compliance with the request of Las
Casas, to examine once more, with the utmost attention, the
point in controversy between him and the people of the colony,
with refped to the treatment of the natives; and in the mean
time to do every thing in his power to alleviate their sufferings,
and prevent the extinction of the race'.

THis was all that the zeal of Las Casas could procure, at Scheme of

that juncture, in favour of the Indians. The impoflibility of cf)ol'opleings ttil
carrying on any improvement in America, unless the Spanish negroes.
planters could command the labour of the natives, was an in-
superable objection to his plan of treating them as free sub-
jects. Ir order to provide some remedy for this, without
which he found it was vain to mention his scheme, Las Casas
proposcd to purchase a fufficicnt number of negroes from
the Portuguese settlements on the coast of Afiica, and to
transport them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and cultivating the
ground. One of the firfl advantages which the lortuguefe
had derived from their difcovcries in Africa, arose from the
trade in slaves. Various circumflanccs concurred in reviving
this odious commerce, which had been long abolishcd in
Europe, and which is no lets repugnant to the feelings of
humanity, than to the principles of religion. As caily as the
year one thousand five hundred and three, a few negro hlaves

i lcrrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 16. 19. zl. lib. iii. c. , 8.
VOL. I. G g had

B 10 K had been ent into the New World . In the year one thousand

----- five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the importation
1517' of them in greater numbers . They were found to be a more

robust and hardy race than the natives of America. They were
more capable of enduring fatigue, more patient under fervi-
tude, and the labour of one negro was computed to be equal to
that of four Indians '. Cardinal Ximenes, however, when so-
licited to encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejeted the
proposition, because he perceived the iniquity of reducing one
race of men to slavery, while he was consulting about the
means of restoring liberty to another . But Las Casas, from
the inconsistency natural to men who hurry with headlong im-
petuofity towards a favourite point, was incapable of making
this ditinaion. While he contended earnestly for the liberty
of the people born in one quarter of the globe, he laboured to
enslave the inhabitants of another region; and in the warmth
of his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke, pronounced
it to be lawful and expedient to impose one fiill heavier upon
the Africans. Unfortunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan
was adopted. Charles granted a patent to one of his Flemish
favourites, containing an exclusive right of importing four
thousand negroes into America. He fold his patent to some
Genoese merchants for twenty-five thousand ducats, and they
were the first who brought into a regular formn that commerce
for fiaves between Africa and America, which has since been
carried on to such an amazing extcnt .

I rl s

L.as Casas BUT the Genoese merchants, conducting their operations, at
pro polzs
ciding la- firt, with the rapacity of monopolifls, demanded flch an high
hnurcr to
llfrp.niola.

k Hcrrern, dec. i. lib . vi vi.

c. i .. " Ibi. lib. ix.

c, 5 ' Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 8.
8 Ibid. lib. ii . c. 20.

price

price for negroes, that the number imported into Hispaniola made B O K
no great change upon the state of the colony. Las Casas, whose --
zeal was no less inventive than indefatigable, had recourse to
another expedient for the relief of the Indians. He oberved,
that most of the persons who had fettled hitherto in America,
were soldiers and sailors employed in the dicovery or conquest
of the country; the younger sons of noble families, allured by
the profpec- of acquiring sudden wealth; or desperate adven-
turers, whom their indigence or crimes forced to abandon their
native land. Inftcad of such men, who were dissolute, rapa-
cious, and incapable of that fober persevering indufiry which
is requisite in forming new colonies, he proposed to supply
the new settlements in Hispaniola and the other islands with a
fufficicnt number of labourers and husbandmen, who flould be
allured by fiiitable premiums to remove thither. These, as
they were accuflomed to fatigue, would be able to perform the
work, to which the Indians, from the feebleness of their con-
flitution, were unequal, and might soon become useful and
opulent citizens. But though Hispaniola flood much in need
of a recruit of inhabitants, having been visited at this time
with the small-pox, which swept off many of the natives, and
though Las Calhs had the countenance of the Flemish miniiners,
this fclhicne was defeated by the bifliop of Burgos, who thwarted
all his projcs r.

LAS CASAS now despaired of procuring any relief for the yto,,ms the

ldCL 01 a new

Indians in lthoe p)laccs mwhere the Spaniards were already fettledc. cUuo,.z.
The evil was become to inveterate there, as not to admit of a
cure. But flch (lifcovclics were daily making in the continent,
as gave an high idea both of its extent and populouliefs. In

r llclrcla, ('cc. 7. lib. ii .
c 21.

g 2 all

B 0 I K all those vati regions there was but one feeble colony planted;
-c-..--. and except a finall spot on the isthmus of Darien, the natives

t17. ill occupied the whole country. This opened a new and more
ample field for the humanity and zeal of Las Casas, who flat-
tered himself that he might prevent a pernicious system from
being introduced there, though he had failed of success in his
attempts to overturn it, where it was already established. Full
of this idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccupied country,
firetching along the sea-coast from the gulf of Paria to the
western frontier of that province now known by the name of
Santa Martha. He proposed to fettle there with a colony con-
posed of husbandmen, labourers, and ecclesiastics. He en-
gaged, in the space of two years, to civilize ten thousand of the
natives, and to inTlrut them so thoroughly in the arts of social
life, that, from the fruits of their industry, an annual revenue
of fifteen thousand ducats should arise to the king. In ten years,
he expecled that his improvements would be ib far advanced,
as to yield annually sixty thousand ducats. He stipulated, that
no failur or soldier flould ever be permitted to icttle in this
diflric ; and that no Spaniard fiould enter it without his
permifion. He even projected to clothe the people whom
lie took along with him in lome peculiar garment, which did
not refemblethe Spanish dress, that they might appear to the
natives to be a diferent race of men from those who had brought
i i many calamities upon tlheir country . From this itheme, of

lwhich I have traced only the great lines, it is manifcll that Las

(Calas had fbrmcd ideas concerning the method of treating the
lIndians, imilar to tlofe by which the Jesuits afterwards carried
-n their great operations in another part of the fnme continent.
) I fppfcd that the luropeans, by availing themfclvcs of that

q IIc rca, dtc. 2. lib. iv. c. .

afccndant

ascendant which they pofeffed in consequence of their superior B O 0 K;

Ill.

progress in science and improvement, might gradually form the _
minds of the Americans to relish those comforts of which they 'S7'
were deflitute, might train them to the arts of civil life, and
render them capable of its funtions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council of the Indies Favourably

this project appeared not only chimerical, but dangerous in a
high degree. They deemed the faculties of the Americans to
be naturally so limited, and their indolence so excessive, that
any attempt to inifruc or improve them would be fruitless.
They contended, that it would be extremely imprudent to give
the command of a country extending above a thousand miles
along the coast, to a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a firan-
ger to the affairs of the world, and unacquainted with the arts
of government. Las Casas, far from being dilcouraged with a
repulse, which he had reason to expc&, hIad recourse once more
to the Flemifs favourites, whlo zealously patronized his fchlemne,
merely because it had been rejctled by the Spanish liniflers.
They prevailed with their maier, whlo had lately been railed to 1,,,.
the Imperial dignity, to refer the consideration of this measure
to a Iclcct llnlcber of his privy-counfllors ; and as Las Casas
cxccltc! agr;lifl the Inembers of the council of thle indies, as
partial and intercitied, all of them were excludcld. The dc-
cilion of menC cllofen by reconimnendation of' te I'lcnilgs, was
pcrIfetly conlfolrmable to their sentiments. They xwarmlyl ap-
proved of I..s Cfiis's plan ; and gave orders bor carrying it into
execution, but rceh icecd the territory allotted Ilin to three IIun-
ldrcd miles alon, the coafl of Cmana, allowing imn, llow-
ever, to extend it as far as he pleaied towards thle interior part
of the country '.
' Gonara , !'!. (;.licr. c. 77. tIcrrcr., d<cc. z. lib. iv. 3. vicde, lib. xix. c 5

TllIs

B o0 o THIS determination did not pass uncenfured. Almost every

.--,--. person who had been in the Weft Indies exclaimed against it,
A fldn' dc- and supported their opinion so confidently, and with such plau-

ie fible reasons, as made it advisable to pause and to review the

the lode of subjeCt more deliberately. Charles himself, though accustomed,
treating the
Indians. at this early period of his life, to adopt the sentiments of his

ministers, with such fubmiflion and deference as did not pro-
mise that decisive vigour of'mind which distinguished his riper
years, began to suspeCt that the eagerness with which the Fle-
mings took part in every affair relating to America, flowed
from fore improper motive, and discovered an inclination to
examine in person into the slate of the question concerning the
character of the Americans, and the proper manner of treating
June zo. them. An opportunity of making this inquiry, with great

advantage, oon occurred. Quevedo, the bishop of Darien,
who had accompanied Pedrarias to the continent in the year
one thousand five hundred and thirteen, happened to land at
Barcelona, where the court then resided. It was soon known,
that his sentiments concerning the talents and disposition of the
Indians differed from those of Las Casas; and Charles naturally
concluded, that by confronting two refpedable persons, who,
during their long residence in America, had full leisure to ob-
serve the manners of the people whom they pretended to de-
scribe, he might be able to discover which of them had formed
his opinion with the greatest discernment and accuracy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was appointed. The em-

peror appeared with extraordinary pomp, and took his feat on
a throne in the great hall of the palace. I-is principal cour-
tiers attended. Don Diego Columbus, admiral of the Indies,
was summoned to be prcfent. The bilhop of Darien was called

'1 upon

upon firfl to deliver his opinion. He, in a short discourse, B o o K
lamented the fatal desolation of America, by the extinction of ---
so many of its inhabitants; he acknowledged that this mufft be '1r7'
imputed, in fonm degree, to the exceflive rgour and inconfi-
derate proceedings of the Spaniards; but declared, that all tlc
people of the New World, whom he had seen either in the
continent or in the islands, appeared to him to be a race of men
marked out, by the inferiority of their talents, for fcrvitude,
and whom it would be impossible to infitrutl or improve, unlcfs
they were kept under the continual infpction of a matter. Las
Casas, at greater length, and with more fervour, defended his
own system. He rejected with indignation the idea that any
race of men was born to servitude, as irreligious and inhumane.
He asserted, that the faculties of the Americans were not na-
turally despicable, but unimproved; that they were capable of
receiving instruction in the principles of religion, as well as of
acquiring the industry and arts which would qualify them for
the various offices of social life; that the mildness and timidity
of their nature rendered them so fubmiliive and docile, that they
might be led and formed with a gentle hand. He profeled,
that his intentions in proposing the fclieme now under confi-
deration were pure and difintercfcd; and thoughl, from the
accomplifnhent of his designs, inefcimable benefits would rc-
fult to the crown of Castile, he never had claimed, nor ver
would receive any recompence upon that account.

CIIARLES, after hearing both, and consulting with ]his mi- Tlicmem
nillers, did not think himiclf fuflicicintly informed to cflablilh "f L:' cir.3

aFroveed of.

any general arrangement with rcfpedt to the flatc of the In- i, So.
dians; but as he had prfc: confidence in the integrity of Ias
Calas, and as even the binlop of Darien admitted his flicnee

to

B 0 0 K to be of such importance, that a trial should be made of its es-
_ -- feets, he issued a patent, granting him the dif-rit in Cumana

L'517. formerly-mentioned, with full power to eflablifh a colony there

according to his own plan

is prepara- LAS CASAS pufled on the preparations for his voyage with
;ion> for exe-
-uting it. his usual ardour. But, either from his own inexperience in

the conduc of affairs, or from the secret opposition of the Spa-
nifh nobility, who universally dreaded the success of an infli-
tution that might rob them of the industrious and useful hands
which cultivated their estates, his progrcfs in engaging hus-
bandmen and labourers was extremely flow, and he could pre-
vail on no more than two hundred to accompany him to Cu-

miana.

Departs for NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal. With this flen-
America, and
meets ith der train, hardly sufficient to take possession of such a vast ter-
forrbtlable ritory, and altogether unequal to any attempt towards civilizing

its inhabitants, he set fail. The first place at which he touched
was the island of Porto-Rico. There he received an account
of a new obflacle to the execution of his scheme, more infu-
perable than any he had hitherto encountered. When he left
America in the year one thousand five hundred and seventeen,
the Spaniards had little intercourse with any part of the con-
tinent, except the countries adjacent to the gulf of Darien.
But as every species of internal industry began to stagnate in
-Iifpaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the natives, the
Spaniards were deprived of those hands with which they had
hitherto carried on their operations, this prompted them to try

' Ilerrcra, dec. z. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfola Annales d Aragon, 74. 9. Rc-
-nifal l-ift. Gener. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.

9 'various

various expedients for supplying that loss. Considerable num- B o o lK
bers of negroes were imported; but, on account of their exor-
bitant price, many of the planters could not afford to purchase '517'
them. In order to procure slaves at an easier rate, ome of
these fitted out vessels to cruize along the coait o the continent.
In places where they found themselves inferior in strength, they
traded with the natives, and gave European toys in exchange
for the plates of gold which they wore as ornaments; but,
wherever they could surprise or overpower the Indians, they
carried them off by force, and fold them as slaves in Hifpa-
niola '. In those predatory excurions the most atrocious ads
of violence and cruelty were committed. The Spanish name
was held in detestation all over the continent. Whenever any
ships appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the woods, or
rushed down to the shore in arms, to repel those hated disturbers
of their tranquillity. They forced ome parties of the Spaniards
to retreat with precipitation; they cut off others; and in the
violence of their resentment against the whole nation, they
murdered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal had prompted
them to fettle in the province of Cumana . This outrage
againfl persons revered for their sanity, excited such indigna-
tion among the people of Hispaniola, who, notwithfianding all
their licentious and cruel proceedings, were possessed with a
wonderful zeal for religion, and a superstitious rcfped for its
ministers, that they determined to inflict exemplary punifl-
ment, not only upon the perpetrators of that crime, but upon
the whole nation. With this view, they gave the command of
five flips and three hundred men to Diego Ocampo, with or-
ders to lay waste the country of Cumana with fire and sword,
and to transport all the inhabitants as slaves to Hifipaniola.

' IIerrcra, (dec. 3. lib ,

i c. 3. Oviedo Hist. lib. xix. c. 3.
TVOL. I. I h This

B 0 0 K This armament Las Casas found at Porto-Rico, in its way to

--. j the continent; and as Ocampo refused to defer his voyage, he
5'17. immediately perceived that it would be impoflible to attempt the

execution of his pacific plan in a country which was the feat of

war and desolation .

?2th April. IN order to provide against the effects of this unfortunate
fLurus,'t incident, he set fail directly for St. Domingo, leaving his fol-

lhern lowers cantoned out among the planters in Porto-Rico. From

many concurring causes, the reception which Las Casas met
with in Hispaniola was very unfavourable. In his negociations
for the relief of the Indians, he had censured the conduct of
his countrymen fettled there with such honest severity, as ren-
dered him univerAally odious to them. They confidered their
own ruin as the inevitable consequence of his success. They
were now elated with hope of receiving a large recruit of
slaves from Cumana, which must be relinquished if Las Casas
were affifled in fettling his projected colony there. Figueroa,
in consequence of the inftrudtions he had received in Spain,
had made an experiment concerning the capacity of the Indians,
which was represented as decisive against the system of Las Casas.
He collected in Hispaniola a good number of the natives, and
fettled them in two villages, leaving them at perfec liberty,
and with the uncontrouled diretion of their own aions. But

that people, accustomed to a mode of life extremely different,
incapable of assuming new habits at once, and dejected tod
witl their own misfortunes as well as those of their country,
exerted f. Aittle induflry in cultivating the ground, appeared b
devoid of iblicitude or foresight in providing for their own
wants, and were such flrangers to arrangement in conducting

T IIcrrcra, dec. z. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

their

their affairs, that the Spaniards pronounced them incapable of B o o K
being formed to live like men in social life, and confiderecd -
them as children, who should be kept under the perpetual tute- 15'7-
lage of persons superior to themselves in wisdom and sagacity Y.

NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumfiances, which alie- Final m;rcar-

ri ge of his

nated the people to whom he applied from himself and firom fch:me.
his meaures, Las Casas, by his ativity and perseverance, by
some conceflions, and many threats, obtained at length a finall
body of troops to protea him and his colony at their first land-
ing. But upon his return to Porto-Rico, he found that the
diseases of the climate had been fatal to several of his people; and
that others having got employment in that island, refused to
follow him. With the handful that remained, he set fail and
landed inCumana. Ocampo had executed his commiflon in that
province with such barbarous rage, having mafTacrcd many of
the inhabitants, sent others in chains to Hispaniola, and forced
the reft to fly for shelter to the woods, that the people of a
small colony, which he had planted at a place which he namcd
Toledo, were ready to perilh for want in a dcfolatcd country.
There, however, Las Casas was obliged to fix his refidlcncc,
though deserted botli by the troops appointed to protc& him,
and by those under the command of Ocampo, who forcfhw and
dreaded the calamities to which he muf be cxpofcd in that
wretched station. He made thle bess provision in his power
for the fafcty and filbfifience of hlis followers ; but as his iutmofi:
efforts.availcd little towards fccuring cither the one or the other,
he returned to Hirfpaniola, in order to solicit more cf'cCual aid
for the preservation of men, who from confidence in hinm had

y Ilrrcr., d!cc. 2. lib . c. 5.

I-IH 2 vceltured

B 0 0 K ventured into a post of so much danger. Soon after his depar-

III.
, _y-- ture, the natives, having discovered the feeble and defenceless

1517. slate of the Spaniards, assembled secretly, attacked them with,

the fury natural to men exasperated by many injuries, cut off
a good number, and compelled the reft to fly in the utmost
consternation to the island of Cubagua. The small colony
fettled there, on account of the pearl fishery, catching the pa-
nic with which they had been seized, abandoned the island,
and not a Spaniard remained in any part of the continent, or
adjacent islands, from the gulf of Pacia to the borders of Da-
rien. Astonished at such a succession of disasters, Las Casas
was ashamed to hew his face after this fatal termination of all
his splendid schemes. He shut himself up in the convent of the
Dominicans at St.'Domingo, and soon after assumed the habit
of that order ..

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from Cumana hap-

pened in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-one,
I have chosen to trace the progress of Las Casas negociations
from their first rife to their final issue without interruption.
His system was the object of long and attentive difcuflion; and
though his efforts in behalf of the oppressed Americans, partly
from his own rashness and imprudence, and partly from the
malevolent oppofit.on of his adversaries, were not attended with
that success which he promired with too sanguine confidence,
they gave rife to various regulations which were of some benefit
to that unhappy people. I return now to the hiflory of the
Spanifl discoverics, as they occur in the order of time .

HI- errera, dec. 2. ib. x. c. 5. Idc. 3. lib. ii. c. , 4, 5. Ovicd) Iil. lib. 19.

c. 5. Gomara, c. 77. Davila Padilla, lib. i.c. 9. 97 Rcnhic l Hill. Gcn. lib. I1. c. 22,
23. ' lerrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 5. p. 329.

I DIEGO

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in the year one B 0 0 K

III..

thousand five hundred and eleven, still retained the government --
of that island, as the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though Nea dico-
he seldom acknowledged his superior, and aimed at rendering veriestowardi-
his own authority altogether independent . Under his pru-
dent administration Cuba became one of the most flourishing of
the Spanish settlements. The fame of this allured many per-
sons from the other colonies, in hopes of finding there either
some permanent establishment, or some employment for their
ativity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all the islands occupied by
the Spaniards, and as the ocean, which firetches beyond- it to--
wards that quarter, had not hitherto been explored, these cir-
cumfiances naturally invited the inhabitants to attempt new dif-
coveries. An expedition for this purpose, in which activity
and resolution might condut to sudden wealth, was more
suited to the genius of the age, than the patient indufiry requi-
site in clearing ground, and manufa&uring sugar. Instigated
by this spirit, several officers, who had served under Pedrarias
in Darien, entered into an. association to undertake a voyage of
discovery. They persuaded Francisco Hernandez Cordova,
an opulent planter in Cuba, and a man of diftinguifled
courage, to join with them in the adventure, and chore him
to be their commander. Velasquez not only approved of
the design, but aflifted in carrying it on. As the veterans
from Darien were extremely indigent, he and Cordova ad-
vanced money for purchasing three finall veflels, and furnifli-
ing them with every thing requisite either for traffic or for
war, a hundred and ten men embarked on board of them,.
and failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of February one.

b lercr.i, dec. 2. lib, ii. c. 19.

thoufandi

B 0 0 1I thousand five hundred and seventeen. By the advice of their
--- --' chief pilot, Antonio Alaminos, who had served under the firit

15 7. admiral Columbus, they flood directly weft, relying on the

opinion of that great navigator, who uniformly maintained
that a westerly course would lead to the most important disco-
veries.

ON the twenty-firft day after their departure from St. Jago,

they saw land, which proved to be Cape Cotoche, the ealtern
point of that large peninsula projecing from the continent of
Yucatan. America, which still retains its original name of 1Yucatan. As

they approached the shore, five canoes came off full of people
decntly clad in cotton garments; an aftonifling fpedacle to
the Spaniards, who had found every other part of America
pofleffed by naked savages. Cordova endeavourcd by small
presents to gain the good-will of these people. They, though
amazed at the strange objeas now presented for the first time to
their view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habitations, with
an appearance of cordiality. They landed accordingly, and as
they advanced into the country, they observed with new won-
der some large houses built with stone. But they soon found
that, if the people of Yucatan had made progress in improve-
ment beyond their countrymen, they were likewise more artful
and warlike. For though the Caziquc reccived Cordova with
many tokens of fricndflip, he had pofled a considerable body of
his fubjecLs in ainbufh behind a thicket, who upon a signal
given by him, rufled out and attacked the Spaniards with
great boldness, and tome degree of martial order. At the first
flight of their arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were wounded;
but the Indians wcrc firuck with such terror by the fuddcn cx-
plosion of the firearms, and so surprised at the execution done

8 by

by them, by the cross-bows, and by the other weapons of their B K
new enemies, that they fled precipitately, and Cordova quitted ---
a country where he had met with fich a fierce reccption, carry- Is2
ing off two prisoners, together with the ornaments of a finall
temple, which he plundered in his retreat.

I-IE continued his course towards the weft without losing

fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth day arrived at Cam- C3'"np^achy
peachy. There the natives received them more hofipitably;
but the Spaniards were much surprised that on all the extensive
coast along which they had failed, and which they imagined to
be a large island, they had not observed any river '. As their
water began to fail, they advanced, in hopes of finding a sup-
ply; and at length they discovered the mouth of a river at
Potonchan, some leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to protec the sailors

while employed in filling the casks; but notwithflanding this
precaution, the natives rushed down upon them withl such fulry,
and in such numbers, that forty-feven of the Spaniards were
killed upon the spot, and one man only of the whole body
escaped unhurt. Their commander, though wounded in
twelve different places, direded the retreat with presence of
mind equal to the courage witl which he had led them on in
the engagement, and with much difliculty they regained their
flips. After this fatal repulse, nothing remained but to hafnen
back to Cuba with their fliattered forces. In their paflhge
thither they uffrcrcd tle molt cxquifitc liflrels for want of
water, that men wounded and sickly, hlut up in finall veflls,

c See NOTE XXVI.

andt

B 0O K and exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can be supposed to

Ill.
* -- - endure. Some of them, finking under there calamities, died by

152Z . the way; Cordova, their commander, expired oon after they

landed in Cuba d

NOTWITHSTANDING the difaflrous conclusion of this expe-

dition, it contributed rather to animate than to damp a spirit of

Voyage of enterprize among the Spaniards. They had discovered an ex-
-GrlJalva.

.tensive country, situated at no great distance from Cuba, fertile
in appearance, and possessed by a people far superior in im-
provement to any hitherto known in America. Though they
had carried on little commercial intercourse with the natives,
they had brought off some ornaments of gold, not considerable
in value, but o singular fabric. These circumstances, re-
lated with the exaggeration natural to men desirous of height-
ening the merit of their own exploits, were more than sufficient
to excite romantic hopes and expectations. Great numbers
offered to engage in a new expedition. Velasquez, solicitous
to diftinguifl himself by some service so meritorious, as might
entitle him to claim the government of Cuba independent of
the admiral, not only encouraged their ardour, but at his own
expence fitted out four flips for the voyage. Two hundred
and forty volunteers, among -whom were several persons of
rank and fortune, embarked in this enterprise. The command
of it was given to Juan de Grijalva, a young man of known
merit and courage, with inflru'tions to observe with attention;'
the nature of the countries which he flould clifcover, to barter
for gold, and if circuinflances were inviting, to fettle a colony

d I-Icrrcra, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. Hillor. Verdadera dela Conquiflade la Nueva

Efpana por Beinal Diaz del Callillo, cap. 1-7. Ovicdo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomara, c. 52.
P. Martyr de infulis nuper inventis, p. 329.

in

in iome proper flation. He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on B o Eo
the eighth of April one thousand five hundred and eighteen.
The pilot Alaminos held the fame course as in the former 'SI'
voyage, but the violence of the currents carrying the ships to Ncv pain.
the ofuth, the first land which they made was the iand of
Cozuw/cl, to the east of Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to May 3,
the woods and mountains at their approach, they made no long
flay there, and without any remarkable occurrence they reached
Potonchan on the opposite fide of the peninsula. The desire
of avenging their countrymen who had been slain there, con-
curred with their ideas of good policy, in prompting them
to land, that they might chaflife the Indians of that diftric:
with such exemplary rigour, as might fIrike terror into all
the people around them. But though they disembark-
ed all their troops, and carried ashore ome field-pieces, the.
Indians fought with such courage, that the Spaniards gained
the victory with difficulty, and were confirmed in their opi-
nion that the inhabitants of this country would prove more for-
midable enemies than any they had met with in other parts of
America. rom Potonchan, they continued their voyage to-
wards the weft, keeping as near as possible to the fiore, and
calling anchor every evening, from dread of the dangerous ac-
cidents to which they might be expold in an unknown fca.
During the day, their eyes were turned continually towards
land, with a mixture of surprise and wonder at the beauty of
the country, and the novelty of the objects which they beheld.
Many villages were fcattcrcd along the coast, in which they
could diflinguifli hofecs of lone that appeared white and lofty
at a diflance. In the warmth of their admiration, they fan-
cied thice to be cities adorned with towers and pinaclcs; and
one of the oIldiers happening to remark that this country rc-

VOL . I.1 i fcmlcd

B o0 IK lenmbled Spain in its appearance, Grijalva, with universal ap-
\-- -- plause, called it New Spain, the name which still distinguishes

5- this extensive and opulent province of the Spanish empire in

June 9. America. They landed in a river which the natives called
Tabao. Tabaco, and the fame of their viaory at Potonchan having

reached this place, the Cazique not only received them amica-
bly, but bestowed presents upon them of such value, as con-
firmed the high ideas which the Spaniards had formed with
respeCt to the wealth and fertility of the country. These ideas
were raised still higher by what occurred at the place where
they next touched. This was considerably to the weft of Ta-
Guaxaca. bafco, in the province since known by the name of Guaxaca.

There they were received with the refpe& paid to superior be-
ings. The peope perfumed them as they landed with incense
of gum copal, and presented to them as offerings the most
choi:e delicacies of their country. They were extremely fond
of trading with them, and in fix days the Spaniards obtained
ornaments of gold, of curious workmanfip, to the value of
fifteen thouflmd pesos, in exchange for European toys of small
price. The two prisoners whom Cordova had brought from
Yucatan, had hitherto fcrvcd as interpreters; but as they did
not underfland the language of this country, the Spaniards
learned from the natives by signs, that they were fuljes of a
great monarch called Montczuma, hose dominion extended
over that anld inany other provinces. Leaving this place, with
xwliich lie had so mincli rcailn to be pleastd, Grijalva continucI
June 19; his courl-c toward(; 'he weft. Ile landed on a finall illand,

vliich lie :nali'd tlc I1le of Sacrificcs, bccaule there the Sa-

'i.l;lS b1 n.'.!:", V'> ihlc firll timel, the horiid fpelc acle of hu-

manl v i 'lil,., vwhilch tc hab:,alroiis 'llperflition of the natives

St. Johin de i i n i
'u;.i. oflirccd to their gods. 1Ic touched at another all illaml,

":!: whlicli

which he called St. John de Ulua. From this place he dif- B 00 K

111.

patched Pedro de Alvarado, one of his officers, to Velasquez,
with a full account of the important discoveries which lie had
made, and with all the treasure that he had acquired by traf-
sicking with the natives. After the departure of Alvarado, he
himself, with the remaining veflils, proceeded along the coast
as far as the river Panuco, the country till appearing to be well
peopled, fertile, and opulent.

SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended, that it was not Rcafons cor

enough to have discovered those delightful rgilns, or to have "ot lcj'; a
performed, at their different landing-places, the lempty cere-
mony of taking pofeffion of them for the crowii of (. liile,
and that their glory was incomplete, unless they plntc:! a co-
lony in some proper station, which might not only fcLre the
Spanish nation a footing in the country, but, witht the rein-
forcements which they were certain of receiving, might gra-
dually 1ibjed the whole to the dominion of their ibvccrign.
But the squadron had now been above five months at ea; the
greatest part of their provisions was exhaufled, and wlat re-
mained of their flores so much corrupted by the eat of the
climate, as to be almost unfit for use; they had loft ftume men
by death; others were sickly; tle country was crowded with
people who seemed to be intelligent as well as brave; and they
were under the government of one powerful monarch, who
could bring them to a againfl their invaders with united
force. To plant a colony under so many circunmfances of dlif-
advantage, was to cxpofe it to inevitable deflruódion. Gri-
jalva, though poffced both of ambition and courage, was dcl-
titute of the superior talents capable of obrming or executing
such a great plan. I-e judged it more prudent to rcturn to

I i ? Cuba,.

B O O K Cuba, having fulfilled the purpose of his voyage, and accom-

IIt.

i-v- plifhed all that the armament which he commanded enabled
rds8. him to perform. He returned to St. Jago de Cuba, on the

twenty-fixth of Oober, from which he had taken his de-
parture about fix months before".

Preparatons THIS was the longest as well as the most successful voyage
for another
cexpedition. which the Spaniards had hitherto made in the New World.

They had discovered that Yucatan was not an illand as they
had supposed, but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their course for many hundred
miles along a coast formerly unexplored, stretching at first to-
wards the weft, and then turning to the north; all the country
which they had discovercd appeared to be no less valuable than
extensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba, Velasquez,
transported with success so far beyond his most sanguine ex-
peaations, immediately dispatched a person of confidence to
carry this important intelligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich
productions of the countries which had been discovered by his
means, and to solicit such an increase of authority as might en-
able and encourage him to attempt the conquest of them. With-
out waiting for the return of his messenger, or for the arrival
of Grijalva, of whom he was become so jealous or distrustful,
that he resolvcd no longer to employ him, he began to prepare
such a powerful armament, as might prove equal to an en-
terprile of so much danger and importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Vclafquez was now in-
tent, terminated in conqucfts of greater moment than what the

" I-Irrcra, dec. 11. lib. iii. c. , z. , 10. Bernal Diaz. c. 8 17. Oviclo Ilill.
Jb. xvii. c. 9. 20. Gomara, c. 4'.

Spaniards

Spaniards had hitherto atchieved, and led them to the know- B o o K
ledge of a people, who, if compared with such of the Ameri-
cans as were then known, may be confidered as highly civil- '58'
ifed; it is proper to pause before we proceed to the history
of events extremely different from those which we have already
related, in order to take a view of the slate of the New World
when firfr discovered, and to contemplate the policy and man-
ners of the rude uncultivated tribes, that occupied all the parts
of it, with which the Spaniards were at this time acquainted.

T I r.

# BOOK IV.

T H E
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

B 0 0 K IV.

WENTY-SIX years had now elapsed since Columbus B 0 K
conduaed the people of Europe to the New World.

During that period the Spaniards had made great progress in Americpart
exploring its various regions. They had visited all the ifands thcn known.
scattered in different clusters through that part of the ocean
which flows in between North and South America. They had
failed along the eaftcrn coast of the continent fron the river De
la Plata to the bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found that
it firetched without interruption through this vafl portion of
the lobe. Tily had ldifcovered the great Southcrn Ocean,
vh Inclh opcncd new p 'oc5i in ltli.t (uartcr. l'licy lhad ac-
quired kin o kInowlcclge oft the coa ft )i Florida, 'iicl led t m
to ol)li-\ve tlhe continnllt s it cs it nd.d i i: 11 oppolite dir-ct(in;
and though they pushed their dtilCovcrics no arthcr towards the

norlli

B 00 K north, other nations had visited those parts which they ne-

IV.
v, _ glected. The English, in a voyage, the motives and success

of which shall be related in another part of this Hliftory, had
failed along the coast of America from Labrador to the confines
of Florida; and the Portuguese, in quest of a shorter passage to
the East Indies, had ventured into the northern seas, and
viewed the fame regions . Thus, at the period where I have
chosen to take a view of the state of the New World, its extent
was known almost from its northern extremity to thirty-five
degrees south of the equator. The countries which firetch
from thence to the southern boundary of America, the great
empire of Peru, and the extensive dominions subjea to the
Sovereigns of Mexico, were fill undiscovered.

The v ;,. ex- VHEN we contemplate the New World, the first circum-
tent of the
New World. iance that strikes us is its immense extent. It was not a

small portion of the earth, so inconsiderable that it might
have escaped the observation or research of former ages, which
Columbus discovered. He made known a new hemisphere, of
greater extent than either Europe, or Asia, or Africa, the three
noted divisions of the ancient continent, and not much inferior
in dimensions to a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its magnitude, but for

its position. It firetches from the northern polar circle to a
high southern latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond the
fartihel extremity of the old continent on that fide of the line.
A country of such extent pailcs through all the climates capable
of becoming the habitation of man, and fit for yielding the

' Ilcrrcra, lcc. . lib. vi. c. 1io.

:l: various

various producions peculiar either to the temperate or to the B o0 0
torrid regions of the earth. I_

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the grandeur of the Grand olje1s

it prersntb to

objets which it presents to view is most apt to firike the eye of view.
an observer. Nature seems here to have carried on her opera-
tions with a bolder hand, and to have diflinguifhed the features
of this country by a peculiar magnificence. The mountains of rts moun.
America are much superior in height to those in the other divi- ajins,
ions of the globe. Even the plain of QOito, which may be
confidered as the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above
the ea than the top of the Pyrenecs. This flupendous ridge
of the Andes, no less remarkable for extent than elevation,
rites in different places more than one third above the Pike of
Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient hcmifphere. The
Andes may literally be said to hide their heads in the clouds;
the storms often roll, and the thunder burfis below their fuim-
mits, which, though exposed to the rays of the fun in the centre
of the torrid zone, are covered with everlafling snows .

FROM those lofty mountains descend rivers proportionally ri;vlcs

large, with which the fireams in the ancient continent are
not to be compared, either for length of course, or tle vaRf
body of water which they roll towards the ocean. The Ma-
ragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata, in South America, the NMiffi-
fippi and St. Laurence in North America, flow in such spacious
channels, that, long before they feel the influence of the tide,
they resemble arms of the sea rather than rivers of frefl
water '.

h See NOTI XXVII. c See NOTP. XXVIII.
VOL. I. K k TlrH

B 0 0 X THE lakes of the New World are no less conspicuous for

Iv.

*----' grandeur than its mountains and rivers. There is nothing in
es other parts of the globe which resembles the prodigious chain

of lakes in North America. They may properly be termed
inland seas of fresh water; and even those of the second or
third class in magnitude, are of larger circuit than the greatcft
lake of the ancient continent.

Its form fa- THE New World is of a form extremely favourable to com-
vourable to
coirlmele . mercial intercourse. When a continent, like Africa, is com-

posed of one vast solid mass, unbroken by arms of the ea pe-
netrating into its interior parts, with few large rivers, and
those at a considerable distance from each other, the greater part
of it seems deftiried to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be
debarred from any ative or enlarged communication with the
reft of mankind. When, like Europe, a continent is opened
by inlets of the ocean of vast extent, such as the Mediterranean
and Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coast is broken by deep
bays advancing far into the country, such as the Black Sea,
the gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam, and of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled with large and
fertile islands, and the continent itself watered with a variety
of navigable rivers, those regions may be said to porfefs what-
ever can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants in com-
merce and improvement. In all these refpecs America may bear
a comparison with the other quarters of the globe. The gulf
of Mexico, which flows in between North and South America,
may be confidcred as a Mediterranean ea, which opens a ma-
ritime commerce with all the fertile countries by which it is
encircled. The islands fcattcred in it are inferior only to those

3 inl

in the Indian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and in B O O K
value. As we stretch along the northern division of the Ame- . -,.
rican hemisphere, the Bay of Chefapeak presents a spacious
inlet, which conduEts the navigator far into the interior parts
of provinces no less fertile than extensive; and if ever the pro-
grefs of culture and population shall mitigate the extreme
rigour of the climate in the more northern difiridts of America,
Hudson's Bay may become as subservient to commercial inter-
course in that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Europe.
The other great portion of the New World is encompassed on
every fide by the sea, except one narrow neck, which separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean; and though it be not
opened by spacious bays or arms of the ea, its interior parts
are rendered accefible by a number of large rivers, fed by so
many auxiliary fireams, flowing in such various diretions,
that, without any aid from the hand of indufiry and art, an
inland navigation may be carried on through all the provinces
from the river De la Plata to the gulf of Paria. Nor is this
bounty of nature confined to the southern division of America;
its northern continent abounds no less in rivers which are na-
vigable almost to their sources, and by its immense chain of
lakes provision is made for an inland communication, more
extensive and commodious than in any quarter of the globe.
The countries firetching from the gulf of Darien on one fide,
to that of California on the other, which form the chain that
binds the two parts of the American continent together, are
not destitute of peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide
is wafled by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by the Pacific.
Some of their rivers flow into the former, foine into the latter,
and secure to them all the commercial benefits that may result
from a commnuication with both.

K k 2 Irr

B O 0 K BUT what most diftinguiihes America from other parts of

IV.

---'- the earth, is the peculiar temperature of its climate, and the
T]emperarule
of its ch'" different laws to which it is subjed with refpet to the difiri-
.neie'. bution of heat and cold. We cannot determine precisely the

portion of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by mea-
furing its diflance from the equator. The climate of a country
is asseted, in some degree, by its elevation above the ea, by
the extent of continent, by the nature of the foil, the height
of adjacent mountains, and many other circumstances. The
influence of these, however, is, from various causes, less con-
fiderable in the greater part of the ancient continent; and from
knowing the position of any country there, we can pronounce
with more certainty what will be the warmth of its climate,
and the nature of its producions.

prcdo'r,i- TiE maxims which are founded upon observation of our
nancCo colU. 1hcifphere will not apply to the other. There, cold predo-

minates. The rigour of the frigid zone extends over half of
that which should be temperate by its position. Countries
where the grape and the fig Ihould ripen, are buried under
snow one half of the year; and lands situated in the fame pa-
rallel with the most fertile and best cultivated provinces in Eu-
rope, are chilled with perpetual frofis, which almost defiroy
the power of vegetation d. As we advance to those parts of
America which lie in the fame parallel with provinces of Alia
and Africa, blessed with an uniform enjoyment of such genial
warmth as is most friendly to life and vegetation, the dominion
of cold continues to be felt, and winter, though during a short
period, often reigns with extreme severity. If we proceed
along the American continent into the torrid zone, we flall

See NOTE XXIX.

find

find the cold prevalent in the New World extending itself also B o o K
to this region of the globe, and mitigating the excess of .,-'
its fervour. While the negro on the coast of Africa is
scorched with unremitting heat, the inhabitant of Peru breathes
an air equally mild and temperate, and is perpetually
shaded under a canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts the
fierce beams of the fun, without obftruaing his friendly in-
fluence . Along the eastern coast of America, the climate,
though more similar to that of the torrid zone in other parts of
the earth, is nevertheless considerably milder than in those
countries of Aiia and Africa which lie in the fame latitude.
If from the southern tropic we continue our progress to the
extremity of the American continent, we meet with frozen
itas, and countries horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for
cold, sooner than in the north .

VAROUS caufcs combine in rendering the climate of Ame- Caurcsotofiis.

rica so extremely different from that of the ancient continent.
Though the utmost extent of America towards the north be
not yet discovercd, we know that it advances nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter have large eas to
the north, which are open during part of the year; and even
when covered with ice, the wind that blows over them is less
intencely cold than that which blows over land in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land firetches from the river
St. Laurence towards the pole, and fprcads out immcnly to
the weft. A chain of enormous mountains, covered with inow

· Voyage de Ulloa, tom, i. p. .53. Anson's Voyage, p. 18 S.
f AnCon's Voyage, p. 74.; and Voyage de Qiros, chcz HIIt. Gen. dcs Voyages,
tom. xiv. p. 83. Richard Iifl. Natur. do 'Air, ii. 305, &c.

7 and

B 0 0 K and ice, runs through all this dreary region. The wind, in

1V.

j passing over such an extent of high and frozen land, becomes

so impregnated with cold, that it acquires a piercing keenness,
which it retains in its progress through warmer climates, and
is not entirely mitigated until it reach the Gulf of Mexico.
Over all the continent of North America, a north-weflerly wind
and exceflive cold are synonymous terms. Even in the most
sultry weather, the moment that the wind veers to that quar-
ter, its penetrating influence is felt in a transition from heat to
cold, no less violent than sudden. To this powerful cause we
may ascribe the extraordinary dominion of cold, and its violent
inroads into the southern provinces in that part of the globe

OTHER causes, no less remarkable, diminish the ative power

of heat in those parts of the American continent which lie be-
tween the tropics. In all that portion of the globe, the wind
blows in an invariable direction from east to tweft. As this
wind holds its course across the ancient continent, it arrives at
the countries which firetch along the western shore of Africa,
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it hath colleced from
the sultry plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the African
defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the region of the
earth which feels the most fervent heat, and is exposcd to the
unmitigated ardour of the torrid zone. But this fame wind
which brings such an acceflion of warmth to the countries lying
between the river of Senegal and Cafraria, traverses the Atlan-
tic Ocean before it reaches the American fhiorc. It is cooled in
its pafTage over this vast body of water, and is felt as a rcfi-cfh-
ing gale along the coafis of Brail '', and Guiana, rendering

lg Ciharlcvoix [lil. (! Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Illil. gcnela!c Voyages, tom. x<v. 21z , &c.
h Scc NO i E XXX.

thec c

these countries, though among the warmest in America, tem- B 0 K

IV.

perate, when compared with those which lie opposite to them -
in Africa'. As this wind advances in its course across America,
it meets with iinmenfe plains, covered with impenetrable so-
refis, or occupied by large rivers, marshes, and fagnating
waters, where it can recover no considerable degree of heat.
At length it arrives at the Andes, which run from north to
south through the whole continent. In pasing over their ele-
vated and fiozen summits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them hardly feel the ardour
to which they seem exposed by their situation '. In the other
provinces of America, from Tierra Firnin westward to the ilex-
ican empire, the heat of the climate is tempered, in some
places, by the elevation of the land above the ea, in others,
by their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by the enormous
mountains scattered over this trat. The islands of America in
the Torrid Zone are either finall or mountainous, and are
fanned alternately by refreshing sea and land breezes.

THE caues of the extraordinary cold towards the southern

limits of America, and in the eas beyond it, cannot be afccr-
tained in a manner equally satisfying. It was long fippoficd
that a vail continent, ditfinguifhed by the name of eirr.
.uit/lailis Incognita, lay between tle southern extremity of
America and the AntarCtic pole. The fame principles which
account for the extraordinary degree of cold in the northern
regions of America, were employed in order to explain that
which is felt at Cape Horn and the adjacent countries. The
immense extent of the southern continent, and the large

i Sec NOTE XXXI. k Acofla Ilif. Novi Orbis, lib. i;.c. ii . uflnbn ll fl.
Nature!ce, &c, tonm. ii. 512, &c ix. 107, &c. Olborn's Cullea. of Voy:Igc', ii. p. st,:.

rivers

B 0 0 c rivers which it poured into the ocean, were mentioned and

c-- admitted by philosophers as causes sufficient to occasion the

unusual sensation of cold, and the still more uncommon an-
pearances of frozen seas in that region of the globe. But the
imaginary continent to which such influence was ascribed, hav-
ing been earched for in vain, and the space which it was sup-
posed to occupy having been found to be an open ea, new
conjectures mufl be formed with refpea to the causes of a tem-
perature of climate, so extremely different from that which we
experience in countries removed at the fame diflance from the
opposite pole '.

Cond;tion AFTER contemplating those permanent and charaEteriflic
whein firll
di!covciL,. qualities of the American continent, which arie from the pe-

culiarity of its situation, and the disposition of its parts, the
next object that merits attention is its condition when first dif-
covered, as far as that depended upon the industry and opera-
tions of man. The effets of human ingenuity and labour
are more extensive and considerable, than even our own vanity
is apt at firfi to imagine. When we survey the face of the habi-
table globe, no finall part of that fertility and beauty, which
we ascribe to the hand of Nature, is the work of man. His
efforts, when continued through a fuccefflon of ages, change
the appearance and improve the qualities of the earth. As a
great part of the ancient continent has long been occupied by
nations far advanced in arts and industry, our eye is accustomed'
to view the earth in that form which it assumes when rendered
fit to be the relidencc of a numerous race of men, and to supply
them with nourishment.

See NOTE XXXII.

BUT

BUT in the New World, the state of mankind was ruder, and B K
the aspec of Nature extremely different. Throughout all its ---

Rude and un-

vast regions, there were only two monarchies remarkable for cultivated.
extent of territory, or diflinguilhed by any progress in im-
provement. The reft of this continent was possessed by small
independent tribes, deflitute of arts and indutiry, and neither
capable to correct the defeats, nor desirous to meliorate the con-
dition of that part of the earth allotted to them for their habi-
tation. Countries, occupied by such people, were almost in the
fame slate as if they had been without inhabitants. Immense
forests covered a great part of the uncultivated earth; and as
the hand of industry had not taught the rivers to run in a pro-
per channel, or drained off the stagnating water, many of the
most fertile plains were overflowed with inundations, or con-
verted into marhes. In the southern provinces, where the
warmth of the fun, the moisture of the climate, and the fertility
of the foil, combine in calling forth the molt vigorous powers of
vegetation, the woods are so choked with its rank luxuriance,
as to be almost impervious, and the surface of the ground is
hid from the eye under a thick covering of shrubs and herbs
and weeds. In this state of wild unassisted nature, a great part
of the large provinces in South America, which extend from
the bottom of the Andes to the sea, flill remain. The Euro-
pean colonies have cleared and cultivated a few spots along the
coast, but the original inhabitants, as rude and indolent as ever,
have done nothing to open or improve a country, polncling al-
nmof every advantage of situation and climate. As we advance
towards the northern provinces of America, Nature continues
to wear the fame uncultivated ac, and in proportion as the
rigour of the climate incrcafes, appears more dclfoite and hor-
rid. There, the forests, though not encumbered wilth the fame

VOL. I. L I exuberance

B 0 K exuberance of vegetation, are of equal extent; prodigious
-L-,_ marshes overspread the plains, and few marks appear of hu-

man aivity in any attempt to cultivate or embellish the earth.
No wonder that the colonies ent from Europe were astonished
at their first entrance into the New World. It appeared to
them waste, solitary, and uninviting. When the English be-
gan to fettle in America, they termed the countries of which
they took possession, The Wilderuefs. Nothing but their eager
expecation of finding mines of gold, could have induced the
Spaniards to penetrate through the woods and marshes of Ame-
rica, where, at every ftep, they observed the extreme difference
between the uncultivated face of Nature, and that which it ac-
quires under the forming hand of indufiry and art m.

Unwhole- THE labour and operations of man not only improve and
firom. embellifi the earth, but render it more wholesome, and friendly

to life. When any region lies neglected and deflitute of cul-
tivation, the air stagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters; the surface of the earth, loaded with
rank vegetation, feels not the purifying influence of the fun;
the malignity of the distempers natural to the climate increases,
and new maladies no less noxious are engendered. Accord-
ingly, all the provinces of America, when first discovered,
were found to be remarkably unhealthy. This the Spa-
niards experienced in every expedition ipto the New World,
whether destined for conquest or settlement. Though by
the natural constitution of their bodies, their habitual tem-
peraince, and the persevering vigour of their minds, they
were as much formed as any people in Europe for acive

" See NOTE XXXIII.

service

service in a sultry climate, they felt severely the fatal and per- B ov K
nicious qualities of those uncultivated regions through which --
they marched, or where they endeavoured to plant colonies.
Great numbers were cut off by the unknown and violent diseases
with which they were infected. Such as survived the de-
ftrutive rage of those maladies, were not exempted from the
noxious effects of the climate. They returned to Europe,
according to the description of the early Spanish hitforians,
feeble, emaciated, with languid looks, and complexions of
such a sickly yellow colour, as indicated the unwholesome tem-
perature of the countries where they had resided ".

THE uncultivated state of the New World afflced not only Its animals.

the temperature of the air, but the qualities of its productions.
The principle of life seems to have been less active and vi-
gorous there, than in the ancient continent. Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its climates, the
different species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer in
proportion, than those of the other hemisphere. In the islands,
there were only four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On the continent,
the variety was greater, and though the individuals of each
kind could not fail of multiplying exceedingly, when almofl
unmolefetd by men, who were neither so numerous, nor so
united in society, as to be formidable enemies to the animal
creation, the number of diflinct species must frill be confidered
as extremely finall. Of two hundred different kinds of ani-
Jnals spread over the face of the earth, only about one third

Goinnra -il . . z. 2. Ovicdd I-lill. lib. ii. c. 13. lib. v. c. o. P. Mart.
Ypill. 5.15. Dccad. p. 176.

L 1 2 cxiflcd

B o o K exiffed in America, at the time of its discovery . Nature was

Iv.
L-v_ _not only less prolific in the New World, but he appears like-

wife to have been less vigorous in her productions. The ani-
mals originally belonging to this quarter of the globe appear to
be of an inferior race, neither so robust, nor so fierce, as those
of the other continent. America gives birth to no creature of
such bulk as to be compared with the elephant or rhinoceros,
or that equals the lion and tyger in strength and ferocity P.
The Tapyr of Brasil, the quadruped of the first magnitude in
the New World, is not larger than a calf of fix months old.
The Puma and Jaguar, its fiercef beasts of prey, which the
Europeans have innacurately denominated lions and tygers,
poftefs neither the undaunted courage of the former, nor the
ravenous cruelty of the latter . ' hey are inactive and timid,
hardly formidable to man, and often turn their backs upon the
least appearance of reffirance r. The fame qualities in the cli-
mate of America which stinted the growth, and enfeebled the
spirit, of its native animals, have proved pernicious to such as
have migrated into it voluntarily fiom the other continent, or
have been transported thither by the Europeans '. The bears,
the wolves, the deer of America, are not equal in size to those
of the Old World'. Most of the domestic animals, with which
the Europeans stored the provinces wherein they fettled, have
degenerated with refped either to bulk or quality, in a coun-

* Buffon Hilt. Naturclle, tom. ix. p. 86. P See NOTE XXXIV.
' Buffon Hil. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Magravii Hilt. Nat. Brasil, p. 229.
· Buffon Hill. Natur. ix. 13. 23. Acolta Hill. lib. iv. c. 34. Pifonis Hill. p. 6..

Hlerrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. . lib. x. c. 13. * Churchill, v. p. 691.
Ovallc Relat. of Chili Church. iii. p. io. Sommariode Oviedo, c. 14-22. Voyage
du Des Marchais, iii. 299. ' Buffon Hill. Natur. ix. 103. Kalm Travels,
i. oz. Biet Voy. de France Equinox. p. 339.

try

try whose temperature and foil seem to be less favourable to B K
the firength and perfection of the animal creation . -

THE fame causes, which checked the growth and the vi- Infe'rs and

reptiles..

gour of the more noble animals, were friendly to the propa-
gation and increase of reptiles and infects. Though this is not
peculiar to the New World, and those odious tribes, the off-
spring of heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every part of
the torrid zone; they multiply falter, perhaps, in America, and
grow to a more monfirous bulk. As this country is, on the
whole, less cultivated, and less peopled, than the other quar-
ters of the earth, the active principle of life waftes its force in
productions of this inferior form. The air is often darkened with
clouds of insets, and the ground covered with flocking and nox-
ious reptiles. The country around Porto-Bcllo swarms with toads
in such multitudes, as hide the surface of the earth. At Guya-
quil, finakes and vipers are hardly less numerous. Carthagena
is infested with numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not only
the cattle but inhabitants . In the islands, legions of ants
have, at different times, consumed every vegetable production ,
and left the earth entirely bare, as if it had been burnt with
fire. The damp forefis, and rank foil of the countries on the
banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem with almost every
offensive and poisonous creature, which the power of a sultry
fun can quicken into life .

" See NOTE XXXV. X Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. Sg.
Id. . 147. Herrera, dec. It. lib. iii. c. 3. 19. Y See NOTE XXXVI.

" Voyage de Condamine, p. 167. Guinllla. iii. 20o, &c. Hll. gener.. des Voyages,

xiv. 317. Ddmont Mmloires fur a Louilianc, i. 1o8. Sornmario de Oviedo,
c. 52-6z..

TnE

B O 1 T-HE birds of the New World are not distinguished by qua-

Iv.
_i--b- lities so conspicuous and charaOcLriftical, as those which we

Bird have observed in its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of

man, and less affeced by the changes which his induitry and
labour make upon the state of the earth. They have a greater
propensity to migrate from one country to another, and can
gratify this inflinc of their nature without difficulty or danger.
Hence the number of birds common to both continents is much
greater than that of quadrupeds; and even such as are peculiar to
America nearly resemble those with which mankind were ac-
quainted in imilar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The
American birds of the torrid zone, like those of the fame cli-
mate in Asia and Africa, are decked in plumage, which dazzles
the eye with the, vivid beauty of its colours, but nature, satis-
fled with clothing them in this gay dress, has denied most of
them that melody of found, and variety of notes, which catches
and delights the ear. The birds of the temperate climates
there, in the fame manner as in our continent, are less fplen-
did in their appearance, but, in compensation for that defect,
have all the power and sweetness of music in their voice. In
some diftrits of America, the unwholesome temperature of the
air seems to be unfavourable even to this part of the creation.
The number of birds is less than in other countries, and the
traveller is ruck with the amazing solitude and silence of its
forests ". It is remarkable, however, that America, where the qua-
drupeds are so dwarfifll and daflardly, should produce the Condor,

Bouguer Voy. au Pernu, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la Martinique, p. 96. Warren

Dcecript. Surinam. (Oborn's Collet. ii. 924. Lcttres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlev.
Hist. de a Nouv,Fraiice, iii. 5

which

which is intitled to pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in B 0 0 1
bulk, in strength, and in courageb. .

TIE foil, in a continet o extensive as America, muff of Soil.

course be extremely various. In each of its provinces, we shall
find ome diflinguifling peculiarity, the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular history. In gene-
ral, we may observe, that the moisture and cold, which pre-
dominate so remarkably in all parts of America, muff have
great influence upon the nature of its foil; countries lying in
the fame parallel with those regions which never feel the ex-
treme rigour of winter in the ancient continent, are frozen
over in America during a great part of the year. Chilled
by this intense cold, the ground never acquires warmth sus-
ficient to ripen the fruits, which are found in the correspond-
ing parts of the other continent. If we would rear in Ame-
rica the produtions which abound in any particular diftrit
of the world, we muff advance several degrees nearer to the
line, than in the other hemifphcre, as it requires such an in-
crease of heat to counterbalance the natural frigidity of the foil
and climate'. At the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants,
and fruits peculiar to the countries within the tropics, arc culti-
vated with success; whereas, at St. Augiftine, in Florida, and
Charles-Town, in South-Carolina, though considerably nearer
the line, they cannot be brought to thrive with equal certainty '.
But, if allowance be made for this diversity, the foil of America
is naturally as rich and frtile as in any part of the earth. As
the country was thinly inhabited, and by a people of little

b Voyage de Uiloa, i. 363. Voyage dle Condaminc, 75. Buffon ilt. Nat.
xvi. 184. Voyage du Dcs Mrchais, iii. 320.

See NOT'r; XXXVII. i See NOTE XXXVIII.

2 induflly,

B K indutrry, who had none of the domestic animals, which civil-

IV.
k' ---' ized nations rear in such vast numbers, the earth was not ex-

haufted by their consumption. The vegetable produaions, to
which its fertility gave birth, often remained untouched, and
being suffered to corrupt on its surface, returned with increase into
its bosom . As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nouriflment from air and water, if they were not destroyed by
man and other animals, they would render to the earth more,
perhaps, than they take from it, and feed rather than impoverifli
it. Thus the unoccupied foil of America might go on en-
riching for many ages. The vast number as well as enor-
mous size of the trees in America, indicate the extraordinary
vigour of the foil in its native state. When the Europeans
first began to cultivate the New World, they were astonished
at the luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin mould; and
in several places the ingenuity of the planter is frill employed
in diminishing and wafting its superfluous fertility, in order
to bring it down to a fiate fit for useful culture f.

I-low was A- HAVING thus surveyed the state of the New World at the
rnerica peo- time of its discovery, and confidered the peculiar features and

qualities which distinguish and characterise it, the next inquiry
that merits attention is, How was America peopled ? By what
course did mankind migrate from the one continent to the
other ? and in what quarter is it most probable that a commu-
nication was opened between them ?

¢ Buffon, HiR. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. 151.
f Charlevoix, Hil. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 4o5. Voyage da Des Marchais. iii. 2z9.
Lery ap Dc Bry, part ii. p. 174. Sec NOTE. XXXIX.

4 W

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all the human race B o K
spring from the fame source, and that the descendants of one

No tadition

man, under the protection as well as in obedience to the corn- concerning it
mand of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth. But (eOvf tl.em.
neither the annals nor the traditions of nations reach back to
those remote ages, in which they took poffefion of the different
countries where they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this first family, or point out with certainty the
time and manner in which they divided and spread over the
face of the globe. Even among the most enlightened people,
the period of authentic history is extremely hort, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is not fur-
prifing, then, that the unlettered inhabitants of America, who
have no solicitude about futurity, and little curiosity concerning
what is past, hould be altogether unacquainted with their own
original. The Californians and Efkimaux, in particular, who
occupy those countries in America which approach nearest to
the ancient continent, are so remarkably rude, that it is alto-
gether vain to search among them for ich information as
might discover the place from whence they came, or the an-
ceflors of whom they are descended '. W\hatever light has been
thrown on this subjed, is derived, not from the natives of
America, but from the inquisitive genius of their conquerors.

WHIEN the people of Europe unexpecedly discovered a New various tlic-

Wrorld, removed at a vast diflance from every part of the an- '-ice'
cient continent which was then known, and filledl with inha-
bitants whose appearance and manners differed remarkably from
the reft of the human species, the queflion concerning their

f Vcnecas llill. of California, i. o.
VOL. I. AI ni original

B 0o K original became naturally an objet of curiosity and attention.
'---,'-. Thc theories and speculations of ingenious men with respect to

this subj.ea, would fill many volumes; but are often so wild
and chimerical, that I fmould offer an insult to the understand-
ing of my readers, if I attempted either to enumerate or to
refute them. Some have presumptuously imagined, that the
people of America were not the offspring of the fame common
parent with the reft of mankind, but that they formed a fepa-
rate race of men, distinguishable by peculiar features in the
contfitution of their bodies, as well as in the charateriftic qua-
lities of their minds. Others contend, that they are descended
from ome remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the earth,
who survived the deluge, which swept away the greatest part
of the human fpeeies in the days of Noah ; and preposterously
suppose rude, uncivilized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated
continent, to be the most ancient race of people on the earth.
There is hardly any nation from the north to the south pole, to.
which ome antiquary, in the extravagance of conjecure, has
not ascribed the honour of peopling America. The Jews, the
Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the Greeks,.
the Scythians in ancient times, are supposed to have fettled in
this western world. The Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwe-
gians, the Welih, the Spaniards, are said to have sent colonies
thither in later ages, at different periods, and on various occa-
sions. Zealous advocates stand forth to support the refpedive
claims of those people; and though they reft upon no better'
foundation than the casual resemblance of some customs, or the
supposed affinity between a few words in their different lan-
guages, much erudition and more zeal have been employed, to
little purpose, in defence of the opposite systems. Those re-
gions of conjeture and controversy belong not to the historian.

His

His is a more limited province, confined to what is eflablifhed 1 0 0 IK

I V.

by certain or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I shall
not venture, in offering a few observations, which may con-
tribute to throw some light upon this curious and much agitated
question.

I. THERE are authors who have endeavoured by mere con- Ought not te

be tounded

jeaures to account for the peopling of America. Some have on mere con.
supposed that it was originally united to the ancient con- jeRure
tinent, and disjoined from it by the hock of an earthquake,
or the irruption of a deluge. Others have imagined, that some
vessel being forced from its course by the violence of a westerly
wind, might be driven by accident towards the American coast,
and have given a beginning to population in that desolate con-
tinent . But with refpeE to all those systems, it is vain either
to reason or inquire, because i is impossible to come to any
decision. Such events as they suppose are barely possible, and
may have happened. That they ever did happen, we have no
evidence, either from the clear testimony of history, or from
the obscure intimations of tradition.

2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncertain than the oron rcfem..

attempts to discover the original of the Americans, erely by blance of
zattempts to difover the original of the Americans, erely b ,manners,
tracing the resemblance between their manners and those of any
particular people in the ancient continent. If we suppose two
bodies of men, though in the most remote regions of the globe,
to be placed in a ate of society similar in its degree of im-

c Parson's Remains of Japhct, p. 24D. Ancient Univerf. Hill. vol. xx. p. 164. P.

i'.ijoio 1'catro Critico, toni. v. p. 304, &c. Acofia Hill. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. .
c, . 19.

M m provcment,

B 0o0 K provement, they must feel the fame wants, and exert the fame

--.-.._ endeavours to supply them. The fame objects will allure, the

fame passions will animate them, and the fame ideas and fen-
timents will arise in their minds. The character and occupa-
tions of the hunter in America mufft be little different from
those of an Asiatic, who depends for subsistence on the chace.
A tribe of savages on the banks of the Danube muff nearly
resemble one upon the plains waffed by the Miffifippi. Instead
then of presuming, from this similarity, that there is any affi-
nity between them, we should only conclude, that the difpo-
fition and manners of men are formed by their situation, and
arise from the ate of society in which they live. The mo-
ment that begins to vary, the character of a people muff change.
In proportion as it advances in improvement, their manners
refine, their powers and talents are called forth. In every part
of the earth the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,.
and we can trace him in his career from the rude simplicity of
savage life, until he attains the industry, the arts, and the ele-
gance of polished society. There is nothing wonderful then in
the similitude between the Americans and the barbarous na-
tions of our continent. Had Lafitau, Garcia, and many other
authors, attended to this, they would not have perplexed a sub-
ject which they pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endeavours
to eftabliih an affinity between various races of people in the
old and new continents, upon no other evidence than such a re-
semblance in their manners as necessarily arifcs from the fimila- -
rity of their condition. There are, it is true, among every people
some cufomns, which, as they do not flow from any natural want
or desire peculiar to their situation, may be denominated uiges
of arbitrary institution. If between two nations fettlcd in remote

parts

parts of the earth, a perfect agreement with refpec. to any of B K

IV.

these hould be discovered, one might be led to fufpef that ,
they were connected by some affinity. If a nation were found
in America that consecrated the seventh day to religious reft, if
in another the first appearance of the new moon was celebrated
with festivity, we might justly suppose that the former had de-
rived its knowledge of this usage of arbitrary inflitution from
the Jews, while the latter might be confidered as nothing more
than an expression of joy natural to man on the return of the
planet which guides and cheers him in the night. The in-
stances of customs, merely arbitrary, common to the inhabitants
of both hemispheres, are, indeed, so few and so equivocal, that
no theory concerning the population of the New World ought.
to be founded upon them.

3. THE theories which have been formed with respect to orofrelgious

rites.

the original of the Americans, from obefrvation of their re-
ligious rites and pracices, are no less fanciful, and deisitute of
solid foundation. When the religious opinions of any people
are neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived from the
inflrutions of revelation, they mull needs be wild and extra-
vagant. Barbarous nations are incapable of the former, and
have not been blesTed with the advantages arising from. the
latter. Still, however, the human mind, even where its ope-
rations appear most wild and capricious, holds a course so re-
gular, that in every age and country the dominion of parti-
cular passions will be attended with similar cftccas. he fa-
vage of Europe or America, when filled with superstitious dread
of invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude to penetrate
into the events of futurity, trcnbl)cs alike with fear, or.
glows with impatience. lie has rcourfc to rites and pracliccs

4 of

B o0 K of the fame kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he

iV.
-.--.-- supposes to be impending over him, or to divine the secret

which is the objet of his curiosity. Accordingly, the ritual
of superstition, in one continent, seems, in many particulars,
to be a transcript of that eflablifhed in the other, and both au-
thorife similar inflitutions, ometimes so frivolous as to excite
pity, sometimes so bloody and barbarous as to create horror.
But without fppofing any consanguinity between such distant
nations, or imagining that their religious ceremonies were
conveyed by tradition from the one to the other, we may
ascribe this uniformity, which in many inflances seems very
amazing, to the natural operation of superstition and enthusiasm
upon the weakness of the human mind.

Not peopled 4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle in this in-
bI;any cain quiry, that America was not peopled by any nation of the an-

izd, cient continent, which had made considerable progress in civili-

zation. The inhabitants of the New World were in a state
of society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with those
arts which are the first essays of human ingenuity in its ad-
vance towards improvement. Even the most cultivated nations
of America were firangers to many of those simple inventions,
which were almost coeval with society in other parts of the world,
and were known in the earliest periods of civil life. From this it
is manicfil, that the tribes which originally migrated to America,
came off from nations which mull have been no less barbarous
than their poflerity, at the time when they were first difcovcred
by the Europeans. I:or, although the elegant and refined arts
may decline or perifl, amidst the violent shocks of those revo-
lutions and difaflcrs to which nations arc exposed, the necefliry
arts of life, when once they have been introduced among any

people,

people, arc never loft. None of the vicissitudes in human OO K

IV.

ailairs ailcet these, and they continue to be prafiifed as long as --_
the race of men exists. If ever the use of iron had been known
to the savages of America, or to their progenitors, if ever they
had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge, the utility of these
inventions would have preserved them, and it is impossible
that they hould have been abandoned or forgotten. We may
conclude then, that the Americans sprung from some people,
who were themselves in such an early and unimproved flage of
society, as to be unacquainted with all the necessary arts, which
remained unknown among their posterity.

5. It appears no less evident, that America was not peopled nor from the

by any colony from the more southern nations of the ancient futhseofer
continent. None of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our continent.
hemisphere can be supposed to have visited a country so remote.
They poffefIed neither enterprise, nor ingenuity, nor power,
that could prompt them to undertake, or enable them to per-
form, such a diflant voyage. That the more civilized nations in
Alia or Africa are not the progenitors of the Americans is ma-
nifeft, not only from the observations which I have already
made concerning their ignorance of the most simple and necef-
fary arts, but from an additional circumRfance. Whenever any
people have experienced the advantages which men enjoy, by
their dominion over the inferior animals, they can neither sub-
sift without the nouriflment which they afford, nor carry on
their operations independent of their minifiry and labour. Ac-
cordingly, the firfl care of the Spaniards when they fettled in
America, was to flock it with all the domefic animals of Eu-
rope, and if prior to them, the Tyrians, the Carthaginians,
the Chincic, or any other polishcd people, had taken poffefion

? of

B o0 K oFthat continent, we flould have found there the animals pe-

IV.
-- .- culiar to those regions of the globe where they were originally

feated. In all America, however, there is not one animal, tame
,or wild, which properly belongs to the warm, or even the
more temperate countries of the ancient continent. The camel,
the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were as much unknown in
America, as the elephant or the lion. From which it is ob-
vious, that the people who first fettled in the western world did
not issue from the countries where those animals abound, and
where men, from having been long accustomed to their aid,
would naturally confider it, not only as beneficial, but as indif-
penfably necessary to the improvement, and even the preferva-
tion, of civil society.

Thetwocon- 6. From confidering the animals with which America is
tinents tem
to be mott ifored, we may conclude that the nearest point of contact be-
contiguous tween the old and new continents is towards the northern ex-
towards the
north. tremity of both, and that there the communication was opened,

and the intercourse carried on between them. All the exten-
five countries in America which lie within the tropics, or ap-
proach near to them, are filled with indigenous animals of
various kinds, entirely different from those in the correspond-
ing regions of the ancient continent. But the northern pro-
vinces of the New World abound with many of the wild ani-
mals which are common in such parts of our hemisphere as lie
in. a similar situation. The bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare,
the deer, the roebuck, the elk, and several other fpecics fre-
quent the forests of North America, no lets than those in the
north of Europe and Asia . It seems to be evident then, that

h Buffon Hifl. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

the

the two continents approach each other in this quarter, and are B 0 0 K
cither united, or o nearly adjacent, that these animals might
pass from the one to the other.

7. THE aual vicinity of the two continents is so clearly Thisarcer-

established by modern discoveries, as removes the chief diffi- dicovery
culty with refpet to the peopling of America. While those
immense regions, which stretched eastward from the river Oby
to the ea of Kamchatka were unknown, or imperfealy ex-
plored, the north eafft extremities of our hemisphere were sup-
posed to be so far distant from any part of the New World,
that it was not easy to conceive how any communication hould
have been carried on between them. But the Ruffians, having
fubjeded the western part of Siberia to their empire, gradually
extended their knowledge of that vast country, by advancing
towards the east into unknown provinces. These were disco-
vered by hunters in their excursions after game, or by soldiers
employed in levying the taxes, and the court of Moscow efti-
mated the importance of those countries only by the small addi-
tion which they made to its revenue. At length, Peter the Great
ascended the Ruffian throne. His enlightened, comprehensive
mind, intent upon every circumflance that could aggrandize his
empire, or render his reign illuflrious, discerned consequences of
those discoveries, which had escaped the observation of his igno-
rant predecessors. He perceived, that in proportion as the re-
gions of Aia extended towards the eafl, they mufl approach
nearer to America; that the communication between the two
continents, which had long been fcarched for in vain, would
probably be found in this quarter, and that by opening this
intercourse, some part of the wealth and commerce of the
wcflcrn world might be made to flow into his dominions by a

Vol,. . N a nlew

B OO K new channel. Such an objeCt suited a genius that delighted in

Iv.
' --u-- grand schemes. Peter drew up inftrudions with his own hand

for prosecuting this design, and gave orders for carrying it into
execution '.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued his plan.

The officers whom the Ruffian court employed in this service,
had to firuggle with so many difficulties, that their progress
was extremely flow. Encouraged by itme faint traditions
among the people of Siberia, concerning a successful voyage in
the year one thousand fix hundred and forty-eight, round the
north-eait promontory of Asia, they attempted to follow the
fame course. Vessels were fitted out, with this view, at dif-
ferent times, from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen
ocean, which nature seems not to have destined for navigation,
they were exposed to many disasters, without being able to
accomplish their purpose. No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formidable Cape"; we are indebted for
what is known of those extreme regions of Asia, to the disco-
veries made in excursions by land. In all those provinces, an
opinion prevails, that countries of great extent and fertility lie
at no considerable difiance from their own coasts. These the
Ruffians imagined to be part of America; and several circum-
stances concurred not only in confirming them in this belief,
but in persuading them that ome portion of that continent
could not be very remote. Trees of various kinds, unknownv
in tliofe naked regions of Alia, are driven upon the coast by
an eaflerly wind. By the fame wind, floating ice is brought
thither in a few days ; flights of birds arrive annually from the

X Mller Voyages ct Dccouvertes par Ics Ruffes, ton. i. p. 4, . 41.
Se NOTE Xl..

fame

fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among the inhabitants, of B °V° K
an intercourse formerly carried on with ome countries situatcd '--"
to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and comparing the

position of the countries in Asia which they had discovered,
with such parts in the north-west of America as were already
known, the Ruffian court formed a plan, which would have
hardly occurred to any nation less accustomed to engage in ardu-
ous undertakings, and to contend with great difficulties. Or-
ders were issued to build two vessels at Ochotz, in the sea of
Kamchatka, to fail on a voyage of discovery. Though that
dreary uncultivated region furniflied nothing that could be of
use in conftrucing them, but ome larch trees; though not
only the iron, the cordage, the fails, and all the numerous
articles requisite for their equipment, but the provisions for
victualling them, were to be carried through the immense de-
ferts of Siberia, along rivers of difficult navigation, and roads
almost impaslable, the mandate of the sovereign, and the per-
severance of the people, at last surmounted every obflacle. Two 1741.
vessels were finiflied, and, under the command of the captains
Behring and Tfchirikow, failed from Kamchatka in quest of
the New World, in a quarter where it had never been ap-
proached. They shaped their course towards the east; and
though a storm oon separated the vcefels, which never rejoined,
and many disasters besel them, the expeCtations from the voy-
age were not altogether frustrated. Each of the commanders
difovered land, which to them appeared to be part of the Ame-
rican continent; and, according to their observations, it seems
to be situated within a few degrees of the north-wcfl coast of
California. Each set ome of his people afliorc; but in one

N n 2 place

B 0 0 K place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians approached; in
'--.--' another, they carried off those who landed, and destroyed their

boats. The violence of the weather, and the diflrefs of their
crews, obliged both to quit this ihofpitable coat. In their
return they touched at several islands, which stretch in a chain
from east to weft between the country which they had dif-
covered and the coast of Asia. They had ome intercourse with
the natives, who seemed to them to resemble the North Ame-
ricans. They presented to the Ruffians the calumet, or pipe of
peace, which is a symbol of friendship universal among the
people of North America, and an usage of arbitrary institution,
peculiar to them.

THE islands of' this new Archipelago have been frequented

by the Ruffian hunters since that time; but the court seemed
to have relinquished its chemie of prosecuting discoveries in
this quarter. It was unexpectedly resumed in the year one
thousand seven hundred and fixty-eight, and captain Krenitzin
had the command of two small vessels fitted out for that pur-
pole. In his voyage outward he held nearly the fame course
with the former navigators, he touched at the fame iands,
observed their situation and producions more carefully, and
discovered several new islands, with which they had not fallen
in. Though he did not proceed so far to the east as to rcvifit
the country which Behring and Tfchirikow supposcd to be part
of the American continent, yet, by returning in a course con--
fiderably to the north of theirs, he correaed some capital iif-
takes into which they had fallen, and has contributed to faci-
litate the progress of future navigators in thoe seas '.

I Sec NOTE XLI.

TH1US

THus the pofibilityofa communication between the continents B o O K

IV.

in this quarter refts no longer upon mere conjecture, but is efta-
blifhed by undoubted evidence "'. Some tribe, or some families
of wandering Tartars, from the restless spirit peculiar to their
race, might migrate to the nearest islands, and, rde as their
knowledge of navigation was, might, by pasing from one to
the other, reach at length the coast of America, and give a
beginning to population in that continent. The distance be-
tween the Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land in
Asia, is greater than that between the part of America which
the Ruffians discovered, and the coast of Kamchatka; and yet
the inhabitants of tliofe islands are manifeitly of Asiatic extract-.
If, notwithflanding their remote situation, we admit that the
Marian islands were peopled from our continent, distance alone
is no reason why we ihould elitate about admitting that
the original of the Americans may be fiom the fame source.
It is probable that future navigators in tlofe seas, by fleer-
ing farther to the north, may find that the continent of Ame-
rica approaches flill nearer to Asia. According to the in-
formation of the barbarous people, who inhabit the country
about the north-eafl promontory of Aia, tere lies, off the
coafl, a small island, to which they fail in less than a day. From
that, they can descry a large continent, which, according to
their dcrcription, is covered with forests, and pofleffed by people
whose language they do not understand ". By them they arc
supplied with the ficins of martens, an animal unknown in the
northern parts of Siberia, and which is never found but in
countries abounding witl trees. If we could rely on this ac-
count, we might conclude, that the American continent is fc-

Mullei's Voyages, tom. i. 249, &c. 267. 276.
Muller's Voy. ct Dccouv. i, 6(C'.

6 parated

B C 0 K parated from ours only by a narrow strait, and all the difficulties

Iv.
»-_ --' with reflect to the communication between them would vanish.

Perhaps the merit of ascertaining this is reserved for the fove-
reign now feated on the throne of Peter the Great, who, by
perfeting his plan, may add this splendid event to those which
already distinguish her reign.

Ano.her ccm- Ir is likewise evident from recent discoveries, that an inter-
mu"ic:tion
h rli n.t.h- course between our continent and America might be carried on

with no less facility from the north-west extremities of Europe.
A. D. S3. As early as the ninth century, the Norwegians discovered

Greenland, and planted colonies there. The communication
with that country, after a long interruption, was renewed in
the last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian miflionaries,
prompted by zeal for propagating the Chriflian faith, have
ventured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated region .
To them we are indebted for much curious information with
respeCt to its nature and inhabitants. We learn, that the north-
weft coast of Greenland is separated from America by a very
narrow strait; that, at the bottom of the bay into which this
firait conducts, it is highly probable that they are united P; that
the inhabitants of the two countries have ome intercourse with
one another; that the Efquimaux of America perfectly refem-
ble the Greenlanders in their afpedl, dress, and mode of living;
that ome ailors, who had acquired the knowledge of a few
words in the Greenlandifl language, reported that these were
A. D. 1,6.. understood by the Efquimaux ; that, at length, a Moravian

miflionary, well acquainted with the language of Greenland,
having visited the country of the Efquimaux, found, to his

Crantzl Ilill. of Grccnl. i. 242. 244. Prcvot Hifi. Gen. de Voyager, tom. xv.
152, not ((96). P iEggc d, p. , 3.

afloninhment,

astonishment, that they spoke the fame language with the B O K

IV.

Greenlanders, and were in every refpet the fame people, and --._
he was accordingly received and entertained by them as a friend
and a brother .

BY these decisive fads, not only the consanguinity of the

Efquimaui and Greenlanders is established, but the possibility
of peopling America from the north of Europe is demonstrated.
If the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, when science had not
begun to dawn in the north of Europe, possessed such naval
ikill as to open a communication with Greenland, their ancef-
tors, as much addidted to roving by sea, as the Tartars are to
wandering by land, might at ome more remote period, ac-
complifh the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there, whose de-
fcendents might, in progress of time, migrate into America.
But if, instead of venturing to(fail diredly from their own
coast to Greenland, we suppose that the Norwegians held a
more cautious course, and advanced from Shetland to the Feroe
Islands, and from them to Iceland, in all which they had
planted colonies, their progress may have been so gradual, that
this navigation cannot be confidered as either longer or more
hazardous, than those voyages which that hardy and enter-
prifing race of men is known to have performed in every age.

8. THOUGH it be possible that America may have received Probably

its firfl inhabitants fi-om our continent, either by the north-west Pt'plenorthll
of Europe or the north-caft of Asia, there seems to be good
reason for supposing that the progenitors of all the American
nations, from Cape Horn to the southern confines of Labrador,

q Crantz' llifl. of Grecnl. p. z61, 262.
5 migrated

B O O K migrated from the latter rather than the former. The Efqui-
' v-.-' maux are the only people in America, who, in their aspeE or

charater, bear any resemblance to the northern Europeans.
They are manifestly a separate species of men, diftin& from
all the nations of that continent, in language, in disposition,
and in habits of life. Their original, then, may warrantably
be traced up to that source, which I have pointed out. But,
among all the other inhabitants of America, there is such a
firiking similitude in the form of their bodies, and the qualities
of their minds, that, notwithfianding the diversities occasioned
by the influence of climate, or unequal progress in improve-
ment, we muff pronounce them to be descended from one
source. There may be a variety in the shades, but we can
every where trace the fame original colour. Each tribe has
Something peculiar which distinguishes it, but in all of them
we discern certain features common to the whole race. It is
remarkable, that in every peculiarity, whether in their persons
or dispositions, which charadlerife the Americans, they have some
resemblance to the rude tribes scattered over the north-east of
Aiia, but almost none to the nations fettled in the northern ex-
tremities of Europe. We may, therefore, refer them to the for-
mer origin, and conclude that their Asiatic progenitors, having
fettled in those parts of America, where the Ruffians have disco-
vered the proximity of the two continents, spread gradually over
its various regions. This account of the progress of population
in America, coincides with the traditions of the Mexicans con---
cerning their own origin, which, imperfecl as they are, were
preserved with more accuracy, and merit greater credit, than
those of any people in the New World. According to them,
their ancestors came from a remote country, situated to the
north-east of Mexico. They point out their various flations

as

as they advanced from this, into the interior provinces, and it B V00 K
is precisely the fame route which they must have held, if they
had been emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in describing
the appearance of their progenitors, their manners, and habits
of life at that period, exactly delineate those of the rude Tar-
tars, from whom I suppose them to have sprung .

THus have I finished a disquisition which has been deemed

of so much importance, that it would have been improper to
omit it in writing the history of America. I have ventured to
inquire, but without presuming to decide. Satisfied with offer-
ing conjectures, I pretend not to eflablifh any fyflern. When
an investigation is, from its nature, so intricate and obscure,
that it is impoflible to arrive at conclusions which are certain,
there may be rome merit in pointing out such as are pro-
bable '.

THE condition and character of the American nations, at the Cond;iion

and charalcer

time when they became known to the Europeans, deserve more of the Ameri-
attentive consideration, than the inquiry concerning their ori- cans.
ginal. The latter is merely an object of curiosity, the former
is one of the most important as well as infiruCive researches,
which can occupy the philosopher or historian. In order to
complete the hiflory of the human mind, and attain to a perfect
knowledge of its nature and operations, we must contemplate
man in all those various ituations wherein he has been placed.
We muff follow him in his progress through the different stages

' Acofla Iill. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garcia Origen d los Indios,

lib. v. c. 3. 'orquermada Monar. Ind. lib. i. c. , &c. Boturini Benaduci Idec
de uina Hill. de li A er. Septcnrr. § xvii. p. 127.

M' Mcoirc fui Ia Louifiane, par Dumont, toni. i. p. 19.
VOL. I. 0 o of

B 0 0 K of society, as he gradually advances from the infant state of

IV.

_
, civil life towards its maturity and decline. We must ob-

serve, at each period, how the faculties of his understanding
unfold, we muff attend to the efforts of his active powers,
watch the motions of affection as they rife in his breast, and
mark whither they tend, and with what ardour they are ex-
erted. The philosophers and historians of ancient Greece and
Rome, our guides in this as well as every other disquisition,
had only a limited view of this subjed, as they had hardly any
opportunity of surveying man in his rudest and most early state.
In all those regions of the earth with which they were ac-
quainted, civil society had made considerable advances, and na-
tions had finilhed a good part of their career before they began
to observe themr. The Scythians and Germans, the rudest
people of whom any ancient author has transmitted to us an
authentic account, possessed flocks and herds, had acquired pro-
perty of various kinds, and, when compared with mankind in
their primitive state, may be reckoned to have attained to a
great degree of civilization.

Les; improved BUT the discovery of the New World enlarged the sphere
than in any
part of the of contemplation, and presented nations to our view, in ftagcs
r'rth.

of their progress, much less advanced than those wherein they
have been observed in our continent. In America, man appears
under the rudest form in which we can conceive him to sublist.
We behold communities just beginning to unite, and may ex-
amine the ientiments and actions of human beings in the in-
fancy of social life, while they feel but imperfectly the force
of its ties, and have scarcely relinquilfed their native liberty.
That state of primxval limplicity, which was known in our
continent only by the fanciful delcription of poets, really ex-

iftcd

BOOK

ifled in the other. The greater part of its inhabitants were v.
firangers to industry and labour, ignorant of arts, and al- --
most unacquainted with property, enjoying in common the
blessings which flowed spontaneously from the bounty of na-
ture. There were only two nations in this vast continent which
had emerged from this rude slate, and had made any confider-
able progress in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the infti-
tutions, which belong to polished societies. Their govern-
ment and manners will fall naturally under our review in
relating the discovery and conquefl of the Mexican and Peru-
vian empires; and we shall have there an opportunity of con-
templating the Americans in the state of highest improvement
to which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches shall be turned to This inquiry

the small independent tribes which occupied every other part of Ctned tod
America. Among there, though with ome diversity in their tribes.
character, their manners and institutions, the tfate of society
was nearly similar, and so extremely rude, that the denomina-
tion of Savage may be applied to them all. In a general
history of America, it would be highly improper to describe the
condition of each petty community, or to invefligate every
minute circumstance which contributes to form the character
of its members. Such an inquiry would lead to details of
immeasurable and tiresome extent. The qualities belonging
to the people of all the different tribes have fiich a near refeln-
blance, that they may be painted with the famie features. WVhere
any circumflances seem to contfitute a divcrlity in their cha-
rater and manners worthy of attention, it will be fiifficient to
point thece out as they occur, and to inquire into the causes
of such peculiarities.

Oo2 IT

B K IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and authentic

Iv. -.--_,' information concerning nations while they remain uncivil-

Diiculty of
otltan.nI, in- ized. To discover their true character under this rude fornm,
fcrmatiol, and to collect the features by which they are diflinguifh-

ed, requires an observer possessed of no less impartiality than
discernment. For, in every stage of society, the faculties, the
sentiments and desires of men are so accommodated to their
own state, that they become standards of excellence to them-
selves, they affix the idea of perfeetion and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and wherever the ob-
je&s and enjoyments to which they have been accustomed are
wanting, confidently pronounce a people barbarous and miser-
able. Hence the mutual contempt with which the members
of communities, unequal in their degrees of improvement, re-
gard each other. Polished nations, conscious of the advan-
tages which they derive from their knowledge and arts, are
apt to view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and, in the pride
of superiority, will hardly allow either their occupations, their
feelings, or their pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has fel-
dom been the lot of communities, in their early and unpolifhed
state, to fall under the observation of persons, endowed with
force of mind superior to vulgar prejudices, and capable of con-
templating man, under whatever aspet he appears, with a can-
did and discerning eye.

from tb) in- THE Spaniards, who first visited America, and who had an
cap:city of opportunity of beholding its various tribes, while entire and
the iult ob-
,crvcrn, unfubdued, were far from pofieffing the qualities requisite for

observing the striking speCtacle prcfented to their view. Nei-
ther the age in which they lived, nor the nation to which
they belonged, had made such progrels in true science, as in-

spirics

spires enlarged and liberal sentiments. The conquerors of B K
the New World were mostly illiterate adventurers, destitute ---
of all the ideas which should have direaed them in contem-
plating objects, so extremely different fiom those with which
they were acquainted. Surrounded continually with danger,
or firuggling with hardships, they had little leisure, and less
capacity for any speculative inquiry. Eager to take poffeflion
of a country of such vast extent and opulence, and happy in
finding it occupied by inhabitants so incapable to defend it,
they hastily pronounced them to be a wretched order of men,
formed merely for servitude; and were more employed in com-
puting the profits of their labour, than in inquiring into the
operations of their minds, or the reasons of their customs and
institutions. The persons who penetrated at subsequent pe-
riods into the interior provinces, to which the knowledge and
devaflations of the first conquerors did not reach, were gene-
rally of a imilar character; brave and enterprising in an high
degree, but so uninformed as to be little qualified either for
observing or describing what they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of the Spa- ant theirpre-

'

. judices;

niards, render their accounts of the people of America ex-
tremely defeaive. Soon after they planted colonies in their
new conquefis, a difference in opinion arose with rclfce: to the
treatment of the natives. One party, solicitous to render their
servitude perpetual, represented them as a brutifli, obflinate race,
incapable either of acquiring religious knowledge, or of being
trained to the funcions of social life. The other, full of pious
concern for their conversion, contended that, though rude and
ignorant, they were gentle, aflctlionatc, docile, and by pro-
per inflruCtions .,::d regulations might be formed gradually

IT1~~~~~~~~~~ into

B K into good Christians and useful citizens. This controversy, as
A.-.x-_ I have already related, was carried on with all the warmth

which is natural, when attention to interest on the one hand,
and religious zeal on the other, animate the disputants. Most
of the laity espoused the former opinion; all the ecclesiastics
were advocates for the latter; and we shall uniformly find that,
accordingly as an author belonged to either of these parties,
he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate the defecs of the
Americans beyond measure. Those repugnant accounts increase
the difficulty of attaining a perfec knowledge of their characer,
and render it necessary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanish writers with distrust, and to receive their information
with ome allowance.

and from the ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the discovery of Ame-
fyllems of
phi!ofophers. rica, before the manners of its inhabitants attracted, in any

considerable degree, the attention of philosophers. At length,
they discovered that the knowledge of their condition and cha-
rader might enable them to fill up a considerable chasm in the
history of the human fpecics, and lead to speculations no less
curious than important. They entered upon this new field
of study with great ardour ; but, inflead of throwing light upon
the subjed-, they have contributed, in some degree, to involve
it in additional obscurity. Too impatient to inquire, they
hastened to decide; and began to eredE fyflcms, when they
should have been searching for fads on which to eflablifll their
foundations. Struck with the appearance of degeneracy in the
human fpccics throughout the New World, and aftonifled at
beholding a vast continent occupied by a naked, feeble, and
ignorant race of men, some authors of great name have main-
tained, that this part of the globe had but lately emerged from

the

the ea, and become fit for the residence of man; that every B O O K

IV.

thing in it bore marks of a recent original; and that its in- .
habitants, lately called into existence, and still at the begin-
ning of their career, were unworthy to be compared with the
people of a more ancient and improved continent '. Others
have imagined, that, under the influence of an unkindly cli-
mate, which checks and enervates the principle of life, man
never attained in America the perfecion which belongs to his
nature, but remained an animal of an inferior order, defective
in the vigour of his bodily frame, and destitute of sensibility,
as well as of force, in the operations of his mind ". In oppofi-
tion to both there, other philosophers have supposed that man ar-
rives at his highest dignity and excellence long before he reaches
a slate of refinement; and, in the rude simplicity of ravage life,
displays an elevation of sentiment, an independence of mind,
and a warmth of attachment, for which it is vain to search
among the members of poliflhed societies x. They seem to con-
fider that as the most perfect state of man which is the least
civilized. They describe the manners of the rude Americans
with such rapture, as if they propoicd them for models to the
reft of the species. Thele contradictory theories have been
proposed with equal confidence, and uncommon powers of ge-
nius and eloquence have been exerted in order to clothe them.
with an appearance of truth.

As all those circumfianccs concur in rendering an inquiry

into the state of the rude nations in America intricate and ob-
fcure, it is neccflary to carry it on with caution. When guided
in our refearchcs by the intelligent obfcrvations of the few phi-

t M. de Buffon His. Nat. iii. 484, &c i. ix. 103. 14.
u M. dc 1'. Rccherchcs Pliiluf. fur les Aincric. paliin. X M. Rotlrcau.

lofoplhers
4

B 0 K 'lofophers who have visited this part of the globe, we my ven-

iv.
.., -. ture to decide. When obliged to have recourse to the super-

fidial remarks of vulgar travellers, of ailors, traders, bucca-
·neers, and miffi6naries, we must often pause, and comparing
detached facts, endeavour to discover what they wanted saga-
city to observe. Without indulging conjecture, or betraying
a propensity to either system, we mufl fludy with equal care to
avoid the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fuperci-
lious contempt for those manners which we describe.

Method ob- IN order to conduct this inquiry with greater accuracy, it
frdy'n the hould be rendered as simple as possible. Man existed as an

individual before he became the member of a community; and
the qualities which belong to him under his former capacity
should be known, before we proceed to examine those which
arise from the latter relation. This is peculiarly necessary in
invefligating the manners of rude nations. Their political
union is so incomplete, their civil institutions and regulations
so few, so simple, and of such small authority, that they ought
to be viewed rather as independent agents, than as members
of a regular society. The character of a savage results almost
entirely from his sentiments or feelings as an individual, and
is but little influenced by his imperfec fubjetion to govern-
ment and order. I shall conduct my researches concerning the
manners of the Americans in this natural order, proceeding
gradually from what is simple to what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily constitution of the Ameri-

cans in those regions now under review. II. The qualities of
their minds. III. Their domeflic slate. IV. Their political
state and inflitutions. V. Their yftem of war, and public

security.

security. VI. The arts with which they were acquainted. B K
VII. Their religious ideas and institutions. VIII. Such singular .---
detached customs as are not reducible to any of the former
heads. IX. I shall conclude with a general review and efti-
mate of their virtues and defeCs.

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans.-The human The conftita-

body is less affeced by climate than that of any other animal. tion o their
Some animals are confined to a particular region of the globe,
and cannot exist beyond it; others, though they may be brought
to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to them, cease to multiply
when carried out of that diftrit, which Nature deltined to be
their mansion. Even such as seem capable of being naturalized in
various climates, feel the effect of every remove from their pro-
per flation, and gradually dwindle and degenerate from the
vigour and perfection peculiar to their species. Man is the
only living creature whose frame is at once so hardy and so
flexible, that he can spread over the whole earth, become the
inhabitant of every region, and thrive and multiply under
every climate. Subjea, however, to the general law of Na-
ture, the human body is not entirely exempt from the opera-
tion of climate, and when exposed to the extremes either of
heat or cold, its size or vigour diminishes.

THE first appearance of the inhabitants of the New World, Complexion,

&c.

filled the discoverers with such aftoniflment, that they were
apt to imagine them a race of men different from those of the
other hemisphere. Their complexion is of a reddish brown,
nearly resembling the colour of copper Y. The hair of their

Y Oviedo Somario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c. 24.
VOL. I. P p heads

B O K heads is always black, long, coarse, and lank. They have no

IV.
, --- " beard, and every part of their body is perfetly fimooth. Their

persons are of a full size, extremely straight, and well propor-
tioned . Their features are regular, though often distorted by
absurd endeavours to improve the beauty of their natural
form, or to render their aspea more dreadful to their enemies.
oarc feeble. In the islands, where four-footed animals were both few and fall,

and the earth yielded her productions almost spontaneously, the
constitution of the natives, neither braced by the ative exer-
cifes of the chace, nor invigorated by the labour of cultivation,
was extremely feeble and languid. On the continent, where
the forests abound with game of various kinds, and the chief
occupation of many tribes was to pursue it, their frame ac-
quired greater firmrnefs. Still, however, the Americans were
more remarkable for agility than strength. They resembled
beafs of prey, rather than animals formed for labour . They
were not only averse to toil, but incapable of it; and when
rouzed by force from their native indolence, and compelled to
work, they funk under talks which the people of the other
continent would have performed with ease b. This feebleness
of constitution was universal among the inhabitants of those
regions in America which we are surveying, and may be con-
fidered as charaEteriftic of the species there '.

THE beardless countenance and smooth skin of the Ame-

rican seems to indicate a defea of vigour, occasioned by some -
vice in his frame. He is destitute of one sign of manhood and

i See NOTE XLII. ' See NOTE XLIII.
b Oviedo Son. p. 1, C. Voy. de Correal, ii. 138. Wafer's Description, p. 131.

B. Las Casas Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torqucm. Monar. i. 580. Oviedo Somario, p. 41.
Iillor. lib. iii. c. 6. I-Ierrera, dec. . lib. ix, c. . Simon, p. 41.

4 of

of strength. This peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the B O OK

IV.

New World are distinguished from the people of all other na-
tions, cannot be attributed, as some travellers have supposed, to
their mode of subsistence d. For though the food of many
Americans be so extremely insipid, that they are altogether
unacquainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in other parts of
the earth have subsisted on aliments equally simple without this
mark of degradation, or any apparent symptom of a diminu-
tion in their vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads us to sus- Les, appe-

pea that there is ome natural debility in their frame, the tite'
smallness of their appetite for food has been mentioned by
many authors as a confirmation of this suspicion. The quan-
tity of food which men consume varies according to the
temperature of the climate in which they live, the degree of
activity which they exert, and the natural vigour of their
constitutions. Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pass their days in indolence and ease, they
require less nourishment than the ative inhabitants of tem-
perate or cold countries. But neither the warmth of their
climate, nor their extreme laziness, will account for the un-
common defed of appetite among the Americans. The Spa-
niards were astonished with obfcrving this, not only in the
islands, but in several parts of the continent. The conflitu-
tional temperance of the natives far exceeded, in their opinion,
the abtlinence of the most mortified hermits ; while, on the
other hand, the appetite of the Spaniards appeared to the Ame-
ricans insatiably voracious; and they affirmed, that one Spa-

a Charlcv. Hlift. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 310. . Ramifio, iii. 304, .
3c6, A. Simon Coouifta, s&c. p. 39. Haklyt, iii. 468. 51j8.

P p 2 niard

B v K niard devoured more food in a day than was sufficient for ten
t - j Americanss.

Less vehe- A PROOF of some feebleness in their frame fill more striking,
mnence of de-.
ire. is the insensibility of the Americans to the charms of beauty,

and the power of love. That passion which was destined to
perpetuate life, to be the bond of social union, and the source
of tenderness and joy, is the most ardent in the human breast;
and though the perils and hardships of the savage state,
though excessive fatigue, on ome occasions, and the dif-
ficulty at all times of procuring fubfiflence, may seem to be
adverse to this passion, and to have a tendency to abate its vi-
gour, yet the rudest nations in every other part of the globe
seem to feel its influence more powerfully than the inhabitants
of the New World. The negro glows with all the warmth of
desire natural to his climate; and the most uncultivated Asiatics
discover that sensibility, which, from their situation, we ihould
expea them to have felt. But the Americans are, in an amazing
degree, strangers to the force of this first inftina of nature.
In every part of the New World the natives treat their women
with coldness and indifference. They are neither the objeas
of that tender attachment which takes place in civilized society,
nor of that ardent desire conspicuous among rude nations.
Even in climates where this passion usually acquires its greatest
vigour, the savage of America views his female with disdain,
as an animal of a less noble species. He is at no pains to win
her favour by the assiduity of courtship, and still less solicitous
to preserve it by indulgence and gentleness . Missionaries

Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 6. g Hennepin Mocurs des Sauvages, 327

&c. Roclefort Hilt. des Ines Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii. x41. Ramufio,
iii. 309. F. Lozano Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 71. F1allner's Defcr. of Patagon. p. 125.
Lectere di P. Catanco ap. Muratori II Chritian. Felice, i. 305.

2 themselves,

themselves, notwithflanding the austerity of monastic ideas, B OO K

IV.

cannot refrain from expressing their astonishment at the difpaf- '-
fionate coldness of the American young men in their intercourse
with the other sex h. Nor is this reserve to be ascribed to any
opinion which they entertain with refpead to the merit of fe-
male chastity. That is an idea too refined for a savage, and
suggested by a delicacy of sentiment and affection to which he is
a stranger.

BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily or mental Refeaions

qualities of particular races of men, there is not a more corn- with refpeC
mon or more educing error, than that of ascribing to a single
cause, those charadteriflic peculiarities, which are the effect of
the combined operation of many causes. The climate and foil
of America differ, in so many respeCts, from those of the other
hemisphere, and this difference is so obvious and friking, that
philosophers of great eminence have laid hold on this as fuffi-
cient to account for what is peculiar in the conflitution of its
inhabitants. They reft on physical causes alone, and confider
the feeble frame and languid desire of the Americans, as con-
sequences of the temperament of that portion of the globe
which they inhabit. But the influences of political and mo-
ral causes ought not to have been overlooked. These operate
with no less effect than that on which they reft as a full ex-
planation of the singular appearances which have been men-
tioned. Wherever the state of society is such as to create ma-
ny wants and desires, which cannot be satisfied without regu-
lar exertions of industry, the body accustomed to labour be-

h Chanvalon. p. 51. Lettr. Edif. tom. xxiv. 318. Tcrtre, ii. 377. Venegaf. i. 81.
.ibas Ilil. d los Triumf. p. l.

comes

B 0 6 K comes robust and patient of fatigue. In a more simple fiate,

lv.
· -, where the demands of men are so few and so moderate, that

they may be gratified, almost without any effort, by the fpon-
taneous productions of nature, the powers of the body are not
called forth, nor can they attain their proper strength. The
natives of Chili and of North-America, the two temperate re-
gions in the New World, who live by hunting, may be deemed
an aive and vigorous race, when compared with the inha-
bitants of the isles, or of those parts of the continent where
hardly any labour is requisite to procure subsistence. The
exertions of a hunter are not, however, so regular, or so con-
tinued, as those of persons employed in the culture of the earth,
or in the various arts of civilized life, and though his agility
may be greater than theirs, his strength is on the whole in-
ferior. If another direCtion were given to the active powers of
man in the New World, and his force augmented by exercise,
he might acquire a degree of vigour which he does not in his
present state possess. The truth of this is confirmed by expe-
rience. Wherever the Americans have been gradually accuf-
tomed to hard labour, their contitutions become robust, and
they have been found capable of performing such talks, as
seemed not only to exceed the powers of such a feeble frame as
has been deemed peculiar to their country, but to equal any effort
of the natives, either of Africa or of Europe'.

TIuF fame reasoning will apply to what has been observed

concerning their slender demand for food. As a proof that this
should be ascribed, as much to their extreme indolence, and
often total want of occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the

l Sec NOTE XLIV.

physical

physical ftrudure of their bodies, it has been observed, that in B o o K

Iv.

those difirias, where the people of America are obliged to _
exert any unusual effort of activity, in order-to procure sub-
fiftence, or wherever they are employed in evere labour, their
appetite is not inferior to that of other men, and, in some
places, it has struck observers as remarkably voracious k.

THE operation of political and moral causes is fill more

conspicuous, in modifying the degree of attachment between
the sexes. In a slate of high civilization, this passion, inflamed
by restraint, refined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, oc-
cupies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a simple inftint
of nature; sentiment heightens the ardour of desire, and the
molt tender emotions of which our frame is susceptible, soothe
and agitate the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted from the cares
and labours of life. Among persons of inferior order, who
are doomed by their condition to incessant toil, the dominion
of this passion is less violent, and their solicitude to procure
subsistence, and to provide for the first demand of nature, leaves
little leisure for attending to its second call. But if the nature
of the intercourse between the sexes varies so much in persons
of different rank in polished societies, the condition of man.
while he remains uncivilized, must occasion a variation fill more
apparent. We may well suppose, that amidst the hardships,
the dangers, and the simplicity of savage life, where subsistence
is always precarious, and often scanty, where men are almost
continually engaged in the pursuit of their enemies, or in
guarding against their attacks, and where neither dress nor
reserve are employed as arts of female allurement, that the at-
" Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 237. Lafitao, i. 5s5. Ovalle Church. iii. 8. Muratori, i. 295.

tentioni

B OO0 K tention of the Americans to their women would be extremely

IV.
a,_c· - feeble, without imputing this solely to any physical defe or

degradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those countries of Ame-

rica, where, from the fertility of the foil, the mildness of the
climate, or ome farther advances which the natives have made
in improvement, the means of subsistence are more abundant,
and the hardships of savage life are less severely felt, the ani-
mal passion of the sexes becomes more ardent. Striking ex-
amples of this occur among some tribes feated on the banks of
great rivers well stored with food, among others who are ma-
tfers of hunting-grounds abounding so much with game, that
they have a regular and plentiful supply of nourishment with
little labour. The superior degree of security and affluence
which they enjoy, is followed by their natural effe6ts. The
passions implanted in the human frame by the hand of nature
acquire additional force; new taftes and desires are formed;
the women, as they are more valued and admired, become more
attentive to dress and ornament; the men, beginning to feel how
much of their own happiness depends upon them, no longer dif-
dain the arts of winning their favour and affecion. The inter-
course of the sexes becomes very different from that which takes
place among their ruder countrymen; and as hardly any restraint
is imposed on the gratification of desire, either by religion, or
laws, or decency, the difiolution of their manners is excessive '..

None of NOTWITTSTANDING the feeble make of the Americans,
tem deferm- almost none of them are deformed, or mutilated, or defec-

tive in any of their senses. All travellers have been firuck

I Biet. 389. Charlcv. iii. 4z3. Dumont Mem. fur Louifianc, i. 155.

with

with this circumfance, and have celebrated the uniform 'B K

Iv.

symmetry and perfection of their external figure. Some
authors search for the cause of this appearance in their phy-
fical condition. As the parents are not exhausted or over-
fatigued with hard labour, they suppose that their children
are born vigorous and found. They imagine, that in the
liberty of savage life, the human body, naked and unconfined
from its earliest age, preserves its natural form; and that all
its limbs and members acquire a jufRer proportion, than when
fettered with artificial refiraints, which stint its growth,
and distort its hape m. Something, without doubt, may be
ascribed to the operation of there causes; but the true reasons
of this apparent advantage, which is common to all avage
nations, lie deeper, and are closely interwoven with the nature
and genius of that state. The infancy of man is so long and
so helpless, that it is extremely difficult to rear children among
rude nations. Their means of subsistence are not only scanty,
but precarious. Such as live by hunting muff range over ex-
tensive countries, and shift often from place to place. The
care of children, as well as every other laborious task, is de-
volved upon the women. The distresses and hardfiips of the
savage life, which are often such as can hardly be supported by
persons in full vigour, muff be fatal to those of more tender
age. Afraid of undertaking a task so laborious, and of such
long duration, the women, in rome parts of America, extin-
gfuifl the first sparks of that life which they are unable to
chcrifh, and by the use of certain herbs procure frequent
abortions ". Sensible that only flout and well-formed children
have force of constitution to struggle through fuchl an hard

" Pifo, p. 6. n Elli's Voyage t Hudson's Bay, ,;S. IlHrrcrn, dec. 7.
Ill. ix. c. ,.

VoL, 1. Q ( infancy,

B °0 K infancy, other nations abandon or defiroy such of their pro,-

l V.
I -L- geny as appear feeble or defective, as unworthy of attention °.

Even when they endeavour to rear all their children without
diftinEtion, so great a proportion of the whole number pe-
rifles under the rigorous treatment which muff be their lot
in the avage state, that few of those who laboured under
any original frailty attain the age of manhood P. Thus, in
palished ocieties, where the means of fubfiflence are secured
with certainty, and acquired with ease; where the talents of;
the mind are often of more importance than the powers of the
body; children are preserved notwithstanding their defects or.
deformity, and grow up to be useful citizens.. In rude.nations,.
such persons are either cut off as soon as they are born,- or becom-
ing a burden to themselves and to the community, cannot long,
protrac their lives. But in those provinces of the New World.
where, by the establishment of the Europeans, more regular.
provision has been made for the subsistence of its inhabitants,
and they are restrained from laying. violent hands on their chil-
dren, the Americans are so far from being eminent for any fu-
perior perfecion in their form, that one flould rather fufpea
some peculiar imbecillity in the race, from the extraordinary
number of individuals who are deformed, dwarfifh, mutilated
blind, or deaf''.

Uniformityof I-IOWEVER feeble the confitittion of the Americans may be,
tli.1r appear it is remarkable, that there is less variety in the human forlfi

throughout the New World, than in the ancient continent.
When Columbus and the other difcovercrs first visitcd the dif-

" Guiill. Hilt. ii. 23.. Techo's Hilt of Pa;r.guay, &:. Churclill's Collca v. vi. c8
L'rcuxii lliit. Callad. p. 7. 1 Voyage de Ulloa, i. 23.

fcrcrnt

.erent countries of America which lie within the torrid zone, B 0 K

IV.

*they naturally expeted to find people of the fame complexion _
with thofc in the corresponding regions of the other hemisphere.
To tlcir amazcment, however, they discovered that America
contained no negroes ; and the cause of this singular appear-
ance became as much the objec of curiosity, as the fat itself
was of wonder. In what part or membrane of the body that
humour resides which tinges the complexion of the negro with a
deep black, it is the business of anatomifls to inquire and de-
fcribc. The powerful operation of heat appears manifestly to
be the cause which produces this firiking variety in the human
species. All Europe, almost the whole of Asia, and the tem-
*perate parts of Africa, are occupied by men of a fair com-
plexion. All the torrid zone in Africa, some of the warmer
regions adjacent to it, and a few countries in Asia, are- filled
with people of a deep black colour. If we trace the nations of
our continent, making our progress from cold and temperate
countries towards those parts which are exposed to the influence
.of vehement and unremitting heat, we shall find, that the extreme
whiteness of their skin soon begins to diminish ; that its colour
deepens gradually as we advance; and after paring through all
the fucceflive gradations of shade, terminates in an uniform
unvarying black. But in America, where the agency of heat
is checked and abated by various causes, which I have already
explained, the climate seems to be deflitute of that force which
produces such wonderful eicfes on the human frame. The
colour of the natives of the torrid zone, in America, can hardly
*e said to be of a deeper hue than that of the people in the more
temperate parts of their continent. Accurate olbfirvers, wlho
had an opportunity of viewing the Americans in v\iv difncrcnt

' 1'. Martyr, dic. p. I.

Q( 2 i.iniatcs,

B °0 K climates, and in countries far removed from each other, have

IV.
a--._ been itruck with the amazing imilarity of their figure and

aspet '.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so little from

one standard in fashioning the human form in America, the
creation of fancy hath been various and extravagant. The
fame fables that were current in the ancient continent, have
been revived with refpea to the New World, and America too
has been peopled with human beings of monstrous and fantastic
appearance. The inhabitants of certain provinces were de-
fcribed to be pigmies of three feet high; those of others to be
giants of an enormous size. Some travellers published accounts
of people with only one eye, others pretended to have discovered
men without heads, whose eyes and mouths were planted in
their breasts. The variety of Nature in her producions is,
indeed, so great, that it is presumptuous to set bounds to her ser-
tility, and to rejec indiscriminately every relation that is not per-
fetly consonant to our own limited observation and experience.
But the other extreme, of yielding an hasty assent, on the
slightest evidence, to whatever has the appearance of being
strange and marvellous, is no less unbecoming a philosophical
inquirer, as, in every period, men are more apt to be betrayed
into error, by their weakness in believing too much, than by
their arrogance in believing too little. In proportion as science
extends, and nature is examined with a discerning eye, the
wonders that amused ages of ignorance disappear. The tales
of credulous travellers concerning America are forgotten; the
monsters which they describe have been fearcled for in vain;

5 See NOTE XLV.
4 and

and those provinces where they pretend to have found inhabit- B K
ants of singular forms, are now known to be possesed by peo- '- _J
pie no wife different from the other Americans '.

THOUGH these relations may, without discussion, be rejected

as fabulous, there are other accounts of such varieties in the
human species in some parts of the New World, which reft
upon better evidence, and merit more attentive examination.
This variety has been particularly observed in three different
diftrias. The first of there is situated in the isthmus of Da-
rien, near the centre of America. Lionel Wafer, a traveller
possessed of more curiosity and intelligence than we ihould have
expeced to find in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there
a fnall, but singular race of men. They are of low flature,
according to his description, of a feeble make, incapable of en-
during fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk white; not refem-
bling that of fair people among Europeans, but without any
tinture of a blush or sanguine complexion. Their kin is
covered with a fine hairy down of a chalky white, the hair of
their heads, their eye-brows, and eye-lashes, are of the fame
hue. Their eyes are of a singular form, and so weak, that
they can hardly bear the light of the fun; but they fee clearly
by moon-light, and are most aive and gay in the night".
No race similar to this has been discovered in any other part of
America. Cortes, indeed, found some persons exactly refem-
bling the white people of Darien, among the rare and mon-
firous animals which Montezuma had collected . But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the provinces border-
ing on the ifihmus of Darien, they were probably brought

See NOTE XLV. U Wafer Dceciipt. oflflh. ap. Dampier, iii . 346.
w Cortes ap. Ramus. iii. p. zl, E.

from

B- O0 .K from thence. Singular as the appearance of those people may

V be, they cannot be confidered as constituting a diftint species.

Among the negroes of Africa, as well as the natives of the Indian
islands, nature sometimes produces a small number of individuals,
with all the characeriflic features and qualities of the white peo-
ple of Darien. The former are called Albinos by the Portuguese,
the latter Kackerlakes by the Dutch. In Darien the parents of
-those Whites are ofthe'.fame colour with the other natives of the
country;- and this observation, applies equally to the anomalous
progeny of the negroes and Indians. ' The fame mother who
produces ome children of a colour that.does not belong to the
race, brings forth the reft of the complexion peculiar to her
· country x. One conclusion may then be formed with refpea
to the people described by Wafer, the Albinos and the Kacker-
laIs; they are a degenerated breed, not a separate class of men;
and from ome disease or defea oftheir parents, the peculiar
colour and debility which mark their degradation is transmitted
to them. As a decisive proof of this, it has been observed, that
neither the white .people of Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa,
propagate their race: their children are of the colour and tem-
perament peculiar to the natives of their refpetive.countries '.

THE second diflriCt that is occupied -by inhabitants differing

in appearance from the other people of America, is situated in
a high northern latitude, extending from the coast of Labrador
towards the pole, as far as.the country is habitable. The peon
.pie scattercd over those dreary regions, are known to the Euro-
.peans by the name of Efquimaux. They themselves, with that
idea of their own superiority, which consoles the rudest and

Margrav. IIit. Rer. Nat. Brna. lib. viii. c. 4. Y Wafer, p. 348. DcmanCr.
: 1ift. de '.Afriquc, ii. 234. Rcchcrch. Philof. fur les Amer. ii. i, &c.

n('r

most wretched nations, assume the name of CKralit or AIcn. B o ° IK

IV.

They are of a middle size and robust, with heads of a difpro- <e-
portioned bulk, and feet as remarkably finall. Their cor-,
plexion, though swarthy, by being continually exposed to the
rigour of a cold climate, inclines to the European white, ra-
ther than to the copper colour. of America, and the men have
beards which are sometimes bushy and long . From these
marks of diflinOtion, as well as from one still less equivocal,
the affinity of thir language to that of the Greenlanders, which
I have already mentioned, we may conclude, with some degree
of confidence, that the Efquimaux are a race different from the-
reft of the.Americans..

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concerning the

inhabitants of the third diflrid, situated at the southern ex-
tremity of America. These are the famous Patagonians, who,
during two centuries and a half, have afforded a subjet
of. controversy to the learned, and an objec of wonder to
the vulgar. They are supposed to be one of the wandering
tribes, which occupy that, valf, but. least known region of Ame-
rica, which extends from the river De la Plata to the Straits
of Magellan. Their proper flation is in that part of the in-
terior country, which lies on the banks of the river Negro;
but in the hunting season they often roam as far as the firaits
which separate Terra dcl Fucg from the main-land. The firfl
accounts of this people were brought to Europe by the compa-
nions of Magellan , who described them as a gigantic race,
above eight feet high, and of frcength in proportion to their

Ellis Voy. to Ilud(. Bay, p. 131. i-9. De la Pothlie, tom. i. p. 79. Wales'
journ. of a Voy. to Churchill River. Phil. Traf. vo!. Ix. 109.

-' allncr's Decription of Pat;lgonia, p. lo2.

.1; cnormous .

B o K enormous size. Among several tribes of animals, a lifparity
A-,--_j in bulk, as confide:able; may be observed. Some large breeds

of horses and dogs exceed the more diminutive races in flature
and ir-ength, as far as the Patagonian is supposed to rife above
the ufural ltandard of the human body. But animals attain the
highest perfection of their species, only in mild climates, or
where they find the most nutritive food in greatest abundance.
It is not then in the uncultivated wafle of the Magellanic re-
gions, and among a tribe of unprovident savages, that we
Should expect to find man, possessing the highest honours of his
race, and distinguished by a superiority of size and vigour, far
beyond what he has reached in any other part of the earth.
The most explicit and unexceptionable evidence is requisite,
in order to eftabliih a faCt, repugnant to those general principles
and laws, which seem to affeCt the human frame in every
other instance, and to decide with refped to its nature and quali-
ties. Such evidence has not hitherto been produced. Though
several persons, to whose testimony great refpet is due, have
visited this part of America since the time of Magellan, and
have had interviews with the natives; though ome have as-
firmed, that such as they saw were of gigantic flature, and
others have formed the fame conclusion from measuring their
footsteps, or the skeletons of their dead; yet their accounts
vary from each other in so many essential points, and are min-
gled with so many circumfiances manifefily false or fabulous,
as detraCt much from their credit. On the other hand, some'
navigators, and those among the most eminent of their order
for discernment and accuracy, have afTerted that the natives of
Patagonia, with whom they had intercourse, though flout

b See NOTE XLVII.

and

.and well made, are not of such extraordinary size as to be B.O O K

iV.

diflinguifhed from the reft of the human fpecics. The exist-
ence of this gigantic race of men, seems, then, to be one of
those points in natural history, with refLpeL to which a cautious
-inquirer will hesitate, and will chufe to fifpcnd his, affcnt until
more complete evidence shall decide, whether he ought to ad-
mit a fad, seemingly inconfiflent with what rcafon and expe-
aience have discovered concerning the flrulure and condition
of man, in all the various situations in which he has been ob-
served.

IN order to form a complete idea with refpea to the confli- Their slate of

heal1h.

tution of the inhabitants of this and the other hemif)hecrc, we
fliould attend not only to the make and vigour of their bodies,
but confider what degree of health they enjoy, and to what period
of longevity they ufially arrive. In the simplicity of the favagc
fiate, when man is not opprefled witl labour, or enervated by
luxury, or difucieted with care, we are apt to imagine that his
life will flow on almost untroubled by disease or suffering, until
his days be terminated, in extreme old age, by the gradual dc-
cays of nature. Wre find, accordingly, among the Americans,
as well as among other rude people, pcrfons, whose decrepit
and flvrivcllcd form feemns to indicate an extraordinary length of
life. But as moil of them are unacquainted with the art of
.numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what is part, as
they are improvident for what is to come, it is impossible to
.ascertain their age with any degree of prccifion . It is evident,
that the period of their longevity mufl vary considerably, ac-
cording to the diversity of climates, and their different modes of

b Ulloa Nolic. Areric 323. Eancro!t Nat. lill. of Guiana, 1.?.
VOL. I. r fubfiflence.

B V0 K subsistence. They seem, however, to be every where exempt

IV. _---,,-- from many of the diflempers which afflid polished nations. None

of the maladies, which are the immediate offspring of luxury,
or sloth, ever visited them; and they have no names in their
languages by which to diflinguiflh this numerous train of ad-
ventitious evils.
Dirafres. BUT, whatever be the situation in which man is placed, he

is born to susser; and his diseases, in the savage state, though
fewer in number, are, like those of the animals whom he
nearly resembles in his mode of life, more violent, and more
fatal. If luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of one
species, the rigour and difreffes of savage life bring on
those of another. As men, in this state, are wonderfully
improvident, and their means of subsistence precarious, they
often pass from extreme want to exuberant plenty, according
to the iciffitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the variety in
the producions of the seasons. Their inconsiderate gluttony
in the one situation, and their severe abstinence in the other,
are equally pernicious. For, though the human conflitution
may be accuflomed by habit, like that of animals of prey, to
tolerate long famine, and then to gorge voraciously, it is not
a little affected by such sudden and violent transitions. The
firength and vigour of savages are, at ome seasons, impaired
by what they susser from scarcity of food; at others, they are
afflicted with disorders arising from indigeflion and a superfluity
of gross aliment. There last are so common, that they may
be confidered as the unavoidable consequence of their mode
of subsisting, and cut off considerable numbers in the prime
of life. They are likewise extremely fubjedt to consumptions,

3 to

to pleuretic, asthmatic, and paralytic disorders', brought on by E O O K
the immoderate hardships and fatigue which they endure in t ---_
hunting and in war; or owing to the inclemency of the sea-
sons to which they are continually exposed. In the savage
sRate, hardships and fatigue violently assault the constitution.
In polished societies, intemperance undermines it. It is not
easy to determine which of them operates with most fatal
effe&, or tends molt to abridge human life. The influence of
the former is certainly molt extensive. The pernicious con-
sequences of luxury reach only a few members in any commu-
nity, the diftrefies of avage life are felt by all. As far as I can
judge, after very minute inquiry, the general period of human
life is shorter among savages, than in well-regulated and in-
duflrious societies.

ON E dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with which, in this

life, offended Heaven chastens the indulgence of criminal desire,
seems to have been peculiar to the Americans. By commu-
nicating it to their conquerors, they have not only amply
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this calamity to
those which formerly embittered human life, they have, per-
haps, more than counterbalanced all the benefits which Europe
has derived fiom the discovery of the New World. This dif-
temper, from the country in which it first raged, or from the
peol)le by whom it was flppofed to have been spread over
]Europe, has been sometimes called the Neapolitan, and some-
times the French disease. At its first appearance, the infccqion

Cliarlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. De la Poticric, ii. 37,

R r 2 was

B 0 E was so malignant, its symptoms o violent, its operation f6.

Iv.
L--,-... rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the efforts of medical ficill,

Afionilhment and terror accompanied this unknown affliCtion
in its progress, and men began to dread the extinCtion of the
human race by such a cruel visitation. Experience, and the
ingenuity of physicians gradually discovered remedies of such.
virtue as to cure or mitigate the evil. During the course of
two centuries and a half, its virulence seems to have abated con-
fiderably. At length, in the fame manner with the leprosy,.
which raged. in Europe for ome centuries, it may wate its force
and disappear; and in ome happier age, this western infetion,
like that from the East,, may be known only by defcrip-
tion '.

Power and II. AFTER confidering what appears to be peculiar in the
qualiies of
tleir mindI. bodily conflitution of the Americans, our attention is naturally

turned towards the powers and qualities of their minds. As
the individual advances from the ignorance and imbecillity of
the infant fRate, to vigour and maturity of understanding, ome-
thing similar to this may be observed in the progrcis of the fpe-
cies. With refpet to it, too, there is a period of infancy, dur-
ing which ftvcral powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all
are feeble and defective in their operation. In the early ages
of society, while the condition of man is fitnple and rude, his
rcafon is ut little excrcif:d, and his desires move within a,
very narrow sphere. Hence arise two remarkable charac.eriilics
of the human mind, in this ftatc. Its intlleCtual powers are
extremely limited ; its emotions and escorts are few and lan-

Sec NOTE XLVIII.

guid.

guid. Both these diftindtions are conspicuous among the rudest B V°
and most unimproved of the American tribes, and constitute a -
firiking part in their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called speculative rca- Intclleaual

soning or research, is altogether unknown in the rude ate of Jmlittd.
society, and never becomes the occupation or amusement of
the human faculties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty, the means of fubfiltence, as well as the
possession of leisure and tranquillity. The thoughts and atten-
tion of a savage are confined within the fmiall circle of objecs,
immediately conducive to his preservation or enjoyment. Every
thing beyond that, escapes his observation, or is perfecly in-
different to him. Like a mere animal, what is before his eyes
interests and affects him; what is out of fight, or at a dilltance,
makes no impression . There are several people in America
whose limited underfrandings seem not to be capable of form-
ing an arrangement for futurity; neither their solicitude nor
their foresight extend so far. They fllow blindfly the im-
pulse of the appetite which they feel, but arc entirely rccg:lrlc!s
of diflant confequcnces, and even of those removed in the cafl
degree from immediate apprehension. \VTlile they iiS lily
prize such things as serve present ufc, or miniiler to prcftcit cit-
joyment, they set no value upon tliofe which are not tlic olj'Ct
of some immediate want . When, on the a!lloaci o! tlIe
evening, a Caribbee feels. himself diltpofd to o to refl, no ccl-
fideration will tempt him to fell his halninc. But, i lite
morning, .when he is fallyinlg..ott to the binclf or pallimne (if

' Ulloa Noticias Anmcrc. 222. Vcin. a; ilt. ( i i. . . S.1 p.
Church Coll. v. 693. Barde Defer. des Caraibcs, p. i,. Lill Voy. ,,..

* '.

B v0 K the day, he will part with it for the slightest toy that catches
----' his fancy '. At the close of winter, while the imprefion of

what he has suffered from the rigour of the climate is fresh in
the mind of the North American, he sets hinifelf with vigour
to prepare materials for ereting a comfortable hut to protect
him against the inclemency of the succeeding season; but as
soon as the weather becomes mild, he forgets what is pait, aban-
dons his work, and never thinks of it more, until the return of
cold compels him, when too late, to resume it u.

IF in concerns the most interesting, and seemingly the most

simple, the reason of man, while rude and destitute of culture,
differs so little from the thoughtless levity of children, or the
improvident inftinC of animals, its exertions in other direc-
tions cannot be very considerable. The objects towards which
reason turns, and the disquisitions in which it engages, mull
depend upon the state in which man is placed, and are fig-
gested by his necefities and desires. Disquisitions, which ap-
pear the most necessary and important to men in one state of
society, never occur to those in another. Among civilized na-
tions, arithmetic, or the art of numbering, is deemed an effen-
tial and elementary science, and in our continent, the invention
and use of it reaches back to a period so remote as is beyond
the knowledge of history. But among savages, who have no
property to eflimate, no hoarded treasures to count, no variety
of objecs or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic is
a superfluous and ufelcfs art. Accordingly, among tome tribes
in America it seems to be quite unknown. There arc many

t' abat Voyages, ii. ii4, ix. Tcitrc, ii. 385. " Adair Ilif. of Amcr.
Ind ians, 417.

whio

who cannot reckon farther than three; and have no denomi- B 00 r

V.

nation to diflinguifh any number above it . Several can pro- , ---'
ceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When they would convey
an idea of any number beyond these, they point to the hair of
their head, intimating that it is equal to them, or with wonder
declare it to be so great that it cannot be reckoned Y. Not only
the Americans, but all nations, while extremely rude, esem to
be unacquainted with the art of computation . As oon, how-
ever, as they acquire such acquaintance or connection with a
variety of objeds, that there is frequent occasion to combine or
divide them, their knowledge of numbers increases, so that the
state of this art among any people may be confidered as one
standard,. by which to eflimate the degree of their improve-
ment. The Iroquois, in North America, as they are much
more civilized than the rude inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay,
or Guiana, have likewise made greater advances in this refpead;
though even their arithmetic does not extend beyond a thou-
sand, as in their petty tranfadions they have no occasion for
any higher number '. The Cherokee, a less considerable nation
on the fame continent, can reckon only as 'ar as a hundred,
and to that extent have names for the several numbers; the
smaller tribes in their neighbourhood can rife no higher than
ten b.

IN other refpeas, the exercise of the underflanding among No abflra

rude nations is ill more limited. The first ideas of every id'as"

" Condam, p. 67. Stadius up. de Bry, ix. 128. Lery. ibid. 25z . Weit. 362.

Lettr. Edif. 23. 314. y Dumont Louis i. 187. Herrera, dec. r. lib. iii.
c. 3. Biet. 36. Bordc 6. z This is the cafe with the Grecnlanders,
Crantz. i. 225. and with Kamcliatkadales, M. 'Abbc Chnlpp, iii. 17. ' Char-
Iev. Noun. France, iii. o02 b Adair Hilt. of Amer. Indianr, 77. See
NO TE XLIX.

human

B OO K hluman being must be such as he receives by the senses. But,

IV.
.---- in the mind of man, while in the savage slate, there seem to

be hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue. The ob-
jecs around him are presented to his eye. Such as may be
subservient to his' use, or can gratify any of his appetites, at-
-trat his notice; he views the reft without curiosity or atten-
tion. Satisfied with confidering them under that simple mode,
in which they appear to him, as separate and detached, he
neither combines them so as to form general clafles, nor con-
templates their qualities apart, nor bestows a thought upon
the operations of his own mind concerning them. Thus, he
is unacquainted with all the ideas which have been denominated
wuiveiraIl, or abq, r7ac, or of refec7ion. The range of his un-
derfianding must, of course, be very confined, and his reason-
ing powers be employed merely on what is fenfile. This is
so remarkably the cafe with the ruder nations of America, that
their languages, (as we fiall afterwards find) have not a word
to express any thing but what is material or corporeal. Time,
fpr7ce, JlbjTiancc, and a thousand other terms which represent
abftrac and universal ideas, are altogether unknown to them .
A naked savage, cowering near the fire in his miserable cab-
bin, or firctclicd under a few branches which afford him a
tcmporary flelter, has as little inclination as capacity for ufclcfs
fpclculation. Ilis thoughts extend not beyond what relates to
nnimal life; and when they are not dircsted towards some of
its concerns, his mind is totally inactive. In situations where
no extraordinary effort, either of ingenuity or labour is requi-
fitc, in order to satisfy the simple demands of nature, rile
powers of the mind are b fcldom rouscd to any exertion, that

c Condam, p. 5.1.

the

the rational faculties continue almoff dormant and unexercifed. B O O K

IV.

The numerous tribes scattered over the rich plains of South- .
America, the inhabitants of some of the islands, and of several
fertile plains on the continent, come under this description.
Their vacant countenance, their flaring unexpressive eye, their
lifeless inattention, and total ignorance of subjeCts, which seem
to be the first which hould occupy the thoughts of rational
beings, made such impression upon the Spaniards, when they
firfi beheld those rude people, that they confidered them as ani-
mals of an inferior order, and could not believe that they be-
longed to the human species d. It required the authority of a
papal bull to counteract this opinion, and to convince them that
the Americans were capable of the functions, and intitled to
the privileges, of humanity'. Since that time, persons more
enlightened and impartial than the discoverers or conquerors of
America, have had an opportunity of contemplating the moLf
savage of its inhabitants, and they have been aflonifhed and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in this condition,
approaches to the brute creation. But in feverer climates,
where subsistence cannot be procured with the fame ease, where
men must unite more closely, and a with greater concert,
necessity calls forth their talents, and harpens their invention,
so that the intelligent powers are more exercised and im-
proved. The North-Americans and natives of Chili, who in-
habit the temperate regions in the two great diflrids of Ame-
rica, are people of cultivated and enlarged understandings, when
viewed in comparison with some of those feated in the islands, or
on the banks of the Maragnon and Orinoco. Their occupations
are more various, their system of policy, as well as of war, more

.1 Harrern, dcc. 2. lib. ii . c . Torqucm. Mon. Ind. iii. 198.
VOL. . S f complex,

B O O K complex, their arts more numerous. But, even among them,

IV.
a _ . the intellectual powers are extremely limited in their operations,

and unless when turned direcly to those obje'ts which interest
a savage, are held in no estimation. Both the North-Americans
and Chilefe, when not engaged in some of the functions be-
longing to a warrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any other subjeL
worthy of their attention, or capable of occupying their minds .
If even among them, reason is so much circumscribed in its ex-
ertions, and never arrives, in its highest attainments, at the
knowledge of those general principles and maxims, which
serve as the foundation of science, we may conclude, that the
intelletual powers of man in the savage iRate are destitute of
their proper objec, and cannot acquire any considerable degree
of vigour and enlargement.

A&ive efforts FROM the fame causes, the aive efforts of the mind are
of the mind
few and lan- few, and, on most occasions, languid. If we examine into the
guid, motives which rouze men to activity in civilized life, and

prompt them to persevere in fatiguing exertions of their inge-
nuity or strength, we lhall find that they arise chiefly from
acquired wants and appetites. These are numerous and im-
portunate, they keep the mind in perpetual agitation, and, in
order to gratify them, invention mue be always on the firetch,
and industry must be incessantly employed. But the desires of
simple nature are few, and where a favourable climate yields'
almotf spontaneously what suffices them, they scarcely fir the
foul, or excite any violent emotion. Hence the people of fe-
veral tribes in America wafle their life in a liltlefs indolence.

r Lafitau, ii. 2.

To

To be free from occupation, fcems to be all the enjoyment to- B O IK

IV.

wards which they aspire. They will continue whole days firetched _---
out in their hammocs, or feated on the earth, in pcrfcd idle-
ness, without changing their posture, or raising their eyes from
the ground, or uttering a single word .

Sucin is their aversion to labour, that neither the hope of Iniprovident.

future good, nor the apprehension of future evil, can surmount
it. They appear equally indifferent to both, discovering little
solicitude, and taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to
secure the other. The cravings of hunger may rouse them;
but as they devour, with little diftindion, whatever will ap-
pcafe its inflincive demands, the exertions which these occa-
lion are of short duration. Deflitute of ardour, as well as
variety of dcfire, they feel not the force of those powerful
springs which give vigour to the movements of the mind, and
urge the patient hand of industry to persevere in its efforts.
Mlan, in some parts of America, appears in a form so rude,
that we can discover no eeas of his activity, and the prin-
ciple of underfianding which flould dire& it, fcems hardly
to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he has no fixed refi-
dence; he has ereced no habitation to flcltcr him from the
inclemency of the weather; he has taken no measures for
fccuring a certain fubffltencc; he neither sows nor reaps; but
roams about as led in fcarch of the plants and fruits which
the earth brings forth in succession; and in qucft of the game
which he kills in the forefls, or of the fifhl which he catches in
the rivers.

T-IS dccripltion, however, applies only to fomc tribes. solnv.irr;ty

with, cli; t
Man cannot continue long in this slate of feeble and unin- to, ail iilie.

¢ Ioulucr Voy. a Pl'lo, loz. Bordc, 15.

S ' 2 formlced

B o O K formed infancy. He was made for industry and aion, and

Iv.
v- the powers of his nature, as well as the necessity of his condi-

tion, urge him to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly, among
most of the American nations, especially those feated in rigorous
climates, some efforts are employed, and ome previous precau-
tions are taken, for securing subsistence. The career of re-
gular industry is begun, and the laborious arm has made the
irft essays of its power. Still, however, the improvident
and slothful genius of the savage state predominates. Even.
among those more improved tribes, labour is deemed ig-
nominious and degrading. It is only to work of a certain
kind that a man will deign to put his hand. The greater part
is devolved entirely upon the women. One half of the com-
munity remains inactive, while the other is oppressed with the
multitude and variety of its occupations. Thus their indufiry
is partial, and the foresight which regulates it,, is no less limited.
A remarkable instance of this occurs in the chief arrangement
with refpea to their manner of living. They depend for their
fubfifence, during one part of the year, on fishing; during
another, on hunting; during a third, on the produce of their
agriculture. Though experience has taught them to foresee
the return of those various seasons, and to make some provision
for their refpeaive exigencies, they either want sagacity to pro-
portion this provision to their consumption, or are so incapable
of any command over their appetites, that, from their incon-
fiderate waste, they often feel the calamities of famine as fe-
verely as the rudest of the savage tribes. What they susser one
year does not augment their indufiry, or render them more
provident to prevent similar dillreffes h. This inconsiderate
thoughtlessness about futurity, the effect of ignorance and the

h Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lettr. Edif. 23. 298. Derciipt. of N. France, Osborn's
Collca. ii. 880. De la Pothcrie, ii. 63.

cause

cause of sloth, accompanies and charaterizes man in every stage B o
of avage life'; and by a capricious singularity in his opera- '---'
tions, he is then least solicitous about supplying his wants, when
the means of satisfying them are most precarious, and procured
with the greatest difficulty .

III. AFTER viewing the bodily constitution of the Ameri- Their social

Rlate.

cans, and contemplating the powers of their minds, we are led,
in the natural order of inquiry, to confider them as united to-
gether in society. Hitherto our researches have been confined
to the operations of understanding refpeding themselves, as
individuals, now they will extend to the degree of their fenfi-
Iility and affection towards their species.

THE domestic state is the first and most simple form of hu- Domestic

man association. The union of the sexes, among different
animals, is of longer or shorter duration in proportion to the
cafe or difficulty of rearing their offspring. Among those
tribes where the season of infancy is short, and the young oon
acquire vigour or agility, no permanent union is formed.
Nature commits the care of training up the offspring to the
mother alone, and her tenderness, without any other afiftance,.
is equal to the task. But where the state of infancy is long and
helpless, and the joint assiduity of both parents is requisite in
tending their feeble brood, there a more intimate connecion
takes place, and continues until the purpose of nature be ac-
complifhed, and the new race grow up to full maturity. As
the infancy of man is more feeble and helpless than that of any
other animal, and he is dependent, during a much longer pe-
riod, on the care and foresight of his parents, the union betwcen.

i Bancroft's Nat. I-ift. of Guiana, 3z6. 333, k See NOTE L.

husband,

B 0o IK husband and wife came early to be confidered, not only as a

IV.
'---- ' solemn, but as a permanent contrac. A general frate of pro-

mifcuous intercourse between the sexes never exled but in the
imagination of poets. In the infancy of focicty, when men,
deflitute of arts and industry, lead a hard precarious life, the
rearing of their progeny demands the attention and eorts of
both parents; and if their union had not been formed and con-
tinued with this view, the race could not have been preserved.
Accordingly, in America, even among the rudest tribes, a re-
gular union between husband and wife was universal, and the
rights of marriage were underflood and recognized. In those
dirricts where fubfifience was scanty, and the difficulty of main-
taining a family was great, the man confined himself to one wife.
In warmer or more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring
food concurred with the influence of climate, in inducing the
inhabitants to increase the number of their wives '. In some
countries the marriage union fubfifcd during life; in others,
the impatience of the Americans under restraint of any species,
together with their natural levity and caprice, prompted them
to dissolve it on very flight prctexts, and often without assigning
any cause .

Ccn l!itin of BUT whether they confidered the obligation of this contrac
"' :."' as perpetual, or only temporary, the condition of women was

equally humiliating and miserable. Whether man has been
improved by the progress of arts and civilization in society, is
a (ucflion, which, in the wantonness of dillputation, has been
agitated among philofoplhrs. That women are indebted to

Lcttr. Eilf. 23. 318. Lnfitau Mocurs, i. 55.. Icry ap de Icly, ii. 23.1. JoLr-

u:l I- (willel ct Btchillilc, p. 88. " l.:ililu i. 5:-'. JIoutel } lIir . liilor.
3 1j. Loizano Dicr. dl Gran Chaco, o7. IIcllel piil Mocurs Jec Saiuvagcs, 1'. 3 . 3

2 Lthe

the refinements of polished manners for a happy change in their B 0 O0
state, is a point which can admit of no doubt. To dcfpifc and -.
to degrade the female fcx, is the clharatcriftic of the f'.rage
Rate in every part of the globe. 1Man, proud of excelling in
strength and in courage, the chief marks of pre-eminence among
rude people, treats woman, as an inferior, with dil;din. Tlhe
Americans, perhaps from that coldness and insensibility which
has been confidered as peculiar to their conflitution, add neglec
and harshness to contempt. The most intelligent travellers
have been struck with this inattention of the Americans to their
women. It is not, as I have already obfcrved, by a fucdied dif-
play of tenderness and attachment, that the American cndea-
vours to gain the heart of the woman whom he wishes to marry.
Marriage itfclf, instead of being an union of affecion and in-
tereftl between equals, becomes, among them, the unnatural
conjunction of a mafler ith his slave. It is the observation of
an author, whose opinions are deservedly of great weight,
that wherever wives are purchased, their condition is extremely
deprefred ". They become the property and the slaves of those
who buy them. In whatever part of the globe this cuoflo
prevails, the observation holds. In countries where refinement
las madle lnme progress, women, excluded from iocicty, and
shut up in fcqueflcred apartments, arc kept under tlhe vigi-
lant guard of their mailers. In ruder nations, they are de-
graded to the meanest funcaions. Among many people of
America tlhe marriage-contract is properly a purchiafe. Tlh
man buys his wife of her parents. Though unacquaint.ed wit
the use of money, or witlh ucli commercial tranfhl(lions as tail
place in more improved society, he knows how to give anl
equivalent for any objc which he desires to pofliis. In lme

Sketches of llil. of Mnn, i. I S..

places

B 0 O K places the suitor devotes his service for a certain time to the

Iv.
I -_ parents of the maid whom he courts; in others, he hunts for

them occasionally, or assists in cultivating their fields, and form-
ing their canoes; in others, he offers presents of such things
as are deemed most valuable on account of their usefulness or
rarity . In return for these, he receives his wife; and this
circumstance, added to the low eimation of women among
savages, leads him to confider her as a female servant whom he
has acquired, and whom he has a title to treat as an inferior.
In all unpolifhed nations, it is true, the functions in domestic
eeconomy, which fall naturally to the share of women, are so
many, that they are fubjeeed to hard labour, and must bear
more than their full portion of the common burden. But
in America their condition is so peculiarly grievous, and their
depression so complete, that servitude is a name too mild to de-
scribe their wretched slate. A wife, among most tribes, is no
better than a beast of burden, destined to every office of labour
and fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in sloth, or
spend it in amusement, the women are condemned to incessant
toil. Tasks are imposed upon them without pity, and services
are received without complacence or gratitude P. Every cir-
cumftance reminds women of this mortifying inferiority. They
muff approach their lords with reverence; they muf regard
them as more exalted beings, and are not permitted to eat in
their pretence q. There are diitrics in America where this do-
minion is so grievous, and so sensibly felt, that some women,
in a wild emotion of maternal tenderness, have destroyed their

* Lafiau M.eurs, &c. i. Co, &c. Charlev, iii. 285, &c. Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. iv.

c. 7. Dumonr, ii. 156. P Tertre, ii. 382. Borde Relat. des Mocurs
des Caraibes, p. 2z. Biet, 357. Condamine, p. Ilo. Fermin. i. 79.

1 Gumilla, i. 153. Barrere, 164. Labat. Voy. ii. 78. Chaunalon, 51. Tcrte,
»i. .feme

4 female

female children in their infancy, in order to deliver them from B 0o0 K

1V.

that intolerable bondage to which they knew they were doomed'. L-
Thus the first institution of social life is perverted. That slate
of domeflic union towards which nature leads the human fpe-
cies, in order to soften the heart to gentleness and humanity,
is rendered so unequal, as to establish a cruel ditinLtion be-
tween the sexes, which forms the one to be harsh and unfeel-
ing, and humbles the other to servility and fubjeaion.

IT is owing, perhaps, in ome measure, to this slate of de- Their women

not prolific.

prefion, that women in rude nations are far from being pro-
lific'. The vigour of their constitution is exhauied by excef-
five fatigue, and the wants and distresses of avage life are so
numerous, as to force them to take various precautions in order
to prevent too rapid an increase of their progeny. Among
wandering tribes, or such as depend chiefly upon hunting for
subsistence, the mother cannot attempt to rear a second child,
until the firfl has attained such a degree of vigour as to be in
some measure independent of her care. From this motive, it
is the universal practice of the American women to nurse their
children during several years '; and as they fcldom marry
early, the period of their fertility is over, before they can finifli
the long but necessary attendance upon two or three successive
children". Among some of the least polished tribes, whose industry
and foresight does not extend so far as to make any regular
provision for their own fubfiflencc, it is a maxim not to bur-

r Gumilla, ii. 233. 238. Hcrrern. dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4. G Lafitau, i. ;o0.

Charlevoix, iii. 04. 1 Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4. u Chanril.
iii. 303. Dumont Mcm. fur Louifiane, ii. 270. Denys Hilt. Natur. de 1'Ameriquc, &c.
ii. 365. Charlev. HIill. de Parng. ii. 422. x Techo's Account of Paranguay,
&c. Church. ColleCt. vi. oS. Lctt. Edif. z4. 200' Lozano Defcr. g9.

VOL. . T t den

O Q° K den themi.elves with rearing more than two children '; and no

.--,. filch numerous families, as are frequent in civilized societies,
are to be found among me, in this state '. When twins are
born, one of them commonly is abandoned, because the mother
is not equal to the task of educating both . When a mother
dies while ihe is nursing a child, 411 hope of preserving its life
fails, and it is buried together with her in the fame grave ', As
the parents are frequently exposed to wnot by their Qwn ipro-
vident indolence, the difficulty of fuflaining their children be-
comes so great, that it is not uncommon to abandon or destroy
them b. Thus their experience of the difficulty of training up
an infant to maturity, amidit the hardships of savage life, often
stifles the voice of nature among the Americans, and fuppreffe
the strong emotions of parental tenderness.

Parental as-
feion and. BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants of America
filial duty.

thus to set bounds to the increase of their families, they are
not deficient in affeCtipn and attachment to their offspring,
They feel the power of this inftin in its, full force, and as
long as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no people
exceed them in tenderness and care . But in rude nations,
the dependence of children upon their parents is of shorter
continuance than in polished societies. When men must be
trained to the various functions of civil life by previous dif,
cipline and education, when the knowledge of abflrufe fci-
ences muff be taught, and dexterity in intricate arts must be ac-
quired, before a young man is prepared to begin his career of

y Macclcur's Journal, 63. z Lett. Edif. x. zoo. See NOTE LI.
a Charlev. iii. 368. Lett. Edif. x. 2oo. P. Melch. HIrnandczMemor. de Chc-
riqui. Colbert, Collct. Orig. Pap. i. b Venegas Hi. of Californ. i. 8.

Gumilla, i. a2 . Biet. 30.

aQ.ion,

ancion, the attentive feelings of a parent are not confined to the g O0 1t

IV.

years of infancy, but extend to the establishment of his child in
the world. Even then, his fblicitude does not terminate. His pro-
teaion may still be req-uisite, and his wisdom and experience still
prove useful guides. Th-us a permanent connection is formed;
parental tenderness is' exercised, and filial refped returned,
throughout the whole course of life. But in the simplicity of
the savage slate, the affection of parents, like the inftindtive
fondness of animals, ceases ainioft entirely as soon as their off-
spring attain maturity. Little inft'rution fits them for that
mode of life to which they are defiined. The parents, as if
their duty were accomplished, when they' have conducted their
children through the helpless years of infancy, leave them as-
tervwards at entire liberty. They seldom advise or admonifll,
they never chide or chastise them. They susser them to be
absolute maflers of their own, actions b. In an American
hut, a father, a mother, ad their posterity, live together
like persons assembled by accident, without seeming to feel
the obligation of the duties mutually arising from this con-
neation '. As filial love is not cherished' by the continuance
of attention or good offices, the recollection of benefits received
in early infancy is too faint to excite it. Conscious of their own
liberty, and impatient of refiraint, the youth of America are
accustomed to a as if they were totally independent. Their
parents are not objets of greater regard than other persons.
They treat them always with ncgledt, and often with fuich
harilfnefs and insolence, as to fill those who have been wit-

b Charlcv. iii. 272. Bict. 39o. Gumilla, i. 212. Lafitau, i. 6z. Crcuxii, HIit.

Canad. p. 71. Fcrnandez, Relac. Hill. de los Chcquit. 33. Charlev. Hilt.
N. Fr. iii. 73.

T t 2 ncefca

? °o K neffes of their conduat with horror d. Thus the ideas which

Iv.
- _-.- ' iPfeem to be natural to man in his savage slate, as they result

from his circumfiances and condition in that period of his pro-
grefs, affe& the two capital relations in domestic life. They
render the union between husband and wife unequal. They
horten the duration, and weaken the force, of the conneCtioi
between parents and children.

Poi;tical in- IV. FROM the domeflic slate of the Americans, the tranfi-
titutions.

tion is natural to the consideration of their civil government
and political institutions. In every inquiry concerning the
operations of men when united together in society, the firfi
objet of attention should be their mode of subsistence. Ac-
cordingly as thatvaries, their laws and policy must be different.
The institutions suited to the ideas and exigencies of tribes,
which subsist chiefly by fishing or hunting, and which have
hardly formed a conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which muff take place when
the earth is cultivated with regular indufiry, and a right of
property, not only in its producions, but in the foil itself, is
completely ascertained.

MoJe of sub- ALL the people of America, now under review, belong to
iillence. the former class. But though they may all be comprehended

under the general denomination of savage, the advances which
they had made in the art of procuring to themselves a certain
and plentiful ubfiftence, were very unequal. On the vast

d Gumilla, i. 212. Tcrtre, ii. 36. Challev. HIfi. dcN. France, iii. 309. Charlev.
-lit. ilc Parag. i. i l. Lezano, Defrip. dcl Gran Chico, p. 68. oo. o . Fcrnand.
Rclac. Iliflor. de los Cliquit, 426.

plains

plains of South-America, man appears in one of the rudest B K
itates in which he has been ever observed, or, perhaps, can '--
exist. Several tribes depend entirely upon the bounty of na-
ture for subsistence. They discover no solicitude, they cmploy
little foresight, they scarcely exert any indufiry, to secure
what is neceifary for their support. The Topayers of Brasil,.
the Guaxeros of Tierra-Firme, the Caigua, the Moxos, and.
several other people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant; Even the
culture of the manioc, of which caffada bread is made, is an
art too intricate for their ingenuity, or too fatiguing to their
indolence. The roots which the earth produces spontaneously,
the fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather in the
woods together with lizards and other reptiles, which the heat
engenders in a fat foil, moistened by frequerrt rains, supply
them with food during ome part of the year . At other By fifmig..
times they subsist by fishing; and nature seems to have in-
dulged the laziness of the people, by the liberality with which
she ministers, in this way, to their wants. The vast rivers of
South-America abound with an infinite variety of the moil de-
licate fish. The lakes and marshes, formed by the annual
overflowing of the waters, arc filled with all the different species,
where they remain shut up, as in natural reservoirs, for the
use of the inhabitants. They swarm in such ihoals, that in
some places they are catched without art or industry '. In
others, the natives have discovered a method of inseting the
water with the juice of certain plants, by which the filh are so

Nicuhoff. Hifl. of Brasil. Church Coll. ii. 13.. Simon, Conquiaa de Ticrra Firn;m,

p. 166. Techo, Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lcttr. Edif. 23. 384.
1o. 19o. Lozano, Defrip. del Gr-in Chac,, p. 81. Ribas, Hiltor. dc los triunfos, &c.
p. 7. S Sre NOTE LI,'

intoxicated,

B 0 0 K intoxicated, that they float on the surface,. and are taken with

Iv.

the hands. Some tribes have ingenuity enough to preserve
them without salt, by drying or smoking them upon. hurdles
over a flow fire h. The- prolific quality of the rivers in South-
America induces- many of the natives to retort to their banks,
and to depend almost entirely for nourifmcnt on what their
waters supply with such profusion . In this part of the
globe,, hunting seems not to have been the firfl employment of
men, or the first effort of their invention and labour to obtain
food. They were fishers before they became hunters; and as
the occupations of the former do not call for equal exertions
of activity, or talents, with those of the latter, people in- that
slate appear to possess neither the fame degree of enterprise,
nor of ingenuity The petty nations, adjacent to the Ma-
ragnon and Orinoco, are Inanifefily the molt inactive and leafl
intelligent of all the Americans.
By hunting. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can fufiain them-

selves in this manner. The greater Fart of the American na-
tions, dispersed over the- forests with which their country is
covered, do not procure subsistence with the fame facility.
For although there forests, especially in the southern continent
of America, are flored plentifully with game , considerable
efforts of activity and ingenuity are requisite in pursuit of it.
Necessity incited them to the one, and taught them the other.
Hunting became their principal occupation; and as it called
forth firenuous exertions of courage, of force, and of invcn-

g See NOTE LIII. h Condam. 159. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lcttr. E.Jil
Il. 99. 23. 328. Acugna, Relat. dc la Riv. dcs Anmaz. 13S.

1 Barrere, Relat. de Fr. Equin. p. 155. k . M;iltvr, Dccad. p. 3.1.
Cumnilla, ii. 4, &c. Acugna, i. 156.

3 tion,

tion, it was deemed a funtion no ess honourable than neceffa- B °0 K
ry. This was peculiar to the men. They were trained to it - -
from their earliest youth. A bold and dextrous hunter ranked
next in fame to the distinguished warrior, and an alliance with
the former is often courted in preference to one with the latter'.
H-ardly any device, which the ingenuity of man has discover-
ed for ensnaring or defiroying wild animals, was unknown to
the Americans. While engaged in this favourite exercise, they
shake off the indolence peculiar to their nature, the latent powers
and vigour of their minds are roused, and they become ative,
persevering, and indefatigable. Their sagacity in finding their
prey, and their address in killing it, are equal. Their reason
and their senses, being constantly direced towards this one ob-
jet, the former dilplays such fertility of invention, and the
latter acquire such a degree of acuteness, as appear almost in-
credible. They difccrn the footfieps of a wild beait, which
escape every other eye, and can follow them with certainty
through the pathless forefl. If they attack their game openly,
their arrow seldom errs from the mark"; if they endeavour to
circumvent it by art, it is almost impossible to avoid their toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were not permitted to
marry, until they had given such proofs of their skill in hunting
as put it beyond doubt that they were capable of providing for a
family. Their ingenuity always on the stretch, and harpened
by emulation, as well as necessity, has firuck out many inven-
tions, which greatly facilitate success in the chafe. The
most singular of these is the discovery of a poison in which
they dip the arrows employed in hunting. The lightest wound

i Charlev. Hiiloire de la N. France, iii. 5 . " Biet Voy. de France
Equin. 357. Davies' Difcov. of the River of Amaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287.

with

oB 0 K -with those envenomed shafts is mortal. If they only pierce the
IV.
a_-_- A:kin, the blood fixes and congeals in a moment, and the strong-

eft animal falls motionless to the ground. Nor does this poison,
-notwithfianding its violence and subtlety, insec the flesh of the
animal which it kills. That may be eaten with perseeR safety,
and retains its native relish and qualities. All the nations
along the Maragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with this
composition, the-chief ingredient in which is the juice extracted
from the root of the curare, a species of withe ". In other parts
of America, they employ the juice of the manchenille for the
fame purpose, and it operates with a no less fatal aivity.
To people possessed of those secrets, the bow is a more de-
ftrucive weapon than the musket, and, in their skilful hands,
does great execution among the birds and beasts which abound
in the forefis of America.

By agricul- BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man to a state more
ture.

advanced. The chafe, even where prey is abundant, and the
dexterity of the hunter much improved, affords but an uncer-
tain maintenance, and at some seasons it must be suspended al-
together. If a savage trusts to his bow alone for food, he and
his family will be often reduced to extreme distress . Hardly
any region of the earth furnishes man spontaneously with what
his wants require. In the mildest climates, and most fertile foils,
his own industry and foresight must be exerted, in ome degree.
to secure a regular -supply of food. Their experience of this
surmounts the abhorrence of labour natural to savage nations,
and compels them to have recourse to culture, as subsidiary to
hunting. Inparticular situations, ome small tribes may subsist

"Gumilla, ii. i. &c. Condamn. zo8. Rechcrch. Philof. ii. z39. Bancroft Nat.
His. of Guiana, z,81 &c. ° See NOTE LIV.

6 by

by fishing, independent of any production of the earth, raised by B o K

Iv.

their own industry. But throughout all America, we scarcely I-
meet with any nation of hunters, which does not praise some
species of cultivation.

THEIR agriculture, however, is neither extensive nor labo- The various

fruits of their

rious. As game and fish are their principal food, all they aim culture.
at by cultivation, is to supply any occasional defect of these. In
the southern continent of America, the natives confined their
industry to rearing a few plants, which, in a rich foil and warm
climate, were easily trained to maturity. The chief of there is
Maize, well known in Europe by the name of Turkey or Indian
wheat, a grain extremely prolific, of simple culture, agreeable
to the taste, and affording a strong hearty nourishment. The
second is the manioc, which grows to the size of a large shrub,
or small tree, and produces roots somewhat resembling parsnips.
After carefully queezing out the juice, these roots are grated
down to a fine powder, and formed into thin cakes, called
Cafada bread, which, though insipid to the taste, proves no
contemptible food P. As the juice of the manioc is a dead-
ly poison, ome authors have celebrated the ingenuity of the
Americans, in converting a noxious plant into wholesome
nourishment. But it fiould rather be confidered as one
of the desperate expedients for procuring fubfiflence, to
which necessity reduces rude nations; or, perhaps, men were
led to the u of it by a progress, in which there is nothing
marvellous. One species of manioc is altogether free of any
poisonous quality, and may be eaten without any preparation
but that of roafing it in the embers. This, it is probable, was

v Sloane I-IO. of Jam. ntrod. p. 18. L;bat. i. 394. Acofla Iiil. i . Occid. N.i-

tur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ulloa, i. 6z. Aublct Mcin. fur le Magnioc. Illl. des 'lantes, oin.
ii p. 6, &c.

VOL. I. IJ 11 frfl

B 0 I K firfi used by the Americans as food; and necessity having gra-

IV.
-- A--' dually taught them the art of separating its pernicious juice

from the other species, they have by experience found i to be
the most prolific as well as the most nourishing plant of the
two q. The third is the plantain, which though it rifes to the
height of a tree, is of such quick growth, that in less than a
year it rewards the industry of the cultivator with its fruit.
This, when roasted, supplies the place of bread, and is both pa-
latable and nourishing . The fourth is the potatoe, whose cul-
ture and qualities are too well known to need any description.
The fifth is pimento, a small tree, yielding a firong aromatic
spice. The Americans, who, like other inhabitants of warm
climates, delight in whatever is hot and of poignant flavour,
deem this seasoning a necessary of life, and mingle it copiously
with every kind of food they take '.

SucH are the various productions, which were the chief ob-

jeca of culture among the hunting tribes on the continent of
America, and with a moderate exertion of active and provident
induitry, these might have yielded a full supply to the wants
of a numerous people. But men, accustomed to the free and
vagrant life of hunters, are incapable of regular application to
labour; and confider agriculture as a secondary and inferior
occupation. Accordingly, the provision for subsistence, arising
from cultivation, was so limited and scanty among the Ameri-
cans, that, upon any accidental failure of their usual success in
hunting, they were often reduced to extreme diflrefs.

q Martyr Decad. 30. Labat. i. 4 1. Gumilla, iii. 192. Machuca Milic Indiana,
t64. See NOTE LV. r See NOTE LVI.

Gumilla, iii. t7a. Acota, lib. iv. c. 20.

IN

IN the islands, the mode of subsisting was considerably dif- B 0O K

Iv.

ferent. None of the large animals which abound on the con- -
tinent were known there. Only four species of quadrupeds,
besides a kind of small dumb dog, existed in the islands, the
biggest of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit . To hunt
such diminutive prey, was an occupation which required no
effort either of acivity or courage. The chief employment of
a hunter in the isles was to kill birds, which on the continent
are deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the pursuit of boys'.
This want of animals, as well as their peculiar situation, led
the islanders to depend principally upon sithing for their sub-
fiftence . Their rivers, and the sea with which they are fur-
rounded, supplied them with this species of food. At some
particular seasons, turtle, crabs, and other fhell-fith, abounded
in such numbers, that they could support themselves with a fa-
cility in which their indolence delighted '. At other times, they
ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious forms . To fishing,
the inhabitants of the islands added some degree of agriculture.
Maize b, manioc, and other plants, were cultivated in the fame
manner as on the continent. But all the fruits of their indufiry, Their agri-
together with what their foil and climate produced fponta- cintur" very
neoufly, afforded them but a scanty maintenance. Though
their demands for food were very sparing, they hardly raised
what was sufficient for their own consumption. If a few Spa-
niards fettled in any diflriE, such a small addition of fupernu-
merary mouths oon exhaufled their scanty flores, and brought
on a famine.

U Oviedo, lib. xii. in proem. x Ribas H-ill. de los triumph. p. 13. D la

Potheric, ii. 33. iii. zo. Y Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. Gomari HIill. (;encr.
c. z8. ' Gomara lifl. Gener. c. 9. Labat, ii. zi, &c. Oviedo,
lib. xiii. c. 3. b See NOTE LVI1.

U 2 T'wo

B OO K Two circumstances, common to all the savage nations of
_ - -.--. America, concurred with those which I have already mentioned,
Two aufis
of its iper- not only in rendering their agriculture imperfec, but in cir-
fedion. cumfcribing their power in all their operations. They had no

tame animals; and they were unacquainted with the use of
metals.

The want of IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest state, appears
tame animals, as lord of the creation, giving law to various tribes of animals,

which he has tamed and reduced to fubjeCion. The Tartar
follows his prey on the horse which he has reared; or tends his
numerous herds, which furnish him both with food and clothing;
the Arab has rendered the camel docile, and avails himself of
its persevering strength; the Laplander has formed the rein-
deer to be subservient to his will; and even the people of Kam-
chatka have trained their dogs to labour. This command over
the inferior creatures is one of the noblest prerogatives of man,
and among the greatest efforts of his wisdom and power.
Without this, his dominion is incomplete. He is a monarch,
who has no fubjeas; a mailer, without servants, and must
perform every operation by the firength of his own arm. Such
was the condition of all the rude nations in America. Their
reason was so little improved, or their union so incomplete,
that they seem not to have been conscious of the superiority of
their nature, and suffered all the animal creation to retain its
liberty, without establishing their own authority over any one fpc-
cics. Most of the animals, indeed, which have been rendered
domeflic in our continent, do not exifl in the New World; but
those peculiar to it are neither so fierce, nor so formidable, as to
have exempted them from servitude. There are rome animals
of the fame species in both continents. But the rein-deer, which

has

has been tamed and broken to the yoke in the one hemisphere, B o O K

IV.

runs wild in the other. The b/on of America is manifestly of the _
fame species with the horned cattle of the other hemisphere c
These, even among the rudest nations in our continent, have been
rendered domestic; and in consequence of his dominion over
them, man can accomplish works of labour with greater facility,
and has made a vast addition to his means of fubliftence. The
inhabitants of many regions in the New World, where the bison
abounds, might have derived the fame advantages from it. It is
not of a nature so indocile, but that it might have been trained to
be as subservient to man as our cattle d. But a savage, in that
uncultivated state wherein the Americans were discovered, is
the enemy of the other animals, not their superior. He waftes
and defiroys, but knows not how to multiply or to govern.
them .

THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftincion between the

inhabitants of the Ancient and New Worlds, and a high pre-
eminence of civilized men above such as continue rude. The
greatest operations of man in changing and improving the face
of nature, as well as- his most considerable efforts in cultivating
the earth, are accomplished by means of the aid which he receives
from the animals whom he has tamed and employs in labour.
It is by their strength that he subdues the stubborn foil, and
converts the desert or marsh into a fruitful field. But man, in
his civilized slate, is so accuRfomed to the service of the domeflic
animals, that he seldom relects upon the vati benefits which
he derives from it. If we were to suppose him, even when

Buffon, Artic. Sif/o. d Nouv. Decouverte par I-ennepin, p. 197.

Kalm. i. 207. ' Buffon Hii. Nar. ix. 85. Hill. Plhilof. cr Polit. ds Lta-
bliflcm. des Europ. dans Ics deux nldes, vi. 364.

nmoa

B O OK most improved, to be deprived of their useful ministry, his

Iv.
^ -',empire over nature muff in some tneafure cease, and he would

remain a feeble animal, at a loss how to subsist, and incapable
of attempting such arduous undertakings as their assistance
enables him to execute with ease.

Want of the IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion of man
useful metals. over the animal creation, or his acquiring the use of metals,

has contributed most to extend his power. The sera of this
important discovery is unknown, and in our hemisphere very
remote. It is only by tradition, or by digging up some rude
instruments of our forefathers, that we learn that mankind
were originally unacquainted with the use of metals, and en-
deavoured to supply the want of them by employing flints,
shells, bones, and other hard fubifances, for the fame purposes
which metals serve among polished nations. Nature completes
the formation of some metals. Gold, illver, and copper, are
found in their perfect state, in the clefts of rocks, in the fides
of mountains, or the channels of rivers. These were accord-
ingly the metals first known, and first applied to use. But
iron, the most serviceable of all, and to which man is most in-
debted, is never discovered in its perfec form; its gross and fiub-
born ore must feel twice the force of fire, and go through two
laborious processes, before it become fit for use. Man was long
acquainted with the other metals, before he acquired the art of
fabricating iron, or attained such ingenuity as to perfeCt an in-
vention, to which he is indebted for those instruments where-
with he subdues the earth, and commands all its inhabitants.
But in this, as well as in many other refpeds, the inferiority
of the Americans was conspicuous. All the savage tribes, scat-
tcred over the continent and islands, were totally unacquainted

4 with

with the metals which the foil produces in great abundance, if B O K

1V.

we except some trifling quantity of gold, which they picked up -
in the torrents that descended from their mountains, and
formed into ornaments. Their devices, to supply this want of
the serviceable metals, were extremely rude and aukward.
The most simple operation was to them an undertaking of
immense difficulty and labour. To fell a tree with no other
instruments than hatchets of stone, was employment for a
month '. To form a canoe into shape, and to hollow it, con-
fumed years; and it frequently began to rot before they were
able to finish it g. Their operations in agriculture were equally
flow and defecive. In a country covered with woods of the
hardest timber, the clearing of a small field destined for cul-
ture required the united efforts of a tribe, and was a work of
much time and great toil. This was the business of the men,
and their indolence was satisfied with performing it in a very
slovenly manner. The labour of cultivation was left to the
women, who, after digging, or rather firring the field, with
wooden mattocks, and stakes hardened in the fire, sowed or
planted it; but were more indebted for the increase to the.
fertility of the foil, than to their own rude industry h.

AGRICULTURE, even when the tfrength of man is seconded

by that of the animals which he has fubjeded to the yoke, and
his power augmented by the use of the various infiruments with
which the discovery of metals has furnished him, is flill a work
of great labour; and it is with the sweat of his brow that he
renders the earth.fertile. It is not wonderful, then, that people

f Gumilla, iii. 196. . Borde Rcl.,t. des Caraibcs, p. 22.
z Gumilla, iii. 166, &c. Lettr. Edif. xii. o.

destitute

B 0 K destitute of both these advantages should have made so little
_-- -- progress in cultivation, that they must be confidered as depend-

ing for subsistence on fishing and hunting, rather than on the
fruits of their own labour.

Political in- FRO.M this description of the mode of fubfifling among the
flitutions a-
tifing from rude American tribes, the form and genius of their political
this ilate. inflitutions may be deduced, and we are enabled to trace various

circumstances of diftintion between them and more civilized
nations.

i. Divided i. THEY were divided into small independent communities.
into small
communities. While hunting is the chief source of subsistence, a vast extent

of territory is equifite for supporting a small number of peo-
ple. In proportion as men multiply and unite, the wild ani-
mals, on which they prey, diminish, or fly at a greater distance
from the haunts of their enemy. The increase of a society in
this state is limited by its own nature, and the members of it
must either disperse, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of procuring food, than by hunting.
Beasts of prey are by nature solitary and unsocial, they go not
forth to the chafe in herds, but delight in those recesses of the
forest where they can roam and destroy undisturbed. A nation
of hunters resembles them, both in occupation and in genius.
They cannot form into large communities, because it would
be impossible to find subsistence, and they muff drive t a
distance every rival who may encroach on those domains, which
they confider as their own. This was the slate of all the Ame-
rican tribes, the numbers in each were finall, though scattered
over vast countries; they were far removed from one another,

and

and engaged in perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip . In Ameo B o o K

I V.

rica, the word nation is not of the fame import as in other A
parts of the globe. It is applied to small societies, not exceed-
ing, perhaps, two or three hundred persons, but occupying
provinces larger than some kingdoms in Europe. The country
of Guiana, though of larger extent than the kingdom of France,
and divided among a great number of nations, did not con-
tain above twenty-five thousand inhabitants k. In the provinces
which border on the Orinoco, one may travel several hundred
miles in different directions, without finding a single hut, or
observing the footsteps of a human creature'. In North-Ame-
rica, where the climate is more rigorous, and the foil less ser-
tile, the desolation is still greater. There, vast journeys of some
hundred leagues have been made through uninhabited plains and
forests ". As long as hunting continues to be the chief em-
ployment of man to which he trusts for subsistence, he can
hardly be said to have occupied the earth .

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are firangers to Unacquainted

with the idea

the idea of property. As the animals on which the hunter of property.
feeds are not bred under his infpecion, nor nourished by his
care, he can claim no right to them, while they run wild in
the forest. Where game is so plentiful that it may be catchcd
with little trouble, men never dream of appropriating what is
of small value, or of cafy acquilition. WVhre it is so rare, that
the labour or danger of the clafe requircs the united efforts

Lozano, Dcfcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59.6z. FIrnandcz, Relac. Ilift. de losChiquit. 62z.
k Voyages de Marchlis, iv. 353. 1 Gniilla, ii. IoT.
01 M. Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. L.llitau, ii. 1;9. Bonfl, Travels throghl
Louisiana, i. xll. Sec NOTE, LVIII. "Sce N O 'E LIX.

'VOL. . X x of

B 0°v K of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a common flock, be-

IV.
---' longing equally to all, who, by their kill or their courage,

have contributed to the success of the excursion. The forest,
or hunting-grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe,
from which it has a title to exclude every rival nation. But no
individual arrogates a right to any difirid of there, in prese-
rence to his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to all; and
thither, as to a general and undivided store, all repair in quest
of sustenance. The fame principles, by which they regulate
their chief occupation, extend to that which is ubordinate.
Even agriculture has not introduced among them a complete idea
of property. As the men hunt, the women labour together, and
after they havefhared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy
the harvest in common . Among ome tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public granary, and di-
vided among them, at stated times, according to their wants P.
Among others, though they lay up separate fibres, they do
not acquire such an exclusive right of property, that they can
etjoy superfluity, while those around them susser want'. Thus
the diffinfions arising from the inequality of pofflefions are un-
known. The terms rich or poor enter not into their language,
and being strangers to property, they are unacquainted with
that, which is the great object of laws and policy, as well as the
chief motive which induced mankind to establish the various
arrangements of regular government '.

High fene of 3. PEOPLE in this tate retain a high sense of equality and
independ- independence. Wherever the idea of property is not eflablifled,
cnce.

° Dr. Frgufon's Essay, 125. P Gumilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hilt. of N. C.iral.
327. Se NOTE LX. q Denys, ilt. Natur. ii. 392, 393.

' P. Martyr, Decad. p. .5. Vcneg. Hlift. of Califoin. i. 6. Lcry, Navig. in
Brasil, c. 17.

there

there can be no diftindtion among men, but what arises fi-om B o o K

Iv.

personal qualities. These cal be conspicuous only on such
occasions as call them forth into exertion, In times of dan-
ger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wifidom and experience
of age are consulted, and prescribe the measures which ought
to be urfued. When they take the field againfl the encniies
of their country, the warrior of most approved courage leads
the youth to the combat'. If they go forth in a body to the
chafe, the most expert and adventurous hunter is foremost,
and direEts their motions. But during seasons of tranquillity
and inaction, when there is no occasion to display those ta-
lents, all pre-eminence ceases. Every circumstance indi-
cates, that all the members of the community are on a level.
They are clothed in the fame simple garb. They feed on the
fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture are exaCtly fimi-
lar. No diflindion can arise from the inequality of possessions.
xVhatever forms dependence on one part, or conflitutes fupe-
riority on the other, is unknown. All are freemen, all feel
thcmfclves to be such, and assert with firmness the rights
which belong to that condition'. This sentiment of inde-
pendence is imprinted so deeply in their nature, that no change
of condition can eradicate it and bend their minds to servitude.
Accustomed to be abfolutc maflers of their own conduct, they
disdain to execute the orders of another, and, having never
known control, will not submit to correction . Many of the
Americans, when they found that they were treated as slaves
by Spaniards, died of grief; many destroyed themselves in
dcfpair'.

Acofla, Iilt. lib. i. c. 19. Stadius, Hiin. Brasil, lib. ii. c. 13. De 3ry, iii. p. ro.
Bict, 361. t Labat. vi. Iz4. Biickcll. Hill. of Carol. 310.

" Sec NOTE. LI. x Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Co:lqu;l.
de la lorida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138. Benzo lifl. Nov. Orb. lib. iv. c. 2.

X 2 4. AONG

B 4.0 AM ONG people in this slate, government can assume little
'-c- -- authority, and the sense of civil subordination must remain
Snf¢ of f:b-
ordination very imperfec. W\hile the idea of property is unknown, or
:mpcrfea. incompletely conceived, and the spontaneous productions of the

earth, as well as the fruits of industry, are confidered as be-
longing to the public flock, there can hardly be any such
fubjcft of difference or discussion among the members of the
fame community, as will require the hand of authority to in-
tcrpofe in order to adjust it. Where the right of separate
and exclusive poftfffion is not introduced, the great objedc
of law and jllrifdiLion does not exist. When called into the
field, either in their own defence, or to invade the territories
of their enemies, when engaged in the toil and dangers of the
chafe, the members of a tribe perceive that they are part of
a political body. They are conscious of their own connection
with the companions in conjunction with whom they aa; and
they follow and reverence such as excel in conduCt and valour.
But, during the intervals between such common efforts, they
are scarcely conscious of the ties of political union . No vi-
fible form of government is established. The names of ma-
gi/'rate and JiibjeC are not in use. Every one seems to enjoy
his natural independence almost entire. If a scheme of. public
utility be proposed, the members of the community are left at
liberty to chufe whether they will assist or not in carrying it
into execution. No flatute imposes any service as a duty, no
compulsory laws oblige them to perform it. All their refolu-
tions are voluntary, and flow from the impulse of their own
minds . The firfl flep towards establishing a public jurifdic-

Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco, 93. Mclendez Tcforos Verdaderos, ii. 23. Sec
N OTE LXII. Y Charlcv. IHifi Nov. France, iii. 266. z68.

tion

tion has not been taken in those rude ocieties. The right of B O K

IV.

revenge is left in private hands ': If violence is committed, or ----.
blood is shed, the community does not assume the power either
of inflicting or of moderating the punishment. It belongs to the
family and friends of the person injured or slain to avenge the
wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered by the aggreflbr.
If the elders interpose, it is to advise, not to decide, and it is
seldom their counsels are lifened to; for as it is deemed pufil-
lanimous to susser an offender to escape with impunity, rcfent-
ment is implacable and everlasting . The object of govern-
ment among savages is rather foreign than domeflic. They do
not aim at maintaining interior order and police by public
regulations, or the exertions of any permanent authority, but
labour to preserve such union among the members of their
tribe, that they may watch the motions of their enemies, and
aa against them with concert and vigour.

SUCH was the form of political order eftablifhled among the T\wht, pcc-

greater part of the American nations. In this state were mofR Icriptiols ;ip
of the tribes, spread over the vast provinces extending eastward ply.
of the Mississipi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence to the
confines of Florida. In a similar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, and several tribes in Pa-
raguay and Guiana, and in the countries which itretch from
the mouth of the Orinoco to the peninsula of Yucatan. Among
such an infinite number of petty afociations, there may be pe-
culiarities which constitute a diftinCion, and:mark the various

z Hcrrcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8. a Charlcv. Ilif. N. France, iii. 271,
272. Lafit. i. 486. Cffani -lift, de Nuevo Reyno d Granada, 226.

degrees

B 0 0 K degrees.of their civilization and improvement. But an attempt

IV.
'----' to trace and enumerate these would be vain, as they have not

been observed by persons, capable of discerning the minute and
delicate circunmfances, which serve to discriminate nations re-
fembling one another in their general character and features.
The description which I have given will apply, with little
variation, to the policy of every people in America, which
to fishing and hunting had added ome degree of agriculture.

RUDE and imperfec as those institutions may appear,

several tribes were not o far advanced in their political pro-
grefs. Among all those petty nations which trusted for ub-
iftence entirely to fihing and hunting without any species of
cultivation, the union was so incomplete, and their sense of
mutual dependence so feeble, that hardly any appearance of go-
vernment or order can be discerned in their proceedings. Their
wants are few, their objects of pursuit simple, they form into
separate tribes, and at together, from inftind, habit, or con-
veniency, rather than from any formal concert and association.
To this class belong :the Californians, several of the fma!l na-
tions in the extensive country of Paraguay, some of the people
on the banks of the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalcne,
in the new kingdom of Granada b.
Some regu- BUT though among these laft-mentioncd tribes there was

ar- hardly any hadow of regular government, and even among

those which I firt described, its authority is flcnder and con-
fined within narrow bounds, there were some places in Amc-

h Vencgas. i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Tccho. Hil. of Paiag. Chuichill, vi. 7;.
Elill. GeC . des Voyages, xiv. 7.1.

3 rica

rica where it was carried far beyond the degree which seems B 0 K

IV.

natural to rude nations. In surveying the political operations '- --
of man, either in his savage or civilized slate, we discover fin-
gular and excentric institutions, which start as it were from
their station, and fly off so wide that we labour in vain to
bring them within the general laws of any system, or to ac-
count for them by those principles which influence other com-
munities in a similar situation. Some instances of this occur
among those people of America, whom I have included under
the common denomination of savage. These are so curious and
important that I hall describe them, and attempt to explain
their origin.

IN the New World, as well as in other parts of the globe, Particularly

in fomeof the

cold or temperate countries appear to be the favourite feat of warmer re-
freedom and independence. There the mind, like the body, is gions.
firm and vigorous. Conscious of their own dignity, and ca-
pable of the greatest efforts in asserting it, men aspire to inde-
pendence, and their stubborn spirits stoop with reluctance to
the yoke of servitude. In warmer climates, by whose influence
the whole frame is so much enervated, that present pleasure is
the supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment, men ac-
quiefce, almost without a struggle, in the dominion of a fupe-
rior. Accordingly, if we proceed from north to south along
the continent of America, we ilall find the power of those
vested with authority gradually increasing, and the spirit of the
people becoming more tame and passive. In Florida, the au-
tlhority of the sachems, caziques, or chiefs, was not only per-
manent, but hereditary. They were distinguished by peculiar
ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds, and
were treated by their fubjeds with that reverence, which people

accustomed.

B oo 1K accuflomed to fubjeeion, pay to a mailer '. Among the nation

IV.
--- of the Natchez, situated on the banks of the Mffiflippi, a dif-

Amnong the
N~\ciihz. ference of rank took place, with which the northern tribes were

altogether unacquainted. Some families were reputed noble,
and enjoyed hereditary dignity. The body of the people was
confidered as vile, and formed only for fubjealion. This dif-
tindion was marked by appellations which intimated the high
elevation of the one state, and the ignominious depression of
the other. The former were called RefpeEtable; the latter, the
Stinkards. The great Chief, in whom the supreme authority
was vested, is reputed to be a being of superior nature, the
brother of the Sun, the sole object of their worship. They ap-
proach him with religious veneration, and honour him as the
representative of their deity. His will is a law, to which all
submit with implicit obedience. The lives of his fubjeds are so
absolutely at his disposal, that if any one has incurred his difplea-
sure, he comes with profound humility and offers him his head.
Nor does their dominion end with their lives ; their principal
officers, their favourite wives, together with many domestics
of inferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that they may be
attended in the next world by the fame persons who served
them in this; and such is the reverence in which they are held,
that those victims welcome death with exultation, deeming it a
recompence of their fidelity and a mark of diftin&ion, to be fe-
leated to accompany their deceased master". Thus a perse
despotism, with its full train of superstition, arrogance, and
cruelty, is eftablifled among the Natchez, and by a singular

c Cardenas y Cano Enfuyo Chrinol. Ai a Hill. dc Floiida, p. 46. Le Moyne de Morgues

Jeoncs Florida. Ap. de Bry. p. , 4. &c. Charlev. Hilt. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

d Dumont Memoir Hilt. fur Louifiane, i. 75. Charlev. Hill. N. France, iii. 419, &c.
Lettr. Edif. o. 0o6. i.

6 fatality,

fatality, that people has tafted of the worst calamities incident B K

IV.

to polished nations, though they themselves are not far ad- '----
vanced beyond the tribes around them in civility and improve-
ment. In Hispaniola, Cuba, and the larger islands, their In the ilnds.
caziques or chiefs poffefled extensive power. The dignity
was transmitted by hereditary right from father to son.
Its honours and prerogatives were considerable. Their sub-
jets paid great respect to the caziqucs, and executed their or-
ders without hesitation or reserve . They were difinguilhed
by peculiar ornaments, and in order to preserve or augment tie
veneration of the people, they had the address to call in the aid
of superstition to uphold tlicir authority. They delivered their
mandates as the oracles of heaven, and pretended to poflefs the
power of regulating the seasons, and of dispensing rain or fun-
shine, according as their fubjcds flood in need of them.

IN some parts of the continent, the power of the caziques In P:,gotp.

seems to have been as extcnfive as in the isles. In 13ogota,
which is now a province of the New kingdom of Granada,
there was fettled a nation, more considerable in number and
more improved in the various arts of life, than any people in
America except the M4exicans and Peruvians. They fublifled
chiefly by agriculture. The idea of property was introduced
among them, and its rights fccurcd by laws, handed down by
tradition, and oblcrved with great care '. They lived in large
towns. They were clothed in a decent manner, and their
houfcs may be termed commodious, when compared with tlofie

Herrera, dlec. . lib. i. c. 6. lib. iii. c. 41. p. 88. Life ofColumb. ch. 32.
I'lcdrliita I-Iilt. de las conquift dcl N. rcyno de Gran. p. 4(.
VOL. I. Y y of

B 0 0 K of the people around them. The effects of this uncommon

IV.
-._ civilization were conipicuous. Government had aflumed a re-

gular form. A jurifdiion was eftablilhed, which took cog-
nizance of different crimes, and punished them with rigour. A.
diftindion of ranks was known; their chief, to whom the Spa-
niards gave the title of monarch, and who merited that name on
account of his splendor as well as power, reigned with absolute
authority. He was attended by officers of various conditions;.
he never appeared in public without a numerous retinue; he
was carried in a fort of palanquin with much pomp, and har-
bingers went before him to sweep the road and strew it with
flowers. This uncommon pomp was supported by presents or
taxes received from his fubjeds, to whom their prince was such.
an object of veneration, that none of them presumed to look.
him directly in the face, or ever approached him but with an
averted countenance . There were other tribes on the fame
continent, among which, though far less advanced than the
people of Bogota in their progress towards refinement, the free-
dom and independence, natural to man in his savage slate, was
much abridged, and their caziques had assumed extensive au-
thority.

Causes of IT is not easy to point out the circumflances, or to discover
lar appear- the causes which contributed to introduce and establish among
ances. each of those people a form of government so different from

that of the tribes around them, and so repugnant to the genius
of rude nations. If the persons who had an opportunity of ob-
serving them, in their original tfate, had been more attentive

r Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i. c. z. lib. v. c. 56. Piedrahita, c. . p. 25, &c. Gomala
Clif. c. 7 .

and

and more discerning, we might have received information from B o o K

1V.

them sufficient to guide us in this inquiry. If the tranfaQions *
of people, unacquainted with the use of letters, were not in-
volved in impenetrable obscurity, we might have derived some
information from that source. But as nothing fatisfacory can
be gathered, either from the accounts of the Spaniards, or
from their own traditions, we must have recourse to con-
jecures, in order to explain the irregular appearances in
the political state of the people whom I have mentioned.
As all those tribes which had loft their native liberty and
independence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in coun-
tries approaching to it, the climate may be supposed to have
had some influence in forming their minds to that servitude,
which seems to be the destiny of man in those regions of the
globe. But though the influence of climate, more powerful
than that of any other natural cause, is not to be overlooked;
that alone cannot be admitted as a solution of the point in
question. The operations of men are so complex, that we must
not attribute the form which they assume, to the force of a
single principle or cause. Although despotism be confined in
America to the Torrid Zone, and to the warm regions border-
ing upon it, I have already observed that these countries contain
various tribes, some of which possess an high degree of freedom,
and others are altogether unacquainted with the reitraints of go-
vernment. The indolence and timidity peculiar to the inha-
bitants of the islands, rendered them so incapable of the senti-
ments or efforts necelfary for maintaining independence, that
there is no occasion to search for any other cause of their tame
fnlbmiffion to the will of a fuiperior. The fubjetion of the
Natcliez, and of the people of Bogota, fecins to have bccn the

Y y 2 confcquience

B O O K consequence of a difference in their tate from that of the other

Iv.
- ·----' Americans. They were fettled nations, reiding conflantly in

one place. Hunting was not the chief occupation of the for-
mer, and the latter seem hardly to have trusted to it for any
part of their subsistence. Both had made such progress in agri-
culture and arts, that the idea of property was introduced in
tome degree in the one community, and fully established in the
other. Among people in this state, avarice and ambition have
acquired objecs, and have begun to exert their power; views
of interest allure the felfifl; the desire of pre-eminence excites
the enterprising; dominion is courted by both; and passions un-
known to man in his savage state prompt the interested and am-
bitious to encroach on the rights of their fellow-citizens. Motives,
with which rude'nations are equally unacquainted, induce the
people to ubmit tamely to the usurped authority of their fupe-
riors. But even among nations in this slate, the spirit of fubjeas
could not have been rendered so obsequious, or the power of
rulers so unbounded, without the intervention of superstition.
By its fatal influence, the human mind, in every stage of its
progress, is depressed, and its native vigour and independence
subdued. \Vhoever can acquire the direction of this formidable
engine, is secure of dominion over his species. Unfortunately
for the people whose inflitutions are the subjeCt of inquiry,
this power was in the hands of their chiefs. The caziques of
the ifes could put what responses they pleased into the mouths
of their Ceis or gods; and it was by their interposition, anl
in their name, that they impolcd any tribute or burden on their
people . The great chief of the Natchcz was the principal
minifler as well as the reprefcntative of the Sun, their deity,

h Icrrera dec. . lib. iii. c. 3.

The

The refpel which the people of Bogota paid to their monarchs, B o O K
was inspircd by religion, and the heir apparent of the kingdom -
was educated in the innermost recess of their principal temple, un-
der such austere discipline, and with such peculiar rites, as tended
to fill his fubjeas with high sentiments concerning the fandity
of his charater, and the dignity of his station . Thus super-
flition, which, in the rudest period of society, is either altogether
unknown, or wafies its force in childifl unmeaning praicces,
had acquired such an ascendant over those people of America,
who had made ome little progress towards refinement, that it
became the chief instrument of bending their minds to an un-
timely servitude, and fubjeaed them, in the beginning of their
political career, to a defpotifn hardly less rigorous, than that
which awaits nations in the last itage of their corruption and
decline.

V. After examining the political inflitutions of the rude na- The'rart of

tions in America, the next objeEt of attention is their art of
war, or their provision for public security and defence. The
small tribes dispersed over America are not only independent
and unconnected, but engaged in perpetual hotlilitics witl one
another k. Though frangers to the idea of fparatc property
veiled in any individual, the rudest of the American nations are
well acquaintcd witl the rights of each community to its own
domains. This right they hold to be perfelc and excluCivc, en-
titling the pofTeflor to oppofc the encroachment of ncighbouring
tribes. As it is of the utmolt conifequence to prcvent tlhem
from deflroying or diflurbing the game in their hunting grounds,
they guard this national property with a jealous attention. ut

' Piedrnhita, p. 27. k Ribas Hlil. dc los triunip. p. 9.

as

B RK as their territories are extensive, and the boundaries of them

IV.
A_ c-- not exactly ascertained, innumerable fubjeas of dispute arise,

which seldom terminate without bloodshed. Even in this
simple and primitive slate of society, interest is a source of dif-
cord, and often prompts savage tribes to take arms, in order to
repel or punish lch as encroach on the forests or plains, to
which they trust for subsistence.

Their mo- BUT interest is not either the most frequent or the noft
tives for en- powerful motive of the incessant hostilities among rude nations.
gaging in
war. These must be imputed to the passion of revenge, which rages

with such violence in the breast of savages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be confidered as the diflinguifling charaaer-
iftic of men, in their uncivilized state. Circumfiances of power-
ful influence, both in the interior government of rude tribes,
and in their external operations against foreign enemies, con-
cur in cherishing and adding flrength to a passion fatal to the
general tranquillity. When the right of redressing his own
wrongs is left in the hands of every individual, injuries are
felt with exquisite sensibility, and vengeance exercised with
unrelenting rancour. No time can obliterate the memory of
an offence, and it is seldom that it can be expiated but by the

From the fpi- blood of the offender. In carrying on their public wars, avage
rit of vcn- nations are influenced by the fame ideas, and animated with the
geance.

fame spirit, as in prosecuting private vengeance. In small com-
munities, every man is touched with the injury or affront offered'
to the body of which he is a member, as if it were a persona!
attack upon his own honour or safety. The desire of revenge
is communicated from breast to breast, and loon kindles into
rage. As feeble societics can take the field only in finall par-
ties, each warrior is conscious of the importance of his own

arm,

arm, and feels that to it is committed a considerable portion of B 0 o K

Iv.

the public vengeance. War, which between extensive king- -- ---
doms is carried on with little animosity, is prosecuted by finall
tribes with all the rancour of a private quarrel. The resent-
ment of nations is as iplacable as that of individuals. It may Hence these-
be dissembled or fupprefled, but is never extinguished; and war, t
often, when least expected or dreaded, it burfis out with re-
doubled fury '. When polifled nations have obtained the glory
of viclory, or have acquired an addition of territory, they may
terminae a war with honour. But savages are not satisfied
until they extirpate the community, which is the object of their
rage. They fight not to conquer, but to destroy. If they en-
gage in hostilities, it is with a resolution never to fee the face
of the enemy in peace, but to prosecute the quarrel with im-
mortal enmity . The desire of vengeance is the firfl, and
almost the only principle, which a savage instils into the minds
of his children ". This grows up with him as he advances in
life; and as his attention is directed to few objects, it acquires
a degree of force unknown among men whole passions are dif-
fipated and weakened by the variety of their occupations and
pursuits. The dcfire of vengeance, which takes poffefion of
the heart of savages, refemblcs the inltindive rage of an ani-
mal, rather than the passion of a man. It turns, with un-
dilcerning fury, even against inanimate oljecs. If hurt acci-
dentally by a flone, they often seize it in a transport of anger,
and endeavour to wreak their vcngcance upon it °. If fruck.

I Boi.cher I-I Nat. de N. FIrance, p. 93. Chalrcv. Hill. e N. France, iii. 215. 251.
Le y ipl) D Dr'v, iii. o,. CIcux. Ilill. Can;l. p. 72. I.ozano Dcfcr. del Gran Chaco,

I9 llc.n.|. 'I c.iir deb S:ICha. 40. lilt. N. Fr. iii. 251.

Colden, i. i, ii. (

l:s . iarrere, p. 17 , 173. Chillev. N. l . ii. 326.

I.ery a) Dr i;ry, iii. 236. Lozano 1iilt. de Parag. i. 14. e Lcwy ap DC
Bry, iii. o.ith

s with.

B o o K with an arrow in battle, they will tear it from the wound,

Iv.

,
-- r break and bite it with their teeth, and dash it on the ground P.

With refpea to their enemies, the rage of vengeance knows
no bounds. When under the dominion of this passion, man
becomes the most cruel of all animals. He neither pities, nor
forgives, nor spares.

THE force of this passion is so well underflood by the

Americans themselves, that they always apply to it, in order
to excite their people to take arms. If the elders of any tribe
attempt to rouze their youth from sloth, if a chief wishes to
allure a band of warriors to follow him in invading an enemy's
country, the most persuasive topics of their martial eloquence
are drawn from revenge. " The bones of our countrymen,"
fay they, " lie uncovered; their bloody bed has not been washed
clean. Their spirits cry against us; they must be appeared. Let
us go and devour the people by whom they were slain. Sit no
longer inactive upon your mats; lift the hatchet, console the
spirits of the dead, and tell them that they shall be avenged ."

and their per- ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth snatch their
ptluity. arms in a transport of fury, raise the song of war, and burn

with impatience to embrue their hands in the blood of their
enemies. Private chiefs often aflemble finall parties, and invade
a hoflilc tribe, without confultiig the rulers of the community.
A inglc warrior, prompted by caprice or revenge, will take
the field alone, and march several hundred miles, to surprise
and cut off a fraggling encmy '. The cxploits of a noted war-

r Lerv ap De Bry, iii. 0. Ilerrer., dec. I. lit. vi. c. 8.

Chal;iilcv. Ilil. N. Fr. ii. 2i6, 217. Lery ;ip Dc Bry, iii. 204.
r SaN oT'lE LXIII.

'8 for,

rior, in such solitary excursions, often form the chief part of B o o K

IV.

the hiflory of an American campaign ; and their elders con-
nive at such irregular allies, as they tend to cherish a martial
spirit, and accuflom their people to enterprise and danger '.
But when a war is national, and undertaken by public autho-
rity, the deliberations are formal and flow. The elders as-
femble, they deliver their opinions in solemn speeches, they
weigh with maturity the nature of the enterprise, and balance
its beneficial or disadvantageous consequences with no incon-
fiderable portion of political discernment and sagacity. Their
priests and soothsayers are consulted, and sometimes they ask
the advice even of their women . If the determination be for
war, they prepare for it with much ceremony. A leader offers
to conduct the expedition, and is accepted. But no man is con-
firained to follow him; the resolution of the community to
commence hostilities imposes no obligation upon any member
to take part in the war. Each individual is still master of his
own conduct, and his engagement in the service is perfectly
voluntary .

TIIE maxims by which they regulate their military opera- Moeofc.r-

tions, though extremely different from those which take place tying on war.
among more civilized and populous nations, are well suited to
their own political state, and the nature of the country in which
they at. They never take the field in numerous bodies, as it
would require a greater effort of foresight and induflry, than is
usual among savages, to provide for their fubfiilence, during a
march of some hundred miles through dreary forests, or during

* See NOTE LXI\. t Bonl, i. 140. Lcry ap Dc Bry. zIS.

Icniiuepin Mncuii dles Sauv. .t. L;ll.tu, ii. 169. Chlarlcv. Hill. N. r.
iii. z5. z.
Z . Bit, 367. 380. ' Chailcv. Iill. N. Fr. z17, zi8.

VO L, I. Z
Z a long

B o K a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers. Th'eir armies are
A _-F - not encumbered with baggage or military ftbres. Each war-

riot, besides' his arms, carries a mat and a fiall bg of pouinded
maize, and with these is completely equipped for any service.
While at a distance from- the enemies frontier, they disperse
through the woods, and support themselves with the game
which they kill, or the fish' which they catch. A's they ap-
proach nearer to the territories of the nation, which they intend
to attack, they colle their troops, and advance with greater
caution. Even then they proceed wholly by ftratagetn andd am-
bufcade. They place not their glory in attacking their' en'emies
with open force. To surprise and deflroy is the greateft'merit'
of a commander, and the highest pride of his followers. War and
hunting are their only occupations, and they condut both with
the fame spirit and the fame arts. They follow the track of
their enemies through the forefl. They endeavour to discover
their haunts, they lurk in ome thicket near to these, and with
the patience of a sportsman lying in wait for game, will conti-
nue in their ltation day after day, until they can rush upon their
prey when most secure, and least able to resist them. If they
meet no straggling party of the enemy, they advance towards
their villages, but with such solicitude to conceal their approach,
that they often creep on their hands and feet through the woods,
and paint their skins of the fame colour with the withered
leaves, in order to avoid detection '. If so fortunate as to re-
main unobserved, they set on fire their huts in the dead of
night, and maffacrc the inhabitants, as they fly naked and dc-
fenceless from the flames. If they hope to cffel a retreat
without being pursued they carry off fme prifoncrs, whom

Y Charlev. .ilF. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Iiennip. Moeurs dcs Sauv. p. 59.

they

they reserve for a more dreadful fate. But if, notwithstanding B o o K

iV.

all their address and precautions, they find that their motions _
are discovered, that the enemy has taken the alarm, and is pre-
pared to oppose them, they usually deem it most prudent to re-
tire. They regard it as extreme folly to meetan enemy who
is on his guard, upon equal terms, or to give battle in an open
field. The most diftinguithed success is a disgrace to a leader,
if purchased with any considerable loss of his followers ; and
they never boast of a vicory if stained with the blood of their
own countrymen ". To fall in battle, instead of being reckoned
an honourable death, is a misfortune which fubjeds the memory
of a warrior to the imputation of raflinefs or imprudence b.

THis system of war was universal in America, and the small Not owing to

uncivilized tribes, dispersed through all its different regions couragef
and climates, display more craft than boldness in carrying on
their hoftiities. Struck with this condut, so opposite to the
ideas and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit peculiar to the
Americans, which is incapable of any generous or manly exer-
tion c. But when we reflect that many of there tribes, on oc-
cafions which call for extraordinary efforts, not only defend
themselves with obstinate resolution, but attack their enemies
with the most daring courage, and that they possess fortitude of
mind superior to the sense of danger or the fear of death, we
must ascribe their habitual caution to some other cause than
conflitutional timidity '. The number of men in each tribe is

See N O T E LXV. a Charlev. lii. N. Fr. iii. 238, 37. Biet.

381. Lafitau Mccurs ds S;uv. ii. z.R.. 1 Charlcv. iii. 376. Sce NO l T
LXVf. C Rcchcrchcs Philof. fur les Amcric. , 115. Vo) ngc e March. iv.
410. '' Lafitau Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 2za , z29. Challev. N. I:. iii. 307.

Zz si,

B o O K so small, the difficulty of rearing new members, amidst the

Iv.

- hardships and dangers of savage life, so great, that the life of a

citizen is extremely precious, and the preservation of it becomes
a capital objea in their policy. Had the point of honour been
the fame among the feeble American tribes, as among the
powerful nations of Europe, had they been taught, in contempt
of danger and death, to court fame or victory, they must have
been ruined by maxims, so ill adapted to their condition. But
wherever their communities are more populous, so that they
can at with considerable force, and can sustain the loss of feve-
ral of their members, without being sensibly weakened, the mi-
litary operations of the Americans more nearly resemble those
of other nations. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes situated
npon the banks of the river De la Plata, often take the field in
such numerous bodies, as deserve the name of armies . They
defy their enemies to the combat, engage in regular battles,
and maintain the conflic with that desperate ferocity, which is
natural to men, who have no idea of war but that of extermi-
nating their enemies, and who never give or take quarter'. In
-the powerful empires of Mexico and Peru, great armies were
assembled, frequent battles were fought, and the theory as well
as practice of war were different from what took place in those
petty societies which assume the name of nations.

Incapabe of BUT though vigilance and attention are the qualities chiefly
order or di- requisite, where the object of war is to deceive and to surprise;
vipline.

and though the Americans, when aing singly, display an
amazing degree of address in concealing their own motions,
and discovering those of an enemy, yet it is remarkable

Fabri Vcrifl. Dcfcrip. ndi. ap deBry, vii.p. 4. f See NOTE LXVIT.

*~'~g'~~ ~that

that, when they take the field in parties, they can seldom be C 00 K

IV.

brought to observe the precautions most eflential to their ----
own security. Such is the difficulty of accustoming savages
to ubordination, or to a in concert; such is their impa-
tience under restraint, and such their caprice and presumption,
that it is rarely they can be brought to conforn themselves
to the counsels and direcions of their leaders. They never
Ration centinels around the place where they reft at night, and
after marching ome hundred miles to surprise an enemy, are
often surprised themselves, and cut off, while funk in as pro-
found sleep as if they were not within reach of danger g

IF notwithstanding this negligence and security, which often

frustrate their most artful schemes, they catch the enemy un-
prepared, they rush upon them with the utmost ferocity, and
tearing off the scalps of all those who fall vicims to their rage",
they carry home those firange trophies in triumph. These
they preserve as monuments, not only of their own prowess,
but of the vengeance which their arm has inflited upon the
people who were objects of public resentment '. They are still
more solicitous to seize prisoners. During their retreat, if they
hope to assec it unmolested, these are commonly exempt from
any insult, and treated with ome degree of humanity, thought
guarded with the most firid attention.

BUT after this temporary suspension, their rage rekindles with T'rcatmcntof;

new fury. As soon as they approach their own frontier, some of prifoncr
their number are dispatched to inform their countrymen with
refpea to the success of the expedition. Then the prisoners

E Charley. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237. Lettr. Edif. 17. 308. 20. 130. Lafit. Mccurs,,
ii. 247. Lahontan, ii. 176. D Sec NOTE. LXVII.

I Lafitau Mo:urs, ii. 256,

begin

B °v K begin to feel the wretchedness of their condition. The women

Cp__L
.. of the village, together with the youth who have not attained

to the age of bearing arms, assemble, and forming thenmfelves
into two lines, through which the prisoners mufi pass, beat and
bruise them with sticks or stones in a cruel manner k After
this first gratification of their rage againt their enemies, follow
lamentations for the loss of such of their own countrymenas have
fallen in the service, accompanied with words and aions which
seem to express the utmost anguish of grief. But, in a moment,
upon a signal given, their tears cease, they pass, with a sudden
and unaccountable transition, from the depths of sorrow to
transports of joy, and begin to celebrate their vicory with all
the wild exultation of a barbarous triumph'. The fate of
the prisoners remains still undecided. The old men deliberate
concerning it. Some are deflined to be tortured to death, in
order to satiate the revenge of the conquerors; ome to replace
the members which the community has loft in that or former
wars. They who are reservcd for this milder fate, are led to
the huts of those whQfe friends have been killed. The women
meet them at the door, and if they receive them, their susser-
ings are at an end. They are adopted into the family, and,
according to their phrase, are feated upon :the.mat of he deceased.
They assume his name, they hold the fame rank, are treated
thenceforward with all the tenderness due to a father, a bro-
ther, a husband, or a friend. But if, either from caprice, or
an unrelenting desire of revenge, the women of any family reC
fuse to accept of the prisoner -who is offered to them, his doom
is fixed. No power can then save him form torture and death.

Their iditlc- WIIILE their lot is in ffpcnfc, the prisoners themselves al)-
c iniiig tlhir pear altogether unconccrerd tlbott what miay befal them. They

k Lahantan, ii. 1 8.t. 1 Chailcv. I-11. N. lir. i.i. 241. i afiau Mcurs, ii. .I.

3 talk,

talk, they eat, they sleep, as if they were perfealy at ease, and B o K

IV.

no danger impending. When the fatal sentence is intimated to 1
them, they receive it with an unaltered countenance, raise their
death-fong, and prepare to susser like men. Their conquerors and fortitude
assemble as to a solemn festival, resolved to put their courage " 'O'''
t6 the utmost proof. A scene ensues, the bare description
of which is enough to chill the heart with horror, wherever
rmen have been accustomed, by nmilder institutions, to refLpet
their species, and to melt into tenderncfs at the fight of hu-
man sufferings. The prisoners are tied naked to a flake,
but so as to be at liberty to move around it. Ail who are
present, men, vWomen, and children, rulh upon them like
furies. EVery species of torture is applied that the rancour
of revenge can invent. Some burn their limbs with red-
hot irons, some mangle their bodies with knives, others tear
their flefl from their bones, pluck out their nails by the
root, and rend and twist their sinews. They vie with one
another in refinements of torture. Nothing ets bounds to their
rage, but the dread of abridging the duration of their ven-
geance by haflening the death of the fuffercrs; and such is their
creel ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoiding indufirioufly
to litrt arty vital part, they often prolong this scene of anguifli
for several days. In spite of all that they itfFer, the victims
continue td ciant their death-fong with a filri voice, they boast'
of their' own exploitsy they insult thcir tormentors for tlicir
want of skill in avenging their friends ahd relations, they wnrn
thli of the vengeahce which awaits them, on account of tleir
death, and excite their ferocity by the mol provoking re-
proaches and threats. To display undaunted fortitude in ffich
dreadful situations is the noblefl triulmplh of a warrior. To
avoid the trial by a voluntary death, or to Ihrink under it, is

dec medl

B O 0 K deemed infamous and cowardly. If any one betray symptoms

IV.
a__- of timidity, they often dispatch him at once with contempt, as

unworthy of being treated like a man m. Animated with those
ideas, they endure, without a groan, what it seems almost im-
poflible that human nature flould futlain. They appear to be
not only insensible of pain, but to court it. " Forbear, aid an
aged chief of the Iroquois, when his insults had provoked one
of his tormentors to wound him with a knife, forbear these
flabs of your knife, and rather let me die by fire, that those
dogs, your allies, from beyond the ea, may learn by my ex-
ample to susser like men ." This magnanimity, of which there
are frequent instances among the American warriors, instead
of exciting admiration, or calling forth sympathy, exasperates
the fierce spirits of their torturers to fresh ads of cruelty °.
Weary at length of contending with men, whose constancy of
mind they cannot vanquish, ome chief in a rage puts a period
to their sufferings, by dispatching them with his dagger or
club P.

Sometimes THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by one no less
cat their pri- shocking. As it is impossible to appease the fell spirit of re-

venge which rages in the heart of a savage, this frequently
prompts the Americans to devour those unhappy persons, who
have been the vitims of their cruelty. In the ancient world,
tradition has preserved the memory of barbarous nations of
cannibals, who fed on human flesh. But in every part of the'
New World, there were people to whom this custom was fa-

m Dc la Potheric, ii. 237. iii. 48. C Colden, Hifl. of Five Nations, i. zoo.
° Voyages de Lahont. i. 236. P Charlev. Hill. N. 1:r. iii. 243, &c. 385.

Lafitau, Mo uri, ii. 265. Crcuxj, lilt. Canad. p. 73. Ilennep. Mocurs dc Sauv.
p. 6+, &c. Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tcrtrc, i. 405. De la Pothcric, ii. 22, &c.

miliar.

miliar. It prevailed in the outhern continent q, in several of B 0 0 IC

IV.

the islands ', and in various diftrids of North-America'. Even --
in those parts, where ccumflances, with which we are un-
acquainted, had in a great measure abolished this practice, it
seems to have been so well known, that it is incorporated into
the idiom of their language. Among the Iroquois, the phrase
by which they express their resolution of making war against
an enemy is, " Let us go and eat that nation." If they solicit
the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they invite it to " eat broth
made of the flesh of their enemies '." Nor, was the pracice
peculiar to rude unpolifhed tribes, the principle from which it
took rife, is so deeply rooted in the minds of the Americans,
that it subsisted in Mexico, one of the civilized empires in the
New World, and relics of it may be discovered among the
more mild inhabitants of Peru. It was not scarcity of food, as
some authors imagine, and the importunate cravings of hunger,
that forced the Americans to those horrid repasts on their fel-
low-creatures. Human flesh was never used as common food
in any country, and the various relations concerning people,
who reckoned it among the stated means of fub'fifence, flow
from the credulity and miflakes of travellers. The rancour of
revenge first prompted men to this barbarous aion . The
fiercest tribes devoured none but prisoners taken in war, or
such as they regarded as enemies . Women and children who

q Stadius ap De Bry, iii. 123. Lcry, ibid. 20o. Biet. 38.. Lcttr. Edif. 23. 341.
Pifo, 8. Condam. 84. 97. Ribas, HifR. de los Triumph. 473.

Life of Columb. 529. Mart. Dec. p. 18. Tcrtre, ii. 0o;.
Dumont, Mem. i. . 24. Charlev. Hisl. N. Fr. i. 259. ii. 14. iii. 21. De 1a Po-

thcrie, iii. 5o. ' Charlcv. I-it. N. Fr. iii. 20 , 2c). Lettr. Edif. 23.
r. 277. De la Pothcric, ii. 298. See NOTE LXIX.

U Biet, 383. lanco, Cnvcrfion de Pirit, p. 28. Bancioft, Nat. Ilii. of Guiana,
p. 259, &c. X Sec NOTE LXX.

VOL. 1. 3 Awere

B 0 0 K were not the'objes of enmity, if not cut off in the fury of

IV.
A-- _-- their first inroad into an hostile country, seldom suffered by the

deliberate effecs of their revenge Y.

THE people of South-America gratify their revenge in a

manner somewhat different, but with no less unrelenting ran-
cour. Their prisoners, after meeting at their first entrance,.
with the fame rough reception as among the North-Americans ,
are not only exempt from injury, but treated with the greatest
kindness. They are feasted and caressed, and ome beautiful.
young women are appointed to attend and solace them. It is.
not easy to account for this part of their conduct, unless we in-
pute it to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem studious
to attach their prisoners to life, by supplying them with every
enjoyment that can render it agreeable, their doom is irrevo-
cably fixed. On a day appointed, the victorious tribe assembles,
the captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he views the
preparations for the sacrifice with as much indifference, as if he-
himself were not the viaim, and meeting his fate with un-
daunted firnnefs, is dispatched with a single blow. The mo-
ment he falls, the women seize the body, and dress it for the
feast. They besmear their children with the blood, in order
to kindle in their bosoms a hatred of their enemies, which is
never extinguished, and all join in feeding upon the flesh with
amazing greediness and exultation . To devour the body of
a slaughtered enemy, they deem the most complete and exqu-i-
site gratification of revenge. Wherever this pratice prevails,

r Biet, 382. Bandini, Vita di Americo, 84. Trtre, 405. Fermin, Dfcrip. de
Surin. i. 54. z Stadius ap Dc Bry, iii. . 40. 123.

Stadius ap de Bry, iii. z28, &c. Lcry, ibid. 2zo.

4 captives

captives never escape death, but they are not tortured with the B o K

I V.

fame cruelty as among the tribes which are less accustomed to
such horrid feasts b

As the constancy of every American warrior may be put to such

revere proof, the great object of education and discipline in the
New World is to form the mind to sustain it. When nations carry
on war with open force, defy their enemies to the combat, and
vanquilh them by the superiority of their skill or courage, fol-
diers are trained to be active, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
America, where the genius and maxims of war are extremely
different, passive fortitude is the quality in highest estimation.
Accordingly, it is early the study of the Americans to acquire
a talent, which will enable them to behave like men, when
their resolution hall be put to the proof. As the youth of
other nations exercise themselves in feats of activity and force,
those of America vie with one another in exhibitions of their
patience under sufferings. They harden their nerves by those
voluntary trials, and gradually accustom themselves to endure
the sharpest pain, without complaining. A boy and girl will
bind their naked arms together, and place a burning coal be-
tween them, in order to try who firfl discovers such impatience
as to shake it off . All the trials, cufloinary in America, when
a youth is admitted into the class of warriors, or when a warrior
is promoted to the dignity of captain or chief, arc accommo-
dated to this idea of manliness. They arc not displays of va-
lour, but of patience; they are not exhibitions of their ability
to offend, but of their capacity to fuffcr. Among the tribes on
the banks of the Orinoco, if a warrior afpircs to tile rank of

bSee N O' T
I LXXI. C Chaile . Iilt. N. Fr. iii. 307.

3 A 2 captain,

B o o K captain, his probation begins with a long faf, more rigid than

Iv.
.-- any ever observed by the most abstemious hermit. At the close

of this, the chiefs aflemble, each gives him three lathes with
a large whip, applied so vigorously, that his body is almost
flayed, and if he betrays the least symptom of impatience or
even sensibility, he is disgraced for ever, and rejeced as un-
worthy of the honour. After ome interval, the constancy
of the candidate is proved by a more excruciating trial. He is
laid in a hammoc with his hands bound faif, an innumerable
multitude of venomous ants, whose bite occasions exquisite
pain, and produces a violent inflammation, are thrown upon
him. The judges of his merit stand around the hammoc, and,
while these cruel infeds fallen upon the most sensible parts of
his body, a sigh,- a groan, an involuntary motion expressive of
what he suffers, would exclude him from the dignity which he
is ambitious to obtain. Even after this evidence of his forti-
tude, it is not deemed to be completely ascertained, but must
tand another test more dreadful than any he has hitherto un-
dergone. He is again suspended in his hammoc, and covered
with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of stinking herbs is kin-
dled underneath, so as he may feel its heat, and be involved
in smoke. Though scorched and almost suffocated, he must
continue to endure with the fame patient insensibility. Many
perish in this rude essay of their firmness and courage, but
such as go through it with applause, receive the ensigns of their
new dignity with much solemnity, and are ever after regarded
as leadcrs of approved resolution, whose behaviour, in the most
trying situations, will do honour to their country '. In North-

a Guni]la, ii. 286, c. Biet, 376, &c.

5 America,

America, the previous trial of a warrior is neither so formal, B O 0 K

IV.

nor so evere. Though even there, before a youth is permitted -----'
to bear arms, his patience and fortitude are proved by blows,
by fire, and by insults, more intolerable to a haughty spirit than
both .

THE amazing Rteadinefs, with which the Americans en-

dure the most exquisite torments, has induced ome authors to
suppose that, from the peculiar feebleness of their frame, their
sensibility is not so acute as that of other people; as women,
and persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be less affeced
with pain than robust men, whose nerves are more firmly braced.
But the constitution of the Americans is not so different, in its
texture, from that of the reft of the human species, as to ac-
count for this diversity in their behaviour. It flows from a
principle of honour, inrtilled early and cultivated with such care,
as to inspire man in his rudest tate with an heroic magnani-
mity, to which philosophy hath endeavoured, in vain, to form
him, when more highly improved and polished. This invin-
cible conflancy he has been taught to confider as the chief
diftincion of man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his conduct, and the paflions which
take possession of his heart, are few. They operate of course
with more decisive effect, than when the mind is crowded with
a multiplicity of objects, or diftradcd by the variety of its pur-
suits; and when every motive that operates with force on the
mind of a savage, prompts them to susser with dignity, they
will bear what might seem to be impoflible for human patience

Charlcv. Hil. N.Fr. iii. 29,

to

B 0 O K to sustain. But wherever the fortitude of the Americans is not

'V.
'. -- routed to exertion by their ideas of honour, their feelings of

pain are the fame with those of the reft of mankind f. Nor is
that patience under sufferings for which the Americans have
been so jufily celebrated an universal attainment. The con-
ftancy of many of the vicims is overcome by the agonies of
torture. Their weakness and lamentations complete the triumph
of their enemies, and reflect disgrace upon their country .

Walled by THE perpetual hostilities carried on among the American
their perpe-
tual wars tribes are productive of very fatal effects. As their imperfect

industry does not supply them with any superfluous store of
provisions, even in seasons of tranquillity, when the irruption
of an enemy defblates their cultivated lands, or diflurbs them
in their hunting excursions, such a calamity reduces a commu-
nity, naturally unprovident and destitute of resources, to ex-
treme want. All the people of the diftrid that is invaded, are
frequently forced to take refuge in woods or mountains, which
can afford them no subsistence, and where many of them perish.
Notwithstanding their exceflive caution in conducting their mili-
tary operations, and the solicitude of every leader to preserve the
lives of his followers, as they seldom enjoy any interval of
peace, the loss of men among the Americans is considerable in
proportion to the degree of population. Thus famine and
the sword combine in thinning their numbers. All their
tribes are feeble, and many which were once powerful have
gradually wafted away and at last disappeared. Nothing now

f See NOTE LXXII.
r. Charlev. IHilt. N. Fr. iii. 248. 385. De la Potheri, iii. 48.

remains

remains of several nations, which were once considerable, but B 00 K

IV.
the name h -

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are tribes which Recruit their

endeavour to recruit their national force when exhausted, by adoping pri.
adopting prisoners taken in war, and by this expedient prevent foners.
their total extinction. The practice, however, is not univer-
ially received. Resentment operates more powerfully among
savages, than considerations of policy. Far the greater part of
their captives was anciently sacrificed to their vengeance, and it
is only since their numbers began to decline fast, that they have
adopted milder maxims. But such as they do naturalize, renounce
for ever their native tribe, and assume the manners as well as
paflions of the people by whom they are adopted , so entirely,
that they often join them in their expeditions against their own
countrymen. Such a sudden transition, and so repugnant to
one of the most powerful inftinas implanted by nature, would
appear strange among any people; but, among the members of
small communities, where national enmity is violent and deep-
rooted, it is more unaccountable. It seems, however, to result
naturally from the principles upon which war is carried on in
America. When nations aim at exterminating their enemies,
no exchange of prisoners can ever take place. From the moment
one is made a prisoner, his country and his friends confider him
as dead . le has incurred indelible disgrace by suffering him-
self to be surprised or to be taken by an enemy; and were he to
return home, after such a fain upon his honour, his nearest re-

t, Charlev. I-Ii. N. Fr. iii. 202, 203. 4z9. Gurnilli, ii. 227 &c.
i Charlev. -lill. N. Fr. iii. :.5, &c. Lafit. ii. 3 . Sec NOTE LXXil.

lation s

n oo K lations would not receive or even acknowledge that they
'----' knew him'. Some tribes were still more rigid, and if a pri-

soner returned, the infamy which he had brought on his
country was expiated, by putting him instantly to death".
As the unfortunate captive is thus an outcast from his own
country, and the ties which bound him to it are irreparably
broken, he feels less rcluctance in forming a new connection
with people, who, as an evidence of their friendly sentiments,
not only deliver him from a cruel death, but offer to admit him
to all the rights of a fellow-citizen. The perfect similarity of
manners among savage nations facilitates and completes the
union, and induces a captive to transfer not only his allegi-
ance, but his affection, to the community into the bosom of
which he is received.

Tleir inferi- BUT though war be the chief occupation of men in their
ority in war to
poliihed na- rude fate, and to excel in it, their highest diftinsion and pride,

tis. their inferiority is always manifest when they engage in com-

petition with polifled nations. Destitute of that foresight
which discerns and provides for remote events, firangers to the
union and mutual-confidence requisite in forming any extensive
plan of operations, and incapable of the subordination no less
requisite in carrying into execution such plans, savage nations
may astonish a disciplined enemy by their valour, but seldom
prove formidable to him by their conduct and whenever the.
contest is of long continuance, must yield to superior art ". The
empires of Peru and Mexico, though their progress in civili-
fation, when measured by the European or Asiatic standards,

' Lahont. ii. 181, 86. " Iericra dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 6. p. 173.
"Sec NOTE LXXI'.

was

was inconsiderable, acquired such an ascendency over the rude B 0O K
tribes around them, that they fubjeed most of them with great '-
facility to their power. When the people of Europe over-ran
the various provinces of America, this superiority was fill more
conspicuous. Neither the courage nor number of the natives
could repel a handful of invaders. The alienation and enmity,
prevalent among barbarians, prevented them from uniting in
any common scheme of defence, and while each tribe fought
separately, all were subdued.

VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted with the use of Their arts.

metals, hardly merit any attention on their own account, but
are worthy of ome notice, as far as they serve to display the
genius and manners of a people. The first difirefs a savage Dress and or-
must feel, will arise from the manner in which his body is as-
feEed, by the heat, or cold, or moisture, of the climate
under which he lives; and his first care will be, to provide some
covering for his own defence. In the warmer and more mild
climates bs America, none of the rude tribes were clothed. To
most of them Nature had not even suggested any idea c. impro-
priety in being altogether uncovered d. As under a mild cli-
mate there was little need of any defence from the injuries
of the air, and their extreme indolence shunned every fpe-
cies of labour to which it was not urged by absolute necef-
fity, all the inhabitants of the isles, and a considerable part
of the people on the continent, remained in this slate of naked
simplicity. Others were satisfied with some flight covering,
such as decency required. But though naked, they were not
unadorned. They dressed their hair in many different forms.

.1 Lery Navigat. ap. De Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Columil)ii, , c. 24. Vcnegas Mi4l.
of Californ. p. 7c.

VOL. I. 3 B Tlcy

B o K They fattened bits of gold, or shells, or shining stones, in their
--_-, ears, their noses, and cheeks . They stained their fins with

a great variety of figures; and they spent much time, and sub-
mitted to great pain, in ornamenting their persons in this fail-
taftic manner. Vanity, however, which finds endless occupa-
tion for its ingenuity and invention, in nations where dress has.
become a complex and intricate art, is circumscribed within so.
narrow bounds, and confined to so few articles among naked
savages, that they are not satisfied with those simple decora-
tions, and have a wonderful propensity to alter the natural
form of their bodies. This pratice was universal among the
rudest of the American tribes. Their operations for that pur-
pose begin as oon as an infant is born. By compressing the
bones of the skull,- while fill soft and flexible, some flatten the
crown of their heads; some squeeze them into the hape of a
cone; others mould them as much as possible into a square
figure ; and they often endanger the lives of their posterity by
their violent and absurd efforts to derange the plan of Nature,.
or to improve upon her designs. But in all their attempts:
either to adorn or to. new-model their persons, it seems to have
been less the. objec of the Americans to please, or to appear
beautiful, than to give an air of dignity and terror to their
aspeCt. Their attention to dress had more reference to war
than to gallantry. The difference. in rank and eimation be-
tween the two sexes was so great, as extinguished, in some
measure, their solicitude to appear mutually amiable. The-
man deemed it beneath him to adorn his pcrfon, for the fake
of one on whom he was accustomed to look down as a slave.

Lery ap. De Bry, iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes. 20. 223.

f Oviedo Hilt. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de Labat. ii. 72. Charlevoix,

iii. 323. Gunilla, i. 197, &c. Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Lawson's
Voy. to Carolina, p. 33.

It

It was when the warrior had in view to enter the council of his B o o K

IV.

nation, or take the field against its enemies, that he assumed -
his choicest ornaments, and decked his person with the nicest
care . The decorations of the women were few and simple;
whatever was precious or flendid was reserved for the men.
In several tribes the women were obliged to spend a considerable
part of their time every day in adorning and painting their
husbands, and could bestow little attention upon ornamenting
themselves. Among a race of men so haughty as to despise,
or so cold as to neglea them, the women naturally became
careless and slovenly, and the love of finery and hew, which
has been deemed their favourite passion, was confined chiefly
to the other sex h. To deck his person was the diftinaion of
a warrior, as well as one of his most serious occupations
In one part of their dress, which, at first fight, appears the
mdft singular and capricious, the Americans have discovered
considerable sagacity in providing against the chief inconve-
niencies of their climate, which is often sultry and moist to ex-
cess. All the different tribes, which remain unclothed, are ac-
customed to anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of
animals, with viscous gums, and with oils of different kinds.
By this they check that profuse perspiration, which, in the torrid
zone, waftes the vigour of the fi-ame, and abridges the period of
human life. By this too, they provide a defence against the ex-
treme moiflure during the rainy season k. They likewise, at certain
seasons, temper paint of different colours with those unctuous
substances, and bedaub themselves plentifully with that compofi-
tion. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish, their skins are

'Wafcr's Voyage, p. 14z. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167. C harlcv. Ilifi. N. Frn. iii. 2 16. z2?2.
b Charlcv. Hill. de la Nouv. France, iii. 78. 37. Lnfitnt, ii. 53. Kl: l \'oyagc.

iii. 273. Lcryap. De Bly, iii. 169, 170. Purch. ?ilr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hill. de los
triumph. &c. 472. Sec NOT Se NOTE
XXXVI.

3 B 2 not

B I0 K not only protected from the penetrating heat of the fun, but,

_ -.-- as all the innumerable tribes of infeas have an antipathy to the

smell or taste of that mixture, they are delivered from their
teazing persecution, which, amidit forests and marshes, efpe-
cially in the warmer regions, must have been altogether into-
lerable in their slate ofnakednefs'.
Habitations. THE next objeCt to dress that will engage the attention of a fa-

vage, is to prepare some habitation that may afford him shelter by
day, and a retreat at night. Whatever is connected with his ideas
ofperfonal dignity, whatever bears any reference to his military
character, the savage warrior deems an objeCt of importance.
Whatever relates only to peaceable and inactive life, he views
with perfect indifference. Hence, though finically attentive to
dress, he is little solicitous about the elegance or disposition of
his habitation. Savage nations, far from that state of improve-
ment, in which the mode of living is confidered as a mark of
distinction, and unacquainted with those wants, which require
a variety of accommodation, regulate the conftruaion of their
houses according to their limited ideas of necessity. Some of
the American tribes were so extremely rude, and had advanced
so little beyond the primeval simplicity of nature, that they had
no houses at all. During the day, they take helter from the
scorching rays of the fun under thick trees; at night they form
a shed with their branches and leaves ". In the rainy season
they retire into covers, formed by the hand of Nature, or hol-
lowed out by their own industry ". Others, who have no fixed
abode, and roam through the forests in quest of game, sojourn
k Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190. 20o. Bancroft Nat. I-li. of Guiana, Si. 28.

e
Sec NOTE XXVII. n Lttrcs Edif. v. 273. Vcnegas Hill. of Califor. i. 76.

Lozana Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 55. Lettres Edif. ii. 176. Gumilla, i. 383.
Bancroft Nat. 11ill.ofGuiana, 277.

in

in temporary huts, which they erect with little labour, and B 0o K
abandon without any concern. The inhabitants of those vafl -
plains, which are deluged by the overflowing of the rivers dur-
ing the heavy rains that fall periodically between the tropics,
raise houses upon piles faflened in the ground, or place them
among the boughs of trees, and are thus safe amidst that wide
extended inundation which surrounds them . Such were the
first essays of the rudest Americans towards providing them-
selves with habitations. But even among tribes which were
more improved, and whose residence was become altogether
fixed, the ftruture of their houses was extremely mean and
simple. They were wretched huts, sometimes of an oblong
and sometimes of a circular form, intended merely for ihelter,
with no view to elegance, and little attention to conveniency.
The doors were so low, that it was necessary to bend or to creep
on the hands and feet in order to enter them. They were
without windows, and had a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow travellers in other
minute circumstances of their description, is not only beneath
the dignity of history, but would be foreign to the object of
my researches. One circumstance merits attention, as it is fin-
gular, and illustrates the characer of the people. Some of their
houses were so large as to contain accommodation for fourscore
or a hundred perobns. Tlhefe were built for the reception of
different families, which dwelt together under the fame roof",
and often around a common fire, without fcparate apartments,
or any kind of fcrcLc or partition between the spaces which
they rcflpetively occupied. As Ioon as men have acquired dif-
tint ideas of property; or when they are so much attached to
their females, as to watch them with care and jealousy; fami-

c Gumilli, i. 22z. Ilrrcra, dec. . lib. ix. c. 6. Ovirdo Smnmar, p. 53, C.
P Sec NOTE' LXXVIII.

5 lies

B 0 K lies of course divide and fettle in separate houses, where they
a--,_- can secure and guard whatever they wish to preserve. This

Singular mode of habitation may therefore be confidered not
only as the effe& of that community of goods which subsisted
among the several people in America, but s a proof of inat-
tention and indifference towards their women. If they had
not been accuflomed to perfet equality, such an arrangement
could not have taken place. If their sensibility had been apt to
have taken alarm, they would not have trusted the virtue of
their women amidst the temptations and opportunities of such a
promiscuous intercourse. At the fame time, the perpetual
concord, which reigns in habitations where so many families are
crowded together, is surprising, and affords a firiking evidence
that they must be people of either a very gentle, or of a very
phlegmatic temper, who, in such a situation, are unacquainted
with animosity, brawling, and difcbrd .
Their arms. AFTER making some provision for his dress and habitation, a

favagewill perceive the necessity of preparing proper arms with
which to assault or repel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early
exercised the ingenuity and invention of all rude nations. The
firit offensive weapons were doubtless such as chance presented,
and the first efforts of art to improve upon these, were extremely
aukward and simple. Clubs made of some heavy wood, flakes
hardened in the fire, lances whose heads were armed with flint
or the bones of ome animal, are weapons known to the rude't
nations. All these, however, were of use only in close encoun-

i Journ. de Grillet & Becha mel dans la Goyane, p. 65. Lafitau Mccurs, ii. 4. Tor-

quem Monarq. i. 247. Journal ill. de Joutel, 217. .rry Hil. Brasil, ap. de Bry,
iii. z38. Lozano. Dcfcr. del Gran Chaco. 67.

6 ter.

ter. But men ifhed to annoy their enemies while at a B 0 O K

Iv.

diRlance, and the bow and arrow is the most early invention for
this purpose. This weapon is in the hands of people, whose
advances in improvement are extremely inconsiderable, and is
familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It
is remarkable, however, that some tribes in America were so
deflitute of art and ingenuity, that they had not attained to the
discovery of this simple invention °, and fecm to have been un-
acquainted with the use of any miflive weapon. The fling,
though in its construction not more complex than the bow, and
among many nations of equal antiquity, was little known to
the people of North America P or the islands, but appears to
have been used by a few tribes in the southern continent . The
people in ome provinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia, to-
wards the southern extremity of America, use a weapon pecu-
liar to themselves. They faflen stones about the ize of a sis to
each end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and swing-
ing-thefe round their heads, throw them with such dexterity
that they seldom mnifs the objec at which they aim r.

AMONG people who. had hardly any occupation but war or Tlhir domfC-

hunting, the chief exertions of their invention ', as well as in- tic utcnlils.
duftry, were naturally direded towards there objecs. Witl
respect to every thing else, their wants and dcfircs were so li-
mited, that their invention was not upon the firctch. As their
food and habitations were pcrfectly simple, their domefLic utcn-
fils were few and rude. Some of the southern tribes had dif-
covered the art of forming vclrls of earthen ware, and baking

0 Picdrahita Conq. dl Nuevo Reyno, 9. 12. r Nanfr. de Ahi. Nun C-
becade vaca, c.x.p. 1. ' Piedrab. p. 6. See NOTFI LNXIX.

' Ovallc's Relation oCliili. Church. Colle. iii. 82. F.lknce's Drcrip. of l'atngon.
p. 130. Secc NOTE XXX.

thcn.

B 0 0 K them in the fun, so as they could endure the fire. In North

I V.

--.--j America, they hollowed a piece of hard wood into the form of
i)refling their
food. a kettle, and filling it with water, brought it to boil by throwing

red-hot flones into it . These vessels they used in preparing
part of their provisions; and this may be confidered as a ftep
towards refinement and luxury, for men in their rudest slate
were not acquainted with any method of dressing their vicuals,
but by roasting them on the fire; and among several tribes in

Cnruion America, this is the only species of cookery yet known . But the
of their ca-
n oes. mailer-piece of art, among the avages of America, is the con-

fruCtion of their canoes. An Eikimaux, fliut up in his boat of
whale-bone, covered with the skins of feals, can brave that stormy
ocean, on which the barrenness of his country compels him to
depend for the ehief part of his fubfiflence . The people of
Canada venture upon their rivers and lakes, in boats made of
the bark of trees, and so light that two men can carry them,
wherever hallows or cataracs obstruct the navigation . In
there frail vessels they undertake and accomplish long voyages .
The inhabitants of the isles and of the southern continent form
their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large tree, with infi-
nite labour, and though in appearance extremely aukward and
unwieldy, they paddle and steer them with such dexterity, that
Europeans, well acquainted with all the improvements in the
science of navigation, have been astonished at the rapidity of
their motion, and the quickness of their evolutions. Their
pirogues, or war-boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty
men; their canoes employed in sithing and in hort voyages

'Charlev. Hil. ofN. Fr. iii. 332. " See NOTE LXXX[.

EllisVoy. 133. r See NOTE LXXXII. Lafitau MccUrs,
&c. ii. 13.

are

are less capacious b. The form as well as materials of all these B 0 0 K

IV.

various species of vessels is well adapted to the fcrvice for which
they are defiined; and the more minutely they are examined,
the mechanifin of their flruclre, as well as neatness of their
fabric, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards induflry among the Amc- Lilcllencfs

ricans, one striking quality in their character is conipicuous. w,'y appiy to
They apply to work without ardour, carry it on with little labour.
adivity, and, like children, are easily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the most interefling, and where the
most powerful motives urge them to vigorous exertions, they
labour with a languid liftlefnefs. Their work advances under
their hand with fch slowness, that an eye-witness compares it
to the imperceptible progress of vegetation . They will spend so
many years in forming a canoe, that it often begins to rot with
age before they finish it. They will susser one part of a roof to
decay and perish, before they complete the other d. The
slightest manual operation consumes a vast length of time, and
what in polished nations would hardly be an cffort of industry,
is among savages an arduous undertaking. This flowncfs of
the Americans in executing works of every kind may be im-
puted to various causes. Among savages, who do not depend
for fubfiltence upon the efforts of regular indiuftry, time is of
so little importance, tlat they Ift no valtuc pnn it; and pro-
videdc they can inifl a dcfign, they never regard how long
they are employed about it. I lie tools which they employ al'e
li( aukward and defeclive, llat every work in which they
engage must ncceflirily bec tedious. Tle hand of the moll in-

' I abat Vo\'nygcs, ii. 91, &c. 131. c ( ;imill:, ii. 97.
* H -r(de Rcl.it. d:. C': lil' , 'p 2z.
Vot. . C, d( ulrious

B o K duflrious and skilful artist, were it furnished with no better

IV.
-- ' initrument than a sone hatchet, a shell, or the bone of fonme

animal, could hardly perfect the most simple work. It is by
length of labour, that he must endeavour to supply his de-
sect of power. But, above all, the cold phlegmatic temper
peculiar to the Americans renders their operations languid. It
is almost impossible to rouze them from that habitual indolence
in which they are funk; and unless when engaged in war or
hunting, they seem incapable of exerting any vigorous effort.
Their ardour of application is not so great as to call forth that
inventive spirit which suggests expedients for facilitating and
abridging labour. They will return to a talk day after day,
but all their methods of executing it are tedious and operose .
Even since the Europeans have communicated to them the
knowledge of their infiruments, and taught them to imitate their
arts, the peculiar genius of the Americans is conspicuous in all
their attempts. They may be patient and assiduous in labour,
they can copy with a servile and minute accuracy, but discover
little invention, and no talents for dispatch. In spite of in-
ftru~tion and example, the spirit of the race predominates;
their motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to urge them
to quicken their pace. Among the Spaniards in America, the
'work of an Indian is a phrase by which they describe any thing,
in the execution of which an immense time has been employed,
and much labour wafted .

Their reli- VII. No circumstance refpeting rude nations has been the
sgi0" objcEt of greater curiosity than their religious tenets and rites;

and none, perhaps, has been so impcrfctly undcrlood, or rc-

Sc NOTE LXXXIII. ' Voyage d Ullon, i. 335. Lttr. I;Xli ' &c.
iS. 348.

4 prcfentcd

presented with so little fidelity. Priests and mifllonaries are the B O K

IV.
persons who have had the best opportunities of carrying on this cc--

i L *DA Peculiar dif-

inquiry, among the most uncivilized of the American tribes. ficulties in
Their minds, engrossed by the doctrines of their own religion, this inquiry.
and habituated to its institutions, are apt to discover something
that resembles those objecs of their veneration, in the opinions
and rites of every people. Whatever they contemplate, they
view through one medium, and draw and accommodate it to
their own system. They study to reconcile the institutions,
which fall under their observation, to their own creed, not to
explain them according to the rude notions of the people
themselves. They ascribe to them ideas which they are inca-
pable of forming, and suppose them to be acquainted with
principles and fads, which it is impossible that they flould
know. Hence, even among the most barbarous nations in
America, some miionaries have been induced to believe, that
they had discovered traces, no less diftind than amazing, of
their acquaintance with the sublime mysteries and peculiar in-
flitutions of Christianity. From their own interpretation of
certain expressions and ceremonies, they concluded that there
people had some knowledge of the doctrine of the Trinity, of
the incarnation of the Son of God, of his cxpiatory sacrifice,
of the virtue of the cross, and of the efficacy of the iacraments .
In such unintelligent and credulous guides as these, we call
place little confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choice of conductors with the

greatest care, we must not follow them with implicit faith.
An inquiry into the religious notions of rude nations is in-

g Vcnegas, i. 88. gz. Torquema;i, ii. 4, 5. Garcia Origen. z2. I crt-rt , (Icc.. .
lib. ix. c. 7. dec. . lib. iv. c. 7.

3 C 2 volvcd

B 0 0 K volved in peculiar intricacies, and we mull often pause in order

, to separate the fads which our informers relate, from the rea-

fonings with which they are accompanied, or the theories which
they build upon them. Sevcral pious writers, more attentive
to the importance of the subjet than to the condition of the
people whose sentiments they were endeavouring to discover,
have belfowed much unprofitable labour in researches of this

nature h

Confined to THERE are two fundamental doarines, upon which the
tjw ar;lclcs. whole fyflem of religion, as far as it can be discovered by the

light of nature, is efltablifhed. The one refpeds the being of
a God, the other the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review with regard
to tlefe important points, is not only an objec of curioi-ty, but
may afford inflrutlion. To these two articles I shall ciifirne
my researches, leaving subordinate opinions, and the derail of

The beng of local superstitions, to more minute inquirers. Wlhoever has
God. had any opportunity of examining into the religious opinions

of persons in the inferior ranks of life, even in the most cn-
lightened and civilized nations, will find that their fyftcm of
belief is derived from inftru&ion, not discovercd by inquiry.
That numerous part of the human fpecics whose lot is labour,
whose principal and almost sole occupation is to secure fubfifl-
ence, views the arrangement and operations of nature with little
reflction, and has neither leilure nor capacity for cntcring into
that path of refined and intricate speculation which conducs to
the knowledge of the principles of natural religion. In the
early and molt rude periods of savage life, such disquisitions
are altogethcr unknown. When the intellctual powers are jull
beginning to unfold, and their first feeble exertions are directed

See NOTE LXXXIV.

towards

towards a few objecs of primary necessity and use; when the n o o K

Iv.

faculties of the mind are so limited, as not to have formed ab- _
fIrad or general ideas; when language is so barren, as to be
deflitutc of names to distinguish any thing that is not perceived
by some of the senses; it is prepofierous to expect that man
hould be capable of tracing with accuracy the relation between
cause and effedt; or to fuippofe that he ihould rife from the con-
templation of the one to the knowledge of the other, and form just
conceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Governor of the uni-
verse. The idea of creation is so familiar, wherever the mind
is enlarged by science, and illuminated with revelation, that
we seldom reflet how profound and abflruie this idea is, or
confider what progress man muff have made in observation and
research, before he could arrive at any knowledge of this ele-
mentary principle in religion. Accordingly, several tribes have
been discovered in America, which have no idea whatever of a
Supreme Being, and no rites of religious worship. Inattentive
to that magnificent speCtacle of beauty and order presented to
their view, unaccustomed to refleCt either upon what they
themselves are, or to inquire who is the author of their exifl-
ence, men, in their avage slate, pass their days, like the ani-
mals around them, without knowledge or veneration of any
fupcrior power. They have not in their languages any name
for the Deity, nor have the most accurate ohlbcrvcrs been able
to difiover any practice or inflitution which cclnced to imply
that they recognized his authority, or were solicitous to obtain
his favour . It is only among men in the molt uncultivated

i Bier, 539. Lcry np 1) Biy, ii. 221. Nicuho.t Churcl. Col ii. 3iz. I.cn . .dl:

2. 177. Id. i2. 13. VCInRCga, i. 7 . T.o/.ilo DcTcript. dcl Gran Chraci, . Icr-
nand. Minion. de Cliquit. 1).

' umill ii. I S,. Rocl"hfort lill. dcs Antil'c,, p .I(,.

Margrave Ilia. in Append. de Chilicnfibuq, 286. Ullon Notic. Anmic. 3i. c;,. lir-
rcic, , 2 1 219. Ilarcout Voy. to Gluinn;. 'Pich. Pilpr. iv. p.i 73. Account of
L;rafil, by al'oltugucfe. lid.l p. 1299. l)m C' Journal, p. 59. SCe N l. LNXXXV.

flaitc

B O0 K state of nature, and while their intelleaual faculties are so feeble

IV.
- . and limited as hardly to elevate them above the irrational crea-

tion, that we discover this total insensibility to the impressions
of any invisible power. But the human mind, formed for re-
ligion, oon opens to the reception of ideas, which are destined,
when correaced and refined, to be the great source of confola-
tion amidst the calamities of life. Among ome of the Ame-
rican tribes, still in the infancy of improvement, we discern
apprehensions of ome invisible and powerful beings. These
apprehensions are originally indiftina and perplexed-, and seem
to be suggested rather by the dread of impending evils, than to
flow from gratitude for blessings received. While Nature
holds on her course with uniform and undifiurbed regularity,
men enjoy the benefits resulting from it, without inquiring
concerning its cause. But every deviation fiom this regular
course rouzes and astonishes them. When they behold events
to which they are not accustomed, they search for the reasons
of them with eager curiosity. Their understanding is unable
to penetrate into these; but imagination, a more forward and
ardent faculty of the mind, decides without hesitation. It
ascribes the extraordinary occurrences in nature to the influence
of invisible beings, and supposes that the thunder, the hurri-
cane, and the earthquake, are effe&s of their interposition.
Some such confused notion of spiritual or invisible power,
superintending over those natural calamities which frequently
desolate the earth, and terrify its inhabitants, may be traced
among many rude nations . But besides this, the disasters
and dangers of savage life are so many, and men often find
themselves in situations so formidable, that the mind, fcnfible
of its own weakness, has no refourcc but in the guidance and

k See N OTE LXXXVI.

pro-

protction of wisdom and power superior to what is human. B O O K

IV.

DejeCted with calamities which oppress him, and exposed to_
dangers which he cannot repel, the avage no longer relies
upon himself; he feels his own impotence, and fees no profped
of being extricated, but by the interposition of some invisible
arm. Hence, in all unenlightened nations, the first rites or
pracices which bear any resemblance to as of religion, have
it for their objea to avert evils which men susser or dread.
The Manitous or Okkis of the North Americans were amulets
or charms, which they imagined to be of such virtue, as to
preserve the persons who reposed confidence in them from every
difaitrous event, or they were confiderecd as tutelary spirits,
whole aid they might implore in circumfiances of diftres '
The Cemis of the islanders were reputed by them the authors
of every calamity that alicts the human race; they were re-
presented under the most frightful forms, and religious ho-
mage was paid to them with no other view than to appease
these furious deities . Even among thoie tribes whose reli-
gious system was more enlarged, and who had formed some
conception of benevolent beings, delighted with conferring
benefits, as well as of malicious powers prone to inflict evil;
superstition ill appears as the offspring of fear, and all its es-
forts were employed to avert calamities. They were perfuaclcd
that their good deities, prompted by the beneiicence of their
nature, would befiow every blefling in their power, without
solicitation or acknowledgment ; and their only anxiety was to
soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers whom they re-
*garded as the enemies of mankind ".

I Charlcv. N. r. iii. 343, &c. Crcuxii Ililt. Canad. p. H, c. '"

Ovic:.,

lib. iii. c. i. p. I i. P. Martyr, decad. p. Ic2, &c. " l T rtc, ii. 3(5. oilr,
p. 14. Stateof Virgii.i, by a Native, book iii. p. 32. 3z . Diiro:t, i. I(5. Bancrols
Nat. Ilill. of Guiana, 3-9.

Se!cII

B 0 0 K SUCH were the imperfec conceptions of the greater part of
>--,-- the Americans with refpet to the interpDfitions of invisible

agents, and such, aliofit universally, was the mean and illi-
beral object of their fuperfititons. ere we to trace back the
ideas of other nations to that rude ate in which history first
presents them to our view, we should discover a surprising re-
semblance in their tenets and practices; and should be con-
vinced, that, in imilar circurntances, the faculties of the hu-
man mind hold nearly the fame course in their progress, and
arrive at almost the fame conclusions. The impressions of fear
are conspicuous in all the systems of fuperflition formed in this
situation. And the most exalted notions of men rife no higher
than to a perplexed apprehension of certain beings, whose
power, though supernatural, is limited as well as partial.

IRemarklUe BUT, among other tribes, which have been longer united,
diversity in
their religios or have made greater progress in:-improvement, we discern
no.:;on. some feeble pointing towards more just and adequate concep-

tions of the power that presides in nature. They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to whom all
things arc indebted for their being. If we may judge by some
of their expretlions, they appear to acknowledge a divine power
as the maker of the world, and the disposer of all events. They
denominate him the Great Sirit o. But there ideas are faint
and confuiccl, and when they attempt to explain them, it is
nmanifell, that among them the word/jpiir has a meaning very-
different froin that in which we employ it, and that they have
no conception of any deity but what is corporeal. They be-
lieve tlicir gols to be of the human fbirm, though of a nature
more cxccllent than man, and retail such wild incoherent

" C:ul;rv. N. Fr. iii. 3.13. Sagard, \oy. du a'ys des HIurons, 226.

fables

fables concerning their funtions and operations, as are alto- B 0 0 K
gether unworthy of a place in history. Even among there v-
tribes, there is no established form of public worliip; there
are no temples ereced in honour of their deities; and no mi-
nifters peculiarly consecrated to their service. They have the
knowledge, however, of several superstitious ceremonies and
practices handed down to them by tradition, and to there they
have recourse with a childish credulity, when rouzed by any
emergence from their usual insensibility, and excited to ac-
knowledge the power, and to implore the protection of superior
beings P.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of Bogota had ad- Syacm of the

vanced beyond the other uncultivated nations of America in Natc"ez.
their ideas of religion, as well as in their political institutions;
and it is no less difficult to explain the cause of this diflinc-
tion than of that which; we have already confidered. The
Sun was the chief objec of religious worship among the Nat-
chez. In their temples, which were conftruetcd with some
magnificence, and decorated with various ornaments, accord-
ing to their mode of architecture, they prefrvcd a perpetual
fire, as the purest emblem of their divinity. Miniflers were
appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame. The first func-
tion of the great chief of the nation, every morning, was an
act of obeyfance to the fun; and fclfivals returned at flated
seasons which were celebrated by the whole community with
bflcnn but unbloody rites . This is the most reiined fpecics

P Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 34 . Coldcn, i. 17. q Drm. .rl, i. 15, c.
Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 17, &. 4z9. Lafitau, i. 167.

VOL. . 3 D of

B 0 0 of superstition known in America, and, perhaps, one of the

1V.
'----' most natural as well as most seducing. The fun is the apparent

source of the joy, fertility, and life, diffused through nature,
and while the human mind, in its early eays towards inquiry,
contemplates and admires his universal and animating energy,
its admiration is apt to stop short at what is visible, without
reaching to the unseen cause ; and pays that adoration to the
most glorious and beneficial work of God, which is due only
to him who formed it. As fire is the purest and most ative
of the elements, and in ome of its qualities and effects re-
fembles the fun, it was, not improperly, chosen to be the
emblem of his powerful operation. The ancient Persians, a
people far superior, in every refpet, to that rude tribe whose
rites I am describing, founded their religious system on similar
principles, and established a form of public vorfhip, less gross
and exceptionable than that of any people destitute of guidance
from revelation. This surprising co-incidence in sentiment
between two nations, in such different states of improvement,
is one of the many singular and unaccountable circumstances
which occur in the history of human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the fun and moon were, like-

wife, the chief objects of veneration. Their system of religion was
more regular and complete, though less pure, than that of the
Natchez. They had temples, altars, priests, sacrifices, and that
long train of ceremonies, which superstition introduces wherever
fle has fully established her dominion over the minds of.
men. But the rites of their worihip were cruel and bloody.
They offered human vitlims to their deities, and many of their
praices nearly refcmbled the barbarous inflitutions of the

4 Mexicicans,

Mexicans, the genius of which we flall have an opportunity B 0 o K
of confidering more attentively in its proper place'.

WITH refpea to the other great doCtrine of religion, con- Their ideas
cerning the immortality of the foul, the sentiments of the Ame- concerning

the imoita-

ricans were more united: the human mind, even when least lityofthe
improved and invigorated by culture, hrinks from the thoughts ful,
of dissolution, and looks forward with hope and expectation to
a state of future existence. This sentiment, resulting from a
secret consciousness of its own dignity, from an intinative
longing after immortality, is universal, and may be deemed
natural. Upon this, are founded the moat exalted hopes of
man in his highest state of improvement; nor has nature with-
held from him this soothing consolation, in the most early and
rude period of his progress. We can trace this opinion from
one extremity of America to the other. In ome regions more
faint and obscure, in others more perfetly developed, but no
where unknown. The most uncivilized of its avage tribes do
not apprehend death as the extincion of being. All hope for
a future and more happy state, where they fall be for evcr ex-
empt from the calamities which embitter human life in its
present condition. Thils they figure as a delightful country,
blefled with perpetual spring, whose forests abound with game,
whose rivers fwarin with ifh, where faniine is never felt,
and uninterrupted plenty flall be enjoyed without labour or
toil. But as men, in forming their iri iperrfcc ideas con-
cerning the invifille world, suppose that there they flall con-
tinue to feel the fame desires, and to be engaged in the fame
occupations; they naturally ascribe eminence ami difliinCQion,

l'icdrahit.l, Conq. cl N. Rcyno, p. 17. &". 1 [ r cr;i, i]cc. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

3 1) 2 il

B 0 0 K in that state, to the fame qualities and talents which are hore

IV.
---' the objea of their elteem. The Americans, accordingly, allot-

ted the highest place, in their- country of spirits, to the skilful
hunter, to the adventurous and successful warrior, to such as
had surprised and slain the greatest number of enemies, who
had tortured many of their captives, and devoured their flesh '.

induce them These notions were so prevalent, that they gave rife to an uni-
to bury arms,
&c. with' versal cuflom, which is, at once, the firongeft evidence that the
the dead. Americans believe in a future state, and the befl illustration of

what they expect there. As they imagine, that the dead be-
gin their career anew in the world whither they are gone,
that they may not enter upon it defenceless and unprovided,
they bury with them their bow, their arrows, and other wea-
pons used in hunting or war; they depofite in their tombs the
kins or fluffs of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, domestic utensils, and whatever is reckoned
among the necessaries in their simple mode of life '. In some
provinces, upon the decease of a cazique or chief, a certain
number of his wives, of his favourites, and of his slaves, were
put to death, and interred together with him, that he might
appear with the fame dignity in his future fration, and be
waited upon by the fame attendants ". This persuasion is so
deep-rooted, that many of their retainers offer themselves as.
voluntary viaims, and court the privilege of accompanying

Lery ap De Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3, &c. De la Potherie,

ii. 45, &c. iii. 5. t Chronica de Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, z88.
Creux. Hilt. Canad. p. 91. Rochefort, Hil. des Antilles, 568. Bict, 391. Del Potherie,
ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf. de Piritu, p. 35.

u Dumont, Louifiane, i. 208, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3. Gomara, Hilt. Gen. c. 28.

P. Mart. decad. 304. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 4. Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c..3. P. Mel-
chior Hernandez, Memnor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. Papcrs, i. Chron. de Cieca de
Leon, c. 33.

their

their departed master, as an high diflinaion. It has been B OK

Iv.

found difficult, on ome occasions, to set bounds to this enthu- _---
fiafm of affectionate duty, and to reduce the train of a fa-
vourite leader to such a number as the tribe could afford to
fparc .

AMONG the Americans, as well as other uncivilized nations, Superition

conneced

many of the rites and observances which bear some resemblance with dvo-
to ads of religion, have no connetion with devotion, but pro- tion.
ceed from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The human
mind is most apt to feel, and to discover this vain curiosity,
when its own powers are most feeble and uninformed. Afto-
nifhed with occurrences, of which it is unable to comprehend
the cause, it naturally fancies that there is omething myfle-
rious and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at events, of
which it cannot discern the issue or the consequences, it has
recourse to other means of discovering them, than the exercise
of its own sagacity. Wherever superstition is so eflablifhed as
to form a regular system, this desire of penetrating into the
secrets of futurity is conneCed with it. Divination becomes a
religious a. Priests, as the ministers of Heaven, pretend to
deliver its oracles to men. They are the only soothsayers,
augurs, and magicians, who possess the sacred and important
art of disclosing what is hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no veneration to any Thi, deart-

superintending power, and who have no established rites or mi- 'i.n! t'l, g
nifters of religion, their curiosity to discover what is future and ficians.
unknown is cherilhed by a different principle, and derives

See NOTE L XXVII.

flrength

B o K itrength from another alliance. As the diseases of men, in the

-. savage frate, are like those of the animal creation, few but ex-

tremely violent, their impatience under what they susser, and
solicitude for the recovery of health, oon inspired them with
extraordinary reverence for such as pretended to underfsand
the nature of their maladies, or to preserve them from their
sudden and fatal effects. These ignorant pretenders, however,
were such utter firangers to the firudture of the human frame,
as to be equally unacquainted with the causes of its disorders,
and the manner in which they will terminate. Enthusiasm,
mingled frequently with some portion of craft, supplied what
they wanted in science. They imputed the origin of diseases
to upernatural influence, and prescribed or performed a variety
of mysterious rites, which they gave out to be of power fuffi-
cient to remove them. The credulity and love of the mar-
vellous, natural to uninformed men, favoured the deception,
and prepared them to be the dupes of their imposture. Among
savages, their first physicians are a kind of conjurers or wizards,
who boast that they know what is past, and can foretell what
is to come. Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverse
kinds, no less firange than frivolous, are the means which they
employ to expel the imaginary causes of malignity Y; and, re-
lying upon the efficacy of these, they predict with confidence
what will be the fate of their deluded patients. Thus super-
flition in its earliest form flowed from the solicitude of nian
to be delivered from present diflrefs, not from his dread of
evils awaiting him in a future life, and was originally ingrafted
on medicine, not on religion. One of the firll, and most in-
telligent hiflorians of America was firuck with this alliance

Y P. Mclch. Icrnandcz, Memorial de Clieriqui. CoJlca. Oiig. Pap. i.

between

between the art of divination and that of physic, among the B O o K

IV.

people of Hispaniola". But this was not peculiar to them. -
The Alexis, the Piayas, the Afitmoins, or whatever was the
diftinguiflhing name of their diviners and charmers in other
parts of America, were all the physicians of their refpeRive
tribes, in the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola. As
their function led them to apply to the human mind when
enfeebled by sickness, and as they found it, in that season of
dejetion, prone to be alarmed with imaginary fears, or amused
with vain hopes, they easily induced it to rely with implicit
confidence on the virtue of their spells, and the certainty of
their preditions .

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of supernatural Gradually

extends..

power and discernment in one instance, they have a propen-
fity to admit it in others. The Americans did not long Iuppofe
the efficacy of conjuration to be confined to one subjed. They
had recourse to it in every situation of danger or distress.
When the events of war were peculiarly dilafirous, when
they met with unforeseen disappointments in hunting, when
inundations or drought threatened their crops with deflruaion,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their incantations, in
order to discover the causes of those calamities, or to foretell
what would be their issue . Their confidence in this dclulive
art gradually increased, and manifested itself in all the occur-
rences of life, When involved in any difficulty, or about to

Oviedo, lib. v. c i.i. lrrera, dec. . lib, iii. c. 4. Obone,

Coll. ii. 800. Dumont, i. 169, &C. Clirlev. N. 'r. iii. 361. 314, &c. I a.,Cn,
I\. Carol. z14. Ribas, Tiiumph. p. 17. Biet, 36. De l ; oti hcIric, ii. 3, &c.

b Charlev. N. r. ii. 3. Dumont, i. 173. Fcrnand. Rclac. de los hiiluit. p. 4.
Lozano, 84. Margrave, -279.

enter

B o0 K enter upon any tranfaaion of moment, every individual regu-

IV.
--- larly consulted the forcerer, depended upon his inftrutions to

extricate him from the former, and to dired his conduct in
the latter. Even among the rudest tribes in America, super-
ftition appears in this form, and divination is an art in high
esteem. Long before man had acquired such knowledge of a
deity as inspires reverence and leads to adoration, we observe
him firetching out a preumptuous hand to draw aside that
veil with which providence kindly conceals its purposes from
human knowledge; and we find him labouring, with fruitless
anxiety, to penetrate into the mysteries of the divine ad-
ministration. To discern, and to worship a superintending
power, is an evidence of the enlargement and maturity of the
human understanding; a vain desire of prying into futurity, is
the error of its infancy, and a proof of its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the faith of the

Americans in dreams, their observation of omens, their atten-
tion to the chirping of birds and the cries of animals, all
which they suppose to be indications of future events, and if
any one of these prognostics is deemed unfavourable, they
inflantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on which they
are most eagerly bent'.

Detached VIIT. BUT if we would form a complete idea of the un-
customs. cultivated nations of America, we must not pass unobserved

some singular cufloins, which, though universal and charac-
tcriflic, could not be reduced, with propriety, to any of the

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 6z. 353. Stadius, ap de Bry, iii. zo. Creuxij, Hifl. Canad.
84. Tccho, llill. of Parag. Chllulch Coll. vi. 37. De la Potheric, iii. 6.

articles

articles into which I have divided my inquiry concerning their B 0 o K1

lV.
manners. _

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, the love of Love of

dancing is a favourite passion. As a great part of their dancing.
time languishes away in listless indolence, without any occu-
pation to rouze or interest them, they delight univerally in a
pastime which calls forth the aive powers of their nature into
exercise. The Spaniards, when they first visited America,
were astonished at the fondness of the natives for dancing,
and beheld with wonder a people, cold and unanimated in most
of their other pursuits, kindle into life, and exert themselves
with ardour, as often as this favourite amusement recurred.
Among them, indeed, dancing ought not to be denominated
an amusement. It is a serious and important occupation, which
mingles in every occurrence of public or private life. If any
intercourse be necessary between two American tribes, the am-
bafladors of the one approach in a solemn dance, and present
the calumet or emblem of peace; the sachems of the other
receive it with the fame ceremony'. If war is denounced
against an enemy, it is by a dance, expressive of the resent-
ment which they feel, and of the vengeance which they medi-
tate b. If the wrath of their gods is to be appeared, or their
beneficence to be celebrated; if they rejoice at the birth of a
child, or mourn the death of a friend', they have dances ap-
propriated to each of thee situations, and suited to the dif-
ferent sentiments with which they are then animated. If a person

a De la Potherie Hist. ii. 17, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 211. 297. .a l,ran.

i. 100. 137. Hennepin. Dccou. i,|9, &c. 1' Chairlv. N. Fr. iii. 29S.
Lafitau, i. Sz3. Joutel, 343. Gornara, llift.Gcn. c. 196.

VOL. I. 3 i

B 0 K is indisposed, a dance is prescribed as the most effectual means

Iv.
_ - of refloring him to health; and if he himself cannot endure

the fatigue of such an exercise, the physician or conjurer per-
forms it in his name, as if the virtue of his ativity could be
transferred to his patient d'

ALL their dances are imitations of some aCtion; and though

the music by which they are regulated, is extremely simple
and tiresome to the ear by its dull monotony, ome of their
dances appear wonderfully expreffilve and animated. The war-
dance is, perhaps, the most friking. It is the representation
of a complete American campaign. The departure of the war-
riors from their village, their march into the enemy's country,
the caution with which they encamp, the address with which
they station ome of their party in ambush, the manner of
surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of the combat,
the scalping of those who are ain, the seizing of prisoners, the
triumphant return of the conquerors, and the torture of the
viEtims, are successively exhibited. The performers enter with
such enthusiastic ardour into their several parts, their geflurcs,
their countenance, their voice are so wild and so well adapted to
their various situations, that Europeans can hardly believe it to be
a mimic scene, or view it without emotions of fear and horror .

BUT however expressive ome of the American dances may

be, there is one circumstance in them remarkable, and con-
neted with the character of the race. The longs, the dances,
the amufcments of other nations, expressive of the sentiments

d DInys IHilt. Nat. 182.lrickc1', 372. De la Potlierie, ii. 3.
1 l)c Ia itheric, ii. 0. Charl c. N. Fr. iii. 297. Lafiitiu, i. 523.

which

-which animate their hearts, are often adapted to display or B o o K
excite that sensibility which mutually attaches the sexes. Among
some people, such is the ardour of this passion, that love is al-
most the sole object of festivity and joy; and as rude nations
are firangers to delicacy, and unaccuflomed to disguise any
emotion of their minds, their dances are often extremely wan-
ton and indecent. Such is the Calenda, of which the natives
of Africa are so passionately fond ; and such the feats of the
dancing girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with so much
avidity of desire. But, among the Americans, more cold and
indifferent to their females, from causes which I have al-
ready explained, this passion mingles but little with their
festivals and pastimes. Their songs and dances are moLlly
solemn and martial, they are connectcld with some of the fc-
rious and important affairs of life , and having no rlation to
love or gallantry, are seldom common to the two ibxcs, but
executed by the men and women apart`. If, on some occa-
sions, the women are permitted to join in the festival, the cha-
racer of the entertainment is fill the fame, and no movement
or geflure is expressive of attachment, or encourages fami-
liarity h.

AN immoderate love of play, cfpecially at games of pi n ;.r

hazard, which seems to be natural to all people unaccuflomcd galmS"'
to the occupations of rcgular induifly, is likewilc univcrfal

¢ Adafon, \Voy. to S nc.n', p. iii. 287. Lab.it, \'oyagc, iv. ' 3. Sloanc, IIItd.
Nt]. o Intf o. 1ut ro!. p. 4. I.ci-in, I)cLrit. Stii. i. . ,).

f Defrip. of N. I'rance. Olbb.)ne, Coll i;. 88 32 Chal. N.

l 'r. i ii. ;|-

r. V;afCl-' Account of Illhlinll, & c. It,9. 1 y ;ip dc 1;y, ii. 177. 1 ).,n i., ll.

dc 'arag. i. 1q9. Ilcricra, dec. z. lib v. i . 8. cc. ic .

. :. c

.. c. . Scc I 1,
LXXXVIII. ' Fa'rrc, 1l. 'iuin. p. l'l.

3 L 2 ilamong

B 0 0 K among the Americans. The fame causes, which so often

IV.
__r prompt persons at their ease in civilized life to have recourse

to this pastime, render it the delight of the savage. The for-
mer are independent of labour, the latter do not feel the ne-
ceflity of it, and as both are unemployed, they run with tran-
sport to whatever is of power to stir and agitate their minds.
Hence the Americans, who at other times are so indifferent,
so phlegmatic, so silent, and so disinterested, as oon as they
engage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy, and al-
ioft frantic with eagerness. Their furs, their domestic uten-
fils, their clothes, their arms, are ltaked at the gaming-table,
and when all is loft, high as their sense of independence is, in
a wild emotion of despair or of hope, they will often risk their
personal liberty, upon a single cast'. Among seVeral tribes,
such gaming parties frequently recur, and become their most
acceptable entertainment at every great festival. Superfiition,
which is apt to take hold of those passions which are most vi-
gorous, frequently lends its aid to confirm and strengthen this
favourite inclination. Their conjurers are accustomed to pre-
scribe a solemn match at play, as one of the moftefficacious
methods of appearing their gods, or of restoring the sick to
health k
and for drink- FROM causes similar to those which render them fond of play,

the Americans are extremely addicted to drunkenness. It fecms.
to have been one of the first exertions of human ingenuity to
discover ome composition of an intoxicating cuality; and
there is hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute of invention,

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 61. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c. Ribas, Triumf. 13. Brickell, 335-
k Charlev. N. Fr. iii. z6z.

6 aS

as not to have succeeded in this fatal research. The mos bar- B o K

Iv.

barous of the American tribes have been so unfortunate as to _.-._
attain this art; and even those who are so deficient in know-
ledge, as to be unacquainted with the method of giving an
inebriating strength to liquors by fermentation, can accomplish
the fame end by other means. The people of the islands, of North
America, and of California, used, for this purpose, the finoke
of tobacco, drawn up with a certain infirument into the noflrils,
the fumes of which acending to the brain, they felt all the
transports and frenzy of intoxication ". In almost every other
part of the New World, the natives possessed the art of extracting
an intoxicating liquor from maize or the manioc root, the fame
substances which they convert into bread. Tie operation by
which they effect this, nearly resembles the common one of
brewing, but with this difference, that in place of ycfl, they
use a nauseous infusion of a certain quantity of maize or manioc
chewed by their women. The saliva excites a vigorous ser-
mentation, and in a few days the liquor becomes fit for drink-
ing. It is not di:fagrecable to the taste, and when swallowed
in large quantities, is of an intoxicating quality ". This is the
general beverage of the Americans, which they diftinguifl by
various names, and for which they feel such a violent and in-
satiable desire, as it is not easy either to conceive or describe.
Among polifled nations, where a succession of various fiuntions.
and amusements keep the mind in continual occupation, the
desire for firong drink is regulated, in a great meafurc, by the
climate, and increases or diminifles according to the variations
of its temperature. In warm regions,, the delicate and fcnlible

m Ovicdo lif. np Ramus. iii. 13. Vcnegas, i. 68. NauIfrag de Cabc:a dc Vaca,

cap. 26. See NOT LXXXIX. StadiL ap. dc Bry, iii. ill.
Lery, ibid. 175,

frame

B 0 K frame of the inhabitants does not require the tlimulation of

ifermented liquors. In colder countries, the constitution of the
natives, more robust and more sluggish, stands in need of ge-
nerous liquors to quicken and animate it. But among savages,
the desire of something that is of power to intoxicate, is in
every situation the fame. All the people of America, whether
natives of the torrid zone, or inhabitants of its more temperate
regions, or placed by a harder fate in the severe climates to-
wards its northern or southern extremity, appear to be equally
under the dominion of this appetite . Such a similarity of
tafle, among people in such different situations, mufft be ascribed
to the influence of some moral caufc, and cannot be contidered
as the eect of any physical or constitutional want. While
engaged in war o in the chafe, the savage is often in the
most interefiing situations, and all the powers of his nature
are rouzed to the most vigorous exertions. But those animating
Iccnes are succeeded by long intervals of repose, during which
the warrior meets with nothing that he deems of sufficient dig-
nity, or importance to merit his attention. He languifies and
mopes in this season of indolence. The posture of his body is
an emblem of the slate of his mind. In one climate, cowering
over the fire in his cabin; in another, stretched under the shade
of fonme tree ; he dozes away his time in sleep, or in an unthink-
ing joyless inactivity, not far rem oved from it. As firong li-
quors awake lhiin from this torpid fate, give a brisker motion
to his spirits, and enliven him more thoroughly than either
dancing or gaminig, his love of theml is cxcclivc. A savage,
when not engaged in aion, is a pcnfive melancholy animal;

°Guinill.l, i. 27. L.,zqino Dcfciipi. dl' Gran Cliaco, 56. 103. Riba, . Ullon, i.

2 19. 37. I\.rchlis, iv. .,6. Fciiandcz MlIthon. dc 1:ls ChiqTit. 3 . BSlrcrc, p. j.3
BI'.nco C'o:1\ncll' dc' il'i;r:t I .

but

but as soon as he tafles, or has a profpc of tfling, the in- B o o K

IV.

toxicating draught, he becomes gay and frolicsome ". What-
ever be the occasion, or pretext, on which the Americans as-
femble, the meeting always terminates in a debauch. IMnany
of their festivals have no other objct, and they welcome the
return of them with transports ofjoy. As they are not accuf-
tomed to restrain any appetite, they set no bounds to this. The
riot often continues without intermifflon several days ; and
whatever be the fatal effects of their excess, they nevcr ccafe
from drinking as long as one drop of liquor remains. The
persons of greatest eminence, the molt diflinguilled \w-rrio-s,
and the chiefs most renowned for their wisdom, have no more
command of themselves than the imof obscure member of the
community. Their eagerness for present enjoyment renders
them blind to its fatal confequenccs; and those very men, whlo,
in other situations, seem to po.efs a force of mind more than
luman, are in this inflance inferior to children in foresight, as
well as confidcration, and mere flavcs of brutlal appetite '
V,'len their pafions, naturally firong, are heightened and in-
famced by drink, they are guilty of the Inmol enormous out-
rages, and the fcflivity fldom concludes without deeds of vio-
lence, or bloodlied .

BUT, amidit this wild debauch, there is one circumflance

remarkable; the women, in most of the American tribes, are
not permitted to partake of it '. Their province is to prepare
thc liquor, to serve it about to the guefis, and to take care of
their huflbands and friends, 'wheil their -rafon is overpowered.

P \ elcn lcz T'eor s Vcrdd. ii. 360. Riibl, ). Ullon, i. !;.

' Lciir. E . i 1.

i. 78. Toirqucmall a Mon, Ind, i. 335. N
'c N 0 1'; XC.

4 This

B ° I -'This exclusion of the women from an enjoyment so highly va-
»--_- 'lued by savages, may be juflly confidered as a mark of their

inferiority, and as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The people
of North America, when first discovered, were not acquaint-
ed with any intoxicating drink; but as the Europeans ear-
ly found it their interest to supply them with spirituous li-
quors, drunkenness oon became as universal among them
as among their countrymen to the south; and their women
having acquired this new taste, indulge it with as little decency
and moderation as the men'.

Put to death IT were endless to enumerate all the detached customs which
the aged and have excited the wonder of travellers in America; but I cannot
incurable.

omit one seemingly as singular as any that has been mentioned.
When their parents and other relations become old, or labour
under any distemper which their slender knowledge of the heal-
ing art cannot remove, they cut short their days with a violent
hand, in order to be relieved from the burden of supporting and
tending them. This practice prevailed among the ruder tribes in
every part of the continent, from Hudson's Bay to the river De
la Plata; and however fliocking it may be to those sentiments
of tenderness and attachment, which, in civilized life, we are
apt to confider as congenial with our frame, the condition of
man in the savage state leads and reconciles him to it. The
fame hardshi-ps and difficulty of procuring fubfifence, whichl
deter savages, in omre cafes, from rearing their children, prompt
them to destroy the aged and infirm. The declining Rate of

Hutchinson, Ilift, ofMaffachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. z25. Sagard, 146.

the

the one is as helpless as the infancy of the other. The former B o o

0

are no less unable than the latter to perform the functions that ' .
belong to a warrior or hunter, or to endure thole various dif-
tresses in which savages are o often involved, by their own want
of foresight and industry. Their relations feel this; and in-
capable of attending to the wants or weakncffcs of others, their
impatience under an additional burden prompts them to ex-
tinguifi that life which they find it difficult to fuflain. This is
not regarded as a deed of cruelty, but as an a of mercy. An
American, broken with years and infirmities, conscious that he
can no longer depend on the aid of those around him, places
himself contentedly in his grave; and it is by the hands of his
children or nearest relations that the thong is pulled, or the
blow infliated, which releases him for ever from the sorrows of
life".

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American tribes in such Ccnceral e;-

f tlkir

various lights, after taking a view of their cufloms and manners cl.,raitr.
from so many different (tations, nothing remains but to form a
general estimate of their charader, compared with that of more
polifled nations. A human being, as he comes originally from
the hand of nature, is every where the fame. At his firfl ap-
pearance in the state of infancy, whether it be among the rudest
savages, or in the muolt civilized focicty, we can (tilccrn no
quality which markis any difliition or luperiority. The ca-
pacity of improvcment ecms to be the fitmc ; and the talents lie
may afterwards acquire, as well as the virtuics he may be ren-
dered capable of cxcrcifin!, depend entirely upon the slate of
society in which lle is placed. To this slate his mind naturally ac-

"Cifl'ii lifl. d N. Rcyno dc GraC;: . p. 3:o. I'i;, 1.'- '

11::; \'), . 1., . Gu-
i;:l.,, i. 333.

VOL. I. 1 cdnln(,,,tcs

B o 0 K commodates itself, and from it receives its discipline and culture.

---- Inproportion to the wants which it accustoms a human being to

feel, and the funtions in which there engage him, his intel-
lectual powers are called forth. According to the connetions
which it eflablifhes between him and the reft of his species, the
affecions of his heart are exerted. It is only by attending to
this great principle, that we can discover what is the charater
of man in every different period of his progress.

; .:-.;:.i 3J we apply it to savage life, and measure the attainments of
)powers. the human mind in that fiate by this standard, we hall find,

according to an observation which I have already made, that
the intellectual powers of man must be extremely limited in
their operations. 'They are confined within the narrow sphere
of what he deems necessary for supplying his own wants. What-
ever has not ome relation to these, neither attraCts his atten-
tion, nor is the object of his inquiries. But however narrow
the bounds may be within which the knowledge of a savage is
circumscribed, he possesses thoroughly that small portion of it
which he has attained. It was not communicated to him by
formal infiru&ion; he does not attend to it as matter of mere
speculation and curiosity; it is the result of his own observation,
the fruit of his own experience, and accommodated to his con-
dition and exigencies. While employed in the ative occupa-
tions of war or hunting, he often finds himself in difficult and
perilous situations, fiom which the efforts of his own sagacity
must extricate him. He is fiequently engaged in measures
where every tfep depends upon his own ability to decide, where
he mufl rely solely upon his own penetration to discern the dan-
gers to which he is cxpofcd, and upon his own wisdom in pro-
, vid ing againfl then.

5 A!s

As the talents of individuals are exerciscd and improved by B 0 K

IV.
such exertions, much political wisdom is aid to be displaycd in

P'olitical ta-

conducting the affairs of their fmall.communities. The council lents.
of old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon its intcrefls,
and determining with refped to peace or war, has bLen conm-
pared to the senate in more polished republics. The proceed-
ings of the former, we are told, are often no less formal and
sagacious than those of the latter. Great political wisdom is
exhibited in pondering the various measures proposed, and in
balancing their probable advantages, against the evils of which
they may be productive. Much address and eloquence are em-
ployed by the leaders, who aspire at acquiring such confidence
with their countrymen, as to have an acndant in those afnim-
blies '. But, among savage tribes, the field for displaying po-
litical talents cannot be extensive. Where the idea of private
property is unknown, and no criminal jurifdicqion is established,
there is hardly any funEion of internal government to exercise.
Where there is no commerce, and scarcely any intercourse
among separate tribes; where enmity is implacable, and hofti-
lities are carried on almost without intermission; there will be
few points of public concern to adjust with their neighbours;
and that department of their affairs which may be denominated
foreign, cannot be o intricate as to require any refined policy
in conducting it. Where individuals are io thoughtlets and
improvident as seldom to take cffectual precautions for fcll-
prcfervation, it is vain to cxpec that public meaufires and de-
liberations will be regulated by the contemplation of remote
events. It is the genius of savages to act from the impull of
prcfcnt passion. They have neither foresight nor temper tr

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. z69, &c.

F !2 Iurll

B OO 0 form complicated arrangements with refpea to their future

Iv.
D I condut. The consultations of the Americans, indeed, are

so frequent, and their negociations are so many , and so long
protracted, as to give their proceedings an extraordinary apea
of wisdom. But this is not owing so much to the depth of
their schemes, as to the coldness and phlegm of their temper,
which render them flow in determining . If we except the
celebrated league, that united the Five Nations in Canada into
a federal republic, which shall be confidered in its proper place,
we can discern few such traces of political wisdom, among the
rude American tribes, as discovers any great degree of foresight
or extent of intellectual abilities. Even among them, we shall
find public measures more frequently directed by the impetuous
ferocity of their youth, than regulated by the experience and
wisdom of their old men.

Degree of as- As the condition of man in the ravage slate is unfavourable
feetion.

to the progress of the understanding, it has a tendency like-
wife, in ome refpets, to check the exercise of affection, and
to render the heart contracted. The strongest feeling in the
mind of a savage is a sense of his own independence. He has
sacrificed so small a portion of his natural liberty by becoming
a member of society, that he remains, in a great degree, the
sole mafier of his own actions . He often takes his refolu-
tions alone, without consulting, or feeling any connection
with the persons around him. In many of his operations, he
flands as much detached from the reft of his fpccies, as if he had
formed no union with them. Conscious how little he depends
upon other men, he is apt to view them with a carelcfs indif-

Y Sc NOTE XCL. ' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 271.
1 I'criaiidcz Mifioni. cle los Cliiqut. 33.

fcrencc.

ference. Even the force of his mind contributes to increase B K

I V.

this unconcern, and as he looks not beyond himself in deliberat- I-,
ing with refpet to the part which he should a, his folici-
tude about the consequences of it seldom extends farther. IHe
pursues his own career, and indulges his own fancy, without
inquiring or regarding whether what he does be agreeable or
offensive to others, whether they may derive benefit, or receive
hurt from it. I-ence the ungovernable caprice of savages,
their impatience under any species of restraint, their inability
to suppress or moderate any inclination, the scorn or neglet
with which they receive advice, their high estimation of them-
selves, and their contempt of other men. Among them, the
pride of independence produces almost the fame effScs with
intcreflcdnefs in a more advanced state of society, it refers every
thing to a man himself, and renders the gratification of his
own wilics, tlic measure and end of conduc.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardness of heart, Hardness of

and insensibility, remarkable in all savage nations. Their heart.
minds, rouzed only by firong emotions, are little susceptible
of gcntle, delicate, or tender affctions '. Their union is so
incomplete, that each individual as as if he retained all his
natural riglhts entire and undiminified. If a favour is con-
ferred upon him, or a crvice performed for his behoof, he
receives it with much fatisfalion, because it contributes to his
enjoyment; but this fcntimcnt extends not beyond hiinilcl, it
excitcs no sense of obligation, he neither feels gratitude, nor
thinks of making any return . Even, among pcrfons the
most clolfly connelcd, there is little correlifondcncc or cx-

Charlcv. N. Fr, iii. 309. c' )vicdo Ill. lib. xvi. c. 2. Sec NOTE XCIL

4 change

B VO K change of those good offices which frengthen attachment, mol-

IV.
----, iify the heart, and sweeten the intercourse of life. Their

high ideas of independence nourish a fullen reserve, which
keeps them at a distance from each other. The nearest rela-
tions are mutually afraid to make any demand, or to solicit any
service ', left it should be confidered by the other as imposing
a burden, or laying a restraint upon his will.
nfnfibility. I HAVE already remarked the influence of this hard unfeel-

ing temper upon domeflic life, with refped to the connecion
between husband and wife, as well as that between parents and
.children. Its effecs are no less conspicuous, in the perform-
ance of those mutual offices of tenderness which the infirmities
of our nature frequently exac. Among tome tribes, when any
of their number are seized with a distemper, they are generally
abandoned by all around them, who, careless of their reco-
very, fly in the utmost consternation from the supposed dan-
ger of infection'. But even where they are not thus deserted,
the cold indifference with which they are attended can afford
them little consolation. No look of sympathy, no soothing ex-
pressions, no officious services contribute to alleviate or to make
them forget their fuffcrings '. Their nearest relations will
often refuse to submit to the finalleft inconveniency, or to
part with the least trifle, however much it may tend to
.their accommodation or relief . So little is the breast of a
savage fiifccptible of those sentiments which prompt men to "
that feeling attention which mitigates diftrels, that, in some
provinces of America, the Spaniards have found it necci.try to

D la Poiheric, iii. 2S. ' Lettre de P. Ctanco np Mlnlat' ri Chrillian

i. 3o;. Tertrc, ii. 410. Lozino, to . ll rrcra, dec. . li. i.i.ii c. ;. dIc. .

iiSc . iv.

c. . Falknel's Dcfciipt. of Patagonia, S9. 'f umlilll, i. 329. Lo-
.ano, 1oo0 . Garica Origen, &c. 90. Illrrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 5.

inforce

inforce the common duties of humanity by positive laws, and to B O O K

IV.

oblige husbands and wives, parents and children, under evere _-
penalties, to take care of each other during their fickncfs .
The fame harshness of temper is still more conspicuous in their
treatment of the animal creation. Prior to their intcrcourfc
with the people of Europe, the North-Americans had ome
tame dogs, which accompanied them in their hunting excur-
sions, and served them with all the ardour and fidelity pecu-
liar to their species. But, instead of that fond attachment,
which the hunter naturally feels towards those useful compa-
nions of his toils, they requite their services with neglect,
seldom feed, and never caress them '. In other provinces,
the Americans have become acquainted with the domestic
animals of Europe, and avail themselves of their service; but
it is universally observed that they always treat them harshly k,
and never employ any method either for breaking or ma-
naging them, but force and cruelty. In every part of the de-
portment of man in his savage state, whether towards his
equals of the human species, or towards the animals below
him, we recognize the fame character, and trace the opera-
tions of a mind, intent on its own gratifications, and regulated
by its own caprice, without much attention or sensibility to the
sentiments and feelings of the beings around him.

AFTER explaining how iinfivourable the avage slate is to Taciturlity.

the cultivation of the nlderflanding, and to the improvement of
the heart, I flould not have thought it necessary to mention
what may be deemed its Icfler dcfecs, if the character of na-

h Cogulludo l ifl. dle Yuclat. n. p. 3co. ChaIlev. N. r. iii. 119. 337.
' Ulloa Notic. Amciican. 312.

tions

1B o 0 K tions as well as individuals, were not often more diftintly marked

A _l---- -
by circumstances apparently trivial, than by those of greater mo-

ment. A savage, frequently, placed in situations of danger
and distress, depending on himself alone, and wrapt up in his
own thoughts and schemes, is a serious melancholy animal.
His attention to others is small. The range of his own ideas
is narrow. Hence that taciturnity which is so disgusting to
men accustomed to the open intercourse of social conversation.
When not engaged in aion, the Americans often fit whole
days in one posture, without opening their lips '. When they
go forth to war, or to the chace, they usually march in a line
at ome distance from one another, and without exchanging a
word. The fame profound silence is observed when they row
together in a canoe "'. It is only when they are animated by
intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by the jollity of the festival and
dance, that they become gay and converfible.
Cunning. To the fame causes may be imputed the refined cunning with

which they form and execute their schemes. Men, who are
not habituated to a liberal communication of their own senti-
ments and wishes, are apt to be so distrustful, as to place little
confidence in others, and to have rccourfe to an insidious craft,
in acconmplifhing their own purpofcs. In civilized life, those
persons, who, by their situation, have but a few olbjcds of pur-
suit on llwhicl their minds incessantly dwell, are mo-l remark-
able for low artifice in carrying on their little projccLs. Among
savages, whose views are equally confined, and their attention
no less persevering, tlhofe circumstances mull operate fill more
powerfully, and gradually accuflom them to a difinecnuous

Voy.age dc Co guer, lo0. " Clarlv. iii .
3 .

fubtlcty

subtlety in all their tranfadions. The force of this is increased B 0 K
by habits which they acquire in carrying on the two most
interesting operations wherein they are engaged. With them
war is a system of craft, in which they trufl for success to fira-
tagem more than to open force, and have their invention con-
tinually on the stretch to circumvent and surprise their enemies.
As hunters, it is their constant object to ensnare, in order that
they may destroy. Accordingly, art and cunning have been
universally observed as distinguishing characteriflics of all
savages. The people of the rude tribes of America are re-
markable for their address and duplicity. Impenetrably fccret
in forming their measures, they pursue them with a patient un-
deviating attention, and there is no refinement of dissimulation
which the ycannot employ, in order to insure theirfuccefs. The
natives of Peru were engaged above thirty years, in concerting
the plan of their infurredion, under the vice-royalty of the
marquis de Villa-Garcia, and though communicated to a great
number of all different ranks, no indication of it ever tran-
spired during that long period; no man betrayed his trust, or
by an unguarded look, or rafl word, gave rife to any fufpi-
cion of what was intended ". The diflimulation and craft of
individuals is no less remarkable than that of nations. When
set upon deceiving, they wrap themfelvcs up so artificially,
that it is impoflible to penetrate into their intentions, or to de-
tect their designs .

13u T if there be dcfeds or vices peculiar to the avage slate, \'irtus.
there are, likcwife, virtues which it inlires, and good (qualities,

Voyage lc Ul':t, i;. cg. ° Gumilla, i. 1(7. Charlcv. ii. Io9.
VOL. I. ^ to

B 0 K to the cxc:cife of which it is friendly. Tlhe bonds of society

iV.

_--_ fit io loose upon the members of the more rude American tribes,
In pcnd(nt that they hardly feel any reitraint. HIence the spirit of inde-

j1"'ii pcndence, which is the pride of a savage, and which he con-

fiders as the unalienable prerogative of man. Incapable of
controul, and disdaining to acknowledge any superior, his
mind, though limited in its powers, and erring in many of its
pursuits, acquires such elevation by the confcioufinefs of its own
freedom, that he acls on some occasions with astonishing force,
and perseverance, and dignity.
Fotit ldc. As independence nourifles this high spirit among savages,

the perpetual wars in which they are engaged call it forth into
action. Such long, intervals of tranquillity as are frequent in
polifled societies, are unknown in the savage slate. Their en-
mities, as I have observed, are implacable and immortal. The
valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in ination. The
hatchet is always in their hand, either for attack or defence.
Evcn in their hunting excursions, they must be on their guard
against surprise fiom the hostile tribes, by which they are fur-
rounded. Accustomed to continual alarms, they grow familiar
with danger, and courage becomes an habitual virtue, resulting
naturally from their situation, and firengthened by conltant
exertions. The mode of displaying fortitude may not be the
fame in Ifmall and rude communities, as in more powerful and
civilized flates. Their fyflcm of war, and fandard of valour
may be frmned upon differcnt principles, but in no situation
does the human mind rife more superior to the sense of danger.,
or the dread of death, than in its mol- simple and unculti-
'vated slate.

ANTo TILE-

AOTI- ERI virtue remarkable among ravages, is attachment B ()

I-

to the community of which they are members. From the na- -----
ture of their political union, one might expect this tic to be to .!c., ,.0-,,
extremely feeble. But there are circumlances which rcndcr mu;'ty.
the influence, even of their loose mode of association, very
powerful. The American tribes are small; combined against
their neighbours, in prosecution of ancient enmities, or in
avenging recent injuries, their interefls and operations are
neither numerous nor complex. These are objects, which
the uncultivated underflanding of a savage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming conneclions, which are lo little
diffuscd. -Ic asSents with warmth to public measures, dicIated
by paflions, similar to those which influence his own condut.
Hence the ardour with which individuals undertake the molt
perilous service, when the community deems it ncccfflry.
-Ience their fierce and deep-rooted antipathy to the public ene-
mies. Hcence their zeal for the honour of their tribe, and that
love of their country, which prompts them to brave danger
that it may triumph, and to endure the most exquilite tor-
ments without a groan, that it may not be disgraced.

T1I us, in every situation where a human being can he place d, s si

even the moil unfavourable, thel- are avi ties that peculiarly be- ,,1,; ,j;,
long to it; there are aicfeions wicl it calls t)rtl;j there isa flpcies i""
(f- Ihalppincll wvhich it yields. Natture, with moll beneficent in-
tcntioln, conciliates and forms the lind to its co(nition, the
idcais and "wihlcs of man extcnd not beyond that s(ite of si,-
cictI to \\lhicll lie is lhabituated. \Vhat it prclilts :a' objccls
of' c(,clnlplaltiinn or cnjoyln lt, lill a:ind laliVsfy his mind, n1al
lie can haridly conceive any other (de of lilc to be 1lealilit
or cvcn to!erable. The Tartar, accuftllolmd to riam over Cx-

3 C; o tcilic

B K tensive plains, and to subsist on the product of his herds, im-

Iv.
t.---- precates upon his enemy, as the greatest of all curses, that he

may be condemned to reside in one place, and to be nourished
with the top of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of their
own pursuits, and satisfied with their own lot, are equally un-
able to comprehend the intention or utility of the various ac-
commodations, which, in more polished society, are deemed
essential to the comfort of life. Far from complaining of their
own situation, or viewing that of men in a more improved
fiate with admiration or envy, they regard themselves as the
standard of excellence, as beings the best entitled, as well
as the most perfectly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Un-
accuflomed to any restraint upon their will or their ations,
they behold with amazement the inequality of rank, and the
subordination which take place in civilized life, and confider
the voluntary submission of one man to another, as a renunci-
ation, no less base than unaccountable, of the first diftinCion
of humanity. Void of foresight, as well as free from care
themselves, and delighted with that state of indolent security,
they wonder at the anxious precautions, the unceasing industry,
and complicated arangements of Europeans, in guarding against
distant evils, or providing for future wants, and exclaim against
their preposterous folly, in thus multiplying the troubles,
and increasing the labour of life °. This preference of their
own manners is conspicuous on every occasion. Even the
names, by which the various nations with to be diflinguiflied,
are aunmcd from this idea of their own pre-eminence. The
appellation which the Iroquois give to themselves is, the chief
of mCen . Caraibe, the original name of the fierce inhabitants

6 Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 308. Lahontan, ii. 97. F Colden, i. 3.

2 of

of the windward islands, signifies the 'warlike people q. The B O 0 Ki
Cherokee, from an idea of their own superiority, call the ----
Europeans Nothings, or the accursed race, and assume them-
selves the name of The beloved people'. The fame principle
regulated the notions of the other Americans concerning the Euro-
peans; for although, at first, they were filled with aftoniifment at
their arts, and with dread of their power, they soon came to abate
their estimation of men, whose maxims of life were so different
from their own. Hence they called them the froth of the ea,
men without father or mother. They supposed, that either
they had no country of their own, and therefore invaded that
which belonged to others'; or, that, being destitute of the ne-
ceffaries of life at home, they were obliged to roam over the
ocean, in order to rob such as were more amply provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far from any in-

clination to relinquish their own labits, or to adopt those of ci-
vilized life. The transition is too violent to be suddenly made.
Even where endeavours have been used to wean a savage from
his own cutfoms, and to render the accommodations of polished
society familiar to him; even where he has been allowed to taste
of those pleasures, and has been honoured with those diftindions,
which are the chief objcds of our dcfire, he droops and lan-
guifhes under the restraint of laws and forms, he fcizes the first
opportunity of breaking loose from them, and returns with
transport to the forest or the wild, where he can enjoy a care-
less and uncontrouled freedom'.

q Rochefort I-lif. des Antillcs, 455. ' Adair, I-ill. of Amer. Indiins,

p. 32. ° Bcnzon. Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. z. ' Chanlcv.
N. Fr. iii. 32z.

Ti us

B O CK Ti-Hus I have finished a laborious delineation of the character

1V.
'-.--- ' and. manners of the uncivilized tribes scattered over the vast

continent of America. In this, I aspire not at rivalling the
great maflers who have painted and adorned savage life, either
in boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of their co-
louring. I am fatistied with the more humble merit of having
persisted with patient induflry, in viewing my subjed in many
various lights, and in collecing from the most accurate ob-
servers such detached and often minute features, as might
.enable me to exhibit a portrait that reSembles the original.

(;cnernl c'un BEFORE I close this part of my work, one observation more
tion oith re-
fp, o it:ss~ is necelfary, in order to justify the conclusions which I have

irjiy. formed, or to prevenit the mitfakes into which such as examine

them may fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a country
so widely extended as America, great attention fiould be paid
to the diversity of climates under which they are placed. The
influence of this I have pointed out with respeCt to several im-
portant particulars, which have been the objec of rcfcarch;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it ought not to be
overlooked. The provinces of America are of filch different
temperament, that this alone is lutifcient to conflitute a dilf
tin&ion between their inhabitants. In every part of the earth
where man exists, the power of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and charaLdcr. In those coun-
tries which approach near to the extremes of heat or cold, this
influence is io conspicuous as to llrike every eye. Whether
we confider man merely as an animal, or as a being cndowed
with rational powers, which fit him ior aivity and lpecula-
tion, we liall find that hle has uniformly attained the greatcft

perfieCion
j::

perretion of which his nature is capable, in the temperate B o o
regions of the globe. There his constitution is molt vigorous,
his organs most acute, and his form molt beautiful. Therc,
too, he possesses a superior extent of capacity, greater fertility
of imagination, more enterprising courage, and a cnibility of
heart which gives birth to pallions, not only ardent, but per-
fevering. In this favourite situation he has dilplaycd the utinoft
efforts of his genius, in literature, in policy, in commerce, in
war, and in all the arts which improve or cmbcllifi life .

TrIs powerful operation of climate is felt most sensibly by rude

nations, and produces greater cffcLts than in ocicties more highly
polishcd. Tle talents of civilized men arc continually exerted
in rendering their condition more comfortable ; and by theic
ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a great mncafure, supply
the defects, and guard agaillft the inconveniencies, of any cli-
mate. But the improvident savage is affcCecld by every circum-
ftancc peculiar to his situation. -Ic takes no precaution either
to mitigate or to improve it. Like a plant, or an ainal, lie
is formed by the climate under which he is placed, and feels
the full force of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of .\mcrica, this natural dil(

tindRion between the inhabitants of the temperate and torr-id
zones is very remarkable. They may, accordingly, he divided
into two great classes. The one complrehrllc s all the North-
Americans, from the river St. Laul-rcce to tlhe Gull of Mexico%

Dr. Fcrgufon' Eay on the Ilil. of Civil Society, part iii. c. i.

togctl'cr

B 0 I0 together with the people of Chili, and a few small tribes to-

_,_
-. -- wards the extremity of the southern continent. To the other

belong all the inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in the
various provinces which extend from the isthmus of Darien
almost to the southern confines of Brasil, along the east fide of
the Andes. In the former, the human species appears mani-
feftly to be more perfect. The natives are more robust, more
active, more intelligent, and more courageous. They possess,
in the most eminent degree, that force of mind, and love of
independence, which I have pointed out as the chief virtues of
man in his savage state. They have defended their liberty with
persevering fortitude againt the Europeans, who subdued the
other rude nations of America with the greatest ease. The
natives of the temperate zone are the only people in the New
World who are indebted for their freedom to their own valour.
The North-Americans, though long encompassed by three formid-
able European powers, fill retain part of their original posses-
sions, and continue to exist as independent nations. The people
of Chili, though early invaded, still maintain a gallant contest
with the Spaniards, and have set bounds to their encroach-
ments; whereas, in the warmer regions, men are more feeble
in their frame, less vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of a
gentle but dastardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure and funk
in indolence. Accordingly, it is in the torrid zone that the Eu-
ropeans have most completely cflablilfed their dominion over
America; the most fertile and desirable provinces in it are sub-
jecd to their yoke ; and if fcveral tribes there fill enjoy in-
(Icpendcnce, it is either becaufc they have never been attacked
by an enemy already satiatcd with conquest, and poficffcd of
larger territories than he was able to occupy, or bccaufe they

have

hfave been saved from oppression by their remote and inaccessible B o K
situation IV.

CONSPICUOUS as this distinCtion may appear between the

inhabitants of those different regions, it is not, however, uni-
versal. Moral and political causes, as I have formerly obferv-
ed, assed the disposition and characer of individuals as well as
nations, fill more powerfully than the influence of climate.
There are, accordingly, some tribes, in various parts of the torrid
zone, possessed of courage, high spirit, and the love of inde-
pendence, in a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little acquainted with the
history of those people, to be able to trace the fevcral cir-
cumRances in their progress and situation, to which they
are indebted for this remarkable pre-eminence. The fad,.
nevertheless, is certain. As early as the first voyage of Co-
lumbus, he received information that fcveral of the islands were
inhabited by the Carlbbees, a fierce race of men, nowise refcm-
bling their feeble and timid neighbours. In his second expe-
dition to the New World, he found this information to be just,
a.nd was himself a witness of their intrepid valour . The fame
character they have maintained invariably in all fubfcqucnt
contens- with the people of our continent ; and, even in our
own times, we have seen them make a gallant fland in defence
of the last territory which the rapacity of the Europeans ad
left in their pofnlfion . Some nations in Brasil were no less.
eminent for vigour of mind, and bravery in war . The

'*iife of Columbus, c. 17, 48. Sec NOTE XCII. v Roclicf.il 11 (1.

des Antilles, 531. * See NOTE XCIV. ' Lcry p Dc ry,
iii. 207, &c.

VOL . 3 II pcople

B o K people of the ifihmus of Darien boldly met the Spaniards in
-_,_-j the field, and frequently repelled those formidable invaders b

Other inflances might be produced. It is not by attending to
any ingle cause or principle, however powerful and extensive
its influence may appear, that we can explain the actions, or
account for the charater, of men. Even the law of climate,
more universal, perhaps, in its operation than any that assets
the human species, cannot be applied, in judging of their con-
duC, without many exceptions.

1 Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. C. 15, &c.; dec. 2. pafim.

N O TES

N O T E S

AND
ILL USTRATIONS.

I 2

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTE I. P. 7.

# NOTE II. P. 10.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 7
T YRE was situated at such a distance from the Arabian Gulf or

Red Sea, as made it impossible to convey commodities from thence

to that city by land-carriage. This induced the Phenicians to render
themselves masters of Rhinocrura, or Rhinocolura, the nearest port in
the Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They landed the cargoes which
they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at Elath, the safest
harbour in the Red Sea towards the north. Thence they were carried
by land to Rhinocolura, the distance not being very considerable; and
being refhipped in that port, were transported to Tyre, and diftri-
buted over the world. Strabon. Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi.p1. 1 28.
Diodor, Sictri. Biblioth. Hiftor. Edit. Wefl'lingi, lib. i. p. 70.

N O T E II. p. o.
THE Periplus -lannonis is the only authentic monument of the Car-

thaginian kill in naval affairs, and one of the most curious fiag-

ments transmitted to us by antiquity. The learned and industrious
Mr. Dodwell, in a dissertation prefixed to the Periplus of I-anno, in
the edition of the Minor Geographers published at Oxford, endea-
vours to prove that this is a spurious work, the conpofition of some

Greck,

Greek, who assumed Hanno's name. But M. de Montesquieu, in his
1'Esprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bougainville, in a differ-
tation published tom. xxvi. of the Memoires de l'Academie des In-
scriptions, &c. have established its authenticity by arguments which to
me appear unanswerable. Ramuilo has accompanied his translation
of this curious voyage with a differration tending to illustrate it.
Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i. p. II2. M. de Bougainville has, with
great learning and ability, treated the fame fubjefts. It appears
that Hanno, according to the mode of ancient navigation, undertook
this voyage in fmnall vessels, so conftrusted that he could keep close in
with the coast. He failed from Gades to the island of Cerne in twelve
days. This is probably what is known to the moderns by the name
of the Isle of Arguim. It became the chief station of the Carthagi-
nians on that coast; and M. de Bougainville contends, that the cif-
terns found there are monuments of the Carthaginian power and in-
genuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and still following the winding of
the coast, he arrived, in seventeen days, at a promontory which he
called The Wef IHorn; probably Cape Palmas. From this he ad-
vanced to another promontory, which he named The South Horn, and
which is manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about five degrees north of
the line. All the circumstances contained in the flort abflraEt of his
journal, which is handed down to us, concerning the appearance and
state of the countries on the coast of Africa, are confirmed and
illustrated by a comparison with the accounts of modern navigators.
Even those circumstances, which, from their seeming improbability,
have been produced to invalidate the credibility of his relation, tend
to confirm it. lie observes, that in the country to the south of Cerne,
a profound silence reigned through the day; but during the night,
innumerable fires were kindled along the banks of the rivers, and
the air resounded with the noise of pipes and drums, and cries of
joy. The fame thing, as Ramufio observes, fill takes place. The
excefive heat obliges the negroes to take shelter in the woods, or in
their houses, during the day. As oon as the iun sets, they sally out,
and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure of music and dancing, in which

they

# NOTE III. p. 11.

they spend the night. Ramus. i. I13, F. In another place, he men-
tions the sea as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred to M.
Adanfon, on the fame coast, may explain this. " As soon," fays
he, " as the fun dipped beneath the horizon, and night overspread
the earth with darkness, the sea lent us its friendly light. MWhile the
prow of our veffil ploughed the foaming surges, it seemed to set
them all on fire. Thus we failed in a luminous inclolure, which fur-
rounded us like a large circle of rays, from whence darted in the wake
of the ship a long stream of light." Voy. to Senegal, p. 176.

NOTE III. p. r.
LONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and of Eudoxus round

Africa, Polybius, the most intelligent and best informed hiltorlan of

antiquity, affirms, that it was not known, in his time, whether Africa
was a continued continent, stretching to the south, or whether it was
encompafled by the ea. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny the naturalist aferts,
that there can be no communication between the southern and northern
temperate zones. Plinii Hist. Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to,lib. ii. c. 68.
If they had given full credit to the accounts of those voyages, the former
could not have entertained such a doubt, the latter could not have
delivered such an opinion. Strabo mentions the voyage of Eudoxus,
but treats it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. 155.; and, according to his
account, no other judgment can be formed with refpe& to it. Strabo
frees not to have known any thing with certainty concerning the form
and state of the Ibuthern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib. xvii. p. i So.
1Ptolemy, the nmof- inquisitive and learned of iall the ncient gcom'a-
phers, was equally unacquainted with any part : Afiica fit u.tdl a
few degrees beyond the equinoctial line; for he liuplPolF's tht tis
great continent was not surrounded by the lfe, Lbu t hat it [rtchlil,
without interruption, towards the foull pole: andl le lb li'r Inillil.s
its true figure, that he describes the continent s bcciiln broader
and broader as it advanced towards the south. Pl'olom:i Geodg.
lib. iv. c. 9. Brietii Parlallcla Gcog,. vteris ct nova, p. bG6.

NO 0i E

# NOTE V. p. 17.

# NOTE VI. p. 20.

NOTE 1V. p. 16..
A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very strong and singular proof

of the ignorance of the ancients with refpet to the ituation of

the various parts of the earth. When Alexander marched along the
banks of the Hydafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into.
the Indus, he observed that there were many crocodiles in those rivers,
and that the country produced beans of the fame species with those.
which were common in Egypt. From thee circumftanGes, he con-
cluded that he had discovered the source of the Nile, and prepared a
fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv.
p. i020. This amazing error did not arise from any ignorance of
geography peculiar to that monarch; for we are informed by Strabo,
that Alexander applied with particular attention in order to acquire.
the knowledge of this science, and had accurate maps or descriptions of
the countries through which he marched. Lib. ii. p. 120. But, in,
his age, the knowledge of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits
of the Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 17.
AS the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great at the mouth

of the river Indus,. this would render the phenomenon more for-
midable to the Greeks. Varen. Geogr. vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE VI. p. 20o
IT is probable that they were seldom induced to advance so far,

either by motives of curiosity, or views of commercial advantage.

In consequence of this, the idea of the ancients concerning the position
of that great river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch
of the Ganges which he distinguishes by the name of the Great Mouth,
in the hundred and forty-fixth degree of longitude from his first me-
ridian in the Fortunate Islands. But its true longitude, computed

from

# NOTE VII. p. 20.

from that meridian, is now determined by astronomical observations
to be only a hundred and five dgrces. A geographer so eminent
must have been betrayed into an error of tis magnitude by the
imperfection of the information which he had received concerning
those dir-ant regions; and this affords a flriking proof of the inter-
course with them being extremely rare. With refpea to the coun-
tries of India beyond the Ganges, his intelligence was fill more de-
fecive, and his errors more enormous. I iall have occasion to obfcrve
in another place, that he has placed the country of the Seres, or
China, no less than sixty degrees farther east than its true position.
M. d'Anville, one of the most learned and inquisitive of the modern
geographers, has set this matter in a clear light, in two dissertations
published in Mem. de l'Academ. des Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii. p. 573.
604.

NOTE VII. p. 20.
IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients were made chiefly

by land; those of the moderns are made chiefly by sea. The progress

of conquest led to the former, that of commerce to the latter. It is a
judicious observation of Strabo, that the conquests of Alexander the
Great made known the Eat, thote of the Romans opened the WeV- ,
and those of Mithridates king of Pontus the North. Lib. i. p. 26.
When discovery is carried on by land alone, its progress imll be flow,
and its operations confined. WVhen it is carried on only by Ica., its
fpllere may be more extenfivc, and its advanccs more rapid ; but it
labours under peculiar defels. Though it nmn;y make known the
position of different countries, and acrtain their boundaries as It; as
thele arc determined by the ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with rc-
sPeCt to their interior late. Above two centuries and a hall have
elapfei lince the lEuropeans failed round the southern promontory of
Africa, and have traded in most of its ports; but, in a c-onlideraible
part of that great continent, they have done little nmore than furvcy its
coasts, and mark its capes and harbours. Its interior regions are in a

VOL. I. 3 1 Igreat

# NOTE VIII. p. 23.

great measure unknown. The ancients, who had a very imperfe&
knowledge of its coasts, except where they are waffed by the Medi-
terranean or Red Sea, were accustomed to penetrate into its inland
provinces, and, if we may rely on the testimony of Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus, had explored many parts of it now altogether un-
known. Unless both modes of discovery be united, the geographical
knowledge of the earth must remain incomplete and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 23.
THE notion of the ancients concerning such an excelfive degree of

heat in the torrid zone, as rendered it uninhabitable, and their

perilfting in this error long after they began to have ome commercial
intercourse with several parts of India lying within the tropics, must
appear o singular and absurd, that it may not be unacceptable to some
of my readers to produce evidence of their holding this opinion, and
to account for the apparent inconsistence of their theory with their
experience. Cicero, who had bestowed attention upon every part of
philosophy known to the ancients, seems to have believed that the
torrid zone was uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there could
be no intercourse between the northern and southern temperate zones.
He introduces Africanus thus addrefling the younger Scipio: " You
fee this earth encompassed and bound in by certain girdles, of which,
two, at the greatest distance from each other, and sustaining the op-
polite poles of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle
one, and the largest of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun ; two are
habitable, the people in the southern one are antipodes to us, with whom
we have no connecsion." Somniun Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek
philosopher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fame doól-ine,
not in a popular work, but in his E-aywyin Eis qxivojv, a treatie
purely scientific. " When we fpcak," lays he, " of the louthern
temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and concerning thole who are
called antipodes, it muil be always unldertood, that we have no cer-
tain knowledge or information concerning the louthern temperate zone,

whther

whether it be inhabited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
carth, and the course which the fun holds between the tropics, we
conclude that there is another zone, situated to the south, which en-
joys the fame degree of temperature with the northern one which we
inhabit." Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus ce Dohr. Tempor. in
quo Uranologium five Syflemata var. Autorum. Amft. 1705.
vol iii. The opinion of Pliny the naturalist, with refpe to both
tlhee points, was the fame: " There are five divisions of the earth,
which are called zones. All that portion which lies near to the two
opposite poles is oppressed with vehement cold, and eternal frost.
There, unblest with the apect of milder stars, perpetual darkness
reigns, or at the utmost a feeble light reflected from furroundino
fnovws. The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun, is
scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery vapour. Between these
torrid and frozen diltricts lie two other portions of the earth, which
are temperate; but, on account of the burning region interposed,
there can be no communication between them. Thus H-eaven has
deprived us of three parts of the earth." I.ib. ii. c. 68. Strabo de-
livers his opinion to the lame eel-, in terms no less explicit: " The
portion of the earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid zone,
is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib. ii. . 154. To there I
might add the authority of many other reipccLable philoolphers and
historians of antiquity.

IN order to explain the sense in which this doctrine was generally

received, we may oblerve, that Parmcnide¢s, as we are informed by
Strabo, was the firll who divided thle earll into live zones, and hel- x-
tended the limits of the zone, which hle fillpofcld o be uninhbitable
on account of heat, beyond the tropics. A/lilkotlC, ;Is we arn likc-
wile fi-rm Strabo, ixed the boundarics of the li'llrnent zones in the
fame manner as they are defined byv 1lotleln eor'i:i:l)rsCs. IutI tlhe
progrcfs o discovery having graduallly ldclontrated that lcvLcrl re-
gions of tle carth whlich lay within the tropics were not only lhalille,
but populous and fertile, this indtucd later geographers to circum-

3 1 2 Iril)e

scribe the limits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to ascertain with
precision the boundaries which they allotted to it. From a paf'age in
Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of antiquity from
whom we receive any hint concerning this subje&t, I should conjecture,
that those who calculated according to the measurement of the earth
by Eratosthenes, supposed the torrid zone to comprehend near sixteen
degrees, about eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such as
followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted about twenty-four
degrees, or lo;ncwhat more than twelve degrees on each fide of the
equator to 'the torrid zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. 151. According to
the former opinion, about two thirds of that portion of the earth.which
lies between the tropics was confidered as habitable; according to the
latter, about one half of it. With this restriction, the docrine of the
ancients concerning the torrid zone appears less absurd; and we can
conceive the reason f their asserting this zone to be uninhabitable,
even after they had opened a communication with several places within
the tropics. When men of science spoke of the torrid zone, they confi-
dered it as it was limited by the definition of geographers to sixteen,
or at the utmost to twenty-four degrees; and as they knew almost
nothing of the countries nearer to the equator, they might flill suppose
them to be uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse, the
name of the torrid zone continued to be given to all that portion of
the earth which lies within the tropics. Cicero seems to have been
unacquainted with the ideas of later geographers, and according to
the division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as the largeit of
the five. Some of the ancients rjeLed the notion concerning the in-
iolerable heat of the torrid zone as a popular error. This, we are
told by Plutarch, was the flntimcnt of Pythagoras, and we learn from -
Str.abo, that rKratollnces and Polybius had adopted the famrie opi-
nion, lib. ii. ,. Ptoleiny lcems to have paid no regard to the an-
rtiCnt dorin nd opinions concerning the torrid zone.

NOT E

# NOTE IX. p. 42.

# NOTE X. p. 49.

# NOTE XI. p. 49.

NOTE IX.. 42.
THE court of inquisition, which effetually checks a spirit of liberal

inquiry, and of literary improvement, wheever it is established,

was first introduced into Portugal by John III. who began his reign,
A. D. 521.

NOTE X. p. 49.
AN inflance of this is related by -Hackluyt, upon the authority of

the Portugueze historian Garcia de Refende. Some English mer-

chants having resolved to open a trade with the coast of Guinea,
John II. of Portugal dispatched ambassadors to Edward IV., in order
to lay before him the right which he had acquired by the Pope's bull
to the dominion of that country, and to requell of him to prohibit
his fubjets to prosecute their intended voyage. Edward was so much
satisfied with the exclusive title of the Portugueze, that lie ifTued his
orders in the terms which they desired. lHackluyt, Navigations,
Voyages, and Traffics of the Englifn, vol. ii. part ii. p. z.

NOTE XI. p. 59.
THE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly ascertained by the

following circumstances. It appears from the fragment of a letter,

addreled by him to Ferdinand and llibella, A. I). 15o0, that ha
had, at that time, been engaged forty years in a sea-faring life. In
another letter, he informs them, that he went to sea at the age of
fourteen; from thole f.ss it follows, that he was born A. 1). 447.
Lile of Chrifl. Columbus, by his ion 1)on Ferdinand. Churchill's
Colletion of Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484, 485.

NOTF.

# NOTE XII. p. 65.

NOTE XII. p. 65.
'THE spherical figure of the earth was known to the ancient geo-

graphers. They invented the method, fill in use, of computing the

longitude and latitude of different places. According to their doc-
trine, the equator or imaginary line which encompasses the earth con-
tained three hundred and sixty degrees; there they divided into twenty-
four parts, or hours, each equal to fifteen degrees. The country of
the Se or Since, being the farthest part of India known to the ancients,
was supposed, by Marinus Tyrius, the most eminent of the ancient
geographers before Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or two hundred
and twenty-five degrees to the east of the first meridian, pafling through
the Fortunate Islands, Ptolomaei Geogr. lib. i. c. . If this fuppo-
fition .was well--founded, the country of the Seres, or China, was
only nine hours, or one hundred and thirty five degrees weft from the
Fortunate, or Canary Islands; and the navigation, in that direction,
was much filorter than by the course which the Portugueze were pur-
suing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had delcribed countries, particu
larly the illand of Cipango or Zipangri, fuppoted to be Japan, con-
fiderably to the east of any part of Asia, known to the ancients. Marcus
Paulus de Region. Oriental. lib. ii. c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. f course, this
country, as it extended further to the east, was itill nearer to the Canary
islands. The conclusions of Columbus, though drawn fom innacurate
observations, werejuft. If the filppofitions of Marinus had been well
founded, and if the countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been
situated to the call of thole whose longitude Marinus had ascertained,
the proper and nearcft courle to the liaft Indies must have been to
fleer directly weft. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 2. A more exten-
five knowledg( of the globe has now discovered the great error of
Marinus, in fupp ofin- China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred
and twenty-five .l- rces nell from the Canary Islands, and that even
Ptolemy was niltaken, when he reduced the longitude of China to
twelve hours, or one hundred and eighty degrees. The longitude

9 of

# NOTE XIII. p. 86.

# NOTE XIV. p. 96.

of the western frontier of that vast empire is seven hours, or one
hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian of the Canary flands.
But Columbus followed the light, which his age afforded, and relied
upon the authority of writers, who were, at that time, regarded as
the inftruEtors and guides of mankind in the science of geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 86.
.AS the Portugueze, in making their discoveries, did not depart

far from the coast of Africa, they concluded that birds, whole

flight they observed with great attention, did not venture to any con-
fiderable diflance from land. In the infancy of navigation, it was
not known, that birds often stretch their flight at an immense dif-
tance from any land. In failing towards the Weft-Indian islands,
birds are often seen at the distance of two hundred leagues from any
land. Sloane's Nat. Hist of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Cateflby saw
an owl at ea, when the ship was fix hundred leagues distant from
land. Nat. HIift. of Carolina, pref. p. 7. I-lift. Naturelle de M. de
Buffon, tom. xvi. p. 32. From which it appears, that this indica-
tion of land, on which Columbus seems to have relied with ome
confidence, was extremely uncertain.

NOTE XIV. p. 96.
1 N a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Iabella, he delcribes

one of the harbours in Cub.i, with all the enthuliaflic admiration of a

difcovcrer.-" 1 dilcovered a river which a galley might cafily en-
ter; the beauty of it induced me to Ifund, ad I found fiom live to
eight fathoms of water. Hlaving proceeded a considerable way up
the river, every thing invited me to cfttle there. The beauty of the
river, the clearness of the water, through which I could ie the lilndy
bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of diffrenct kinds, the tllefl
and finest I had seen, and an infinite number of olier large and llot-
infling trees, the birds, and the verdlure of the plains, are lo wonder-.

fully.

# NOTE XV. p. 100.

fully beautiful, that this country excels all others as far as the
day furpafis the night in brightness and iplendour, so that I often
said, that it would be in vain for me to attempt to give your high-
neffes a full account of it, for neither my tongue nor my pen could
come up to the truth, and indeed I am so much amazed at the
fight of such beauty, that I know not how to describe it." Life of
Columb. c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. Ioo.
THE account which Columbus gives of the humanity and orderly

behaviour of the natives on this occasion is very firiking. " The

king (fays he, in a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) having been in-
formed of our misfortune, expressed great grief for our loss, and
immediately ent aboarc all the people in the place in many large
canoes; we oon unloaded the hip of every thing that was upon
deck, as the king gave us great assistance, he himself, with his bro-
thers and relations, took all possible care, that every thing flould
be properly done both aboard and on shore. And, from time to
time, he fcnt ome of his relations weeping, to beg of me not to
be dejected, for he would give me all that he had. I can assure your
highnefls, that there would not have been so much care taken in
securing our effects in any part of Spain, as all our property was put
together in one place near his palace, until the houfcs which he wanted
to prepare for the cuflody of it, were emptied. IHe immediately
placed a guard of armed men, who watched during the whole night,
and those on fiore lamented as if they had been much interefled in
our loss. The people are lo affectionate, so tractable, and lb peace-
able, that I swear to your highnefles, that there is not a better race
of men, nor a better country in the world. They love their neigh-
bour as themselves ; their conversation is the sweetest and mildel in
the world, cheerful, and always accompanied with a smile. And
although it is true that they go naked, yet your highneles may be
afTured that they have many very commendable customs ; the king is

6 served

# NOTE XVI. p. 106.

served with great slate, and his behaviour is so decent, that it is
pleasant to fee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful memory
which these people have, and their desire of knowing every thing,
which leads them to inquire into its causes and effecs. Life of Co-
lumbus, c. 32. It is probable that the Spaniards were indebted for
this officious attention, to the opinion which the Indians entertained
of them as a superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. Io6.
E VERY monument of such a man as Columbus is valuable. A

letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and Isabella, describing what

passed on this occasion, exhibits a moit striking picure of his intre-
pidity, his humanity, his prudence, his public spirit, and courtly
address. " I would have been less concerned for this misfortune,
had I alone been in danger, both because my life is a debt that I owe
to the Supreme Creator, and because I have at other times been ex-
posed to the most imminent hazard. But what gave me infinite
grief and vexation was, that after it had pleased our Lord to give
me faith to undertake this enterprize, in which I had now been so
successful, that my opponent would have been convinced, and the
glory of your highnesses, and the extent of your territory increased
by me; it should please the Divine Majesty to flop all by my
death. All this would have been more tolerable, had it not been
attended with the loss of those men whom I had carried with me,
upon promise of the greatest prosperity, who feeing themfclves in
such distress, curled not only their coming along with me, but that
fear and awe for me, which prevented them from returning as they
often had resolved to have done. But betides all this, my sorrow was
greatly increased, by recolle6ing that I had left my two sons at
school at Cordova, destitute of friends, in a foreign country, when
it could not in all probability be klnown that I had done such services
as might induce your highness to remember them. And though I
comforted myself with the faith that our Lord would not permit that,

VOL. I. 3 K which

# NOTE XVII. p. 110.

which tended so much to the glory of his church, and which I had
brought about with so much trouble, to remain imperfefR, yet I con-
fidered that, on account of my fins, it was his will to deprive me
of that glory, which I might have attained in this world. While in
this confused state, I thought on the good fortune which accompanies
your highnesses, and imagined, that although I flould perish, and
the vessel be loft, it was poflble that you might somehow come to
the knowledge of my voyage, and the success with which it was at-
tended. For that reason I wrote upon parchment with the brevity
which the situation required, that I had discovered the lands which
I promised, in how many days I had done it, and what course I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country, the characer of
the inhabitants, and that your highnesses fubjets were left in pof-
feflion of all that I had discovered. Having fealed this writing, I
addressed it to your hghneffes, and promised a thousand ducats to
any person who fiould deliver it fealed, so that if any foreigners
found it, the promised reward might prevail on them not to give
the information to another. I then caused a great calk to be brought
to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an oiled cloth, and afterwards
in a cake of wax, I put it into the cask, and having ftopt it well, I
cast it into the sea. All the men believed that it was some a of de-
votion. Imagining that this might never chance to be taken up, as
the flips approached nearer to Spain, I made another packet like the
first, and placed it at the top of the poop, so that if the flip funk,
the cask remaining above water m;ght be committed to the guidance
of fortune."

NOTE XVII. p. nIo.
SOME Spaniflh authors, with the meanness of national jealousy,

have endeavoured to detrat from the glory of Columbus, by in-

finuating that he was led to the discovery of the New World, not by
his own inventive, or enterpriling genius, but by information which
he had received. According to their account, a veffcl having bc:n

5 driven

driven from its course by easterly winds, was carried before them far
to the weft, and landed on the coast of an unknown country, firom
which it returned with difficulty; the pilot, and three sailors, being
the only persons of the crew that survived the diftrefcs which they
suffered, from want of provisions and fatigue in this lung voyac.
In a few days after their arrival, all the four died, but the pilot
having been received into the house of Columbus, his intimate Iriend,
discloscd to him, before his death, the secret of the discovery which
he had accidentally made, and left him his papers containing a jour-
nal of the voyage, which served as a guide to Columbus in his
undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know, is the irft author who
published this story, Hist. c. 13. Every circumstance is destitute of
evidence to support it. Neither the name of the vellisl nor its deftina-
tion is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of the sea-port
towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to the Canaries, or to Ma-
deira; others, that it was a Bifcayner in its way to England; others,
a Portuguese fIip trading on the coast of Guinea. The name of the
pilot is alike unknown, as well as that of the port in which he landed
on his return. According to ome, it was in Portugal; accord-
ing to others, in Madeira, or the Azores. The year in which
this voyage was made is no less uncertain. Monfon's Nay. Traas.
Churchill, iii. 371. No mention is made of this pilot, or his dilco-
veries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries of
Columbus. I-lerrera, with his usual judgment, paflcs over it in
silence. Oviedo takes notice of this report, but confiders it as a tale
fit only to amuse the vulgar. I lift. lib. ii. c. 2. As Columbus held
his courle dlirectly wefl from the Canaries, and never varied it, lIme
iater authors have 'luppofed, that tis unil'ormity is a proof otl his
being guided by some previous information. But they do not recol-
lct the principles on which lie fourlded all his hopes of fucccls, that
by holding a westerly course, he muff certainly arrive at thole re-
gions of the east describcd by the ancients. 111s firm belcif of his
own lyfteci led him to take that course, and to purlue it without de-
viation.

K 2. )'rlIItk

OTHER nations betide the Spaniards have called in question Co-

lumbus's claim to the honour of having discovered America. Some
German authors ascribe it to Martin Behaim, whom they fuppoie to
be their countryman. But they mention neither the year in which he
made the discovery, nor the place from which he failed, nor one cir-
cumftance of the voyage. Jo. Frid. Stuvenius, in a Dissertation de
vero Novi Orbis Inventore, published at Francfort in the year 1714,
warmly aftrrts the title of Behaim, but without producing in conirma-
tion of it, any thing that has even the shadow of evidence. There
was indeed a Martin de Boemia, a noted cosmographer in the fifteenth
century, whom Herrera mentions as a friend to Columbus, dec. i.
lib. i. c. 2. but he assures us that he was a Portuguese, and born in
the island of Fayal, one of the Azores. Ibid. and dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19.
Gomara informs us, that Magellan was possessed of a terrestrial globe,
made by this Martin de'Boemia, on which he demonstrated the course
he purposed to hold, in searching for that strait which he afterwards
discovered. Hilt. c. 19. It seems probable, then, that the Germans
have been induced, merely by the name of this artist, to suppose him
a native of Bohemia, and on that supposition, have raised their ima-
ginary pretensions.

THOSE of the Welsh seem not to reft on a foundation much more

solid. In the twelfth century, according to Powell, a dispute having
arisen among the sons of Owen Guyneth, king of North-Wales, con-
cerning the succession to his crown, Madoc, one of their number,
weary of this contention, betook himself to sea in quest of a more
quiet settlement. He steered due weft, leaving Ireland to the north,
and arrived in an unknown country, which appeared to him so de-
firable, that he returned to Wales, and carried thither several of his
adherents and companions. This is said to have happened about the
year 170, and after that, he and his colony were heard of no more.
But it is to be observed, that Powell, on whose testimony the authen-
ticity of this flory refts, published his history above four centuries
from the date of the event which he relates. Among a people so

rude

rude and so illiterate as the Welsh, at that period, the memory of a
tranfaEtion so remote mutt have been very imperfectly preserved, and
would require to be confirmed by some author of greater credit, and
nearer to the ara of Madoc's voyage than Powell. Later antiquaries
have indeed appealed to the testimony of Meredith ap Rhees, a Welsh
bard, who died A. D. 1477. But he too lived at such a distance of
time from the event, that he cannot be confidered as a witness of
much more credit than Powell. Betides his verses published by Hak-
luyt, vol. iii. p. i. convey no information, but that Madoc, difla-
tisfied with his domestic situation, employed himself in searching the
ocean for new poflfFions. But even if we admit the authenticity of
Powell's story, it does not follow that the unknown country which
Madoc discovered by fleering weft, in such a course as to leave Ire-
land to the north, was any part of America. The skill of the Welsh
in the twelfth century was hardly equal to such a voyage. If he
made any discovery at all, it more probably might be Madeira, or
some other of the western ies. The affinity of the Welsh language
with some dialects spoken in America, has been mentioned as a cir-
cunmflance which confirms the truth of Madoc's voyage. But that has
been observed in so few instances, and in some of there the affinity is
so obscure, or so fanciful, that no conclusion can be drawn from
the casual resemblance of a small number of words. There is a bird,
which as far as is yet known, is found only on the coaffs of South Ame-
rica, from Port Desire to the Straits of Magellan. It is diftinguiflcd by
the name of Penguin. This word in the Welsh language signifies
HIhitc-bead. All the authors who favour the pretensions of the Welsh
to the discovery of America, mention this as an irrefragable proof of
the affinity of the Welsh language with that spoken in that region of
America. But Mr. Pennant, who has given a scientific description of
the Penguin, observes, that all the birds of that genus have black helads,
"so that we must resign every hope (adds he) founded on this
hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New World."
Philof. Tranfat. vol. lviii. p. 91, &c. Beide this, if the Welsh,
towards the close of the twelfth century, had fettled in any part of

America,

America, some remains of the Christian doctrine and rites muff have
been found among their decendants, when they were discovered
about three hundred years posterior to their migration, a period so
short, that, in the course of it, we cannot well suppose that all Euro-
pean ideas and arts would be totally forgotten.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery of America,

fecm to be better founded than those of the Germans or Welfll.
The inhabitants of Scandinavia were remarkable in the middle ages
for the boldness and extent of their maritime excursions. In
874, the Norwegians discovered, and planted a colony in Iceland.
In 982, they discovered Greenland, and eftablifled settlements there.
From that, some of their navigators proceeded towards the weft,
and discovered a country more inviting than those horrid regions with
which they are acquainted. According to their representation, this
country was sandy on the coasts, but in the interior parts level and
covered with wood, on which account they gave it the name of Helle-
land, and Mark-land, and having afterwards found ome plants of the
vine which bore grapes, they called it Win-land. The credit of this
story refts, as far as I know, on the authority of the saga, or chro-
nicle of king Olaus, composed by Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturlufons,
published by Perinfkiold at Stockholm A. D. 1697. As Snorro was
born in the year 1179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
centuries after the event which he relates. His account of the na-
vigation and discoveries of Biorn, and his companion Lif, is a very
rude confused tale, p. 1C4. l xo. 326. It is impofible to dilcover
from him, what part of America it was in which the Norwegians
landed. According to his account of the length of the d.lys and
nights, it mull have been as far north as the fifty-cighth degree of
latitude, on Come part of the coatt of Labradore, aplproacling n ar
to the entry of Hudfbn's Straits. Grapes, certainly, are not the pro-
duction of that country. 'Iorfeus uippoles that there is an error in
the text, by rcRifying of which, the place where the Norwegians
landed may be luppoled to be situated in latitude 9°. But that is

n(Ot

# NOTE XVIII. p. 111.

# NOTE XIX. p. 122.

not the region of the vine in America. From peruing Snorro's tale,
I should think that the situation of Newfoundland corresponds best
with that of the country discovered by the Norwegians. But grapes
are nor the production of that barren ifand. Other conjectures are
mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd. a 'Hist. de Dannem. 175, &c. I
am not sufficiently acquainted with the literature of the north, to ex-
amine them. It leems manifest, that if the Norwegians did discover
any part of America at that period, their attempts to plant colonies
proved unluccefiful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. II.
pETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentleman, who re-

ided at that time in the court of Spain, whose letters contain an

account of the tranfaftions of that period, in the order wherein they
occurred, describes the sentiments with which he himself and his
learned correspondents were affected, in very striking terms. " Prae
letitia profiluiffe te, vixque a lachrymis prae gaudio temperafe,
quando literas adfpexifti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti
hacenus, te certiorem feci, mi luaviffime Pomponi, infinuafti. Ex
tuis ipfe literis colligo, quid fenferis. Senfifi autem, tantique rena
fecifti, quanti virum summa doctrina infignitum decuit. Quiis nam
que cibus fublimibus praftari poteft ingeniis, ifto fuavior ? quod
condimentumn gratius? A me facio conjeduram. Beari fentio Ipiritus
meos, quando accitos alloquor prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab
ea redent provincia. Implicent animos pecuniarum cumulis augen-
dis miferi avari, libidinibus oblccni; noftras nos mentcs, ipoltquani
Deo pleni aliquando fuerimus, contemplando, lhijulcelodi rerum
notitia demulciamus." l pill. 152. Pomponio Lto.

NOT E XIX. p. 122.
SO firmly were men of'fcience, in that age, persuaded that the coun-

tries which Columbuls had dilcovered weie connected with the Eall
Indies, that Bernaldes, the curate of Los Palacios, who seems to have

been

# NOTE XX. p. 127.

# NOTE XXI. p. 139.

been no inconsiderable proficient in the knowledge of cosmography,
contends that Cuba was not an island, but a part of the continent,
and united to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he delivered
as his opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest for some time
on his return from his second voyage; and he supports it by several
arguments, moffly founded on the authority of Sir John Mandeville.
MS. penes me. Antonio Gallo, who was secretary to the magistracy of
Genoa towards the close of the fifteenth century, published a short
account of the navigations and discoveries of his countryman Colum-
bus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica de rebus populi Genuenfis; in
which he informs us, from letters of Columbus which he himself had
seen, that it was his opinion, founded upon nautical observations,
that one of the islands he had discovered was distant only two hours or
thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts of the geographers
of that age, was laid doWn, upon the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii.
c. 3. as the mofi easterly place in Asia. From this he concluded,
that if some unknown continent did not obftrut the navigation, there
mufft be a short and easy access, by holding a westerly course, to this
extreme region of the East. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum,
vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. 127.
B E R N AL D ES, the curate de los Palacios, a contemporary writer,

fays, that five hundred of there captives were ent to Spain, and

fold publickly in Seville as slaves; but that, by the change of climate,
and their inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in a short
time. MS. penes me.

NO TE XXI. p. 139.
C OLUMBUS seems to have formed ome very singular opinions

concerning the countries which he had now discovered. The
violent fwcll and agitation of the waters on the coast of Trinidad led

hi3
3

# NOTE XXII. p. 150.

him to conclude, that this was the highest part of the terraqueous
globe, and he imagined that various circumstances concurred in prov-
ing that the sea was here visibly elevated. Having adopted this
erroneous principle, the apparent beauty of the country induced him
to fall in with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that the ter-
reftrial paradise was the highest land in the earch; and lie believed
that he had been so fortunate as to dilcover this happy abode. Nor
ought we to think it f-range that a person of so much sagacity fiould
be influenced by the opinion or reports of such a fabulous author as
Mandeville. Columbus and the other discoverers were obliged to
follow such guides as they could find; and it appears from several
passages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend of Colum-
bus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was given to the teflimony
of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes frequently quotes him, and
always with refpet.

NOTE XXII. p. 150.
IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara or Oviedo, the most ancient

Spanifhl historians of America, nor Herrera, confider Hojeda, or

his companion Vespucci, as the first discoverers of the continent of
America. They uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some
have supposed that national resentment again ft Vefpucci,for deserting the
lervice of Spain, and entering into that of Portugal, may have prompted
thele writers to conceal the a-ions which he performed. But Martyr
and Benzoni, both Italians, could not be warped by the faime preju-
dice. Martyr was a contemporary author ; he resided in the court
of Spain, anld had ti e bell op)portunity to be exaclly informed with
rcfped' to all public tranlhlions; and yet, lieither in his Dec:dls, the
iirll general liflory pIublifhed ol the New \Vorld, nor in his .pifll s,
which contain an ;1accoutnt of all tle remarkable events of his tilnl,
does lie aliribe to V'li)lcci tlle honolur of havinp; first dil:bovcre.l the
continclt. 3BeCnoni \Wict s 1 ;tdventurTr to A?.llCiC.l ill the year
1541, ;and rclidld tlcre a coslilr.alc ti:ne. 1 Ic ;lp)ears to halve

\o 1. .3 bccn

been animated with a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his native
country, and yet does not mention the exploits and discoveries of
Velpucci. Herrera, who compiled his general history of America
from the most authentic records, not only follows those early writers,
but accufcs Vespucci of falsifying the dates of both the voyages which
he made to the New World, and of confounding the one with the
other, in order that he might arrogate to himself the glory of having
discovered the continent. Her. dec. . lib. iv. c. 2. He asserts,
that in a judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal fiscal, it was
proved by the testimony of Hojeda himself, that he touched at Hifpa-
niola when returning to Spain from his first voyage; whereas Vespucci
gave out that they returned directly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria,
and touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage; and that he
had finished the voyage in five months; whereas, according to Vefpuc-
ci's account, he had employed seventeen months in performing it.
Viaggio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo, p. 45.
Herrera gives a more full account of this inquest in another part of his
book, and to the fame effet. Her. dec. i. lib. vii. c. 5. Colum-
bus was in Hispaniola when Hojeda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed Hojeda's at-
tempt to excite a new infurrevcion, and, of consequence, his voyage
must have been posterior to that of the admiral. Life of Columbus,
c. 84. According to Vespucci's account, he set out on his first voyage
May oth, 1497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At that time Columbus was
in the court of Spain preparing for his voyage, and seems to have
enjoyed a considerable degree of favour. The affairs of the New
World were at this juncture under the direction of Antonio Torres, a
friend of Columbus. It is not probable, that at that period a com-
mission would be granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral,
by undertaking a voyage which he himself intended to perform.
Fonseca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted the licence for
his voyage, was not recalled to court, and reinstated in the direc-
tion of Indian affairs, until the death of prince John, which happened
September 1.197, . Martyr, Ep. Iz8. several months poftexior to

4 tile

# NOTE XXIII. p. 192.

the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set out upon his voyage.
A life of Vespucci was publifled at Florence by the Abate Bandini,
A. D. 1745, 4to. It is a work of no merit, written with little judg-
ment, and less candour. He contends for his countryman's title to the
discovery of the continent with all the blind zeal of national partiality,
but produces no new evidence to support it. We learn from him,
that Vespucci's account of his voyage was published as early as the
year i510, and probably sooner. Vita di Am. Vefp. p. 52. At
what time the name of AMERICA came to be firt given to the New
World, is not certain.

NOTE XXIII. p. 192.
THE form employed on this occaflon served as a model to the

Spaniards in all their subsequent conquests in America. It is so

extraordinary in its nature, and gives us such an idea of the proceed-
ings of the Spaniards, and the principles upon which they founded
their right to the extensive dominions which they acqclired in the New
World, that it well merits the attention of the reader. " I Alonio de
Hojeda, servant of the most high and powerful kings of Callile and
Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations, their meflenger and cap-
tain, notify to you and declare, in as ample form as I am capablc,
that God our Lord, who is one and eternal, created the heaven and
the earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you nd we, and all
the men who have been or shall be in the world, are dfccnlded. Bur
as it has come to pass, through the number of enllerations during
more than five thousand years, that they have been di licefid into dil-
fcrent parts of the world, and arc divided into various killgdlomi and
provinces, because one country was not able to contain tlhem, nor
could they have found in one the means of lfbfifltncc and pl)rclrv.I-
tion; therefore God our Lord gave the charge of all tlholec people (t
one llan, named St. Peter, whom he colillitutcd tlIC lord and Il(:id
of all the huan race, that all men, in whatever place tly ;ireC lrn,
or in whatever aith or place they Ire educated, mightl yield obdienic(

3 , 2 l uto

unto him. He hath fubjeced the whole world to his jurifdition;
and commanded him to eftablifl his residence in Rome, as the most
proper place for the government of the world. He likewise promised
and gave him power to effablifh his authority in every other part of
the world, and to julge and govern all Christians, Moors, Jews, Gen-
tiles, and all other people, of whatever sec or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope, which signifies admirable, great father
and guardian, because he is the father and governor of all men.
Those who lived in the time of this holy father obeyed and acknow-
ledged him as their lord and king, and the superior of the universe.
The fame has been observed with refpet to them who, since his time,
have been chosen to the pontificate. Thus it now continues, and
will continue to the end of the world.

" ONE of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath made a grant of

there islands, and of the Terra Firma of the ocean sea, to the Catholic
kings of Castile, Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, of glorious
memory, and their successors, our sovereigns, with all they contain, as
is more fully expressed in certain deeds passed upon that occasion,
which you may fee, if you desire it. Thus his majesty is Icing and
lord of these islands, and of the Terra Firma, in virtue of this dona-
tion; and, as king and lord aforesaid, most of the islands to which his
title hath been notified, have recognized his majesty, and now yield
obedience and fubjecion to him as their lord, voluntarily and without
refiflance; and instantly, as soon as they received information, they
obeyed the religious men ent by the king to preach to them, and to
instruct them in our holy faith; and all rhefle, of their own free-will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Chriflians, and continue
to be so; and his majesty having received them graciously under his
protection, has commanded that they flould be treated in the fame
Imanner as his other fubj6ts and vafials. You are bound and obliged
to a in the i'ame manner. Therefore 1 now entreat and require you
to conlider attentively what I have declared to you; and that you
Inl.y more percdtly comprehend it, that you take such time as is rea-

I lonable,

# NOTE XXIV. p. 205.

fonable, in order that you may acknowledge the Church as the fupe-
rior and guide of the universe, and likewise the holy father called the
Pope, in his own right, and his majesty by his appointment, as king
and sovereign lord of there islands, and of the Terra Firma ; and that
you consent that the foresaid holy fathers shall declare and preach to
you the doctrines above mentioned. If you do this, you at well,
and perform that to which you are bound and obliged; and his ma-
jefty, and I in his name, will receive you with love and kindness, and
will leave you, your wives and children, free and exempt from fervi-
tude, and in the enjoyment of all you poffels, in the fame manner as
the inhabitants of the islands. Betides this, his majefly will bestow
upon you many privileges, exemptions, and rewards. But if you
will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey my injunction, then,
with the help of God, I will enter your country by force, I will carry
on war against you with the utmost violence, I will fubjcc you to
the yoke of obedience to the church and the king, I will take your
wives and children, and will make them slaves, and fell or dispose of
them according to his majesty's pleasure; I will seize your goods, and
do you all the mirchief in my power, as rebellious fubjeas, who will
not acknowledge or submit to their lawful sovereign. And I protest,
that all the bloodshed and calamities which fliall follow are to be im-
puted to you, and not to his majesty, or to me, or the gentlemen who
serve under me ; and as I have now made this dcl.-ration and re-
quifition unto you, I require the notary here present to grant me a
certificate of this, fuiblcribcd in proper form." llerrera, dec. x.
lib. vii. c. 4..

N O T E XXIV. p. 205.
BALBOA, in his letter to the king, oblsrves, that of the hundred

and ninety men whonm he took with hiin, there were never above

eighty fit for frvice at one time. So much l did ticy jillCr firI hun-
ger, fatigue, and ficlncls. Ilerrca, dec, i. lib. x. c. 16. 1. Mart.
elccad. p. 226.

N 0 T I'.

# NOTE XXV. p. 217.

# NOTE XXVI. p. 239.

# NOTE XXVII. p. 249.

NOTE XXV. p. 217.
F ONSECA, bishop of Palencia, the principal director of American

affairs, had eight hundred Indians in property; the commendator

Lope de Conchillos, his chief associate in that department, eleven
hundred; and other favourites had different numbers. They sent
overseers to the islands, and hired out those saves to the planters.
Herr. dec. . lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 239.
T H OUGHI America is more plentifully supplied with water than

the other regions of the globe, there is no river or itream of

water in Yucatan. This peninsula projects from the continent a hun-
dred leagues, but, where broadest, does not extend above twenty-
five leagues. It is a flat plain, without mountains. The inhabitants
are supplied with water from pits, and wherever they dig them, find
it in abundance. It is probable, from all those circumstances, that
this country was formerly covered by the ea. Herrera: Defcriptio
India Occidentalis, p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle, par M. de Bufl-n,
tom. i. p. 593.

NOTE XXVII. p. 249.
T H E height of the most elevated point in the Pyrenees is, ac-

cording to M. Cassini, fix thousand fix hundred and forty-fix

feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi., in the canton of Berne, is
ten thousand one hundred and ten feet. The height of the Pike of
Teneriffe, according to the measurement of P. Feuillc, is thirteen
thousand one hundred and feventy-eight feet. The height of Chim-
borazo, the most elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand
two hundred and eighty feet. Voyage de D. Juan Ulloa, Obferva-
tions Astron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. 114. The height of that part of

Chimborazo

# NOTE XXVIII. p. 249.

Chimborazo which is covered perpetually with snow, is two thousand
four hundred feet. Prevot. Hist. Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii.
p. 636.

NOT E XXVIII. p. 249.
AAS a particular description makes a stronger imprelfion than general

affertiorns, I hall give one of Rio de la Plata by an eye-witness.

P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe jefuir, landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749,
and thus represents what he felt when such new objets were first pre-
sented to his view. " While I resided in Europe, and read in books
of history or geography that the mouth of the river De la Plata was
an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I confidered it as an exag-
geration, because in this hemisphere we have no example of such vast
rivers. When I approached its mouth, I had the molt vehement desire
to ascertain the truth with my own eyes, and I have found the matter
to be exactly as it was represented. This I deduce particularly fi-om
one circumstance: When we took our departure from Monte-Video,
a fort situated more than a hundred miles from the mouth of the river,
and where its breadth is considerably diminifhled, we failed a complete
day before we discovered the land on the opposite bank of the river;
and when we were in the middle of the channel, we could not discern
land on either fide, and aw- nothing but the sky and water, as if we
had been in ome great ocean. Indeed, we flould have taken it to
be ea, if the frefl water of the river, which was turbid like the Po,
had not satisfied us that it was a river. Moreover, at Buenos Ayres,
another hundred miles up the river, and where it is fill much nar-
rower, one cannot discern the opposite coafl, which is indeed very
low and flat; but one cannot perceive the houses or the tops of the
fteeplcs in the Portuguclc settlement at Colonia on the other fide of
the river." Lettera prima, published by Muratori, 11 Chlrifianefimo
lEclicc, &c. i. p. 257.

N OTE'

# NOTE XXIX. p. 252.

# NOTE XXX. p. 254.

NOTE XXIX. p. 252.
N EWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Canada, are

the countries which lie in the fame parallel of latitude with the

kingdom of France; and in all of them the water of the rivers is
frozen during winter to the thickness of several feet; the earth is
covered with snow as deep ; almost all the birds fly, during that sea-
son, from a climate where they could not live. The country of the
Efkimaux, part of Labrador, and the countries on the south of Hud-
son's Bay, are in the fame parallel with Great Britain; and yet in all
there the cold is so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has
not attempted cultivation.

NOTE XXX. p. 254.
ACOSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who en-

deavoured to account for the different degrees of heat in the old

and new continents, by the agency of the winds which blow in
each. Hilt. Moral. &c. lib. ii. & iii. M. de Buffon adopts this
theory, and has not only improved it by new observations, but has
employed his amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing
and placing it in the mofi striking light. Some remarks may be added,
which tend to illutrate more fully a doctrine of much importance in
every inquiry concerning the temperature of various climates.

I'-I:N a cold wind blows over land, it muf in its pafTage rob the

surface of some of its heat. By means of this, the coldincts of the
wind is abated. But if it continue to blow in the fame direction, it
will come, by degrees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will
fiiuler no longer any abatement of its own kecnnefs. Thus, as it ad-
vances over a large traC of land, it brings on all the fevcrity of intense
tron!.

L r.r

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep ea; the super-

ficial water muff be immediately cooled to a certain degree, and the
wind proportionally warmed. But the superficial and colder water
becoming specifically heavier than the warmer water below it, de-
scends ; what is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes to be
cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which passes over it, or
to diminish its cold. This change of the superficial water, and fuccef-
five ascent of that which is warmer, and consequent successive abate-
ment of coldness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the sea
by the mechanical aion of the wind, and also by the motion of the
tides. This will go on, and the rigour of the wind will continue to
diminish until the whole water is so far cooled, that the water on the
surface is no longer removed from the aion of the wind, fast enough
to hinder it from being arrefled by frost. Whenever the surface
freezes, the wi;nd is no longer warmed by the water from below, and
it goes on with undiminished cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity of winter frois

in extensive continents; their mildness in small islands; and the fu-
perior rigour of winter in those parts of North America with which
we are best acquainted. In the north-west parts of Europe, the feve-
riy of winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which usually blow in
the months of November, December, and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over Innd, it heats the

surface, which nuft therefore cease to abate the fervour of the wind.
But the fame wind blowing over water, agitates it, brings up the
colder water from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the ea to nitigate the heat of the wind or

air palling over it, proceeds from the following circumstance, tlhat on
account of the transparency of the lea, its surface cannot be heated to a
great degree by the fun's rays whereas thcground, fubjcctcd to their in-

VOL. I. 3 M UCILCC,

A3uence, very oon acquires great heat. When, therefore, the wind
blows over a torrid continent, it is soon raised to. a heat almost into-
lerable; but during its paflage over an extensive ocean, it is gradually
cooled; so that on its arrival at. the farthest hore, it is again fit for
respiration..

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of large conti-

nents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate of islands in the fame
latitude; and for the superior warmth in summer which large con-
tinents, situated in temperate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy,
when compared with that of islands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effet of the fun's rays, but on their
continued operation, on the effect which they have formerly produced,
and which remains for some time in the ground. This is the reason
why the day is warmelt about two in the afternoon, the summer
warmest about the middle of July, and the winter coldest about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fun beams from

heating, the ground, are a great cause of the temperate climate of the
equatorial parts. The ground, not being heated, cannot heat the
air ; and the leaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
ground, have not a mass of matter sufficient to absorb heat enough
for this purpose. Betides, it is a known sac, that the vegetative
power of a plant occasions a perspiration from the leaves in propor-
tion to the heat to which they are exposed; and, from the nature of
evaporation, this perlpiration produces a cold in the leaf propor-
tional to the perspiration. Thus the effec of the leaf in heating the
air in contact with it, is prodigiously diminished. For those obfer-
vations, which throw much additional light on this curious subjec,.
I am indebted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Robifon, profelfor of
natural philosophy in. the university of Edinburgh.

NOTE

# NOTE XXXI. p. 255.

NOTE XXX. p. 255.
THE climate of Brasil has been described by two eminent natu-

raliffs, Pifo and Margrave, who observed it with a philofophi-

cal accuracy, which we desiderate in the accounts of many other
provinces in America. Both represent it as temperate and mild, when
compared with the climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to the
refreshing wind which blows continually from the sea. The air is not
only cool, but chilly through the night, in so much that the natives
kindle fires every evening in their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafili.
enfi, lib. i. p. , &c. Margravius Hitfor. Rerum Natural. Brasilia,
lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who relided long in Brasil, confirms
their description. Churchill's Collecion, vol. ii. p. 26. Gumilla,
who resided many years in the country, upon the river Orinoco,
gives a similar description of the temperature of the climate there.
Hit. de 1' Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a very considerable
degree of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Amazons. Re-
lat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne,
gives a similar account of the temperature of that climate, and ascribes
it to the fame cause. Voyage de la France, Exquinox, p. 330. No-
thing can be more different from thee descriptions than that of the
burning heat of the African coaff given by M. Adanfon. Voyage
to Senegal, passim.

THE most obvious and probable cause of this superior degree of

cold, towards the southern extremity of America, seems to be the form
of the continent there. Its breadth gradually lecrealcs as it liretches
fiom St. Antonio southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much contra&ced. On the ealt
and weft fides, it is wafled by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. From
its southern point it is probable that an open sea firetches to the
Antartic pole. In whichever of these direclions the wind blows, it is
cooled before it approaches the Magellanic regions, by pafling over

3 M 2 a vail

# NOTE XXXII. p. 256.

a vast body of water, nor is the land there of such extent that it can
recover any considerable degree of heat in its progress over it. These
circumnlances concur in rendering the temperature of the air in this
diftri& of America, more similar to that of an insular, than to that of
a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the fame degree
of summer heat, with places in Europe and Asia, in a corresponding
northern latitude. The north wind is the only one that reaches this
part of America, after blowing oer a great continent. But from
an attentive survey of its position, this will be found to have a ten-
dency, rather to diminifl than augment the degree of heat. The-
southern extremity of America is properly the termination of the im-
mense ridge of the Andes, which stretches nearly in a direEt line from
north to south, through the whole extent of the continent. Tile
most sultry regions in South-America, Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and
Tucuman, lie many degrees to the east of the Magellanic regions,
The level country of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situ
ated considerably to the weft of them. The north wind then, though
it blows over land, does not bring to the southern extremity of
America, an increase of heat colleaed in its pffaage over torrid re-
gions, but before it arrives there, it must have swept along the
summits of the Andes, and come impregnated with the cold of that
frozen region.

N Q T E XXXII. p. 256.
TWO French frigates were sent upon a voyage of discovery in

the year 1739. In latitude 44° south, they began to feel a con-

fiderable degree of cold. In latitude 48°, they met with islands of
floating ice. Hiftoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes, tom. ii.
256, &c. Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59°. Id. tom. i.
p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Patagonia, latitude
50° 33' south, on the fifteenth of December, which is midsummer
in that part of the globe, the twenty-firft of December being the
longelt day there, compares the climate to that of England in

the

# NOTE XXXIII. p. 258.

the middle of winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed on Terra del Fuego in the Bay of Good Success,
latitude 55°, on the sixteenth of January, which corresponds to the
month of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants died in one
night of extreme cold, and all the party were in the most imminent
danger of perishing. Id. ii. 51, 52, By the fourteenth of March,
corresponding to September in our hemisphere, winter was set in with
rigour, and the mountains were covered with snow. Ibid. 72.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 258.

M
l CONDAMINE is one of the latest and most accurate ob-

servers of the interior state of South-America. " After de-

scending from the Andes (fays he) one beholds a vafi and uniform
profpet of water and verdure, and nothing more. One treads upon
the earth, but does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with luxu-
riant plants, weeds, and shrubs, that it would require a considerable
degree of labour to clear it, fcr the space of a foot. Relation abregc-
d'un Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the singularities in the forests is
a fort of osiers, or withs, called bjucos by the Spaniards, and lianes
by the French, and nibbees by the Indians, which are usually em-
ployed as ropes in America. This plant twists about the trees which
it meets with, and rising above their highest branches, its tendrils
descend perpendicularly, strike into the ground, take root, rile up
around another tree, and thus mount and descend alternately. Other
tendrils arc carried obliquely by the wind, or ome accident, and
form a confusion of interwoven cordage, which relembles the rigging
of a ship. Bancroft, Nat. lift. of Guiana, 99. These withs are orten
as thick as the arm of a man. Ib. p. 75. M. Bouguer's account of the
forests in Peru perfct'ly resembles this delcription. Voyage au P'cru,
p. 16. Oviedo gives a similar decription of the orclts in other
parts of America. I-lift. lib. ix. p. 144. D. The country of the
Moxos is o much overflowed, that they arc obliged to rlidc on

the

# NOTE XXXIV. p. 260.

the ummit of some riing ground during some part of the year,
and have no communication with their countrymen at any distance.
Lettres Edifiantes, tom. x. p. 187. Garcia gives a full and just
dcecription of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marihes in those countries
of America which lie between the tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii.
c. 5. § 4, 5. The incredible hardships to which Goncalez Pizarro
was exposed in attempting to march into the country to the east of the
Andes, gives a very striking idea of that part of America in its ori-
ginal uncultivated state. GarciL de la Vega, Royal. Comment. of
Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

N OTE XXXIV. p. 260.
T HE animals of America seem not always to have been of a size

inferior to those in other quarters of the globe. Near the banks

of the Ohio, a considerable number of bones of an immense magni-
tude have been found. The place where this discovery has been
made lies about one hundred and ninety miles below the junction
of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles ditant from
the banks of the latter, on the fide of the marfl called the Great
Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quantities about five or fix feet
under ground, and the firatum is visible in the bank on the edge of
the Lick. Journal of Colonel George Croglan, MS. penes me. This
spot seems to be accurately laid down by Evans in his map. These
bones muf have belonged to animals of enormous bulk, and na-
turalifis being acquainted with no living creature of such size, were
at first inclined to think that they were mineral substances. Upon re-
ceiving a greater number of specimens from various parts of the earth,
and after infpelcling them more narrowly, they are now allowed to be
the bones of an animal. As the elephant is the largest known quadru-
ped, and the tufls which were found nearly resembled, both in form
and quality, the tusks of an elephant, it was concluded that the carcases
Adcpofitel on the Ohio were of that species. But Dr. I-unter, one

of

# NOTE XXXV. p. 261.

of the persons of our age best qualified to decide with respect to this
point, having accurately examined several parcels of tusks, and grinders,
and jaw-bones, sent from the Ohio to London, gives it as his opi-
nion, that they did not belong to an elephant, but to some huge carni-
vorous animal of an unknown species. Phil. Tranfat. vol. Iviii. p. 3.
Bones of the fame kind, and as remarkable for their size, have been
found near the mouths of the great rivers Oby, Jcnileia, and Lena,
in Siberia. Stralhrenberg, Defcript. of north and cast Parts of Europe
and Asia, p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to be confined in his
range to the torrid zone, and never multiplies beyond it. In such
cold regions as thole bordering on, the frozen fa, he could not live.
The existence of such large animals in America might open a wide
field for conjecture. The more we contemplate the face of nature,
and confider the variety of her proluctions, the more we mull be
satisfied that astonishing changes have been made in the trraqueous
globe by convulsions and revolutions, of which no account is pre-
served in history.

N OTE XXXV. p. 261.
T'HIS degeneracy of the domestic European animals in Ame-

rica ought to be imputed partly to each of these causes. In the

Spanish settlements, which are ituated either within the torrid zone, o;'
in countries bordering upon it, the increase of heat, and diversity of
food, prevent sleep and horned cattle from attaining the lame size as
in Europe. They seldom become so fat, and their flesh is not o
juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In Nortlh America, where the
climate is more favourable, and limilar to that of IKurope, the qua-
lity of the grafles which spring up naturally in their pallurc-grouinls
is not good. Mitchell, p. j51- Agricultue is flill o uch in its
infancy, that artificial food for cattle is not railed in any quantity.
During a winter, long in many provinces, and rigorous il all, no
proper care is taken of their cattle. The general treatment ol their
horlfs and horned cattle is injudicious and harsh in all the Englilh

8. coloies..

# NOTE XXXVI. p. 261.

# NOTE XXXVII. p. 263.

# NOTE XXXVIII. p.263.

colonies. These circumstances contribute more, perhaps, than any
thing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to the degeneracy of
breed in the horses, cows, and heep, of its provinces.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 261.
I'N the year xI58, the island of Hispaniola was affliced with a

dreadful visitation of those detru&ive inse&s, the particulars f

which Herrera describes, and mentions a singular instance of the
fuperitition of the Spanish planters. After trying various methods of
exterminating the ants, they resolved to implore protetion of the
faints, but as the calamity was new, they were at a loss to find out
the faint who could give them the most effetual aid. They cast lots
in order to discover the patron whom they should invoke. The lots
decided in favour of St. Saturninus. They celebrated his festival with
great solemnity, and immediately, adds the historian, the calamity be-
gan to abate. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 15. p. 107.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 263.
TH E author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Americains sup-

poses this difference in heat to be equal to twelve degrees, and

that a place thirty degrees from the equator in the old continent,
is as warm as one situated eighteen degrees from it in America.
ton. i. p. i . Dr. Mitchell, after observations carried on during thirty
years, contends that the difference is equal to fourteen or fifteen de.
grees of latitude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NO T E XXXVIII. p. 263.
JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head of St. John's

river in Ear Florida, observed a frost so intense, that in one night,

the ground was frozen an inch thick upon the banks of the river.
The limes, citrons, and banana trees, at St. Augustine were de-

C*'.is~~~~~~~ firoyed.

# NOTE XXXIX. p. 264.

# NOTE XL. p. 274.

flroyed. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other intances of the extraor-
dinary operations of cold in the southern provinces of North-Amne-
rica are collected by Dr. Mitchell. Present State, p. 206, &c. Fe-
bruary 7th, 1747, the frogs at Charleftown was so intense, that a
person having carried two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the
morning they were split to pieces, and the water solid 'umps of ice.
In a kitchen, where there was a fire, the water in a jar, in which
there was a large live eel, was frozen to the bottom. Almost all the
orange and olive trees were destroyed. Description of South-Caro-
lina, 8vo. Lond. 1761.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 264.
A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch Guiana, a coun-

try every where level, and so low, that during the rainy sea-

sons, it is usually covered with water near two feet in height.
This renders the foil so rich, that on the surface, for twelve
inches in depth, it is a stratum of perfect manure, and as such has
been transported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo,
thirty crops of rattoon canes have been railed successively, whereas
in Weft-Indian islands more than two is never expected. The expe-
dients by which the planters endeavour to diminish this excelfive ser-
tility of foil are various. Bancroft, Nat. Hifl. of Guiana, p. o1, &c.

NOTE XL. p. 274.
M U ULLE R seems to have believed, without sufficient evidence,

that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i. p. 11, &c.; and the

Imperial Academy of St. Peterfburgh give ome countenance to it,
by the manner in which Tf/chuko/J2oi-nofs is laid down in their charts.
But I am aflulred, from undoubted authority, that no Ruffian vcflet
has ever failed round that cape, and as the country of fJcttki is not
.ubibc to the Rufnian empire, it is very imperfc6ly known.

VOL1. I. 3N NOTE

# NOTE XLI. p. 276.

NOTE XLI. p. 276.
WrERE this the place for entering into a long and intricate geo-

graphical disquisition, many curious observations might arise

from comparing the accounts of the two Ruffian voyages, and the
charts of their refpeaive navigations. One remark is applicable to
both. We cannot rely with absolute certainty on the position which
they assign to several of the places which they visited. The weather
was so extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the fun or itars, and
the position of the islands and supposed continents was commonly de-
termined by reckoning, not by observation. Beering and Tfchirikow
proceeded much farther towards the ealt than Krenitzin. The land
discovered by Beering, which he imagined to be part of the American
continent, is in the 236th degree of longitude from the firfi me-
ridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 580 28" of latitude. Tichirikow
came upon the fame coast in longit. 241°, lat. 56°. Muller, i.
248, 249. The former must have advanced 60 degrees fiom the
port of Petropawlowflka, from which he took his departure, and the
latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it ap-
pears that he did not fail farther towards the east than the 2Soth de-
gree, and only 32 degrees from Petropawlowfka. In 1741, Beering
and Tfchirikow, both in going and returning, held a course which
was mofily to the south of that chain of islands which they discovered,
and observing the mountainous and rugged afpeft of the head-lands
which they descried towards the north, they supposed them to be
promontories belonging to tome part of the American continent,
which, as they fancied, stretched as far foutli as the latitude 56. In
this manner they are laid down in the chart publishcd by Muller,
and likewise in a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of Beering's
flip, communicated to me by Mr. Professor Robifon. But in 1769,
Krenitzin, after wintering in the island Alaxa, tsood lb far towards the
north in his return, that his course lay through the middle of what
they had luppoled to be a continent, which he found to be an open

1 lea,

sea, and that they had mistaken rocky isles for the head-lands of a
continent. It is probable, that the countries discovered in 174 1, to-
wards the east, do not belong to the American continent, but are
only a continuation of the chain of islands. From the extreme
summer cold of all those isles, one is led to conjecture that no large
continent lies very near to them. The number of volcanos in this
region of the globe is remarkable. There are several in Kamfchatka,
and not one of the islands, great or small, as far as the Ruffian na-
vigation extends, is without them. Many are aually burning, and
the mountains in all bear marks of having been once in a state of
eruption. Were I disposed to admit such conjectures as have found
place in other inquiries concerning the peopling of America, I might
suppose that this part of the earth, having suffered violent convul-
sions from earthquakes and volcanos, an isthmus, which may have
formerly united Asia to America, has been broken, and formed into
a cluster of islands by the shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian navigators were

attempting to make discoveries in the north-west of America, the
Spaniards were prosecuting the fame design from another quarter. In
1769, two small vessels failed from Loretto in California to explore
the coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula. They ad-
vanced no farther than the port of Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
in several successive expeditions fitted out from the port of St. Bias in
New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58.
Gaze/a de Madrid, March 19, and May r4, 1776. But as the journals
of those voyages have not yet been publifficd, I cannot compare their
progress with that of the Runfinns, or flew how near the navigators
of the two nations have approached to each other. It is to be hoped,
that the enlightened miniller, who has now the direStion of Ameri-
can alfairs in Spain, will not withhold this information fiom the
public.

3 N 2 NOT E

# NOTE XLII. p. 290.

NOTE XLIT. p. 290.
FEW travellers have had such opportunity of observing the na-

tives of America, in its various diftrits, as Don Antonio Ulloa.

In a work lately publilhed by him, he thus describes the charaterif-
tical features of the race: " a very small forehead, covered with hair
towards its extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little
eyes; a thin nose, small and bending towards the upper lip; the
countenance broad; the ears large; the hair very black, lank, and
coarse; the limbs well turned, the feet small, the body of just pro-
portion; and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old age,
when they acquire some beard, but never on the cheeks." Noticias
Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who resided several
years in a part of America which Ulloa never visited, gives a sketch
of the general apec of the Indians there. " They are all of a copper
colour, with ome diversity of hade, not in proportion to their dif-
tance from the equator, but according to the degree of elevation of
the territory which they inhabit. Those who live in a high country
are fairer than those in the marshy low lands on the coast. Their
face is round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any people
from an oval shape. Their forehead is small, the extremity of their
ears far from the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, their eyes black,
or of a chefnut colour, small, but capable of discerning objects at a
great distance. Their hair is always thick and sleek, and without
any tendency to curl They have no hair on any part of their body
but the head. At the first aspet, a southern American appears to be
mild and innocent, but on a more attentive view, one discovers in
his countenance omething wild, distrustful, and fullen." MS. penes
me. The two portraits, drawn by hands very different from thofc
of common travellers, have a near resemblance.

N OTE

# NOTE XLIII. p. 290.

# NOTE XLIV. p. 294.

# NOTE XLV. p. 300.

NOTE XLIII. p. 290.
AM A Z I N G accounts are given of the persevering speed of the

Americans. Adair relates the adventures of a Chikkafah war-

rior, who run through woods and over mountains, three hundred
computed miles in a day and a half and two nights. Hilt. of Amer.
Ind. 396.

NOTE XLIV. p. 294.
M GoDIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years among the In- ;

dians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years in the French

colony of Caycane, in which there is a constant intercourse with the
Galibis and other tribes on the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of
conflitution among the Americans is exactly in proportion to their
habits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as those on
the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river
Orinoco, are not to be compared for Ptrength with those in cold
countries; and yet, fays he, boats daily set out from Para, a Por-
tuguefe settlement on the river Amazons, to ascend that river against
the rapidity of the stream, and with the fame crew they pro-
ceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues distant. No
crew of white people, or even of negroes, would be found equal to
i task of such persevering fatigue, as the Portuguese have expe-
rienced, and yet the Indians, being accultomed to this labour from
their infancy, perform it. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLV. p. oo.
D ON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of Peru and

Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and several of the provinces

bordering on the Mexican Gulf, while employed in the fame service
with the French mathematicians during the space of ten years, and

who

# NOTE XLVI. p. 301.

# NOTE XLVII. p. 304.

who afterwards had an opportunity of viewing the North-Americans,
aferts, " that if we have seen one American, we may be said to have
seen them all, their colour and make are so nearly the fame." Notic.
Americanas, p 308. A more early observer, Pedro de Ciega de Leon,
one of the conquerors of Peru, who had likewise traversed many pro-
vinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and women, al-
though there is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to be almost
innumerable, and such diversity of climates, appear nevertheless like
the children of one father and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i.
c. 19. There is, no doubt, a certain combination of features, and
peculiarity of afpeca, which forms what may be called a European or
Asiatic countenance. There must likewise be one that may be de-
nominated American, common to the whole race. This may be sup-
posed to strike the traveller at first fight, while the various lhades, which
distinguish people of different regions, escape his observation. But when
persons who had resided so long among the Americans concur in bearing
testimony to the similarity of their appearance in every climate, we
may conclude that it is more remarkable than that of any other race.
See likewise Garcia Origen de los Indies, p. 54. 242. Torquemada
Monarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

N O T E XLVI. p. 301.
MI. LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in the interior parts of

Brasil, he had been informed that some persons resembling the

white people of Darien have been found; but that the breed did not
continue, and their children became like other Americans. This race,
however, is very iperfecly known. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVII. p. 304.
T E teflimonies of different travellers, concerning the Patagonians,

have been collected and liated with a considerable degree of accu-
racy by the author of Recherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c.

iii.

iii. 18 , &c. Since the publication of his work, several navigators have
visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their predecessors, differ very
widely in their accounts of its inhabitants. By Commodore Byron and
his crew, who failed through the Straits in 1764, the common size of
the Patagonians was estimated to be eight feet, and many of them much
taller. Phil. Tranfad. vol. Ivii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and
Carteret, who actually measured them in 1766, they were found to be
from fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height. Phil. Tranf.
vol. Ix. p. 22. These seem to have been the very people whose size
had been so much over-rated in the year 1764; for several of them
had beads and red baize of the fame kind with what had been put
aboard Captain W\allis's flip, and he naturally concluded that they
had got these from Mr. Byron. Hawkewiv. i. In 1767 they were
again measured by M. Bougainville, whose account agrees nearly with
that of Captain Wallis. Voy. 129. To these I flall add a teflimony
of great weight. In the year 1762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de Echa-
varri accompanied the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres, and
resided there several years. He is a very intelligent author, and his
reputation for veracity unimpeached among his countrymen. In
speaking of the country towards the fouhern extremity of America,
"' By what Indians," fays he, " is it possesed ? Not certainly by the
fabulous Patagonians, who are supposed to occupy this difdrict. I
have from many eye-witnefles, who have lived among those Indians,
and traded much with them, a true and accurate description of their
persons. They arc of the fame stature with Spaniards. I never flaw one
who rose in height two varas and two or three iches," i. . about
80 or 81.332 inches Englifi, if chavarri makes his computation
according to the 'v-ra ot MNadrid. '1his arecs nearly with the mea-
furement of Captain Wallis. Reyno Jelfitico, 2,8. Mr. Falkner,
who resided as a mifilonary forty years in the fbuthern parts of Ame-
rica, fays, that '" the Patagonians, or Puelches, are a largebodlied
people ; but I never heard of that gigantic race which others have
mentioned, though I have en perlons of ll the diflerlcnt tribes of
southern Indians." Introd. p. 26.

N 0 T' I

# NOTE XLVIII. p. 308.

# NOTE XLIX. p. 311.

# NOTE L. p. 317.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 308.
ANTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and ingenious physician,

publithed a dissertation in the year 1765, in which he endeavours

to prove, that this disease was not introduced from America, but
took its rife in Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical and
malignant disorder. Did I chute to enter into a disquisition on
this fubje, which I should not have mentioned, if it had not been
intimately connected with this part of my inquiries, it would not be
difficult to point out some mistakes with refpet to the facts upon
which he founds, as well as some errors in the consequences which
he draws from them. The rapid communication of this disease from
Spain over Europe, seems to resemble the progress of an epidemic,
rather than that of a disease transmitted by infection. The first men-
tion of it is in the year 1493, and before the year 1497 it had made
its appearance in most countries of Europe, with such alarming fymp-
toms as rendered it necessary for the civil magistrate to interpose, in
order to check its career.

NOTE XLIX. p. 3 1.
TT HE people of Otaheite have no denomination for any number

above two hundred, which is sufficient for their tranfidions.
Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 228.

NOTE L. p.317.
AS the view which I have given of rude nations is extremely dif-

ferent from that exhibited by very refpecable authors, it may

be proper to produce some of the many authorities on which I found
my description. The manners of the savage tribes in America have
never been viewed by persons more capable of observing them with
dilcernment, than the philosophers employed by France and Spain, in

3 the

the year 1735, to determine the figure of the earth. M. Bouguer
d'Antonio Ulloa, and D. George Juan, resided long among the na.
tives of the least civilized provinces in Peru. M. de la Condamine
had not only this opportunity for observation, but, in his voyage
down the Maragnon, he had access to infpe& the state of the various
nations feated on its banks, in its vast course across the continent of
South America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their represent-
ation of the character of the Americans. " They are all extremely
indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they are stupid, they pass whole
days fitting in the fame place, without moving, or speaking a
lingle word. It is not easy to describe the degree of their indif-
ference for wealth, and all its advantages. One does not well know
what motive to propose to them, when one would persuade them to
perform any service. It is vain to offer them money; they answer,
that they are not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. 102. If one con-
fiders them as men, the narrowness of their understanding seems to
be incompatible with the excellence of the foul. Their imbecillity is
so visible, that one can hardly form an idea of them different from
what one has of the brutes. Nothing disturbs the tranquillity of their
fouls, equally insensible to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-
naked, they are as contented as a monarch in his most splendid array.
Riches do not attract them in the finalleft degree, and the authority
or dignities to which they may aspire, are so little the objeRs of their
ambition, that an Indian will receive with the fame indifference the
office of a judge (Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the
former and appointed to the latter. Nothing can move or change
them. Interest has no power over them, and they often refuse to
perform a small service, though certain of a great recompence. Fear
makes no impression upon them, and refpeR as little. Their difpofi-
tion is so singular, that there is no method of influencing them, no
means of rouzing them from that indifference, which is proof against
all the endeavours of the wisest persons; no expedient that can induce
them to abandon that gross ignorance, or lay aside that careless negli-
gence, which disconcert the prudence and dilappoint the care of lucl

VOL. I. 30 aS

us are attentive to their welfare. Voyage de Ulloa, torn. i. 335,
356. Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordinary
instances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility," fays M. de la Condamine,
" is the basis of the American chara&ter. I leave others to determine,
whether this hould be dignified with the name of apathy, or disgraced
with that of stupidity. It arises, without doubt, from the small num-
ber of their ideas, which do not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons
even to voracity, when they have wherewithal to satisfy their appetite.
Temperate, when necessity obliges them, to such a degree that they
can endure want without seeming to desire any thing. Pusillanimous
and cowardly to excess, unless when they are rendered desperate by
drunkenness. Averse to labour, indifferent to every motive of glory,
honour, or gratitude; occupied entirely by the object that. is present,
and always determined by it alone, without any solicitude about
futurity; incapable of foresight or of refleion; abandoning them-
selves, when under no restraint, to a puerile joy, which they express
by frisking about, and immoderate fits of laughter; without obje&
or design, they pass their life without thinking, and grow old without
advancing beyond childhood, of which they retain all the defects.
If this description were applicable only to the Indians in ome pro-
vinces of Peru, who are slaves in every respect but the name, one
might believe, that this degree of degeneracy was occasioned by the
servile dependence to which they are reduced; the example of the
modern Greeks being proof how far servitude may degrade the human
species. But the Indians in the mifions of the Jesuits, and the savages
who still enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited in their faculties,
not to ay as stupid as the other, one cannot observe, without humi-
liation, that man, when abandoned to simple nature, and deprived of
the advantages resulting from education and society, diffirs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. M.
de Chanvalon, an intelligent and philolbphical oblcrvcr, whlo vifitcel
Martinico in 751, and rerided there fix years, gives the following
ldclription of the Caraibs. " It is not the red colour of their conm-
plcxion, it is not the singularity of their features, which conllitutes

the
5

the chief difference between them and us. It is their excenlive fim-
plicity; it is the limited degree of their faculties. Their reason is
not more enlightened or more provident than the inftina of brutes.
The reason of the most gross peasants, that of the negroes brought
up in the parts of Africa most remote from intercourse with Euro-
peans, is such that we discover appearances of intelligence, which,
though unfolded, is capable of increase. But of this the understand-
ing of Caraibs seems to be hardly ffceptible. If found philosophy
and religion did not afford us their light, if we were to decide accord-
ing to the first impression which the view of that people makes upon
the mind, we should be disposed to believe that they do not belong
to the fame species with us. Their stupid eyes are the true mirrour
of their fouls; it appears t be without funEtions. Their indolence
is extreme; they have never the least solicitude about the moment
which is to succeed that which is present." Voyage a la Martinique,
p. 44, 45. 5I. M. de la Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm
this description. " The characterillics of the Californians," fays P.
Venegas, "as well as all of the other Indians, are stupidity and in-
sensibility; want of knowledge and reflection; inconstancy, impetuo-
fity, and blindness of appetite; an exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of
all labour and fatigue; an excelfive love of pleasure and amuse-
mnent of every kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity;
and, in fine, a most wretched want of every thing which conflitutes
the real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tractable, and use-
ful to himself and society. It is not easy for Europeans, who never
were out of their own country, to conceive an adequate idea of those
people: for, even in the least frequented corners of the globe, there
is not a nation to stupid, of such contracted ideas, and so weak both
in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians. Their underlland-
ing comprehends little more than what they ice; abflraa ideas, and
much less a chain of reasoning, being far beyond their powcr; o
that they scarce ever improve their first ideas, and these are in general
false, or at least inadequate. It is in vain to represent to them any
future advantages which will result to themi from doing or abstaining

3 0 2 frol

from this or that particular immediately present; the relation of
means and ends being beyond the stretch of their faculties. Nor
have they the leaPd notion of pursuing such intentions as will procure
themselves some future good, or guard them against future evils. Their
will is proportional to their faculties, and all their pafions move in a
very narrow sphere. Ambition they have none, and are more desirous
of being accounted ptrong than valiant. The objects of ambition with
us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, posts, and diftintions of fuperi-
ority, are unknown among them; so that this powerful spring of
aSion, the cause of so much seeming good and real evil in the world,
has no power here. This disposition of mind, as it gives them up to
an amazing languor and lassitude, their lives fleeting away in a per-
petual inactivity and detestation of labour, so it likewise induces them
to be attracted by the first object which their own fancy, or the per-
suasion of another, place before them; and at the fame time renders
them as prone to alter their resolutions with the fame facility. They
look with indifference upon any kindness done them; nor is even the
bare remembrance of it to be expected from them. In a word, the
unhappy mortals may be compared to children, in whom the de-
velopement of reason is not completed. They may indeed be called
a nation who never arrive at manhood. Hilt. of Californ. Engl Tranfl.
i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a similar account of the want of foresight
and inconsiderate disposition of the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay.
Voyage, p. 194, 195.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable, that negroes

from all the different provinces of Africa are oblerved to be more
capable of improving by instruction. They acquire the knowledge of
several particulars which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence
the negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a superior order of
beings, and look down upon the Americans with contempt, as void
of capacity and of rational discernment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322,
323.

NOTE

# NOTE LI. p. 322.

# NOTE LII. p. 325.

NOTE LI. p. 322.
I HAVE observed, p. 297. that, for the fame reason, they never

attempt to rear children who are feeble, distorted, or defecive in

their make. So deeply were both those ideas imprinted in the minds of
the Americans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when compared
with the barbarous tribes whose manners I am describing, retained them;
and even their intercourse with the Spaniards has not been able to root
them out. When twins are born in any family, it is still confidered
as an ominous event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous ats
of mortification, in order to avert the calamities with which they are-
threatened. When a child is born with any deformity, they will not,
if they can possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptized, and it is with
difficulty they can be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la.
Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE LII. p. 325.
Tp HE number of the fish in the rivers of South America is so ex-

traordinary, as to merit particular notice. " In the Maragnon,'

fays P. Acugna, " fish are so plentiful, that, without any art, they
may take them with their hands." p. 138. " In the Orinoco,"
fays P. Gumilla, " besides an infinite variety of other filh, tor-
toifes or turtle abound in such numbers, that I cannot find words
to express it. I doubt not but that such as read my account will
accuse me of exaggeration: but I can affirm, that it is as difficnlt toC
count them, as to count the sands on the banks of that river. One
may judge of their number by the amazing consumption of them ;
for all the nations contiguous to the river, and even many who are at
a distance, fock thither at the season of breeding, and not only find
fuflenance during that time, but carry off vail quantities bth of the
turtles and of their eggs, &c." Hist. de 'Orenoque, ii. c. 22. p. 59.
M. de la Condamine confirms their accounts, p. 159.

NOTlE

# NOTE LIII. p. 326.

# NOTE LIV. p. 328.

# NOTE LV. p. 330.

NOTE LIII. p. 326.
PISO describes two of there plants, the Cururuape, and the Guajana-

limbo. It is remarkable, that though they have this fatal effect up-

on fishes, they are so far from being noxious to the human species, they
are used in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft men-
tions another, the Hiarree, a small quantity of which is sufficient to in-
ebriate all the fifhl to a considerable distance, so that in a few minutes
they float motionless on the surface of the water, and are taken with
ease. Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. o16.

NOTE LIV. p. 328.
REMARKABLE infiances occur of the calamities which rude nations

susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, one of the

moit gallant and virtuous of the Spanish adventurers, resided almost
nine years among the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted
with every species of agriculture. Their subsistence was poor and
precarious. " They live chiefly," fays he, " upon roots of different
plants, which they procure with great difficulty, wandering from
place to place in search of them. Sometimes they kill ome game,
sometimes they catch fish, but in such small quantities, that their hun-
ger is so extreme as compels them to eat spiders, the eggs of ants,
worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of un&uous earth, and I am per-
fuaded, that if in this country there were any ifones, they would
swallow there. They preserve the bones of fishes and serpents, which
they grind into powder, and eat. The only season when they do not
susser much from famine, is when a certain fruit, which he calls Tunas,
is ripe. They are ometimes obliged to travel far from their ulual
place of residence, in order to find them. Naufragias, c. xviii. p. 20,
21, 22. In another place, he observes that they are frequently re-
duced to pass two or three days without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE LV. p. 330.
Mt FIRMIN has given an accurate description of the two species

of manioc, with an account of its culture, to which he has
added some experiments,' in order to ascertain the poisonous qualities

of

# NOTE LVI. p. 330.

# NOTE LVII. p. 331.

of the juice extrated from that species which he calls the biter caf-
sava. Among the Spaniards it is known by the name of ruca brava.
Defcr. de Surin. torn. i. p. 66.

NOTE LVI. p. 330.
THE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as in America.

Oviedo contends, that it is not an indigenous plant of the New

World, but was introduced into the island of Hispaniola, in the year
1516, by father Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary islands, whither the original flips had been brought
from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii. c. i. But the opinion of
Acofta and other naturalists, who reckon it an American plant, teems
to be better founded. Acofta Hill. Nat. lib. iv. 21. It was culti-
vated by rude tribes in America, who had little intercourse with the
Spaniards, and who were destitute of that ingenuity which disposes
men to borrow what is useful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 86.
Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE LVII. p. 331.
IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the most accurate and bet in-

formed writers concerning the Welt Indies, affirms, that maize,

though cultivated in the continent, was not known in the islands, the
inhabitants of which had none but caffada bread. -lift. Nat. lib. iv.
c. 6. But P. Martyr, in the firtl book of his first Dccad, which was
written in the year 1493, upon the return of Columbus fiom his first
voyage, expressly mentions maize as a plant which the islanders cul-
tivated, and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likcwife as-
ferts, that they were acquainted with the culture of maize. Ilflor.
Gcner. cap. 28. Oviedo dclceribcs maize without any intimation of
its being a plant that was not natural to llifpaniula. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE

# NOTE LVIII. p. 337.

# NOTE LIX. p. 337.

NOTE LVIII. p. 337.
M EW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was only known;

has lately been visited by intelligent observers. It lies in a re-

gion of the globe where it muff enjoy a very favourable climate, as ic
Aretches from the i oth to the 3 8th degree of northern latitude. It is of
great extent, and from its square form must be much more than equal
to all Europe. The people who inhabit the various parts of it appear
to be of one race. They are evidently ruder than most of the Ame-
ricans, and have made still less progress in improvement and the arts
of life. There is not the least appearance of cultivation in any part
of this vast region. The inhabitants are extremely few, so that the
country appears almost desolate. Their tribes are still more incon-
fiderable than those of America. They depend for subsistence, almost
entirely, on fishing. They do not fettle in one place, but roam about
in quest of food. Both sexes go ftark-naked. Their habitations,
uterifilsi &c. are more simple and rude than those of the Americans.
Voyages, by Hawkefworth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the
country where man has been discovered in the earliest stage of his pro-
grefs, and it exhibits a miserable specimen of his condition and powers
in that uncultivated state. If this country shall be more fully ex-
plored by future navigators, the comparison of the manners of its
inhabitants with those of the Americans will prove an inftruEtive ar-
ticle in the history of the human species.

NOTE LIX. p. 337.
P. GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his Rtation among the

Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes the face of the coun-

try: " We have marched twelve days without meeting a ingle hu-
man creature. Sometimes we found ourselves a vast meadows, of
which we could not fee the boundaries, through which there flowed
many brooks and rivers, but without any path to conduct us. Some-
times we were obliged to open a passage across thick forests, through

6 buflles,

# NOTE LX. p. 338.

bushes, and underwood filled with briars and thorns. Sometimes we
had to pals through deep marshes, in which we funk up to the middle.
After being fatigued through the day, we had the earth for our bed,
or a few leaves, exposed to the wind, the rain, and all the injuries of
the air. Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 30. Dr. Brickell, in an excursion
from North Carolina towards the mountains, A. D. 1730, travelled
fifteen days without meeting with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of
North Carolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make a set-
tlement in South America, A. D. 1532, marched fifty days through
a country without one inhabitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 11.

NOTE LX. p. 338.
I STRONGLY fufpeC that a community of goods, and an undivided

store, are known only among the rudest tribes of hunters; and

that as soon as any species of agriculture or regular industry is known,
the idea of an exclusive right of property to the fruits of them is in-
troduced. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which I have
received concerning the state of property among the Indians in very
different regions of America. " The idea of the natives of Brasil
concerning property is, that if any person cultivate a field, he alone
ought to enjoy the produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend
to it. If an individual or a family go a-hunting or fiffing, what is
caught belongs to the individual or to the family, and they comnu-
nicate no part of it to any but to their cazique, or to such of their
kindred as happen to be indisposed. If any perlon in the village come
to their hut, he may fit down freely, and eat without asking liblrtty.
But this is the consequence of their general principle of hofpit;lily
for I never observed any partition of the increase of their fields, o
the produce of the chace, which I could conrider as the rult of any
idea concerning a community of goods. On th: contranry, they arc
to much attached to what they deem to be their property, that it:
would be extremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As far as I have
fen, or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians in Souct American ,

Vol,. I. 3 P amcn;,

# NOTE LXI. p. 339.

# NOTE LXII. p. 340.

among whom that community of goods which has been so highly ex-
tolled is known. The circumstance in the government of the Jes'uits,
molt irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the community of
goods which they introduced. This was repugnant to their original
ideas. They were acquainted with the rights of private exclusive
property, and they ifubmitted with impatience to regulations which
destroyed them. M. le Cheval de Pinto, MS. penes me. Aual
poflefflon (ays a miflionary who resided several years among the
Indians of the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but whenever
a pofiTffSr fees fit to quit it, another has as good right to take it as he
who left it. This law, or cultom, rcfpects not only the particular spot
on which he erects his house, but also his planting ground If a man
has prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he designs in fu-
ture to build or plant, no manr has a right to incommode him, much
less to the fruit of his labours, until it appears that he voluntarily gives
up his views. But I never heard of any formal conveyance from one
Indian to another in their natural state. The limits of every canton
is circumscribed; that is, they are allowed to hunt as far as such a
river on this hand, and such a mountain on the other. This area is oc-
cupied and improved by individuals and their families. Individuals,
not the community, have the use and profit of their own labours, or.
success in hunting. MS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley, pnes me.

NOT E LXI. p. 339.

i - I S difference of temper between the Americans and negroes is
so remarkable, that it is a proverbial faying in the French illands,

" Regarder un fauvage de travers, c'efl le battre; le battrc, c'tet le
tuer; battre un negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre ii. 490.

NOTE LXII. p. 340.
t'r I E description of the political Rlate of the people of Cinaloa,

peretly reliembles that of the inhabitants of North America,
"They have neither laws nor kings (fays a miflionary who relided

long

# NOTE LXIII. p. 352.

long among among them), to punish any crime. Nor is there, among
them, any species of authority, or political government, to restrain
them in any part of their condu&. It is true, that they acknow-
ledge certain Caziques, who are heads of their families or villages, but
their authority appears chiefly in war, and the expeditions agaill their
enemies. This authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right,
but by their valour in war, or by the power and number of their fa-
milies and relations. Sometimes they ove their pre-eminence to their
eloquence in displaying their own exploits." Ribas Hiflor. de las
Triumph. &c. p. . The state of the Chiquitos in South America
is nearly the fame. " They have no regular form of government, or
civil life, but in matters of public concern they liften to the advice
of their old men, and usually follow ir. The dignity of Cazique is not
heredtary, but conferred according to merit, as the reward of valour
in war. The union among them is imperfect. Their society refem-
bles a republic without any head, in which every man is mafler of
himself, and, upon the lealt difgufl, separates from those wi;h whom
he seemed to be connected." Relacion Ililtorical de las Mifiones de
los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under
very different climates, when nations are in a similar state of society,
their inflitutions and civil government affiume the fame form.

N O T E LXIII . . 52.
" J I-lave known the Indians (lhys a perlbn well acquaittcd with their

mode of life) to go a thouliand miles for the purp.lle of revenge,

in pathless woods, over hills and mountains, through huge cane
swamps, expolfed to the extremities of heat and cold, the vicilitu.1 of
fealons, to !untger and tliirf. Suchl is their over-boiling revcngefl
temnler, that they utterly contemnn all tole thinls as imaginary triles,
if thry are ol happy as to get the lcal of the murderer, or enemy, to
fatisly the craving ghofis of their deccalcd relatioas." Adair's l-lill. ol
Amer. Indians, p. 150.

31'2 NO TE

# NOTE LXIV. p. 353.

# NOTE LXV. p. 355.

# NOTE LXVI. p. 355.

NOTE LXIV. p. 353.
j N the account of the great war between the Algonquins and Iro-

quois, the atchievements of Pifkaret, a famous chief of the Al-

gonquins, performed moffly by himself alone, or with one or two
companions, make a capital figure. De la Potheri, i. 297, &c.
Colden's Hist. of Five Nations, 25, &c.

NOTE LXV. p. 355.
TH E life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger, and he is

always degraded from the rank which he had acquired by his
former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

N OTE LXVI. p. 355.

S the ideas of the North Americans with refpet to the mode of
carrying on war, are generally known; I have founded my ob-

servations chiefly upon the testimony of the authors who describe them.
But the fame maxims took place among other nations. A judicious
missionary has given a view of the military operations of the people in
Gran Chaco, in South America, perfe&ly similar to those of the Iro-,
quois. " They are much addicted to war (fays he), which they carry
on frequently among themselves, but perpetually against the Spaniards.
But they may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they never
make head against the Spaniards, unless when they can afTault them
by fealth, or have guarded against any mischance by spies, who may
be called indefatigable; they will watch the settlements of the Spa-
niards for one, two, or three years, observing by night every thing
that pafles with the utmost solicitude, whether they may expeEt re-
fiftance or not, and until they are perfectly secure of the event, they
will not venture upon an attack; so that when they do give the aflult,
they are certain of success, and free fiom all danger. These spies, in

order

# NOTE LXVII. p. 356.

# NOTE LXVIII. p. 357.

order that they may not be observed, will creep on all-four like cats
in the night; but if they are discovered, make their escape with
much dexterity. But, although they never chufe to face the Spani-
ards, if they be surrounded in any place, whence they cannot escape,
they will fight with dfperate valour, and fell their lives very dear.'
Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE LXVII. p. 356.
LERY, who was an eye-witness of the proceedings of the T'oupin-

ambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against a powerful nation of

their enemies, describes their courage and ferocity in very striking
terms. Ego cum Gallo altero, paulo curiofius, magno noftro pericu-
lo (si enim ab hoftibus capti aut left fuiffemus, devorationi fuiffemus
devoti), barbaros noftros in militiam euntes comitari volui. Hi, nu-
mero 4000 capita, cum hoftibus ad littus decertarunt, tanta ferocitate,
utvel rabidos & furiosos quofque fuperarent. Cum primum hotes
confpexerc, in magnos atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Hac gens
adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum re-
flat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant. Quod a na-
tura illis inditum e reor. Teftor interea me, qui non femel, turn
peditum turn equitum copias ingenres, in aciem inftrutas hic confpexi,
tanta numquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgenti-
bus, quanta turn pugnantibus iflis perfufum suisse. Lery Hist. Na-
vigat. in Brasil. ap de Bry, iii. 207, 208,209.

NO TE LXVIII. p. 357.
T H E Americans, like other fierce nations, originally cut off the

heads of the enemies whom they flew in war, and carried them

away as trophies. But, as they found these cumberlorne in their re-
treat, which they always make very rapidly, and often through a vast

extent

# NOTE LXIX. p. 361.

# NOTE LXX. p. 361.

'extent of country, they became satisfied with tearing off their scalps.
This custom, though molt prevalent in North America, was not un-
known among the southern tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE LXIX. p. 36r.
T 1i E terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by the fame fierce

spirit of revenge. " I go to war to revenge the death of my

'brothers; I shall kill; I fllall exterminate; I lhall burn my enemies;
I hall bring away slaves ; I shall devour their heart, dry their flefl,
drink their blood; I fha!l tear off their scalps, and make cups of
their skulls." BofTu's Travels through Louisiana, vol. i. p. Io2. 1 am
informed, by persons on whoSe tetimony I can rely, that as the num-
ber of people in the Indian tribes has decreased so much, almost none
of their prisoners are put to death. It is confidered as better policy
to spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful cencs which I have de-
fcribed occur now so rarely, that miflienaries and traders who have re-
fided long among the Indians, never were witnesses to them.

NOT E LXX, p. 361.
A LL the travellers who have visited the mol uncivilized of the

American tribes, agree in this. It is confirmed by two re-

markable circumflances, which occurred in the conquefl of clifcrent
provinces. In the expedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year
1528, the Spaniards were reduced to such extreme diflrefs by famine,
that in order to prcferve their own lives, they eat such of their com-
panions as happened to die. This appeared o shocking to the natives,
who were accultomed to devour their prisoners, that it filled them
with horror and indignation against the Spaniards. Torquemada Mo-
narch. Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufagios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca,
c. xiv. p. 15. During the siege of Mexico, though the Mexicans de-

9 voured

# NOTE LXXI. p. 363.

# NOTE LXXII. p. 366.

voured with greedinels the Spaniards and Tlafcalans, whom they took
prisoners, the utmof rigour of the fanine which they fufifred could
not induce theim to touch the dead bodies of their own countrymen.
Bern. Diaz. del Castillo Conquift. de la N. Elpagna, p. 156.

N O T E LXXI. p. 363.
M ANY singular circumilances conccrning the treatment of pri-

foners among the people of Br.iil, are contiined in the narna-

tive ofStadius, a German officer, in the lervice of the Portuguese,
publishcd in the year i55&.. lie was taken priloner by the Toupin-
ambos, and relmained in captivity nine years. lIe was often prlcint
at thoif horrid fetlivals which he delcribes, and was defined himlflf
to the fame cruel fate with other prisoners. Lut he saved his liI by
extraordinary efforts of courage and addrcfs. De Bry, iii. p. 3.,
&c. M. De ery, who accompanied M. Dc Villegagnon in his ex-
pedition to Brasil, in the year 1550, and wo rcficlcd a good timle in
tlat country, agrees with Stadius in every circumnlance of importance.
He was frequently an eye-witncls of the manner in which tile Brall-
lians treated their prisoners. De Bry, iii. 2io. Several Ilriking
particulars omitted by them, are mentioned by a Portugulcle author,
Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

N O T E LXXII. p. 366.

H-IOUG 11 have followed that opinion conccrniing ihe apatly
of the Americans, which appeared to mie inolt rat: ,nil, and

supported by the authority of the mnlft reflipctable authors, other theo-
ries have been formed with regard to it, by writers of great eminence.
1). Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the Ikin
and bodily habit of the Americans is fich, that they are less lIr lfil)e
of pain than the reft of mankind. I-1c produces leveral prools o ithi;,
from the manner in which th-y endure the n;mol crucl chirurgial

operations,

# NOTE LXXIII. p. 367.

# NOTE LXXIV. p. 368.

operations, &c. Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314. The fame ob-
servation has been made by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian, they fay,
never complains under pain, and will bear the amputation of a leg or
arm without uttering a ingle groan. MS. penes me.

NOT E. LXXIII. p. 367.

HH I S is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among the Romans,
in the early periods of their commonwealth, it was a maxim that

a prisoner, " turn deceffife videtur cum captus eft." Digest. lib. xlix.
tit. I5. c. 18. and afterwards when the progress of refinement render-
ed them more indulgent with refpeR to this article, they were obliged
to employ two fictions of law to secure the property, and permit the
return of a captive, the one by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by
the Jus PoltliminiiHeinec. Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294.
Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom was ever ac-
cepted for a prisoner. As oon as one is taken in war, he is reputed
to be dead; and he is so in effe& to his country and his family. Voy.
du Cheval. des Marchais, i. p. 369.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 368.
T I-I E people of Chili, the most gallant and high-fpirited of all the

Americans, are the only exception to this observation. They

attack their enemies in the open field; their troops are ranged in re-
gular order; their battalions advance to the charge not only with
courage, but with discipline. The North Americans, though many
of them have substituted the European fire-arms in place of their own
bows and arrows, fiill adhere to their ancient maxims of war, and
carry it on according to their own peculiar sysem. But the Chilefe
nearly resemble the warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their mili-
tary operations. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church's Cull. iii. p. 7I.
Lozano's Hist. Parag. i. 144, 45.

4 NOTE

# NOTE LXXV. p. 371.

# NOTE LXXVI. p. 371.

# NOTE LXXVII. p. 372.

NOTE LXXV. p. 371.
ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In Yucutan, the

men are so solicitous about their dress, that they carry about

with them mirrors, probably made of stone, like those of the
Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. in which they delight to view them-
selves; but the women never use there. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He
takes notice, that among the fierce tribe of the l'anches, in the new
kingdom of Granada, none but diftinguiflbed warriors were permitted
either to pierce their lips, and to wear green stones in them, or to
adorn their heads with plumes of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In
Ibme provinces of Peru, though that empire had made considerable
progress in civilization, the state of women was little improved. All
the toil of cultivation and domestic work was devolved upon them,
and they were not permitted to wear bracelets, or other ornaments,
with which the men were fond of decking themselves. Zarate lift.
de Peru, i. p. 15, 6.

NOTE LXXVI. p 371.

l Have ventured to call this mode of anointing and painting their
bodies, the dress of the Americans. This is agreeable to their

own idiom. As they never stir abroad if they are not completely
anointed; they excuse themselves when in this situation, by iaying,
that they cannot appear because they are naked. Gumilla Hilt. de
l'Orenoque, i. 191.

N O T E LXXVII. p. 372.
SOME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gull of Calilirnia,

seem to be among the rudefl people of America united in the social ltate.

They neithercultivate nor sow; they have no houtls in which they rcfide.
Those in the inland country fibfif by hunting; tholi on the lca-coalt
chiefly by fifling. Both depend upon the ipontaneous Iprolduions
of the earth, friits, plantS, ;and roots of vario in ds, In the rainy
firanbn, as they have no habitations to aold them flllter, they gather
VoL.. I. 3 Q bundles

# NOTE LXXVIII. p. 373.

# NOTE LXXIX. p. 375.

bundles of reeds, or strong grass, and binding them together at one
end, they open them at the other, and fitting them to their heads,
they are covered as with a large cap, which like a pent-house throws
off the rain, and will keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a hed with the branches of trees, which pro-
tects them from the sultry rays of the fun. When exposed to cold
they make large fires, round which they sleep in the open air. Hifto-
ria de los triumfos de nueftra fanta fed entre gentes las mas barbaras,
&c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 373.
T H E S E horses resemble barns. We have measured some

which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and twenty paces

broad. Above a hundred persons reside in some of them. Wilson's
Account of Guiana. Purch. Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. 1291.
The Indian houses, fays M. Barrere, have a most wretched appear-
ance, and are a striking image of the rudeness of early times. Their
huts are commonly built on ome riling ground, or on the banks of
a river, huddled sometimes together, sometimes straggling, and always.
without any order. Their aspec is melancholy and disagreeable. One
fees nothing but what is hideous and savage. The uncultivated Fil ls
have no gaiety. The silence which reigns there, uss when it rr-
rupted by the disagreeable notes of birds, or cries of wild beaiis, is
extremely difmnal. Relat. de la France Equin. p. 46.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 375.
SOME tribes in South America can fend their arrows to a great

diflance, and with considerable force, without the aid of the bow.

They make ife of a hollow reed, about nine feet long, and an inch
thick, which is oallcd a Sarbacane. In it they lodge a finall arrow,
with olicm uinfpun cotton wound about its great end; this confines the
air, lo that they can blow it with afonifhling rapidity, and a sure aim,

-I to

# NOTE LXXX. p. 375.

# NOTE LXXXI. p. 376.

to the distance of above a hundred paces. These small arrows are al-
ways poisoned. Fermin. Defcr. de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hit. of
Guiana, p. 281, &c. The Sarbacane is much used by the East
Indians.

N O T E LXXX. p. 375.
I Might produce many instances of this, but shall satisfy myself with

one, taken from the Efimaux. " Their greatest ingenuity (fays

Mr. Ellis) is shewn in the structure of their bows, made commonly of
three pieces of wood, each making part of the fame arch, very
nicely and exactly joined together. They are commonly of fir or
larch; and as this wants strength and elasticity, they lfpply both by
bracing the back of the bow, with a kind of thread, or line, made of
the sinews of their deer, and the bow-firing of the fame materials. To
make them draw more flifily, they dip them into water, which causes
both the back of the bow and the f-ring to contraO:, and consequent-
ly gives it the greater force; and as they pradife from their youth, they
shoot with very great dexterity." Voyage to I-ludfon's Bay, p. 138.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 376.
iJECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of mankind in

their inventions. There is, however, such inequality in some

parts of their progress, and onme nations get so far the start of others
in circumstances nearly similar, that we mufl arie this to some
events in their story, or to some peculiarity in their situation with
which we are unacquainted. The people in the island of Otaheite,
lately discovered in the South Sea, far excel molt of thec Americans
in the knowledge and pratice of the arts of ingenuity, and yet they
had not invented any method of boiling water, and having no vl]l
that would bear the fire, they had no more idea that water could be
made hot, than that it could be made solid. Voyage., by -lawklfworth,
i. 466. 484.

3 Q_2 NOTI

# NOTE LXXXII. p. 376.

# NOTE LXXXIII. p. 378.

# NOTE LXXXIV. p. 380.

# NOTE LXXXV. p. 381.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 376.
0 N E of tlhee boats, which could carry nine men, weighed only sixty

pounds. Gofnol Relat. des Voy. a la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au
Nord. tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 378.
A Remarkable proof of this is produced by Ulloa. In weaving

hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse cloaths, which they

are accustomed to manufacture, their industry has discovered no
more expeditious method, than to take up thread after thread, and
after counting and forting them each time, to pass the woof between
them, so that in finishing a small piece of there fluffs, they frequently
spend more than two years. Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the
fame description of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. According to
Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch of the North American Indians are
not greater, p. 422. From one of the engravings of the Mexican
paintings in Purchas, vol. iii. p. io6. I think it probable that the
people of Mexico were unacquainted with any better or more expedi-
tious mode of weaving. A loom was an invention beyond the ingenuity
of the moss improved Americans. In all their works they advance
so slowly, that one of their artifIs is two months at a tobacco-pipe with
his knife, before he finishes it. Ibid. p. 423.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 380.

H E article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeurs des Sauvages, ex-
tends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 38I.
I Have referred the reader to several of the authors who describe the

most uncivilized nations in America. Their teflimony is uniform.

That of P. Ribas concerning the people of Cinaloa, coincides with the
recf. " I was extremely attentive (fays he), during the years I refid-
ecl among them, to acertain whether they were to be confidcred as

i~~~~~~~1 ~ ~idolaters;

# NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382.

# NOTE LXXXVII. p. 389.

# NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 395.

idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the most perfet exactness, that
though among some of them there may be traces of idolatry, yet others
have not the least knowledge of God, or even of any false deity, nor
pay any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who exercises domi-
nion over the world; nor have they any conception of the providence
of a creator or governor, from whom they expect in the next life the
reward of their good, or the punifliment of their evil deeds. Neither
do they publicly join in any a of divine worship. Ribas Triumphos,
&c. p. 16.

N O T E LXXXVI. p. 382.

THE people of Brasil were lo much affiightened by thunder, which
is frequent and dreadful in their country, as well as in other parts

of the torrid zone, that it was not only the object of religious reve-
rence; but the most expreflive name in their language for the Deity,
was IFoupan, the fame by hich they diftinguifled thunder. Pifo de
Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church-Coll. ii. p. 132.

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 389.
B Y the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness, gives of the

funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it appears, that the

feelings of the persons who fuffcred on that occasion were very different.
Some solicited the honour with eagerness ; others laboured to avoid
their dom, and tiveral saved their lives by flying to the woods.
As the Indian Bramins give an intoxicating draught to the women,
who are to be burnt together with the bodies of their lhulban Is, which
render them inlenfible of their a;ipoaching farc, the Natcllcz obliged
their victims to fwvallow fevcral large pills of tobacco, which pro-
duce a similar eflict. Mem. dec Lous. i. 227.

N O T LXXXVIII. . 395.

ON lome occasions, particularly in dances
i n ilit titd for the reco-

very of pelIrfos who are indiflpofcd, they ae re cXremly licentious
and indecent. I)e la Potherie I-illt. &c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. r.

l_

# NOTE LXXXIX. p. 397.

# NOTE XC. p. 399.

# NOTE LCI. p. 404.

iii. p. 319. But the nature of their dances is commonly such as I
have described.

NO TE LXXXIX. p. 397.
THIE Ohomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the Orinoco, em-

ploy for the fame purpose a composition, which they call Yupa.

It is formed of the feeds of an unknown plant, reduced to powder,
and certain shells burnt and pulverized. The effecs of this when
drawn up into the nostrils are so violent, that they resemble madness
rather than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE XC. p. 399.
Ti 0 U G H this observation holds true among the greater part

of the southern tribes, there are ome in which the intemperance

of the women is as excessive as that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hist.
of Guiana, p. 275.

NOTE XCI. p. 404.
EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerning the manners of

the Americans, one meets with inconsistent and inexplicable cir-

cumflances. P. Charlevoix, who, in consequence of the controversy
between his order and that of the Franciscans, with respect to the ta-
lents and abilities of the North Americans, is disposed to represent
both their intellectual and moral qualities in the most favourable light,
aferts, that they are engaged in continual negociations with their
neighbours, and conduct these with the most refined address. At the
fame time, he adds, " that it becomes their envoys or plenipoten-
tiaries to exert their abilities and eloquence, for if the terms which
they offer are not accepted of, they had need to stand on their guard.
It frequently happens, that a blow with a hatchet is the only return
given to their propositions. He is not out of danger even if he is so
fortunate as to avoid the stroke, he may expect to be pursued, and if
taken, to'be burnt." Hist. N. Fr. iii. 251. Men capable of such

acts

# NOTE XCII. p. 405.

# NOTE XCIII. p. 417.

ats of violence, seem to be unacquainted with the first principles up-
on which the intercourse between nations is founded; and instead of
the perpetual negociations which Charlevoix mentions, it seems im-
possible that there should be any correspondence whatever among
them.

NOTE XCII. p. 40o.
I T is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans, " Gaudlent mune-

ribus, fed nec data imputant, nec acceptis obliantur." C. 21. An

author who had a good opportunity of observing the principle which
leads savages neither to express gratitude for favours which they had
received, nor to expect any return for such as they benlowed; thus ex-
plains their id-as: " If, fy they, you give me t!is, it is bcaufe you
have no need of it yourself; and as for me, I never part with that w!ich
I think necessary to me." Memoir fur les Galibis; i lift. des plantes de
la Guiane Francoise par M. Aublct, tomn. ii. p. 1 10.

N O T E XCIII. p. 417-
AND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of Columbus,

hath preserved ome circumllances concerning the bravery of

the Caribbees, which are not mentioned by Don Ferdinand Columbus,
or the other hiitorians of that period, whose works have been publiflied.
ACaribbean canoe, with four men, two women, and a boy, fell in uncx-
pectedly with the fleet of Columbus in his second voyage, as itwas leer-
ing through their islands. At firls, they were ltruck alnmof llupild ith
aftonilhment at such a range linehacle, and hardly moved from the
spot for above an hour. A Spanill bark, with twenty-five men, ad-
vanced towards them, and tile fle gradually lurroundled them, so a';
to cut off their commlunicalion with tile fiore. "' \lien tey law
that it was impoflible to cli:ape (iys the hiloriin), thely lizdll thlci
arms with undaunted r

ti lution, and began tie attack. I u:e the

expreflioln, cith lunlal/cd r/o/iuior, fur they were f'w, and beheld
a vas number ready to afflult clem. 'lhe)' wounded several. of thl,

Slpaniarls,

# NOTE XCIV. p. 417.

Spaniards, although they had targets, as well as other defensive
armour; and even after their canoe was overset, it was with no little
difficulty and danger, that part of them were taken, as they con-
tinued to defend themselves, and to use their bows with great dexterity
while swimming in the sea." Hist. de D. Fern. y D. Yfab. MSS.
c. 1i9.

NOTE XCIV. p. 417.
A Probable conjecture may be formed with refpet to the cause of

the diftinftion in characer between the Caribbees and-the inhabit-

ants of the larger islands. The former appear manifestly to be a fe-
par.te race. Their language is totally different from that of their
neighbours in the large islands. They themselves have a tradition,
that their ancestors came originally from ome part of the coniinent,
and having conquered ad exterminated the ancient inhabitants,
took poffcflion of their lands, and of their women. iRoclefort 384.
Tertre, 360. Hence they call theimfelves jLanree, whl.-l Signifies a
man come from beyond ea. Labat. vi. 131. Accordingly, the
Caribbees frill use two distinct languages, one peculiar to the men,
and thle other to the women. Tertre, 361. The language of the
men has nothing common with that spoken in the large islands. The
dialect of the women considerably resembles it. Labat. 129. This
strongly confirms the tradition which I have mentioned. The Carib-
bees themselves imagine, that they were a colony from the Galibis, a
powerful nation of Guiana, in South America. Tertre, 361. Roche-
fort, 348. But as their fierce manners approach nearer to those of
the people in the northern continent, than to thote of the natives of
South America; and as their language has likewise ome affinity to
that spoken in Florida, their origin lhould be deduced rather from the
former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c. I errera, Dec. i.
lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they Itill observe their ancient practice of
deflroying all the males, and preserving the women either for fervi-
urcle or for breeding. V7E

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. I Bp1 T AN

IM rct < ,)kjr 9

V^ICTVM^
