THE

HISTORY
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIO0

GRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND

MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OP

HISTORY AT MADRID.

VO L. I.
A NEW EDITION.

B A S tL
BASIL2
Printed fr . J. TOURNEISEN; and j. . LEGRAND.

MI C CXC.

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.

I N fulfilling the engagement which I had come
under to the Public with refpedc to the History
of America , it was my intention not to have
published any part of the work until the whole
was completed. The prefenrt state of the British
Colonies has induced me to alter that resolution.
While they are engaged in civil war with Great
Britain, inquiries and speculations concerning
their ancient forms of policy and laws, which
exist no longer, cannot be interesting. The
attention and expectation of mankind are now
turned towards their future condition. 11 what-
ever manner this unhappy contest may termi-
nate, a new order of things must arise in North*
America, and its affairs will assume another
aspet. I wait, with the solicitude of a good
citizen, until the ferment subside, and regular
government be re-established, and then I shall
return to this part of my work, in which I had

a 2

made ome progress. That, together with the
history of Portuguese America, and of the fettle-
ments made by the several nations of Europe in
the Veft-India-islands , will complete my plan.

The three volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the New
World, and of the progress of the Spanish arms
and colonies there. This is not only the most
splendid portion of the American story, but so
much detached, as, by itself, to form a perfect
whole, remarkable for the unity of the subjed.
As the principles and maxims of the Spaniards
in planting colonies, which have been adopted
in some measure by every nation, are unfolded
in this part of my work, it will serve as a
proper introduction to the history of all the
European establishments in America, and convey
such information concerning this important article
of policy, as may be deemed no less interesting
than curious.

In describing the achievements and institutions

of the Spaniards in the New World, I have
departed in many instances from the accounts of
preceding historians, and have often related fads
which seem to have been unknown to them.
It is a duty I owe the Public, to mention the
sources from which I have derived such

intelligence, as justifies me either in placing
tranfadions in a new light, or in forming any
new opinion with refped to their causes and
effecs. This duty I perform with greater satis-
fation, as it will afford an opportunity of ex-
prefling my gratitude to those benefators, who
have honored me with their countenance and
aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to expec

the most important information, with regard to
this part of my work, I confidered it as a very
fortunate circumstance for me, when Lord Gran-
tham, to whom I had the honor of being per-
fonally known, and with whose liberality of
sentiment, and disposition to oblige, I was well
acquainted, was appointed ambassador to the
court of Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met
with such a reception as satisfied me that his
endeavours would be employed in the most
proper manner, in order to obtain the grati-
fication of my wishes; and I am perfeely fen-
fible, that what progress I have made in my
inquiries among the Spaniards, ought to be
ascribed chiefly to their knowing how much his
Lordship interested himfelfin my success.

But did I owe nothing more to Lord Grantham,
than the advantages which I have derived from

a?

his attention in engaging Mr. Waddilove, the
ch.,plain of his embassy, to take the condu&c
of my literary inquiries in Spain, the obligations
I lie under to him would be very great. Du-
ring five years, that gentleman has carried on
researches for my behoof, with such aivity,
perseverance, and knowledge of the subjed, to
which his attention was turned, as have filled
me with no less atonishment than fatisfadion.
He procured for me the greater part of the Spa.
nish books, which I have consulted; and as
many of them were printed early in the sixteenth
century, and are become extremely rare, the
collecing of these was such an occupation, as,
alone, required much time and assiduity. To
his friendly attention I am indebted for copies
of several valuable manuscripts, containing fads
and details which I might have searched for in
vain, in works that have been made public.
Encouraged by the inviting good-will with which
Mr. Waddilove conferred his favors, I tranf-
mitted to him a set of queries, with refpet both
to the customs and policy of the native Ame.
ricans, and the nature of several institutions in
the Spanish settlements, framed in such a manner,
that a Spaniard might answer them, without
disclosing any thing that was improper to be

communicated to a foreigner. He translated these
into Spanish, and obtained from various persons
who had resided in most of the Spanish colo'
nies, such replies as have afforded me much
inftrudion.

Notwithstanding those peculiar advantages

with which my inquiries were carried on in
Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to add,
that their success must be ascribed to the bene-
ficence of individuals, not to any communica-
tion by public authority. By a singular arrange-
ment of Philip II. the records of the Spanish
monarchy are deposited in the Archivo of Si-
mancas, near Valladolid, at the distance of a
hundred and twenty miles from the feat of
government, and the supreme courts of justice.
The papers relative to America, and chiefly to
that early period of its history, towards which
my attention was directed, are so numerous,
that they alone, according to one account, fill
the largest apartment in the Archivo; and accor-
ding to another, they compose eight hundred
and feventy-three large bundles. Conscious of
poflefling, in tbme degree, the industry which
belongs to a historian, the profpet of such a
treasure excited my most ardent curiosity. But
the profped of it , is all that I have enjoyed.

a4

Spain, with an excels of caution, has uniformly
thrown a veil over her tranCfacions in America,
From strangers they are concealed with peculiar
fohcitude. Even to her own fubjests the Archivo
of Sinancas is not opened without a particular
order from the crow ; and after obtaining that,
papers cannot be copied, without paying fees
of office so exorbitant, that the expense ex-
ceeds what it would be proper to bestow, when
the gratification of literary curiosity is the only
object It is to be hoped, that the Spaniards
will at last discover this system of concealment .to
be no less impolitic than illiberal. From what
I have experienced in the course of my inqui,
ries, I am ahtisfied, thac upon a more minute
scrutiny into their early operations in the New
World, however reprehensible the aions of
individuals may appear, the conduct of the
nation will be placed in a more favorable
light.

In other parts of Europe very different fentl.

ments prevail. Having searched, without ficcefs,
in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to Charles V,
written soon after he landed in the Mexican
empire. which has not hitherto been published;
it occurred to me, that as the emperor was
letting out for Germany at the tine when the

ieffengers from Cortes arrived in Europe, the
letter with which they were intruited might
poflibly be preserved in the Imperial library of
Vienna. I communicated this idea to Sir Robert
IIurray Keith, with whom I have long had the
honor to live in friendship, and I had oon the
pleasure to learn, that upon his application, her
Imperial Majesty had been graciously pleased to
issue an order, that not only a copy of that
letter (if it were f6und), but of any other
papers in the library, which could throw light
upon the History of America, should be tranf-
mitted to me. The letter from Cortes is not
in the Imperial Library, but an authentic copy,
attested by a notary, of the letter written by
the magiitrates of the colony planted by him
at Vera Cruz, which I have mentioned, Vol. ii.
having been found, it was transcribed and
sent to me. As this letter is no less curious,
and as little known as that which was the object
of my inquiries, I have given some account, in
its proper place, of what is most worthy of
notice in it. Together with it, I received a
copy of a letter from Cortes, containing a long
account of his expedition to Honduras, with
refped to which, I did not think it necessary to
enter into any particular detail; and likewise

those curious Mexican paintings, which I have
described, Vol. iii.

MIy inquiries at St. Petersburgh were car-

ried on with equal facility and success. In exa-
mining into the nearest communication between
our continent and that of America, it became
of consequence to obtain authentic information
concerning the discoveries of the Rufliang in their
navigation from Kamchatka towards the coast
of America. Accurate relations of their first
voyage, in 1741, have been published by Muller
and Gmelin. Several foreign authors have enter-
tained an opinion, that the court of Russia
studiously conceals the progress which has been
made by more recent navigators, and suffers
the Public to be amused with false accounts of
their route. Such condud appeared to me un-
suitable to those liberal sentiments, and that
patronage of science, for which the present
sovereign of Ruflia is -eminent; nor could I dif-
cern any political reason, that might render it
improper to apply for information concerning
the late attempts of the Ruffians to open a com-
munication between Asia and America. My in-
genious countryman, Dr. Rogerfon, first phyfi-
cian to the empress, presented my request to her
Imperial Majesty, who not only disclaimed any

idea of concealment, but instantly ordered the
journal of Captain Krenitzin, who conduced
the only voyage of discovery made by public
authority since the year 1741, to be translated,
and his original chart to be copied for my use,
By consulting them, I have been enabled to give
a more accurate view of the progress and extent
of the Ruffian discoveries, than has hitherto been
communicated to the Public.

From other quarters I have received informa-

tion of great utility and importance. M. le Che-
valier de Pinto, the minister from Portugal to the
court of Great Britain, who commanded for several
years at Matagroffo, a settlement of the Portu-
guefe in the interior part of Brazil, where the
Indians are numerous, and their original manners
little altered by intercourse with Europeans, was
pleated to fend me very' full answers to some
queries concerning the charater and institutions
of the natives of America, which his polite
reception of an application made to him in my
name, encouraged me to propose. These satis-
fled me, that he had contemplated with a discern-
ing attention the curious objecs which his
situation presented to his view, and I have often
followed him as one of my best initruted
guides.

M. Suard, to whose elegant translation of the

History of the Reign of Charles V. I owe the
favorable reception of that work on the conti-
nent, procured me answers to the fame queries
from M. de Bougainville, who had opportunities
of observing the Indians both of North and
South America, and from M. Godin le Jeune,
who resided fifteen years among Indians in Quito,
and twenty years in Cayenne. The latter are
more valuable from having been examined by
M. de la Condamine, who, a few weeks before
his death, made some short additions to them,
which may be confidered as the last effort of
that attention to science which occupied a long
life.

Mly inquiries were not confined to one'region

in America. Governor Hutchinson took the trou-
ble of recommending the consideration of my
queries to Mr. Hawley and Mr. Brainerd, two
protestant missionaries, employed among the
Indians of the Five Nations, who favored me
with answers, which discover a considerable
knowledge of the people whose customs they
describe. From William Smith, Efq; the inge-
nious historian of New York, I received some
useful information. When I enter upon the
History of our Colonies in North-America, I

shall have occasion to acknowledge how much
I have been indebted to many other gentlemen
of that country.

From the valuable Colledion of Voyages made

by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with whose attend
tion to the History of Navigation and Discovery
the Public is well acquainted, I have received
some very rare books, particularly two large
volumes of Memorials, partly manuscript, and
partly in print, which were presented to the
court of Spain during the reigns of Philip III
and Philip IV. From there I have learned many
curious particulars with refped to the interior
state of the Spanish colonies, and the various
schemes formed for their improvement. As this
Colletion of Memorials formerly belonged to
the Colbert Library, I have quoted them by
that title.

All those books and manuscripts I have con.

fulted with that attention which the refped due
from an Author to the Public required; and by
minute references to them, I have endeavoured
to authenticate whatever I relate. The longer
I refled on the nature of historical composition,
the more I am convinced that this scrupulous
accuracy is necessary. The historian who records
the events of his own time, is credited in

proportion to the opinion which the Public
entertains with refped to his mearis of informa.
tion and his veracity. He who delineates the
tranfadions of a remote period, has no title to
claim assent, unless he produces evidence in
proof of his assertions. Without this, he may
write an amusing tale, but cannot be said to
have composed an authentic history. In those
sentiments I have been confirmed by the opinion
of an Author *, whom his industry, erudition,
and discernment, have deservedly placed in a
high rank among the molt eminent historians
of the age. Emboldened by a hint from him,
I have published a catalogue of the Spanish
books which I have consulted. This pradice was
frequent in the last century, and was confidered
as an evidence of laudable indultry in an author;
in the present, it may, perhaps, be deemed
the effe& of ostentation; but as many of these
books are unknown in Great Britain, I could
not otherwise have referred to them as authori.
ties, without encumbering the page with an
insertion of their full titles. To any person
who may chufe to follow me in this path of
inquiry, the catalogue mult be very useful.

My readers will observe, that in mentioning
4' Mr. Gibbon.

ums of money, I have uniformly followed the
panish method of computing by pesos. In Ame-
ica, the peso fuerte, or duro, is the only one
nown, and that is always meant when any um
imported from America is mentioned. The peso
ferte, as well as other coins, has varied in
its numerary value; but I have been advised,
without attending to such minute variations, to
confider it as equal to four shillings and sixpence
of our money. It is to be remembered, how-
ever, that in the sixteenth century, the effe'tive
value of a peso, i. e. the quantity of labor
which it represented, or of goods which it would
purchase, was five or fix times as much as at
present.

N. B. Since this edition was put into the pres,

a History of Mexico, in two volumes in quarto,
translated from the Italian of the Abbe D. Fran-
cefco Saverio Clavigero, has been published.
From a person, who is a native of New Spain,
who has resided forty years in that country,
and who is acquainted with the Mexican lan-
guage, it was natural to exped much new in.
formation. Upon perusing his work, however,
1 find that it contains hardly any addition to the
ancient History of the Mexican empire, as related

by, Acofta and Herrera, but what is derived from
the improbable narratives and fanciful conjectures
of Torquemada and Boturini. Having copied
their splendid descriptions of the high state of
civilization in the Mexican empire, he, in the
abundance of his zeal for the honor of his native
country, charges me with having mistaken ome
points, and with having misrepresented others,
in the History of it. When an author is con.
fcious of having exerted industry in research, and
impartiality in decision, he may, without pre.
fumption, claim what praise is due to these qua.
lities, and he cannot be insensible to any accu.
fation that tends to weaken the force of his
claim. A feeling of this kind has induced me to
examine such ftridtures of M. Clavigero on my
History of America as merited any attention,
especially as these are made by one, who seemed
to possess the means of obtaining accurate infor-
mation; and to show that the greater part of
them is destitute of any just foundation. This I
have done in notes upon the paflages in my
History, which gave rife to his criticisms,
CoL T, CG E of E n N U R I,

Mar Ob ij, 1788.

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

O F
Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A

C A R E T E de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la
Riviere de la Plata, &c de hl par Terre au Perou. Ext.
Recucil de Thevenot, Part IV.

A voyage up the River de la Plata, and thence

y Land to Peru, 8vo. London, 698.
Acolta ( P. Jos. de) Hiftoria Natural y Moral de las Indias.
to. Madrid, i 9go.

(Joseph de) Iliftoire Naturelle & Morale des Indes
ant Orientales qu'Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 6oo.

Novi Orbis Hiltoria Naturalis & Moralis. Exfl.
n Collet. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

--- De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de prbcu-

anda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo. ir89.

- (Chriftov.) Tratado de las Drogas y Medecinas
e las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al vivo,
to. Burgos, I 7 -

Acugna (P. Chrilloph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama-
ones, 12mo. Tom. ii. Paris, 1682.
Acugna's Relation of the great River of the Amazons i
South America, 8vo. Loud. 698.

b

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigamzine a fcoprire il Regno di
fet:c itLa. R.Kmufio, 111., 363.

iLbuqluerque Cucllo, (Duarte de) Memorial del Arte de
la GCuerra del rra1il, 4to. Mad. 163 4.

Alcawarado (Franc.) A Historical Relation of the Discovery
of the fle of MIadeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y Herrera (D. Dionyflo de) Avifo Hiftorico.

Politico-Geografico, con las Noticias mas particulares, del
Peru, Tierra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reino de Granada, 4to.
lMad. 1740.

-- ompendio Hiftorico de la Provincia y Puerto de
Guayaquil, 4to. Ilad. 1741.

MIemorial fobre diferentes Puntos tocantes al

ellado de la real hazienda, y del comercio, &c. en las
Indias, fol.

Aidama y Cuevara C. Jos. Auguftin de) Arte de la
Lengua Mexicana, izmo. Mexico, 1754.

:xlvarado (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes

Referiendole sus Expediciones y Conquiftas en varras Pro.
tincias de N. Epagna. Exft. Barcia, Hiftoriad. Primit
tom. i.

~---- Lettere due, &c. Exft. Ramus. III. 296.
Aparicio y Leon (D. Lorenzo de) Difcurfo Hiftorico.

Politico del Hospital San Lazaro de Lima, 8vo. Lim.
176 1.

Aranzeles Reales de los Miniftros de la Real Audiencia dc
N. Efpagna, fol. Mexico, 727.

Argefiola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Iflas
Vlalucas, fol. Mad. 609.

--- Annales de Aragon, fol. Sragoca, 6;o,
Arguello ( Eman. ) Scntum Confelfionis, i2mo. Mex.
1703.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. dc) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del
l'eru, 4to. Lima, 621.

Avcndagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus, ceu generalis

nlftrudor pro Regimine Confcientike, in iis que ad Indias
fpcdtant, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 66o.

Aznar (D. Bern. Fran. Difcurfo tocante a la real hazienda
y adminiftracion de ella, 4to.

B

Bandini (Angelo Maria) Vita e Lettere di Amerigo
,refpucci, 4to. Firenze, 1745.

Barcia ( D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores' Primitivos de las
Indi:s Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera ( D. Martin de). Argentina y Conquifta

del Rio de la Plata oema. Exit. Barcia, Hifloriad.
Primit. 11I.

Barros (Joano de) Decadas de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lisboa,
1682.

Bellefteros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, foL
2 vols. Lima, i685.

Beltran (P. F. Pedro) Arte del Idioma Maya reducido a
fucintas reglas, y Semilexicon, 4to. Mex. 1746.

Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hiftori -- De Bry America,
Part IV. V. VI.

Betancourt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las glefias

iletropolitanas de las Ihdias, 4to. Mad. 6 37.

Blanco (F. Ylatias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indios
Cunranagotos y otros, r2mo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Idea de una nueva Hiftoria

general de la America Septentrional, fundada fobre iaterial
copiofa de Figuras, Synimolas, Caraderes, Cantares y Manu.
fcritos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco de) El
Nuevo Mlundo Poema Heroico, 4to. Barcelona, c-or.

Botero Bencs (Juan) Defcripcion de Todas l1s Provincias,
Rcinos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, 748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographi Vetcris & Novae, 4tQ.
Paris, 1648'

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) elacion de los Nau
fragios. Exit. Barcia, Hist. Prim tom. .

b

Cabe7a de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Examen Apologetico de

la Hiftorica Narracion de los Naufragios. Exft. Brcia HIift,
Prim. tom. i.

------ Comentarios de lo fucedido durante
fiu gobicrno del Rio de la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relacione de. Exft. Ranmifio, 111. ;3o.
Cabota Sebaf.) Navigacione de Exft. Ramus. I1 21 1.
Ca auftus (Aloyfius) Navigatio ad Terras incognitas,
Exit. Nov. Orb. (ryt:ei, p. r.

Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Chronica moralizada del Orden
de Sant Auguftin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1 638.

California - Diario illorico de los Viages de Mar y Tierra

lheclios en 7 68, al Norte de California di orden del Marques
de Croix, Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Alemorial Informatorio de lo que

a fu Mageflad provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to.
I64S.

Campomanes (D. Pedro Rodrig.) ntiguedad Maritima de

laRepublica de Cartago, con el Periplo de Iu general Hannon
tiaduc do e illutrado, 4to. Mad. 7s 6.

-Difcurfo fobre el fomento de la Induftria
popular, vo. AMad. 1774.

Difcurfo fobre la Educacion popular de los
Artefanos, 8vo. vol. Mad. I77s, &c.

Carracas - Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Conpagnia

Guipufcoana de Caracas, 12mo. Alad. 1765.
"Carivantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias que
tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe provien,
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Magellad, lo que fe gafta de
ella y le queda libre, &c. &c. l)edicado al Marqucs de
Santos Claros, Aio, de i6ii. IMS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfiy)o Chronoloico para la
Iliftoria general de ;i Florida, fsl. Alad. 17 .

Carranzana (D. (;oncles) A (;olgraphical )cfcription of
the Coalss, &c. of the Spanifi Wel-Ilndics, 8vo. Lond. 1 740.

Cal.s (Iart. de las) Brevilrinia Kelacion de la )cfruccion
de las Indias, 4to. 1552.

**v *

Canss (Bart. de las) Narratio Iconibus illuftrata per Theod.
de Bry. 4to. Oppent. 6 4.

- - ( Bart. de las') An Account of the first Voyages

and Discoveries of the Spaniards in America, 8vo. Lond.
169;.

Caflani (P. Joseph ) Hiftoria de la Provincia de la Com-

pagnia de Jesus del Nuevo Reino de Granada, fol. Mad.
1741.

Callanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimento

& Conquilta de India pelos Portugueses, fol. 2 vol. Lisboa,
1I52.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera y Secunda de las Elegias de
Varones Illutres de Indias, 4to. vol. Mad. i589.

Cafillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la Con-
quifia de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 16;2. .

Castro, Figueroa y Salazar (D. Pedro de) Relacion de fu
ancimiento y fervicios, mno.

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las

pefas y Medidas de varias Naciones, reducidas a las que
corren en Caltilla, 4to. Mlad. 17 31.

Cepeda (D. Fern.) Relacion Universal del Sitio en que
ella fundada la Ciudad de Mexico, fol. Ilex. 16; 7,

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Chronica del Peru, fol. Sevill.

Cifieros (Diego) Sitio, Naturaleza y Propriedades de la
Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Clemente ( P. Claudio) Tablas Chronologicas, en que

contienen los Suceflbs Ecclefiatlicos y Seculares de Indias,
4to. Va]. 1689.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria deYucatan, fol.
Mad. 1688.

Collecaon dos Brives Pontificos e Lcyes Regias que foraon

Expedidos y Publicadas defile o Anno 1741 , fobre a la Li-
bcrt.ad des Pcflbas bene e Commcrcio dos Indos de Brefil.

Colleccion General de las Providencias halta aqui tomadas
por cl Gobierno fobre cl Ellragamiento, y Occupacion de las

b

Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de
Efp;lgna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D,
Chrifloval Colon. Exft. Barcia, Hilft. Prim. I. .

Columbus (Christ. ) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hac.
tenus incognitas invenit xft. Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. 90.

- (Ferd.) Life and \ctions of his Father Admiral
Christoph. Columbus. Exit. Churchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Compagnia Real de Comercio para las Iflas de St.
Domingo, Puerto-rico y la Margarita, izmo.

Compendio General de las contribuciones y gaftos que

ocarionan todos los effetos, frutos, caudales, &c. que trafican
entre los reinos de Castilla y America, 4to.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en

la muy Noble y muy leal Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos
de T 5 & iS 6 , fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum
Dlexici, Anno is85, fol. Mexici, 1770.

Continente Americano, Argonauta de las costas de Nueva
Efpagna y Tierra Firme. 2nmo.

Cordeyro (\ntonio) Hiftoria Infulana das ilhas a Portugal
fujeytas no Oceano Occidental. fol. Lisb. 1717.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los

Segnores, manera y diferencia de ellos, que havia en la
Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus comarcanas, y de
sus Leyes, Ufos y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en
tribLt r sus Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gntilidad, &c. MS.
4to pp. 07.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere

del Viaggio fatto da Fra. Marco da Nizza alle fette Citta
di Cevola. Exft. Ramufio Il. 354.

---- Relazione del Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ramufio Ill.
3 5 9.

Cortes (Hern. ) Quatro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador

Carlos V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiftas en la Nueva
Efpagna. Exft. Barcia, Hist. Prim. tom. .

Corteffii (Ferd.) Do infulis nuper inventis Narrationes ad
Carolun V. fol. 1532.

ortefe (Fern.) Relazione, &c. Exft. Ramufio II. 22 .
Cubero ( D. Pedro ) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte del

Mundo, Saragoqa, 4to. 688.
Cumana Gobierno y Noticia de, fol. MS.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria de la Fundacion y

Difcurfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufi
162S.

(Gil Gonzalez) Theatro Ecclefiaftico de la Pri-

iitiva Iglefia de las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vol.
1649.

Documentos. tocantes a a Perfecucion, que los Regulares

de la Compagnia fafcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas, Obifpo
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echaveri (D. Bernardo. Ibagnez de) E Reino Jefuitico det

Paraguay. Exft. tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentos, 4to.
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Afru (D. Francisco de) La Eftrella de Lima

convertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes,
1688.

Eguiara El Egueren (D. Jo. Jos. ) Bibliotheca Mexicana,

five Eruditorum Hiaoria Virorum in America Boreali natorum,
&c. tom. prim. foL Mex. 177;. N. B. No more than
one volume of this work has been published.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana, Poma
Heroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

----- 2 vol. 8vo. Mad. 777.

Efcalona (I). Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Perub
vicun, fol. Mad. 177j.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiftoria del Reino de Portugal'
fol. Amber. 1 7 o.

b4

Far;n v Sousa, History of Portugal from the first Age~
to the Rev;;.ition under John IV. 8vo. lond. 1698.

Fernin1':.. ;~icgo) Primera y ecunda Parte de la Hifturia
del Peru, tifl Sevill. 7.-

__ ----( 1'. .u:in Patr.) Relacion liftorial de las

Milliones de lus ndios que'llaman Chiquitos, 4to. Mad,
1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron.) Espagnoles Americanos - Dif.
curfo VI. del tom. iv. del Theatro Critico. Mad. 769.

Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico fobre

la Poblacion de la America - Difcurfo XV. del tom. v. del
Theatro Critico.

---- (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la
Ciudad y Provincia Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 763.

Frevre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.
Frafib (D. Pedro) De Regio Patronatu Indiarum, fol.
2 vols. Matriti, 1775.

G

Galvao (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcubrimientos Antigosy
Aloderno.s, fol. Lisboa, 173 I.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the

first Original unto the Year i SS. Osborne's Collect. II1
34..

Gamboa (D. Fran. Xavier de) Comentarios a las ordi.
nanzas de Minas, fol. Mad. 1761.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiiloria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de la

India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion del Santo Evan.
gelio en ella, i2mo. Baeca, 6z6.

(Fr. (regorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo
Mundo, fol. Mlad. 1-29.

Gaiflllu ( Anton. Vclafquez) Arte de Lengua Mexicana,
4to. Puibla de los Angeles. i 7 6.

(Gaeta d(e Mexico por los Annos 1728, 1729, 1730, 4to.
Girava (Ilieronymo) Dos Libros dc Cofrmographia. Milan,
l s6.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata
del Dcfcubriniiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias, y

Guerras que tuvo con los Indios, Exft. Barcia, Hist. Prim.
tom. i.

Godoy Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 30o.
Gomara (I Fr. Lopez de ) La Hiftoria general de las Indias,
I2mo. Anib. 1 54.

- Hiftoria general de las Indias. Exft. Barcia, Hilt.
Priln. tom. ii.

--- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 6 Conquifta de
Mexico. Exit. Barcia , Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Guatemala-Razon puntual de los fuceffos mas memora-

bles, y ie los eftragos y dannos que ha padecido la rindad do
Guatemala, fol. 774.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) El Orinoco illuftrado y defendido;

Hiftoria Natural, Civil, y Geographica de elle Gran Rio, &c.
4to. tom. ilad. 745.

----- - Hiftoire Naturelle, Civile , & Geogra-

phique de l'Orenoque. Traduite par M. Eidous, izmo.
'tom. iii; Avig. I7 8.

Gufian.( Nugno de) Relazione fcritta in Omitlan, Provincia

di Mechuacan nella maggiore Spagna nell i o. Exft. Ra-
muflo III. 3 i.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides Belli Guiaranici, ab
Anno 7 s4. Exft. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarurn, Animaliumr & Ilineralium
Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. i6 i.

Herrera ( Anton. de) Hiftoria general de los Hechos de

los Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma del Mar Oceano,
fol. 4 vols. Mad. 60o.

Hiftoria general, &c. 4 vols. Mad. i70o.

---- - General History, &c. Translated by Stephens,
8vo. 6 vols. Lond. 74o.

- Defcriptio Indite Occidentalis, fol. Amft. 1622.

Huemez y Horcalitas ( D. Juan Francisco de) Extrado de
los Autos de Diligcncias y reconocimientos de los rios, lagunas,

vertientes, y defagues de Mexico y fu valle &c. fol.
Mex. 1748.

I

Jefuitas-Colleccion de las applicaciones que fe van ha.

ciendo de los Cienes, casas y Colegios que fueron de la Corn.
pagnia de Jesus, expatriados de eftos Reales dominios, 4to.
2 vols. Lima, 1772 y 1771.

.---- Coleccion General delasProvidencias hafta aqui

tomadas por el Gobierno fobre el Eftranamiento y Occupa.
cion de las temporatidades, de los Regulares de la Compagnia
de Epagna, Indias, y flas Filipinas, 4to. Mad. 1767.

- Retrato de los Jefuitas formado al natural, 4to
2 vols. Mad. 1768.

- Relacion Abbreviada da Republica que os Reli.
giofos Jefuitas eftableceraon, mo.

Idea del Origen, Gobierno., &c. de la Com
pagnia de Jesus, 8vo. Mad. 1768.

L

Lavinius (Apollonius) Lihri V. de Peruvi Invention. &
rebus in eadem geftis, 12mo. Ant. I q67.

Leon ( Fr. Ruiz. de) Hernandia, Poema Heroico de la Con.
quifta de Mexico, 4to. Mad. I75.

--- (Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental y
Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. r177.

Lima, A true account of the Earthquake which happened

there 28th Otober 1746. Tranllated from the Spanish,
$vo. Lond. 1748.

Lima Gozofa, Defcripcion de las feftivas Demonftraciones,

con que efta ciudad Celebro la real Proclamacion de el
Nombre Augufto del Catholico Monarcha D. Carlos Ill.
Lima, 4to. 1760.

Llano Zapata ( D. Jos. Eufeb. ) Preliminar al Tomo I. de

las MIcmorias liltorico-Phyficas , Critico-Apologeticas de la
America Mcridional, vo. Cadiz, 17g9..

Lopez (D. Juan Luis) Difcurfo Hiftorico-Politico en defenfa
de la Jurifdiccion Real, fol. 685.

---- (Thorm.) Atlas Geographico de la America Sep-
tentrional y Meridional, 12mo. Par. 7 8.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant. ) Arzobifpo de Mexico, ahora, cl

Toledo, Hifioria de Nueva Efpagna, efcrita por fu Efclarecido
Conquistador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada con otros Docu-
mentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano ( P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, de los Terri-

torios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los Ritos
y Coftumbres, de las innumerabiles Naciones que la habitan.
4to. Cordov. I733.

Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la Pro.
vincia del Paraguay, fol. z vols. Mad. 1753.

Madriga (Pedro de) Description du Gouvernement du

Perou. Exft. Voyages qui ont fervi l'etabliffement de 1a,
comp. des Indes, tom. ix. Ios.

lariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades de la
Compagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad 768.

Isartinez de la Puente ( D. Jos. ) Compendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiftas, y Guerras de la India
Oriental, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del Infante Don
Enrique de Portugal fu inventor. 4to. Mad. 681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & Novo
Orbe Decades tres, i2mo. Colon. 574.

- De Infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus
Incolarum. Ibid. p. 329.

--- Opus Epiftolarum, fol. Amft. 670.

11 Somnario cavato dalla fua Storia del Nuovo
Mondo. Ramufio 111. i.

Mata (D.Geron. Fern. de) Ideas politicas y morales,
12mo. Toledo, 164o.

Illechuacan-Relacion de las Ceremonias , Ritos, y Po.

blacion dc los Indios de Mechuacan hecha al I. S. D. Ant. dQ
Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, fol. MS.

Melendez (Fr. Joan). Teforos Verdaderos de las Indias,

Hiitorita ie la Provincia de S. Juan Baptilfa del Peru, del
Orcl'n de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols. Rom. 681.

\1imnorial Ajultado por D. A. Fern.de Heredia, Goberna.
dor Je Nicaragua y Honduras, fol, 175.

Aleniorial juftadlo contra los Officiales de Casa de MonedA
en Mexico de el anno 729, fol,

Alendo7a L)D. Ant. de) Lettera all' Imperatore del Disco.

primento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramon.
tano. Lxft. Ramulio 111. 3s 5

(Juan Gonz. de) Storia del gran Reino de
China, con un' Itinerario del Nuovo Alondo, 8vo. Rom,

X1M.
Miguel (Vic. Jot. ) Tablas de los Sucelffs Ecclefiafticos

en Africa, Indias Orientales y Occidentales , 4to. Val,
1689.

Mlifcellanea Economico-Politica, &c. fol. Pampl. 1749.
lolina (P. F. Anton.) Vocabulario Caftellano y Mexicano,
fol. 7 1.

Alonardes (El Doctor) Primera y Segunda y Tercera

Parte de la Hiftoria Medicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen de
nuefras Indias Occidentales, que firven en Aledicina, 4to
Sev'illa, 17;4.

Aloncada ( Sancho de) Reflauracion Politica de Efpagna y
defeos Publicos , 4to. MIad. 746.

.Morales (mbrofio de) Chronica General de Efpagna,
fol. 4 vol. Alcala, 1574.

Alorcno y Elcaudon ( D. Fran. Ant. ) Defcripcion y Eftado

del Virreinato de Santa Fe, Nuevo Reino de Granada, &c.
fol. MS.

Mluno ( . Antonio) Difcurfo fobre la economia politica,
8vo. Mlad. 1769.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Rela7ione del Viaggio fatto per Terra
al Cevolc, Regno di fettc Citt'. Exit. Ramus 111. 36.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes
arth. y Gonz. de Nodal al deCcubrimiento del Fltrecho que
oy es nomnbrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de Magel-
anes, 4to. Mad.

Noticia Individual de los dercchos fegun lo reglado en
Itimo provedo de' .1720. 4to. Barcelona, 1732.
Nueva Efpagia-T-iftoria de los Indios de Nueva Epagna
ividida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos,
acrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
egunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe , y modo de
elebrar las Fieltas de Nueftra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera
cl Genio y Caradter de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que
otaban sus Acontecimientos, con otras particularidades; y
oticias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Reino. Efcrita

en el Agno r54. por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos
que primero paffaron a entender en fu Conversion. MS. fol.
pp. 618.

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domnado. Poema, mo. Mad.
160o 5..

Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad.
i681.

Ortega (D. Cafimiro de ) Refumen Hiftorico del primer
Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) Hiltory of the Portuguese , during the
Reign of' Emanuel , vo. 2 vols. Lond. 17q2.

Olti)rius ( llieron. ) Dc rebus Emmanuclis Lulitanie Regis,
8vo. Col. Agr. r 72.

Ovalle ( Alonfo ) litorica Relacion del Reino de Chili
fj. Rom. 1646.

-- 1 ill Hilorical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili,
Exft. Chwnchill, Collect. lll. .

Oviecdo y agnos.( D. Jos.) HiRuria de la Conquifta yPublit
cacion de Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedo Sunmario, . Exc . xit. Ramulio II. 44.

Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sumaria de la Hiftoria
Natural de las Indias. Exft. Barcia, Hist. Prim. tom.i.

Oviedo Storia Generale e Naturale deile Indie Occiden.
tali. Exft. Ramufio III. 74.

- Reiazione della Navigazione per lo Grandiffimo
Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III. 41.

Palacio (D. Raim. Mig.) Difcurfo Economico Politico,
4to. Mad. 778.

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes de los Indios 6
Naturaleza y Coftumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

Vie du Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque
d'Angelopolis, i2mo. Cologne, 1772.

Pegna Juan Nugnez de la ) Conquifta y Antiguedades de
las Iflas de Gran Canaria, 4to. llad. 1676.

Pegna Montenegro D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Pa.

rochos de Indias, en que tratan las materias mas particulares,
tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminiftracion, 4to. Amberes,
1754.

Penalofa y Mondrtgon (Fr. Benito de) CineO Excellen.

lias del Espagnol que des pueblan a Efpagna, 4to. Pampl.
1629.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada 6 Con.
quifta del Peru Poema Ileroico, 4to. Litia, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apotlol de las In.

dias y nuevas gentes San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia
de Jesus, Epitome de sus Apoftolicos hechos, 4to. Pampl.
166s.

Pereira de Berrido ( Bernard.) Annales Hiftoricos do eftado
do Maranchao, fol. Lisboa, 1749.

Pcru-Rilazione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Difcopri-
mento e Conquilta del Peru. Exft. Ramus. II. 37r.

Peru-Rilazione d'un Sccretario di Franc. Pizarro della
Conquilta del Peru. Exlt. Ramulio III. 371.

- Relacion del Peru, MS.
Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Iugoos,

c. por haver los Commerciado illicitamente en tiempo de
uerra, fol. 17i5.
Philipinas-Carta que ecribe un Religioro antiguo de
hilipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le pregunta
l Natural y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Etas Iflas.
1S. 4to.

Piedrahita ( Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquiftas
el Nuevd Reino de Granada, fol. Amberes.
Pinelo ( Ant. de Leon ) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental
Occidental en que fe contienen los Efcritores de las Indias
rientales y Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. Mad. i'737.
Pinzonius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio & res per
eum reperta. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynai, p. 9.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) arones illuftres del N.
undo, fol. Mad. 1639.
Plantus Judaorum & Chriftianorum in Anmerica PeruntinA ,
l2mo.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hifto

rias de los Defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus Iflas,
4to. Mad. 68 .

Qtiir (Ferd. de) Terra Auflralis Incognita or a newr

Southern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the 'orld
lately found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

Raniufio ( Giov. Battilta) Raccolta delle Navigaziolni
Viaggi, fol. ; vol, Venet. 88

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de carracas, Noticias hiflo-

riales Practicas, de los Suceffos y Adelatntamientos de efts
Compagnia defde f fundacion en 1728 hafta 1764, 4to.
J76s.

Recopilacion de las Leyes de los Reinos de las Indias, fol.
4 vols. Mad. 1756.

Reglamento y Aranceles Reales para el Comercio de
Efpagna a Indias fol. Mad. I778.

Relazione d'un Gentiluomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe della

gran Citta Temiftatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nuova
Spagna. Exft. Ramus. III. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant. ) Hitoria general de las Indias Occi.

dentales y particular de la Gobernacion de Chiapa y Guati-
mala, fol. Mad. 16zo.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage

defde que falio de Lima, hafta que llego a Efpagna, 4to.
Mad. 16S 7.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos ( D. Ant. Joach. ) Manual Con.
pendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad. 7 ;5.

Ribas ( Andr. Perez de) Hiftoria de los Triumphos de

Nueftra Sta Fe, entre Gentes las mas Barbaras, en las miifiones
de Nueva, Efpagna, fol. Alad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el

eftado aual de los Papeles universales de la Monarclhia,
a'S.

Ripia ( Juan de la) Pradica de la Adminifiracion y cobranza
de las rentas reales, fol. Mad. I768.

Rocha Pitta ( Sebaftiano de) Hiftoria de America Portu-

gueza defde o Anno de isoo do fu Defcobrimento ate o de
1724, fol. Lisboa, i7?o.

Rodriguez (Manuel) Explicaeion de la Bulla de la Santa
Cruzada, 4to. Alcala, 89.

-- (P. Man.) El Mlaragnon y Amazonas, Hiftoria

de los Defcubrimientos, Entradas y Reduccion de las Naciones,
fol. Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. I595.

Roma y Rofell (D. Franc.) Las fegnales de la feli.

cid, d de Efpagna y mnedios de hacerlas efficaccs. vo. Mlad.
11768.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida de Juan de Palafox,
Arzobifpo de Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.

Rubaclava (Don Jos. Gutierrez da) Tratado iftorico

Politico, y Legal de el comniercio de las Indias Occidentales,
i2mo. Cad. 750o.

Ruiz (P. Ant. ) Conquifta spiritual hecha por los Reli.

giolbs de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias de 1l
Paraguay Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarchia de Efpagna,
torn. i, ii, iii, fol. Jlad. 1770.

y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquifra de
Mexico-Segunda parte, Cordov. 174t.

y Levllos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conftituciones

y Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y iModernas de la Real
Univerlidad y efludio general de San Marco de la Ciudad de
los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes, 73 .

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur l'Origine de 1a

Maladie Vnerienne, dans laquelle on prouve qu'elle n'a point
tet portee de l'Amerique, 12mo. Paris, 1765.
Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de ) Viage al Eftrecho de
llagellanes, 4to. Mad. 176g.

Santa Cruz (El Alarques) Comercio Suelto y en Compagnias
General, 2zmo. Mad. 17 2.

Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, y Margarita, Real Corn.
pagnia de Comercio, 12mo. 17 6.

Sctlemidel (Hulderico) liftoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio
de la Plata y Paraguay. Exft. Barcia, Hilt. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva ( Jos. de ) Rccucil Chronologique & Ana-

lytique de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dire de Jesus,
depuis son Entrde dans ce Royaume cn i S40 jufqu'a son Ex.
pulfion 75;9, 12mo, 3 vols. Lisb. 1769.

Segni (D. Diego Raymundo) Antiquario Noticia General
de Eli)agna y sus Indios, 12mo. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius ) Dialogus de juftis belli cayfis, prae
fcrtim in ndos Novi Orbis. MAS.

- (Jo. Genelius) Epituolarum Libri VII. mo,

Salam. $
S 7. ;

C

Sepulveda de regno, Libri III. i2mo. Ilerdae, Ir7o.
Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr. ) Theatro Naval Hydrographico,
4to. 1648.

----- Defcripcion Geographica y Perrotera de la
Region Austral ilagellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquiftas de
TierraFirmeenlas Indias Occidentales, fol. Cenqa, 627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hiftoria de las Conquiltas de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1684.

-- History of the Conquest of Mexico. - Tranf-
lated by Townshend, fol. 1724.

Solorzano y Pereyra (Joan.) Politica Indiana, fol. vol.
Mad. 776.

--- De Indiarum jure. five de juftht Indiarum Occi-
dentalium Gubernatione, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. 6-,2.

- Obras Varias pofthumas, fol. Mad. 1776.

Soto y marne ( P. Franc. de ) Copia de la Relacion de Viage

que defde la ciudad de Cadix a la Cartagena de Indias hizo,
4to. Mad. 175;.

Spilbergen et Le MVaire, Speculum Orientalis Occidentalifque
Navigationum, 4to. L. Bat. 1619.

Suarez de Figueroa (Chriftov. ) Hechos de D. Garcia
Hurtado de Mendoza, 4to. Mad. 6 3.

T

Tanco (Luis Bezerra) Felicidad de Mexico en la admi-

rable Aparicion de N. Segnora de Guadalupe, vo. Ilad.
174s.

Tarragones (Ilieron. Gir.) Dus Libros de Cofinographia,
4to. Milan, ; 6.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The liftory of the Provinces

Paraguay, Tucumani, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exit. Churchill's
Coll. VI. .

Torqueinada (Juan dc) Monarchia Indiana, fol. 3. vols.
Mad. 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per, dc) Viage del Mundo. Exit. Barcia
llift. Prim. 111.

Torres (Franc. Caro. de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Mi-

litares de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, defde. fu Fundacio
halta el Key D. Felipe II. Adminiitrador perpetuo dellas,
fol. Al{ad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiftoria N-atural
Efpagnola, fol. Mad. 17 4.

Differtacioh Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte
Geographica de las .flas Philipinas, 2mo. Mad. 1i75.

Totanes ( F. Sebastian de) Manual Tagalog para auxilio de

provincia de las Philipinas, 4to. Samplai en las Philipinas,
1 745.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiforique de 'Amerique
Nlridionale, 4to. torn. Paris, I7;2.

(D. Ant. de ) Noticias Anericanas, Entretenimi-

entos Phyfico - Hiforicos, fobre la America Meridional y la
Septentrional Oriental, 4to. Mad, 1772.

-- (D. Bern. de) Refltblecimiento de las Fabricas,

trafico, y comercio maritimo de Efpagna, izmo. 2 vol
Mad. 1740.

- (Franc.) Navigazione per icoprire laifole;delle

Specierie fino al Mare tletto Verrnejo nel 19. Ex.,-Ra-
muf. III. t g9. .

( D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Ma.nufadures &
du Commerce d'Ffpagnc, t211m. A1 m. 7A . 7.

Ultariz (D. Gcron. ) Theoxia y Pradtica de Comnerio y
de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

The Theory and Practice of Commerce , and M.a
!itime 'Aflairs, 8vo. vols. Lond. 1751.

Vcrges (D. Thom.n Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la Cud.

(1id el Salvador y Baia de Todos Santos en la Provincia del
13ialil, 4to. Mad. 628.

C 2

Varga Machuca (D. errl. de) Milicia y Defcripcion da
las Indias, 4to. Mad. i 699.

Vega Garcilaffo de la ) Hifloire de la Conquete de la
Floride. Traduite par Richelet, i mo. 2 tom. Leyd. 1731.

- - Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.
Lond. 682.

Vega (L'Ynca GarcilafTo de la) Hiftoire des Guerrea

Civiles des Espagnols dans les Indes, par Bauduoin, 4to.
2 tom. Paris, 648.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanifl Rule of Trade to the
'Weft Indies, 8vo. Lond. 702.

--- Linage (Jos.) Declamacion OratQria en Defenfa de
D. Jos. Fern. Veitia Linage, fol. r70o.

-- Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occidentales,
fol. Sevill. 1672.

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil Hifory of Cali.
fornia, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 179.

Verazzario (Giov. ) Relazione delle Terre perlui Scoperte
nel 't24. Exit. RamuGfo II. p. 420.

Vefputius (mericus) Dua Navigationes sub aufpiciis
Ferdinandi, &c. Exft. De Bry. America. Pars X.

------ Navigatio prima, fecunda, tertia, quarta. Exit
Nov. Orb. Grynai, p. ;.

Viage'de Efpagna, r21no. 6 tom. Mad. x776.
Victoria ( Fran.) Relationes Theologica de Indis & de jure
belli contra eos, 4to. 76 .

Viera y Clavijo ( E Jos. ) Noticias de la Hiftoria general de
las Iflas de Canaria, 4to. tom. Mad. 1772.

Villilobos (D. Juan de) Manifiefto fobre la introduccion

de efclavos negros en las Indias Occidentales, 4to. Sevilla,
I68a.

Villagra (Gasp. de)' Hifloria de Nuevo Mexico Poema,
izmo. Alcala. 16ro.

Villa Segnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant. ) Theatro Americano.

Defcripcion general de los Reynos y Provincias de la Nueva
Efpagna, fol. torn. Mex. 1746.

---- Refpuefta fobre el precio de Azogue, 4to0
Vocabulario Brafiliano y ortuges, 4to. 1S.

\V

Ward (D. Bernardo) Proyecto Economico fobre la pobla-

cion de Efpagna, la agricultura en todos sus ramos, y demas
clLbleciilienftos de indultria, comercio con nueftra marina,
arreglo de nueftros interefes en America, libertad del comercio
en Indias, &c. vols. 4to. MS.

X

Xeres (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquifta del

Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V.
Exii. Barcia, Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

Relazione, &c. &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 372.

Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Iifioria del Defcubrimiento y Con.

quifta de la Provincia del Peru. Exft. Barcia, Hist. Prim.
torn. iii.

Hiftoire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du
Perou, ir2mo. 2 tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al Rey

N. Segnor. D. Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro Aumento del
Real Erario. No place. 1712.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hiftoria y Viage del
Nundo, 4to. Mad. 169 .

CONTENTS

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOO K I.
PROGRESS of navigation among the ancients - I'irv

of their discoveries ar preparatory to tbofe of the
moderns - Inperfedion of ancient navigation and
geography - Doc7rine of the Zoner - Farther
difcoverier checked by the irruption of barbarous
nations - Geographical knowledge still preserved in
the Eafl, and among the Arabians - Revival of
commerce and navigation in Eutrope - favored
by the Croifades - extended by travellers into the
E£s - promoted by the invention of the mariner's
co;npafs - FirJf regular plan of discovery formed,
by Portugal - State of that kingdomt - Schemes
of Prince Henry - Early attempts feeble - Progrefi
along the nveflern coafi of Africa - Hopes of discovering
a ne-m route to the afi Indies - /Ittempts to
accomplish this - Profr'eds of ficceJs. Page I

BOO K II.
Birth ad education of Columbus - acquires naval skill

in the service of Portugal - conceives hopes of
reaching the Eaf Indies by holding a weflerly course
-his fyJiem founded on the ideas of the ancients,
and knowledge of their navigation - and on the
discoveries of. the Portugzuee - His negociations
with diferent courts - Objacles which he had to
surmount in Spain - Voyage of dicovery - dif-
culties - fztcceJf - return to Spain - Aftonishiment
of mankind on this discovery of a New World -
Papal grant of it - Second voyage - Colony fettled -
Farther discoveries - War with the Indians - Firfi
tax ipofed on them - Third voyage - He discovers
the continent - State of the Spanish colony -
Errors in the firfl fyfleni of colonizing - Voyage of
the PortugueJe to the East Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope - Ejfeds of this - Discoveries made
by private ad7entztrers in the New World - N;ame of
America giveln to it - Iachinations againfi
Colunmbus - Disgraced and sent in chains to Europe
- Fourth voyage of Columbus - His discoveries
- difafers - death. Page 70

B O O K III.
State of the colony in Hijpaniola - Nea war with the

Indians - Cruelty of the Spaniards - Fatal
regulation concerning the condition of the Indians

- Diminttion of that people - Discoveries and
Jfttlemicnts - Sirs/ colony p.'an:ted on the continent
- Conquefl of Cuba - DiJ;'overy of Florida - of
the South Sea - Great expeoiations raised by this
- Cizates of disappointment vzith refpef to these
for Jb;oe time - Controvefjy concerning te treat.
;nent of the Indians -. C'otrary decifons - Zeal
of the ecclejiaflics, particularly of Las CaJas -
Singular proceedings of Ximenes - Negroes imported
into America - Lar Casas' idea of a znevp colony
- permitted to attempt it - in fiuccefrjil -
DiScoveries towards the Ief - 2itcatan -
Campeachb - New Spain - preparations for
ia;nading it. "PI . age 209

1' (;' oE

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK I.

THE
HISTORY

0 F
AMERICA.

BOOK I.

THE progress of men in discovering and peopling B o o i
the various parts of the earth, has been extremely I
flow. Several ages elapsed before they removed The earth
far from those mild and fertile regions where they 'lIYpl eo.
were originally placed by their Creator. The
occasion of their first general dispersion is known;
but we are unacquainted with the course of their
migrations, or the time when they took poifeflion
of the different countries which they now inhabit.
Neither history nor tradition furnish such informa-
tion concerning those remote events, as enables
us to trace, with any certainty, the operations of
the human race in the infancy of society.

We may conclude, however, that all the early irf;tmigra.

migrations of mnankind( were made by land. The til by
ocean, which surrounds the habitable earth, as ld
wtll as the various arms of the sea which separate
one region from another, though defliecl to
facilitate the communication between diflant coun-
tiies, fee , at irft view, to be formed to clieck

VOL. 1. .1

B o O i the progress of man, and to mark the bounds

of that portion of the globe to which nature had
confined him. It was long, we may believe,
before men attempted to pass these formidable
barriers, and became so skilful and adventurous as
to commit themselves to the mercy of the winds
and waves, or to quit their native ihores in quest
of remote and unknown regions.

Firl at. Navigation and lhip-building are arts so nice
telmpts to. and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
,ardsnavi. as well as experience, of many successive ages to

bring them to any degree of perfection. From the
raft or canoe, vwhich first served to carry a savage
over the river that obstructed him in the chace,
to the contrudion of a vessel capable of conveying
a numerous crew with safety to a distant coast,
the progress in improvement is immenfc. Vlany
efforts would be made, many experiments would
be tried, and much labor as well as invention
would be employed, before men could accomplilh
this arduous and important undertaking. The rude
and imperfect state in which navigation is frill
found among all nations which are not considerably
civilized, corresponds with this account of its pro.
grefs, and demonfirates that, in early times, the
art was not so far improved as to enable men to
undertake dillant voyages, or to attempt remote
discoveries.

i troduc- As soon, however, as the art of navigation
tiol Of became known, a new species of correspondence
comnmerct, among men took place. It is from this era, that

we mutf date the commencement of such an inter-

course between nations as deserves the appellation n o o
of commerce. Men are, indeed, far advanced in i.
improvement before commerce becomes an object
of great importance to them. They must even
ave made some considerable progress towards
ivilization, before they acquire the idea of pro-
erty, and ascertain it so perfectly as to be
cquainted with the most simple of all contradts,
that of exchanging by barter one rude commodity
or another. But as soon as this important right is
eftablilled, and every individual feels that he has
in exclusive title to possess or to alienate \vhatever
e has acquired by his own labor or dexterity,
lhe wants and ingenuity of his nature suggest to
im a new method of increasing his acquisitions
lid enjoyments, by disposing of what is super-
iuous in his own ores, in order to procure what
s necessary or desirable in those of oher men.
hus a commercial intercourse begins , and i;
arried on among the members of the fame com-
tnnity. By degrees, they difcovcr that neigl!boui--
ing tribes possess what they themselves want, and
njoy comforts of which they wifl to partake.
in the famne mode, and pon the fame p)rinciples,
hat domestic traflic is carried on within the focictx,
n1 external commerce is eflabliflicd with ohc
iribes or nations. heir inItutl inteie(f and mIULLtu.I
vants rcnder tis intclcoill e (lcld ralle, anLd

l ij l-

ceptibly introduicc thi mi ximl s l;vs wlic
acilitate its pIrogr(:ef and render it '(:Ltre. IJIIL o(
Cery cxtenfive coinimerce can take placc bc\ ln
llontiguoLus prox'int. ., wvhofc foil ;ii cli,
:.!:

15 ,*

B o o K being nearly the fame, yield similar productions.

I. Remote countries cannot convey their coinmodi.

ties by land, to those places, where on account
of their rarity they are desired, and become
valuable. It is to navigation that men are indebted
for the power of transporting the superfluous
flock of one part of the earth , to supply the
wants of another. The luxuries and blellings of
a particular climate are no onger confined to
itfclf alone, but the enjoyment of them is commu,
nicated to the most distant regions.

In proportion as the knowledge of the advanta.

ges derived from navigation and commerce con.
tinued to spread, the intercourse among nations
extended. The ambition of conquest, or the
necessity of procuring new settlements, were no
longer the sole motives ofvifiting distant lands. The
desire of gain became a new incentive to ativity,
roused adventurers, and sent them forth upon
long voyages, in search of countries, whose
produts or wants might increase that circulation,
wVhich nourifles and gives vigor to commerce.
Trade proved a great source of discovery, it
opened unknown seas, it penetrated into new
regions, and contributed more than any other
cause, to bring men acquainted with the ituation,
the nature, and commodities of the different parts
of the globe. But even after a regular commerce
was eftiblilled in the world, after nations were
confidcr;ably civilized, and the cienccs and arts
vere cultivated witl ardor and success, navigation

continued to be so imperfect, that it can hardly B o o
be haid to have advanced beyond the infancy of L
its improvement in the ancient world.

Among all the nations of antiquity the frudure mperfeflion

of their vessels was extremely rude, and their ofnavigationi
method of working them very defective. They amon te
were unacquainted with several principles and
operations in navigation, which are now con-
fidered as the first elements on which that science
is founded. Though that property of the magnet,
by which it attracs iron, was well known to th,e
ancients, its more important and amazing virtue
of pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their
obfcrvation. Destitute of this faithful guide,'.which
now conducts the pilot with so much certainty in
the unbounded ocean, during the darkness of
night, or when the heavens are covered with
clouds, the ancients ha; no other method of
regulating their course than by observing the fin
and liars. Their navigation was of conlfequence
uncertain and timid. They durst seldom quit fight
of land, but crept along the coaR, exposed to
all the dangers, and retarded by all the obllruc-
tions, unavoidable in holding such an.,awkward
course. An incredible length of time was requisite
for performing voyages, which are now finifled
in a hrt space. Even in the ildeft climates,
and in seas the least tempcftuous, it was only
during the summer months that the ancients
ventured out of their harbours. The remainder of
the year was olt in inactivity. It would have been

B!3

B O o K deemed molt inconsiderate raflinefs to have braved

t. the fury of the winds and waves during winter'.

'While both the science and pradtice of navi.

gation continued to be so defedtive, it was an
undertaking of no finall difficulty and danger to
visit any remote region of the earth. Under every
disadvantage, however, the ative spirit of corn

Naviirtion merce exerted itself. The Egyptians, soon after
ani colti. the clabliflment of their monarchy, are fid to
merce ofthe
Egyptians. have opened a trade between the Arabian Gulph

or Red Sea, and the western coast of the great
Indian continent. The commodities which they
imported from the east, were carried by land from
the Arabian Gulph to the banks of the Nile, and
conveyed down that river to the Mediterranean.
But if the Egyptians in early times applied them-
selves to commerce, their attention to it was of
short duration. The fertile foil and mild climate of
Egypt produced the necessaries and comforts of
life with such profusion, as rendered its inhabitants
so independent of other countries, that it became
an eftablifbed maxim among that people, whose
ideas and institutions differed in almost every
point from those of' other nations, to renounce
all intercourse with foreigners. In consequence
of this, they never went out of their own country;
they held all sea-faring persons in detefation , as
impious and profane; and fortifying their own
harbours, they denied Itrangers admittance into
them'. It was in the decline of their power, and

Vegctius de Re milit. lib. iv.
Diodl. Sicul. lib.i. p1 . Ed. V Wefrclingi. Amit
rT,;, Str;ihn , lib. xvii. p. 114?.. Ed. Amft. 1707.

when their veneration for ancient maxim had B o K
greatly abated , that they again opened their I,
ports , and resumed any communication with
foreigners.

The character and situation of the Phenicians ofthe

were as favorable to the spirit of commerce and Pheuicians,
discovery as those of the Egyptians were adverse
to it. They had no diflinguifhing peculiarity in
their manners and inflitutions; they were not
addicted to any singular and unsocial form of
fnperflition; they could mingle with other nations
without cruple or relucance. The territory
which they possessed was neither large nor fertile.
Commerce was the only source from which they
could derive opulence or power. Accordingly,
the trade carried on by the Phenicians of Sidon
and Tyre, was more extensive and enterprising
than that of any state in the ancient world. The
genius of the Phenicians, as vell as the object of
their policy and the spirit of their laws, were
entirely commercial. They were a people of
merchants who aimed at the empire of the sea,
and aually poflefed it. Their flips not only
ilequented all the ports in the Mediterranean,
but they were the first who ventured beyond the
ancient boundaries of navigation, and passing the
Straits of Gades , visited the weflern coasts of
Spain and Africa. In many of the places to which
they resorted, they planted colonies, and commu,
nicated to the rude inhabitants some knowledge
of their arts and improvements. While they extended
their (lifcocries towards the north and the welt,

B 4

B O O K they did not neglect to penetrate into the more

x. opulent and fertile regions of the south and east.

Having rendered themselves mailers of several
commodious harbours towards the bottom of the
Arabian Gulph, they, after the example of the
Egyptians, established a regular intercourse with
Arabia and the continent of India on the one
hand, and with the eastern coast of Africa on the
other. From these countries they imported many
valuable commodities, unknown to the reft of the
world, and, during a long period, engrossed
that lucrative branch of commerce without a
rival '
Ofthejews. The Vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired

by monopolizing the trade carried on in the Red
Sea, incited their neighbours the Jews, under the
prosperous reigns of David and' Solomon, to aim
at being admitted to some share of it. This they
obtained, partly b their conquest of Idumea,
which stretches along the Red Sea, and partly
by their alliance with Hiram king of Tyre.
Solomon fitted out fleets, which, under the direc-
tion of Phenician pilots, failed from the Red Sea
to Tarflhifh and Ophir. These it is probable were
ports in India and Africa which their conductors
were accuftorned to frequent, and from them the
Jewilh flips returned with such valuable cargoes
as suddenly diffused wealth and splendor through
the kingdom of lfrael '. But the singular inftitu-

' See NOTE. I. at the End of the Volume.

i lcmoire fur le Pays d'Ophir par . D'Anville. Mnm.
de l'Academ. des Infcript. &c. tom, xxx. 8;.

tions of the Jews, the observance of which was B o O R
enjoined by their divine lcgiflator, with an inten- I.
tion of preserving them a separate people, unin-
fecded by idolatry, formed a national characer
incapable of that open and liberal intercourse with
firangers which commerce requires. Accordingly,
this nfocial genius of the people, together with
the disasters which besel the kingdom of Israel,
prevented the commercial spirit which their
monarchs labored to introduce, and to cherish,
from spreading among them. The Jews cannot
be numbered among the nations, which con-
tributed to improve navigation, or to extend
discovery.

But though the instruCtions and example of the ofthe Ca..

Phenicians were unable to mould the manners thgillans
and temper of the Jews, in opposition to-the
tendency of their laws , they transmitted the
commercial spirit with facility, and in full vigor,
to their own descendants the Carthaginians. The
commonwealth of Carthage applied to trade and
to naval affairs, with no less ardor, ingenuity,
and success, than its parent fate. Carthage early
rivalled, and soon surpassed Tyre, in opulence
and power, but seems not to have aimed at
obtaining any fllare in the commerce with India.
'he Phenicians had engrossed this, and had such
a command of the Red Sea as secured to them
the exclusive poffefion of that lucrative branch
of trade. The commercial ativity of the Cartha-
ginians was exerted, in another direction. Without
contending for the trade of the east with their

B o o n mother-country, they extended their navigatior

i. chiefly towards the weft and north. Following th(

course which the Phenicians had opened, the)
passed the Straits of Gades, and pufling theii
discoveries far beyond those of the parent state
visited not only all the coasts of Spain, but thofi
of Glul, and penetrated at last into Britain. At
the fame time that they acquired knowledge ol
new countries in this part of the globe, they
gradually carried their researches towards the
South. They made considerable progress, by land;
into the interior provinces of Africa, traded with
some of them, and fubjeded others to their
empire. They failed along the western coast of
that great continent, almost to the tropic of
Cancer, and planted several colonies, in order
to civilize the natives, and accustom them to
commerce. They discovered the Fortunate Islands,
now known by the name of the Canaries, the
utmost boundary of ancient navigation in te
weflern ocean '

Nor was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from, one country to another. Commerce
\vas followed by its usual cffects among both tlefe
people. It awakenedc criofity, enlarged the ideas
and dcfiies of men, and incited them to bold
cntcrprifes. Voyages were undertaken, the sole

Plinii Nat. flift. lib. vi. c. 3 7. edit. in ifurn Delph.
4to. x(8j.

object of which was to discover new countries, B 0 o K
and to explore unknown seas. Such, during the
prosperous age of the Carthaginian republic, were
the famous navigations of Hanno and Himilco.
Both their fleets were equipped by authority of
the senate, and at public expense. Hanno was
directed to seer towards the south, along the
coast of Africa, and he seems to have advanced
much nearer the equinoctial line than any former
navigator'. Himilco had it in charge to proceed
towards the north, and to examine the western
coasts of the European continent2. Of the fame
nature was the extraordinary navigation of the
Phenicians round Africa. A Phenician fleet, we
are told, fitted out by Necho king of Egypt,
took its departure about fix hundred and four
years before the Christian aera, from a port in the
Red Sea, doubled the southern promontory of
Africa, and after a voyage of three years, returned
by the Straits of Gades, to the mouth of the
Nile '. Eudoxus of Cyzicus is said to have held
the fame course, and to have accomplished the
fame arduous undertaking .

These voyages, if performed in the manner
which I have related, may jufly be reckoned the

Plinii Nat. Hifl. lib. v. c. . annonis Periplus ap.
Gcogranph. minures, edit Iluidfoni, vol. i. p. .

Plinii Nat. Ililt. lib. ii. c. 67. Fftus Avicnus apud

Bocliarc. (;eogr. Sacr. lib. i. c 6o. p. 6 2. Oper. vol. iii.
L. BLt. 1707.

]lcrrtlot. lib. iv. c. 42.
' Plinii Nat. Hilt. lib. ii. c. 67.

S o o greatest effort of navigation in the ancient world;

I. and if we attend to the imperfedt f(ate of the art

at that time, it is difficult to determine, whether
we should mot admire the courage and sagacity
with which the design was formed, or the conduct
and good fortune with which it was executed.
But unfortunately, all the original and authentic
accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages,
whether undertaken by public authority, or in
prosecution of their private trade, have perished
The information which we receive concerning them
from the Greek and Roman authors, is not only
obscure and inaccurate, but, if we except a fhoit
narrative of Hanno's expedition , is of suspicious
authority '. Whatever acquaintance with the
remote regions of the earth the Phenicians or
Carthaginians may have acquired, was concealed
from the reft of mankind with a mercantile
jealousy. Every thing relative to the course o
their navigation was not only a mystery of trade,
but a secret of state. Extraordinary fads are
recorded concerning their solicitude to prevent
other nations from penetrating into what they
wished hould remain undivulged ". Many of
their discoveries seem, accordingly, to have beau
scarcely known beyond the precints of their own
states. The navigation round Africa, in particular,
is recorded by the Greek and Roman writers,
rather as a strange amuting tale, which they did

See NOTE. II.
Strah. Geogr. lib. iii. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. 1 4..

ot comprehend, or did not believe, than as a B 0 d i
eal tranfadion, which enlarged their knowledge
nd influenced their opinion . As neither the
rogrefs of the Phenician or Carthaginian disco.
eries, nor the extent of their navigation, were
ommunicated to the reft of mankind, all memorials
f their extraordinary kill in naval affairs seem, in
great measure, to have perifled , when the
aritiine power of the former was annihilated by
lexander's conquest of Tyre, and the empire of
he latter was overturned by the Roman arms.

Leaving, then, the obscure and pompous fthle
ccounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voya- Geeks
es to the curiosity and conjecures of antiquaries,
iftory must reft satisfied with relating the progress
f navigation and discovery among the Greeks
ld Romans, which, though less splendid, is better
fcertained. It is evident that the Phenicians, who
nftructed the Greeks in many other useful sciences
nd arts, did not communicate to them that
xtenfive knowledge of navigation which they
iemfelves possessed; nor did the Romans imbibe
hat commercial spirit and ardor for discovery
hich distinguished their rivals the Carthaginials.
hough Greece be almost encompassed by the
ea, which formed many spacious bays and
commodious harbours, though it be surrounded
y a vast number of fertile islands, yet, notwith-
anding fuich a favorable situation, which fcemed
to invite that ingenious people to apply thrnfclves

' See NOTE III.

B o O R to navigation, it was long before this art attained

L any degree of perfection among them. Their early

voyages, the object of which was piracy rather
than commerce, were so inconsiderable, that the
expedition of the Argonauts from the coast of
Thessaly to the Euxine sea, appeared such an
amazing effort of Ikill and courage , as entitled
the conductors of it to be ranked among the
demigods, and exalted the vessel in which they
failed to a place among the heavenly constellations,
Even at a later period, when the Greeks engaged
in their famous enterprise againit Troy , their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have been
much improved. According to the account of
Homer, the only poet to whom history ventures
to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous accuracy
in describing the manners and arts of early ages,
merits this diftindion, the science of navigation,
at that time, had hardly advanced beyond its
rudest fiate., The Greeks in the heroic age seem
to have been unacquainted with the use of iron,
the most serviceable of all the metals, without
which no considerable progress was ever made in
the mechanical arts. Their vessels were of inconfi.
derable burden, and mostly without decks. These
had only one malt, which they erected or took
down at pleasure. They were firangers to the use
of anchors. All their operations in failing were
clumify and unskilful. They turned their obfcrvation
towards flars, which were improper for regulating
their courfc, and their mode of ohfcrving them
was inaccurate and fallacious. When they hl

nifhed a voyage they drew their paltry barks B o o K
lore, as savages do their canoes, and they I.
mained on dry land until the season of returning
sea approached. It is not then in the early or
croic ages of Greece, that we can expe to
bferve the science of navigation, and the spirit
f discovery, making any considerable progress.
uring that period of disorder and ignorance, a
houfand causes concurred in restraining curiosity
id enterprise within very narrow bounds.
But the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a state of
reater civilization and refinement. Government, in
ts most liberal and perfec form, began to be
Rtablifled in the communities of Greece ; equal
ws and regular police were gradually introduced;
he sciences and arts which are useful or ornamental
life were carried to a high pitch of improvement,
nd several of the Grecian commonwealths applied

commerce with such ardor and success, that
hey were confidered, in the ancient world, as
aritime powers of the first rank. Even then,
.nwever, the naval vicories of the Greeks must
e ascribed rather to the native spirit of the people,
nd to that courage which the enjoyment of liberty
nfpires, than to any extraordinary progress in the
cicnce of navigation. In the Persian war, those
xploits which the eloquence of the Greek historians
as rendered so famous, were performed by fleets,
ompofed chiefly of fnall velfels without decks"',
he crews of which ruflied forward with impetuous
alor, but little art, to board tliofe of the enemy.

IThucysd. lib. i. c. 14.

B o o K to navigation, it was long before this art attained

any degree of perfection among them. Their early
voyages, the object of which was piracy rather
than commerce, were so inconsiderable, that the
expedition of the Argonauts from the coast of
Thessaly to the Euxine sea, appeared such an
amazing effort of Ikill and courage, as entitled
the conductors of it to be ranked among the
demigods, and exalted the vessel in which they
failed to a place among the heavenly constellations.
Even at a later period, when the Greeks engaged
in their famous enterprise against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have been
much improved. According to the account of
Homer, the only poet to whom history ventures
to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous accuracy
in describing the manners and arts of early ages,
merits this diftindion, the science of navigation,
at that time, had hardly advanced beyond its
rudest state., The Greeks in the heroic age feern
to have been unacquainted with the use of iron,
the most serviceable of all the metals, without
which no considerable progress was ever made in
the mechanical arts. Their vessels were of inconfi-
derable burden, and moflly without decks. These
had only one malt, which they erected or took
down at pleasure. They were firangcrs to the uife
of anchors. All their operations in failing were
clumsy and unskilful. They turned their obfcrvation
towards liars, which were improper for regulating
their courfc, and their mode of ohfcrving them
was inaccurate and fallacious. When they hall

nihffed a voyage they drew their paltry barks B o K
shore , as savages do their canoes, and they I.
emained on dry land until the season of returning
o sea approached. It is not then in the early or
croic ages of Greece, that we can expe to
bferve the science of navigation, and the spirit
f discovery, making any considerable progress.
uring that period of disorder and ignorance, a
houfand causes concurred in restraining curiosity
ind enterprise within very narrow bounds.
But the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a tlate of
reater civilization and refinement. Government, in
ts mroft liberal and perfec form , began to be
ftablified in the communities of Greece ; equal
awvs and regular police were gradually introduced;
le sciences and arts which are useful or ornamental
i life were carried to a high pitch of improvement,
nrd several of the Grecian commonwealths applied
o commerce with such ardor and success, that
hey were confidered, in the ancient world, as
aritime powers of the first rank. Even then,
lowever, the naval victories of the Greeks muff
e ascribed rather to the native spirit of the people,
nd to that courage which the enjoyment of liberty
nfpires, than to any extraordinary progress in the
cicnce of navigation. In the Persian war, those
xploits which the eloquence of the Greek historians
las rendered so famous, were performed by fleets,
:ompofcd chiefly of finall vessels without decks ";
he crews of which ruflied forward with impetuous
;alor, but little art, to board those of the enemy.

' LThucy'd lib. i. c. 14.

o o iK In the war of Peloponnefus, their flips seem still to
I. have been of inconsiderable burthen and force. The

extent of their trade was in proportion to this low con.
dition of their marine. The maritime tates of Greect
hardly carried on any commerce beyond the limit
of the Mediterranean sea. Their chief intercour
was with the colonies of their countrymen, plante
in the lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They some
limes ifited the ports of Egypt, of Gaul, an
of Thrace, or passing through the Hellespont
they traded with the countries situated around th
Euxine sea. Amazing instances occur of thei
ignorance, even of those countries, which la
within the narrow precincts to which their navi
gation was confined. Wihen the Greeks had as
fembled their combined fleet against Xerxes a
Egina, they thought it unadvifable to fail
Samos, because they believed the distance betwee
that island and Egina to be as great as the diftanc
between Egina and the Pillars of Hercules"
They were either utterly unacquainted with a
the parts of the globe beyond the IMediterranean
tea, or what knowledge they had of them wa
founded on conjecture, or derived from the i
formation of a few persons, whom curiosity an
the love of science had prompted to travel b
land into the Upper Asia, or by sea into Egypt
the ancient feats of wisdom and arts. After al
that the Greeks learned from them, they appear t
have been ignorant of the most important fa&d

' Hcrodot. lib. viii . c. 2.

n which an accurate and scientific knowledge of B o o K
e globe is founded..
The expedition of Alexander the Great into
e east, considerably enlarged the sphere of
vigation and of geographical knowledge among,
e Greeks. That extraordinary man, notwith-
anding the violent paflions which incited him,
tfome times, to the wildest acions, and the
oft extravagant enterprises, possessed talents
hich fitted him not only to conquer, but to
overn the world. He was capable of framing
ofe bold and original schemes of policy, which
ve a new form to human affairs. The revolution
commerce, brought about by the force of his
enius, is hardly inferior to that revolution in
pire, occasioned by the success of his arms. It
probable, that the opposition and efforts of the
public of Tyre, which checked him so long in
e career of his victories, gave Alexander an
pportunity of observing the vast resources of a
aritime power, and conveyed to him some idea
f the immense wealth which the Tyrians derived
om their commerce, especially that with the
aft Indies. As soon as he had accomplifled the
eftiudion of Tyre, and reduced Egypt to fibjec-
on, he formed the plan of rendering the empire
hich he proposed to eftablilh, the centre of com-
erce as well as the feat of dominion. With this
icw he founded a great city, which he honored with
is own name, near one of the mouths of the
ver Nile, that by the Mediterranean sea, and the
eighbourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it might

VOL. I. C

&- o . i commnnan the trade both of the east and Weft"

I; 'This situation was chosen with such discernment,

that Alexandria soon became the chief commercial
city in the world. Not only during the fubfiftenc
of the Grecian empire in gypt and in the ealt
but anmidft all the successive revolutions in the
countries, from the time of the Ptolemies to th
discovery of the navigation by the Cape of Good
Hope, commerce, particularly that of the Ea
Indies, continued to flow in the channel which the
sagacity and foresight of Alexander had marked
out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having

opened to the Greeks a communication with
India by Tea; he aspired to the sovereignty o
those regions which furnished the reft of mankind
with so many precious commodities, and conduted
his army thither by land. Enterprising, however
as he was, he may be said rather to have viewed
than to have conquered that country. He did not,
in his progress towards the east, advance beyond
the banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus,

lwhich is now the western boundary of the val

continent of India. Amicdt the wild exploits which
diltinguilh this part of his history, he pursued
meafnrcs that mark the fperiority of his genius,
as well as the extent of his views. He had pene
tratcd as far into India as to confirm his opinion
of its commercial importance, and to pcrceive
that inimtene wealth might be derived from

. Str.,b. Gogr. lib. xvii. p. r143. 1149,

intercourfewithacountry, where the arts of elegance B o o K
having been more early cultivated, were arrived
at greater perfedion than in any other part of the
earth 1. Full of this idea, he resolved to examine
the course of navigation from the mouth of the
Indus to the bottom of the Perflan Gulf; and if
it flould be found practicable, to establish a re-
gular communication between them. In order to
effec this, he proposed to remove the catarads,
with which, the jealousy of the Persians, and
their aversion to correspondence with foreigners,
had obftruted the entrance into the Euphrates";
to carry the commodities of the east up that river,
and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the
interior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while, by
the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the river Nile,
they might be conveyed to Alexandria, and dif
tributed to the reft of the world. Nearchus, an
officer of eminent abilities, was intrusted with the
command of the fleet fitted out for this expedition.
He performed this voyage, which was deemed an
enterprise so arduous and important, that Alexander
reckoned it one of the molt extraordinary events
which diftinguilhed his reign. Inconsiderable as
it may now appear, it was, at that time, an
undertaking of no little merit and difficulty. In
the prosecution of it, striking instances occur of the
small progress which the Greeks had made in naval

1 Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. o36. Q. Curtius, lib,
xviii. c. 9.

7 Strab. Geogr. lib. xvi. p. 107 5.

C3

B o knowledge. " Having never failed beyond the

I. bounds of the MIediterranean, where the ebb and

flow of the ea are hardly perceptible, when they
first observed this phrcnomenon at the mouth of
the Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy, b
which the gods tetified the displeasure of Heaven
against their enterprise". During their whole
course they feemn never to have loft fight of land,
but followed the bearings of the coast so servilely
that they could not much avail themselves of
those periodical winds, which facilitate navigation
in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no
less than ten months' in performing this voyage,
which, from the mouth of the Indus to that of
the Persian Gulf, does not exceed twenty degrees,
It is probable, that amidst the violent convulsions,
and frequent revolutions in the East, occasioned
by the 'cntefts among the successors of Alexander,
the navigation to India, by the course which Near.
chus had opened, was discontinued. The Indian
trade carried on at Alexandria, not only subsisted,
but was so much extended under the Grecian
monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a great source
of the wealth which diltinguiled their kingdom.

oirie Ro. The progress which the Romans made in
i,.In. navigation and discovery, was still more incon-

fiderable than that of the Greeks. The genius
of the Roman people, their military education,
ind the spirit of their laws, concurred in efrang.

" See NOTE IV.
"See NO'TE. V. ' Plin, His. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23

g them from commerce and naval affairs. It B o o.
as the necessity of opposing a formidable rival, i.
ot the desire of extending trade, which first
ornpted them to aim at maritime power.
hough they soon perceived that, in order to.
quire the universal dominion after which they
pired, it was necessary to render themselves
aflers of the sea, they fill confidered the naval
rvice as a subordinate station, and reserved for
such citizens as were not of a rank to be
mitted into the legions t. In the history of
e Roman republic, hardly one event occurs,
at marks attention to navigation any farther
an as it was instrumental towards conquest.
hen the Roman valor and discipline had
bdued all the maritime flates known in the
cient world; when Carthage, Greece, and
gypt, hadfubmitted to their power, the Romans
d not imbibe the commercial spirit of the con-
uered nations. Among that people of soldiers,
have applied to trade would have been deem-
a degradation of a Roman citizen. They
andoned the mechanical arts, commerce, and.
avigation, to slaves, to freedmen, to provincials,
id to citizens of the owelt class. Even after
e subversion of liberty, when the severity and
uglhtinefs of ancient manners began to abate,
ommerce did not rife into high estimation among
ic Romans. The trade of Greece, Egypt, and
ic other conquered countries, continued to be,

' Polyb. ib. v.

c

B o o K carried on in its usual channels, after they wer

reduced into the form of Roman provinces. A!
Rome was the capital of the world, and the feai
of government, all the wealth and valuable pro
dudions of the provinces flowed naturally thither,
The Romans, satisfied with this, seem to have
suffered commerce to remain almofs entirely in
the hands of the natives of the rfpedive countries
The extent, however, of the Roman power,
which reached over the greatert part of the known
world, the vigilant infpedtion of the Roman
magistrates, and the spirit of the Roman govern.
ment, no less intelligent than active, gave such
additional security to commerce, as animated it
with new vigor. 'The union among nations was
never so entire, nor the intercourse so perfect
as within the bounds of this vast empire
Commerce, under the Roman dominion, was
not obftruted by the jealousy of rival states,
interrupted by frequent hostilities, or limited by
partial reflrictions. One fperintending power
moved and regulated the indufitry of mankind
and enjoyed, the fruits of their joint efforts.

Navigation felt this influence, and improved

under it. As soon as the Romans acquired a
taste for the luxuries of the lafl the trade with
India through Egypt was pufled with new vigor,
and carried on to greater extent. By frequenting
the Indian continent, navigators became acquainted
with the periodical courfc of the winds, which,
in the ocean that fcparatcs Africa from India,

low with little variation during one half of the B o o
ear from the east, and during the other half blow I.
ith equal steadiness from the weft. Encouraged
y observing thls, they abandoned their ancient
ow and dangerous course along the coast, and
s soon as the wveftcrn monsoon set in, took their
eparture from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Ara
ian Gulf, and firetched bold!y across the ocean.
he uniform diredcion of the wind, supplying the
lace of the compass, and rendering the guidance
f the stars less necessary, conducted them to the
ort of Mufiris, on the western flore of the Indian
continent. There they took on board their cargo,
and returning with the eaftcrn monsoon, finished
their voyage to the Arabian Gulf within the year.
This part of India, now known by the name of
the Malabar coast, seems to have been the ut-
most limit of ancient navigation in that quarter
of the globe. What imperfet knowledge the
ancients had of the immcnfe countries which
firetch beyond this towards the east, they re-
ceived from a few adventurers, who had visitcd
them by land. Such excursions were neither fre-
quent nor extensive, and it is probable, that while
the Roman intercourse with India fublfiftcd, no
traveller ever penetrated farther than to the banks
of the Ganges '. The fleets from l'gypt which
traded at Nlufiris were loaded, it is true, with,

' Plin. THilt. Nat. lib. vi. c. 21.
: Strab. (;cgr. lib. xv. p. 1oo6. oIo.See NOTE. Vs

C4

B o K the spices and other rich commodities of the conti.

I, nent and islands of the farther India; but these

were brought to that port, which became the
flaple of this commerce, by the Indians themfel.
ves, in canoes hollowed out of one tree ". The
Egyptian and Roman merchants, satisfied with
acquiring those commodities in this manner, did
not think it necessary to explore unknown seas,
and venture upon a dangerous navigation, in quest
of the countries which produced them. But though
the discoveries of the Romans in India were so
limited, their commerce there was such as will
appear considerable, even to the present age,
in which the Indian trade has been extended far
beyond the practice or conception of any pre.
ceding period. We are informed by one author
of credit ', that the commerce with India drained
the Roman empire every year of more than four
hundred thousand pounds; and by another, that
one hundred and twenty ships failed annually
from the Arabian Gulf to that country .

nirceveries The discovery of this new method of failing
ofthe an- to India, is the most considerable improvement in
cients by
laid. navigation made .during the continuance of the

Roman power. But in ancient times, the know.
ledge of remote countries was acquired more fre.
quently by land than by ea ; and the Romans,
from their peculiar disinclination to naval affairs,

Plin. Nat. lift. lib. vi. c. 26.

' Plin. Nat Hist. lib. vi. c. 6.
' Striib. (cogr. lib. ii. p. 179.
7 See NOTE. VII.

may be said to have negleded totally the latter, B 0 0. 1
though a more easy and expeditious method of disco- I.
very. The progress, however, of their victorious
armies through a considerable portion of Europe,
Asia, and Africa, contributed greatly to extend
discovery by land, and gradually opened the na-
vigation of new and unknown seas. Previous to
the Roman conquests, the civilized nations of an-
tiquity had little communication with those coun-
tries in Europe, which now form its most opulent
and powerful kingdoms. The interior parts of Spain
and Gaul were imperfectly known. Britain, fepa-
rated from the reft of the world, had never been
visited, except by its neighbours the Gauls, and
by a few Carthaginian merchants. The name of
Germany had carcely been heard of. Into all
these countries the arms of the Romans penetrated.
'hey entirely subdued Spain and Gaul; they con-
quered the greatest and most fertile part of Britain;
they advanced into Germany, as far as the banks
of the river Elbe. In Africa, they acquired a con-
fiderable knowledge of the provinces, which
firetch along the Mediterranean sea, from Egypt
westward to the straits of Gades. In Asia, they
not only fubjeded to their power molt of the
provinces which composed the Persian and Mace-
donian empires , but, after their victorics over
Mithridates and Tigranes, they seem to have made
a more accurate survey of the countries conti-
guous to the Euxine and Caspian eas, and to
havc carried on a more extensive trade than that
of the Greeks with the opulent and commercial
lations, then featcd around the Euxine sea.

B o o K From this fuccind survey of discovery and

1. navigation, which I have traced from the earliefl

Imperfeai. dawn of hitlorical knowledge to the full establish.
onof geo. ment of the Roman dominion, their progress ap.
graphical
knowledge pears to have been wonderfully flow. It seems
amngnthe neither adequate to what we might have expeed
ancients.

from the activity and enterprise of the human
mind, nor to what might have been performed
by the power of the great empires which fucce
fively governed the world. If we reject accounts
that are fabulous and obscure; if we adhere flea.
dily to the light and information of authentic
hiffory, without fuhflituting in its place the con.
jectures of fancy, or the dreams of etymologists,
we must conclude, that the knowledge which the
ancients had acquired of the habitable globe was
extremely confined. In Europe, the cxtenfive pro.
vinces in the eastern part of Germany were little
known to them. They were almost totally unac.
quainted with the va(t countries which are now
subject to the kings of Denmark, Sweden, Prussia,
Poland , and the I'uflian empire. The more barren
regions, that ftrctch within the arctic circle, were
quite unexplored. In Africa, their researches did not
extend far beyond the provinces which border
on the Mlcditcrranean, and those situated on the
western fore of the Arabian Gils. In Afla, they
were uinacqluiilte , as 1 formerly observed, with
all the feIctile and opulent countries beyond the
Gan.ges , whichl frnilli tie rnoll valuable commo-
(ditics that, in modern times, halve been the great
objet of the European commernce with India; nor

do they seem to have ever penetrated into those B o o K
imnmenfe regions occupied by the wandering tribes, I.
which they called by the general name of Sarma.
tians or Scythians, and now pofelfed by Tartars
of various denominations, and by the Asiatic sub-
jeds of Russia.

But there is one opinion, that universally pre- A remark-

vailed among the ancients, which conveys a more able pof'
firiking idea of the small progress they had made
in the knowledge of the habitable globe, than can
be derived from any detail of their discoveries.
They supposed the earth to be divided into five
regions, which they distinguished by the name
of zones. Two of these, which were nearest the
Poles, they termed frigid zones, and believed that
the extreme cold which reigned perpetually there,
rendered them uninhabitable. Another, feated un-
der the line, and extending on either fide towards
the tropics, they called the torrid zone, and
imagined it to be so burnt p with unremitting
heat, as to be equally deflitute of inhabitants. On
the two other zones, which occupied the remain-
der of the earth, they beflowed the appellation
of temperate, and taught that these, being the
only regions in which life could subsist, were
allotted to man for his habitation. This wild opi-
nion was not a conceit of the uninformed vulgar,
or a fanciful fiction of the poets, but a syster
adopted by the most enlightened philosophers,
the most accurate historians and geographers in.
Greece and Rome. According to this theory, a
vast portion of the habitable earth was pronounced

B o o I to be unfit for sustaining the human species. Those

i. fertile and populous regions within the torrid zone,

which are now known not only to yield their
own inhabitants the necefTaries and comforts of
life, with most luxuriant profusion, but to com.
municate their superfluous flores to the reft of the
world, were supposed to be the mansion of per.
petual sterility and desolation. As all the parts of
the globe, which the ancients had discovered, lay
within the northern temperate zone, their opinion
that the other temperate zone was filled with inha.
bitants, was founded on reasoning and copjedure,
not on discovery. They even believed that, by
the intolerable heat of the torrid zone, such an
insuperable barrier was placed between the two
temperate regions of the earth, as would prevent
for ever any intercourse between their refpedive
inhabitants. Thus this extravagant theory not only
proves that the ancients were unacquainted with
the true state of the globe, but it tended to render
their ignorance perpetual, by representing all
attempts towards opening a communication with
the remote regions of the earth, as utterly imprac.
ticable 28

But, however imperfect or inaccurate the geo-

graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Romans
had acquired may appear, in refpct of the present
improved fl.te of that fcicncc, their progress in
discovery will seem confidcrable, and the extent
to which they carried navigation and commerce

" See NOTE. VIII.

must be reckoned great, when compared with the o o
ignorance of early times. As long as the Roman t.
empire retained such vigor as to preserve its autho-
rity over the conquered nations, and to keep them
united, it was an objed of public police, as well
s of private curiosity, to examine and describe
the countries which composed this great body. Even
when the other sciences began to decline, geo-
graphy, enriched with new observations, and re-
ceiving some acceflion from the experience of every
age, and the reports of every traveller, continued
to improve. It attained to the highest point of per-
ection and accuracy to which it ever arrived in the
ncient world, by the industry and genius of Pto- Improve.
lemy the philosopher. He flourihled in the second me"tsi"

geography

century of the Christian era, and published a de- by Ptolemy.
ription of the terretfrial globe, more ample and
exad than that of any of his predecessors.

But, soon after, violent convulsions began to Theinva.
lake the Roman ate; the fatal ambition or ca- lon ofthe

Roman em.

rice of Constantine, by changing the feat of go- pire by bar
vernment, divided and weakened its force; the barousna-
barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as tions.
instruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the
Roman power, began to assemble and to muster
their armies on its frontier; the empire tottered to
its fall. During this decline and old age of the
Roman ate, it was impossible that the sciences
flould go on improving. The efforts of genius
were, at that period, as languid and feeble as those,
of government. From the time of Ptolemy, no
considerable addition seems to have beeni made to

B o o K geographical knowledge, nor did any important

r. revolution happen in trade, excepting that Con.

ftantinople, by its advantageous situation, and the
encouragement of the eastern emperors, becamea
commercial city of the first note.

Efreas of At length, the clouds which had been so long
their con.
que.tfon gathering round the Roman empire, burst into
titninercial storm. Barbarous nations ruffed in from fevera
intercoure. quarters with irresistible impetuosity, arid, in th

general wreck, occasioned by the inundation
which overwhelmed Europe, the arts, sciences
inventions and discoveries of the Romans, perished
in a great measure, and disappearcd '. All the
various tribes, which fettled in the different pro.
vinces of the Roman empire, were uncivilized,
firangers to letters, destitute of arts, unacquainted
-with regular government, subordination, or laws.
The manners and institutions of some of them were
so rude, as to be hardly compatible with a fate of
social union. Europe, when occupied by such in.
habitants, may be said to have returned to a second
infancy, and had to begin anew its career in i-
provement, fciencc, and civility. The firit effect
of the settlement of those barbarous invaders was
to dissolve the union by which the Roman power
had cemented mankind together. They parcelled
out Europe into many small and independent states,
differing from each other in language and customs.
No intercourse subsisted between the members of
those divided and hostile communities. Accuflonied

" Hilt. of Clarlos V. vol. i. p. . 73.

0 a simple mode of life, and averse to in- B o o -
ultry, they had few wants to supply, and few I.
uperfuities to dispose of. The names of firanger
nd of enemy became once more words of the fame
mport. Cufloms every where prevailed, and even
aws were established, which rendered it disagree-
ble and dangerous to visit any foreign country ".
ities, in which alone an extensive commerce can
e carried on, were few, inconsiderable, and
eftitute of those immunities which produce fecu-
ity or excite enterprise. The sciences, on which
eography and navigation are founded, were little
ultivated. The accounts of ancient improvements
nd discoveries, contained in the Greek and Roman
uthors, were neglected or misunderstood. The
nowledge of remote regions was loft, their fitua-
ion, their commodities, and almost their names,
ere unknown.
One circurnfltance prevented commercial interi Commerce
course with distant nations from ceasing altogether. fill e.
Constantinople, though often threatened by the theEafter
ierce invaders, who spread desolation over the reft empire,
of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their
dePtrudive rage. In that city, the knowledge of
ancient arts and discoveries was preserved; a taste
for splendor and elegance subsisted; the produc.
tions and luxuries of foreign countries were in
request; and commerce continued to flourinf there
when it was almost extind in every other part of
Europe. The citizens of Conflantinople did not.
confine their trade to the islands of the ArchipoQ

' Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 77. 327.

B-o o i: lago, or to the adjacent coafis of Asia; they took

I, a wider range, and following the course which

the ancients had marked out, imported the com.
modities of the East Indies from Alexandria. Whenl
Egypt was torn from the Roman empire by the
Arabians, the induRtry of the Greeks discovered a
new channel, by which the produdions of India
might be conveyed to Constantinople. They were
carried up the Indus, as far as that great river is
navigable; thence they were transported by land
to the banks of the river Oxus, and proceeded
down its stream to the Caspian sea. here they
entered the Volga, and failing up it, were carried
by land to the Tanais, which condudted them into
the Euxine sea, where vessels from Constantinople
waited their arrival . This extraordinary and
tedious mode of conveyance merits attention, not
only as a proof of the violent passion which the
inhabitants of Constantinople had conceived for the
luxuries of the east, and as a specimen of the ar.
dor and ingenuity with which they carried on
commerce; but because it demonstrates, that,
during the ignorance which reigned in the reft of
Europe, an extensive knowledge of remote coun-
tries was fill preserved in the capital of the Greek
empire.

and among At the fme time, a gleam of light and know-
the Arabio ledge broke in upon the east. The Arabians having
ans. contracted some relish for the sciences of the peo-

ple whose empire they had contributed to over-

'1 Ramnufo , vol. i p. 372, F.

turn

turn, translated the books of several of the Greek B o o K
philosophers into their own language. One of the I,
frft was that valuable work of Ptolemy, which
ave already mentioned. The study of geography
ecame, of consequence, an early object of. atten-
ion to the Arabians. But that acute and ingenious
cople cultivated chiefly the speculative and fcien-
ific parts of geography. In order to afcertain..tihe
igure and dimensions of the terrestrial globe, they
pplied the principles of geometry, they had re-
course to astronomical observations, they employed
xperiments and operations , which Europe, in
nore enlightened times, has been proud to adopt
nd to imitate. At that period, however, the
ame of the improvements made by the Arabians
id not reach Europe. The knowledge of their
ifcoveries was reserved for ages capable of com-
rehending and of perfecing them.

By degrees, the calamities and desolation Revival or
rought upon the weflern provinces of the Roman commerce
empire by its barbarous conquerors, were forgot- atid navig-

tion in Eu.

ten, and in some measure repaired. The rude tri- rope.
bes which fettled there, acquiring insensibly ome
idea of regular government, and some relish for
the flunions and comforts of civil life, Europe
began to awake from its torpid and unadive state.
The first ymptoms of revival were discerned in
Italy. The northern tribes which took poffcfsion
of this country, made progress in improvement
with greater rapidity than the people fettled in
other parts of Europe. Various caules, which it
is not the object of this work to enumerate or

VOL. 1. D

u o o i explain , concurred iii resoring liberty and inde;

I. pendence to the cities of Italy ". The acquifitior

of these roused industry , and gave motion anc
vigor to all the active powers of the human mind
Foreign commerce revived, navigation was attend
ed to and improved. Conftantiniople became thl
chief mart to which the Italians resorted. Therf
they not only met with a favorable reception, bu
robtained such mercantile privileges as enabled then
to carry on trade with great dvantage. The)
were supplied both with the precious commoditice
of the east, and with miny curious manufadures
the produd of ancient arts and ingenuity whid
itill ftuibfted among the Greeks. As the labor an
expense of conveying the productions of India t(
Constantinople by that long and indiredt courf
which I have defcribedl, rendered them extremel
rare, and of an exorbitant price, the industry o
the Italians discovered other methods of procurinl
them in greater abundance, and at an easier rate
They sometimes purchased them in Aleppo, Tri
poli, and other ports on the coast of Syria, ti
vwhich they were brought by a route not unknows
to the ancients. They were conveyed from Indi
by sea, up the erfian Gulf, and ascending th
lutphlratcs and Tigris, as far as Bagd(at, were ca
ried by land across the Desert to Palmyra, an
from thence to the towns on the Mcditerranear
But from the length of the journey, and the da
gers to which the caravans were cxpofcd, tl

' Ilil. of Charles V. . p. 33.

proved always a tedious, and often a precarious o o I
mode of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of
Egypt, having renewed the commerce with India
in its ancient channel, by the Arabian Gulf, the
Italian merchants, notwithstanding the violent an-
tipathy to each other with which Christians and
the followers of Mahomet were then possessed, re.
paired to Alexandria, and enduring, from the love
of gain, the insolence and exactions of the Maho-
metans, established a lucrative trade in that port.
From that period, the commercial. spirit of Italy
became active and enteiprifing. Venice, Genoa,
Pisa, rose from inconsiderable towns, to be popu-
lous and wealthy cities. Their naval power in-
creased; their vessels frequented not only all the
ports in the Mediterranean:, but venturing:fome-
times beyond the Straits, visited the mrnritime
towns of Spain, France, the Low Countries, and
England; and, by distributing their commodities
over Europe, began to communicate to itsvarious
nations some taste for the valuable produdions of
the east , as well as some ideas of maiufadures
and arts, which were then unknown beyond the
precincts of Italy.

While'the cities of Italy were thus dvancing Their pro.

in their career of improvement, an event happened gres fa-
the moR extraordinary perhaps in the history of toreltY
mankind, which, instead of retarding the commer- fades,
cial progress of the Italians, rendered it, more
rapid. The martial spirit of the Europeans,
heightened and inflamed by religious zeal, prompted
them to attempt the deliverance of the4-olyLand

D 2

o o K from the dominion of infidels. Vast armies, corn.
I. pored of all the nations in Europe, marched to.

wards Asia, upon this wild enterprise. 'lhe Genoese,
the Pifans, and Venetians furnished the transports
which carried them thither. They supplied them
with provisions and military flores. Beside the
immense fums which they received on this ac.
count , they obtained commercial privileges
and establishments, of great consequence in the
settlements which the Crusaders made in Pa.
teltine , and in other provinces of Asia. From
those sources, prodigious wealth flowed into
the cities which I have mentioned. This was ac-
companied with a proportional increase of power,
and by the end of the Holy War, Venice, in par.
ticular, became a great maritime state, possessing
an extensive commerce , and ample territories .
Italy. was not the only.country in which the Cru-
fades contributed to revive and diffuse such a fpi.
rit as prepared Europe for future discoveries. By
their expeditions into Asia, the other European
nations became well acquainted with remote re-
gions, which formerly they knew only by name,,
or by the reports of ignorant and credulous pil-
grims. They had an opportunity of observing the
manners, the arts, and the accommodations of
people more polished than themselves. This in-
tercourfe between the east and weft subsisted almot
two centuries. The adventurers , who returned
from Asia, communicated to their countrymen the

'f Effai de 1'Hiltolre du Commerce de Venife, p. 2 , &c.

ideas which they had acquired, and the habits of B o o t
life they had contracted by visiting more refined re
nations. The Europeans began to be sensible of
wants with which they were formerly unacquaint-
ed; new desires were excited ; and such a taste
for the commodities and arts of other countries
gradually spread among them , that they not only
encouraged the resort of foreigners to their har-
bours, but began to perceive the advantage and
necessity of applying to commerce themselves +.

This communication, which was opened between bythe di.
Europe and the western provinces of Asia, encou- travelicfa
raged several persons to advance far beyond the land.
countries in which the Crusaders carried on their
operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild
fanaticism , which seems at that period to have
mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less
than in all the counsels of nations, first incited men
to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken from
profpeds of commercial advantage, or from mo-
tives of mere curiorfiy. Benjamin, a Jew of Tu-
dela, in the kingdom. of Navarre, possessed with
a superstitious veneration for the law of MIAofes,
and solicitous to visit his countrymen in the eafi,
whom he hoped to find in such a state of power
and opulence as might redound to the honor of
his fed, set out from Spain in the year ri6o, and
travelling by land to Coflatitinople , proceeded

"l ift. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 25, &c.

1) 3

o o K through the countries to the north of the Euxine
&b and Caspian seas, as far as ChinefeTartary. From

thence he took his route towards the south, and
after traversing various provinces of the farther
India, he embarked on the Indian ocean , visited
several of its ilands, and returned at the end of
thirteen years, by the way of Egypt, to Europe,
with much information concerning a large diftri8
of the globe, altogether unknown at that time to
the western world ". The zeal of the head of the
Christian church co-operated with the superstition
of Benjamin the Jew, in discovering the interior
and remote provinces of Asia. All Christendom
having been alarmed with accounts of the rapid
progress of the Tartar arms under Zengis Chan,
Innocent IV. who entertained most exalted ideas
concerning the plenitude of his own power, and
the submission due to his injunctions , sent father
John de Piano Carpini, at the head of a mission of
Franciscan monks, and father Afcolino , at the
head of another of Dominicans , to exhort Kayuk
Chan, the grandson of Zengis, who was then at
the head of the Tartar empire, to embrace the
Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the
earth by his arms. The haughty defccndant of the
greatest conqueror Asia had ever beheld, aftonifled
at this strange mandate from an Italian priest,
whose name and jurifdidion were alike unknown
to him, received it with the contempt which it
merited, though he dismissed the mendicants who

" lergeron Recueil des Voyages, &c. tom. i. p. .

delivered it with impunity. But as they had pene- B '0 o K
trated into the country by different routes , and I.
followed for some time the Tartar camps, which 45.
were always in motion, they had an opportunity
of visiting a great part of Asia. Carpini, who pro-
ceeded by the way of Poland an'dRuffia, travelled
through its northern provinces as far as the extre-
mities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have
landed somewhere in Syria, advanced through
its southern provinces, into the interior parts of
Persia "

Not long after, St. Louis of France contributed 1253.
farther towards extending the knowledge which
the Europeans had begun to acquire of those
diltant regions. Some designing impostor, who
took advantage of the slender acquaintance of
Christendom with the state and characer of the
Asiatic nations, having informed him that a pow-
erful Chan of the Tartars had embraced the
Christian faith, the monarch liftcned to the tale
with pious credulity, and inffantly resolved to
fend ambassadors to this illustrious convert, with
a view of inciting him to attack their common
enemy the Saracens in one quarter, while he fell
upon them in another. As monks were the only
pcrfons in that age who pofleffed such a degree of
knowledge as qualified them for a service of this
kind, he employed in it father An(drew, a Jaco,
bine, who was followed by father William de
Rubruquis, a Franciscan. \With respect to the

36 Ialiluyt, i. z i. Bergeron, tom. i.

D4

B o o Is progress of the former, there is no memorial ex.

. tant. The journal of the latter has been published.

He was admitted into the presence of Mangu, the
third Chan in succession from Zengis, and made a
circuit through the interior parts of Aria, more
extensive than that of any European who had
hitherto explored them "

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent

forth to vifitAfia, succeeded others who ventured
into remote countries, from the profped of comr
mercial advantage, or from motives of mere cu.
riofity. The first and most eminent of there was
}O . Vlarco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Having

engaged early in trade , according to the custom
of his country, his aspiring mind wished for a
sphere of ativity more extensive than was afforded
to it by the established traffic carried on in those
ports of Europe and Asia, which the Venetians
frequented. This prompted him to travel into
unknown countries, in expedtation of opening
with them a commercial intercourse, more suited
to the sanguine ideas and hopes of a young ad.
venturer.

As his father had already carried some European

commodities to the court of the great Chan of the
Tartars, and had disposed of them to advantage,
he resorted thither. Under the protection of Ku-
blay Chan, the mofl powerful of all the successors
of Zengis, he continued his mercantile peregrina-
tions in Asia upwards of twenty-fix years; and

" Hikl. i. 71. Rcucil d oyages par Bergeron , ton. i.

uring that time advanced towards the eaRs, far Bn o
eyond the utmot boundaries to which any Eu- I.
opean traveller had ever proceeded. Instead of
flowing the course of Carpini and Rubruquis,
long the vast unpeopled plains of Tartary, he
assed through the chief trading cities in the more
ultivated parts of Asia, and penetrated to Cam-
alu, or Peking, the capital of the great kingdom
f Cathay , or China, subjeA at that time to the
cceffors of Zengis. He made more than one
oyage on the Indian ocean , he traded in many
f the islands, from which Europe had long re-
eived fpiceries and other commodities, which it
eld in hijh estimation, though unacquainted with
he particular countries to which it was indebted
or those precious productions; and he obtained
formation concerning several countries, which
e did not visit in person, particularly the island
ipangri, probably the fame now known by the
ame of Japan ". On his return, he aflonifhed
is contemporaries with his descriptions of vast
egons, whose names had never been heard of

Europe, and with such pompous accounts of
eir fertility, their populousness, their opulence,
e variety of their manufactures, and the extent
f their trade, as rose far above the conception of
m uninformed age.
About half a century after Marco Polo, Sir 312'
lohn Mndeville, an Engliflman, encouraged by
is example, visited most of the countries in the

3 Viaggi di Marco Polo. RamuC. ii. z. Bergeron,
ill. ii.

o o c east which he had described, and, like him,

published an account of them . The narrations
of those early travellers abound with many wil1
incoherent tales, concerning giants, enchanters
and monflers. But they were not, from that cir
cumftance, les acceptable to an ignorant age
which delighted in what was marvellous. Th
wonders which they told, rnoftly on hearsay, fille
the multitude with admiration. The fads whic
they related from their own observation, attrade
the attention of the more discerning. The former
which may be confidered as the popular tradition
and fables of the countries through which the
had passed, were gradually disregarded as Europ
advanced in knowledge. The latter, howeve
incredible some of them may have appearedi
their own time, have been confirmed by the o
servations of modern travellers. By means o
both, however, the curiosity of mankind a
excited with refped to the remote parts of th
earth, their ideas were enlarged, and they were
not only insensibly disposed to attempt new dif
coveries, but received such information as diredte
to that particular course in which these were after,
wards carried on.

and by the While this spirit was gradually forming in
invention of Europe, a fortunate discovery was made, which
the marTners' * 1

e'
coupas. contributed more than all the efforts and ingenuity

of preceding ages, to improve and to extend
navigation. That wonderful property of the

" Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandeville.

agnet, by which it communicates such virtue to B o o r
needle or slender rod of iron, as to point to-
ards the poles of the earth, was observed. The
ewhich might be made of this in directing na-
gation was immediately perceived. That most
luable, but now familiar instrument, the mariners'
mpafs, was formed. When, by means of it,
ivigators found that at all seasons, and in every
ace, they could discover the north and south
ith so much ease and accuracy, it became no
nger necessary to depend merely on the light of
e stars and the observation of the sea-coast.
hey gradually abandoned their ancient timid and
ngering course along the hore, ventured boldly
to the ocean, and relying on this new guide,
uld steer in the darkest night, and under the
oft cloudy sky, with a security and precision
itherto unknown. The compass may be said to
ave opened to man the dominion of the sea,
nd to have put him in full possession of the earth,
y enabling him to visit every part of it. Flavio
ioia, a citizen of Amalfi, a town of considerable
rade in the kingdom of Naples, was the author
f this great discovery, about the year one thou-
nd three hundred and two. It hath been often
he fate of those illustrious benefacors of mankind,
vho have enriched science and improved the arts
y their inventions, to derive more reputation
han benefit from the happy efforts of their genius.
ut the lot of Gioia has been still more cruel;
hrough the inattention or ignorance of contem-
orary hiflorians, he has been defrauded even of

B o o i the fame to which he had such a 'just title. 1

I. receive from them no information with refpet

his profeflion, his character, the precise time whe
he made this important discovery, or the acciden
and inquiries which led to it. The knowledge
this event, though productive of greater effeS
than any recorded in the annals of the huma
race, is tranfnitted to us without any of thol
circumstances, which can gratify the curiosity th
it naturally awakens0. But though the use
the compass might enable the Italians to perfor
the short voyages to which they were accustomed
with greater security and expedition, its influenc
was not so sudden or extensive, as immediatel
to render navigation adventurous, and to excit
a spirit of discovery. Many causes combined i
preventing this beneficial invention from producin
its full effect instantaneously. IAen relinquish ancie
habits slowly, and with relucance. They ar
averse to new experiments, and venture upoi
them with timidity. The commercial jealousy o
the Italians, it is probable, labored to conceal ti
happy discovery of their countryman from othl
nations. The art of steering by the compass
with such skill and accuracy as to inspire a fu
confidence in its diredion, was acquired graduall)
Sailors, unaccustomed to quit fight of land , durl
not launch out at once and commit themselves t
unknown seas. Accordingly , near half a centur

'* Collinas & Trombellus de Acus nautica Inventore
Infit. Acad. Bonon. tom. ii. part iii. . 72.

apfed, from the time of Gioia's discovery, before B o o K
vigators ventured into any seas which they had I.
t been accustomed to frequent.
The first appearance of a bolder spirit may be Some ap.
ted from the voyages of the Spaniards to the pearanc of
anary or Fortunate flands. By what accident fpiritin
ey were led to the discovery of those small isles, navigation
hich lie near five hundred miles from the Spanish
aft, and above a hundred and fifty miles from
e coast of Africa, contemporary writers have
t explained. But about the middle of the four-
enth century, the people of all the different king-
rts into which Spain was then divided, were
customed to make piratical excursions thither, in
der to plunder the inhabitants, or to carry them
as slaves. Clement VI. in virtue of the right
aimed by the holy fee to dispose of all countries
ffeffed by infidels, erected those isles into a
ingdom, in the year one thousand three hundred
d forty-four, and conferred it on Lewis de la
erda, descended from the royal family of Castile.
ut that unfortunate prince, destitute of power to
ert his nominal title, having never visited the
anaries, John de Bethencourt, a Norman baron,
btained a grant of them from Henry III. of
atile4". Bethencourt, with the valor and good
rtune which diftinguifled the adventurers of his
ountry, attempted and effected the conquest, and
e possession of the Canaries remained for some

Viera y Clavijo Notic. de la Hifior. de Canaria, .
68, &c. Glas IHift. c. x.

C o o IK time in his family, as a fief held of the crown

I. Cafiilc. Previous to this expedition of Bethencou
l36g. his countrymen fettled in Normandy are said

have visited the coast of Africa, and to have p
ceeded far to the south of the Canary islands. B
their voyages thither seem not to have been und
taken in consequence of any public or regul
plan for extending navigation and attempting ne
difcovcries. They were either excursions fuggefi
by that roving piratical spirit, which descended
the Normans from their anceflors, or the co
mercial enterprises of private merchants, whi
attraced so little notice, that hardly any memoi
of them. is to be found in contemporary autho
In a general survey of the progrefs'of discover
it is sufficient to have mentioned this event; an
leaving it among those of dubious existence,
of small importance, we may conclude, th
though much additional information concernin
the remote regions of the East had been receive
by travellers who visited them by land, navigatio
at the beginning of the fifteenth century, had n
advanced beyond the t(ate to which it had attaine
before the downfal of the Roman empire.

Fir regular At length the period arrived, when Providen
ri,1 ofdif. decreed that men were to pars the limits withi
covery,

owhich they had been so long confined, and ope
to themselves a more ample icldl wherein to difpll
their talents, their enterprise , and courage. TIl
first considerable efforts towards this were nl
made by any of the more powerful fatnes
Emlopc, or by those who had applied to navigatio

vith the greatelt assiduity and success. The glory B o o t
f leading the way in this new career was reserved I.
or Portugal, one of the smallest and least power- formed by

the Portu.

ul of the European kingdoms. As the attempts gueret"
f the Portuguese to acquire the knowledge of
hose parts of the globe with which mankind were
hlen unacquainted, not only improved and ex-
ended the art of navigation, but roused such a
pirit of curioity and enterprise, as led to the
discovery of the New World, of which I propose
to write the history, it is necessary to take a viewV
of the rife, the progrers, and success of their
various naval operations. It was' in this school
that the discoverer of America was trained; and
unless we trace the steps by which his inftruCors
and guides advanced, it will be impossible to com.
prehend the circumstances which suggested the
idea, or facilitated the execution of his great
design.

Various circumstances prompted the Portuguese circumfhn.
to exert their activity in this new diredion, and ceswhich
enabled them to accomplish undertakings apparently ledtothis.
superior to the natural force of their monarchy.
The kings of Portugal, having driven the Moors
out of their dominions, had acquired power, as
well as glory, by the success of their arms ag.ainst
the infidels. By their vicories over them, they
had cxtended the royal authority beyond the nar-
row limits within which it was originally cir-
cumfcribcd in Portugal , as well as in other feudal
kingdoms. They had the command of the national
force, could rouse it to ad with united vigor,

o o and, after the expulsion of the Moors, could ern.
I. ploy it without dread of interruption from any

domestic enemy. By the perpetual hostilities car
ried on forfeveral centuries against the Mahometans,
the martial and adventurous spirit which diflin.
guifhed all the European nations during the midd
ages , was improved and heightened among th
Portuguese. A fierce civil war towards the clo
of the fourteenth century, occasioned by a di
puted fucccflion, augmented the military ardor o
the nation, and formed or called forth men o
such aive and daring genius, as are fit for bold
undertakings. The situation of the kingdor,
bounded on every fide by the dominions of
more powerful neighbour, did not afford fre
scope to the activity of the Portuguese by land
as the strength of their monarchy was no mat
for that of Castile. But Portugal was a maritime
slate, in which there were many commodious
harbours; the people had begun to make fore
progress in the knowledge and practice of naviga
tion; and the sea was open to them, presenting
the only field of enterprise in which they could
distinguish themselves.

rirlt at- Such was the slate of Portugal, and such the
tn"ipt. disposition of the people, when John I. surnamed

the Bastard, obtained secure poffefion of the
crown by the peace concluded with Castile in the
year one thousand four hundred and eleven. He
wvas a prince of great merit, who, by fuperiol
courage and abilities, had opened his way to
throne which of right did not belong to him. HIe

instantly

n[tnntly perceived that it would be impossible to B o o
reserve public order, or domestic tranquillity, I.
ithout finding foine employment for the restless
irit of his fibjedts. With this view, he assembled
numerous fleet at Lisbon, composed of all the
ips that he could fit out in his own kingdom,
nd of many hired from foreigners. This great
rmament was deflined to attack the Moors fettled
n the coast of Barbary. While it was equipping,
few vessels were appointed to fail along the
eftern shore of Africa bounded by the Atlantic
cean, and to discover the unknown countries
tuated there. From this inconsiderable attempt,
e may date the commencement of that spirit of
ifcovery which opened the barriers that had so
ng fliut out mankind from the knowledge of one
als of the terrestrial globe.
At the time when John sent forth these ships
n this new voyage, the art of navigation was
ill very imperfect. Though Africa lay so near

Portugal, and the fertility of the countries
ready known on that continent invited men to
plore it more fully, the Portuguese had'never
entrred to fail beyond Cape Non. That pro-
ontory, as its name imports, was hitherto con-
dcred as a boundary which could not be passed.
ut the nations of Europe had now acquired as
inch knowledge, as emboldened them to disregard
ce prejudices and to corret the errors of their
iccftors. The long reign of ignorance, the constant
inmy of every curious inquiry, and of every new
ilctalking, was approaching to its period. The

VOL . I.

B O O K light of science began to dawn. The works of tht

I. ancient Greeks and Romans began to be read wit

admiration and profit. The sciences cultivated b
the Arabians were introduced into Europe by tb
Moors fettled in Spain and Portugal, and by ti
Jews , who were very numerous in both the
kingdoms. Geometry, aflronomy, and geography
the sciences on which the art of navigation
founded, became objets of studious attention
The memory of the discoverics made by tb
ancients was revived, and the progress of thei
navigation and commerce began to be traced. Sont
of the causes which have obftruded the cultiv
tion of science in Portugal, during this centur
and the last, did not exill, or did not operate i
the fame manner, in the fifteenth century , an
the Portuguese , at that period, seem to have ke
pace with other nations on this fide of the Alpi
in literary pursuits.
Itsracccs. As the genius of the age favored the executio

of that new undertaking, to which the peculiai
state of the country invited the Portuguese, i
proved successful. The vessels sent on the di
covery doubled that formidable Cape, which had
terminated the progress of former navigators, an
proceeded a hundred and sixty miles beyond it,
to Cape Bojaidor. As its rocky cliffs, which
firetchcd a colifidcrable way into the Atlantic,
appearc(l more dreadful than the promontory whlicl
they had pffed , the Portuguese commanders durh

41 See NOTE 1X.

ot attempt to fail round it, but returned to Lif- n o o
on, more satisfied with having advanced so far, I.
han ahIamed of having ventured no farther.
Inconsiderable as this voyage was, it increa- Prince
ed the pafion for discovery, which began to lenrythe
ife in Portugal. The fortunate issue of the king's direorof
xpedition against the Mocr of Barbary, added guefedifcn.
rength to that spirit in the nation, and pufied veries.
t on to new ndertakings. In order to render 4
hefe successful, it was neceffTry that they hould
e conduded by a person who possessed abilities
apable of difcernilng what was attainable, who
njoyed leisure to form a regular system for pro-
ecuting discovery, and who was animated with
rdor that would persevere in spite of obstacles and
epulfes. Happily for Portugal, he found all
hose qualities in Henry duke of Viseo, thd
ourth son of king John by Philippa as Lancaster,
ifler of Henry IV. king of England. That prince
n his early youth, having acconmpanied his father
ai his expedition to Barbary, diflinguiflhed himself
y many deeds of valor. To the martial spirit
which was the charaderiltic of every man of noble
irth at that time, he added all the accomplishments
of a more enlightened and polilhed age. He cul-
tivated the arts and fcienices, wliich wcre then
unknown and despiscd by persons of his rank.
lie apl)lied with peculiar fondness to the fludy of
geography; and by tlhe inlfrucdion of able masters,
as well as by the accounts of travellers, he early
acquil(el fclch knowledge of the habitable globe as
lifcovered the great probability of finding new

E :4

B o O and opulent countries, by failing along the coa

h. of Africa. Such an objed was formed to awaken

the enthusiasm and ardor of a youthful mind, and
he espoused with the utmolt zeal the patronage of
a design which might prove as beneficial, as it
appeared to be fplencid and honorable. In order
that he might purfuc this great scheme without
interruption, he retired from court immediately
after his return from Africa, and fixed his residence
at Sacres, near Cape St. Vincent, where the pro.
fpecct of the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts
continually towards his favorite projec , and en.
couraged him to execute it. In this retreat he
was attended by some of the mol learned men in
his country, who aided him in his researches. He
applied for information to the Mloors of Barbary,
who were accustomed to travel by land into the
interior-provinces of Africa, in quest of ivory,
gold-dufl, and other rich commodities. He con.
fulted the Jews fettled in Portugal. By promises,
rewards, and marks of respect, he allured into his
service several persons, foreigners as well as Por.
tuguefe, who were eminent for their skill in
navigation. In taking those preparatory steps, the
great abilities of the prince were seconded by his
private virtues. His integrity, his affability, his
refpedt for religion, his zeal for the honor of his
country, engaged persons of all ranks to applaud
his design, and to favor the execution of it. His
schemes were allowed by the greater part of his
countrymen to proceed neither from ambition, nor
the desire of ywcalth, but to flow from the warn

bencvolence of a heart eager to promote the hap- o o
piness of mankind , and which jtflly entitled him 1.
to assume a motto for his device, that described
the quality, by which he wished to be diftin-
guifled, the talent of doing good.

llis first effort, as is usual at the commencement nir,:overy of

of any new undertaking, was extremely incon- PortoSato,
fiderable. He fitted out a ingle ship, and giving '
the command of it to John Gonzalez Zarco and
Tristan Vaz, two gentlemen of his household,
who voluntarily offercd to concdut the enterprise,
lie inftruded them to use their utmost efforts to
double Cape Bojador, and thence to steer towards
the south. They, according to the mode ofnaviga-
tion which still prevailed, held their course along
the fiore; and by following that diredtion, they
must have encountered almost insuperable difficul-
ties in attempting to pass Cape Bojador. But for-
tune came in aid to their want of kill, and pre-
vented the voyage from being altogether fiuitlefs.
A sudden squall of wind arose, drove them out
to sea, and when they expected every moment to
perih , landed them on an unknown island, which
from their happy escape they named Porto Santo.
In the infancy of navigation, the discovery of this
frmall island appeared a matter of fch moment,
tlat they inflantly returned to Portugal with the
good tidings , and were received by Henry with
the applause and honor due to fortunate adven-
tirers. This faint dawn of success filled a mind'
ardent in the pursuit of a favorite object with such
Liguine hopes as were fuflicient incitements to

E.

B o o i proceed. Next year, Henry sent out three ships

I. under the fame commanders, to whom he joined
'4'9 Bartholomew Pereftrello, in order to take pof.

fellion of the island which they had discovered
When they began to tfttle in Porto Santo, they
observed towards the south a fixed spot in the
ofMadeira. horizon, like a small black cloud. By degrers,

they were led to conjecture that it might be land,
and fleering towards it, they arrived at a con.
fiderable island uninhabited and covered with
wood, which on that account they called ladeira",
As it was Henry's chief object to render his dif.
142. coveries useful to his country, lie immediately

equipped a fleet to carry a colony of Portuguese
to there iflinds. By his provident care, they were
furnished not only with the feeds, plants, and
domeflic animals common in Europe; but as he
foresaw that the warmth of the climate and fertility
of the foil would prove favorable to the rearing
of other produtions, he procured flips of the
vine from the island of Cyprus, the rich wines of
which were then in great request, and plants of
the fgar-cane from Sicily, into which it had
been lately introduced. Thcfe throve so prosper.
oufly in this new country, that the benefit of
cultivating them was irniptdiatcly perceived, and
the fgar and wine of Madeira quickly became
considerable articles in the commerce of Portugal "

' liltorical Relation of the firfl Discovery of ladlcira,

trantlated frtio the Poriuguefc of Fran. Alcafarana, p.
&c.

4 Lud. GuicciardiniDcecritt. de'PacCi lBaffi, r, o.
80, 8

As soon as the advantages derived from this o o K
rftl settlement to the weft of the European I.
ontinent began to be felt, the spirit of discovery noubleCape
ppeared less chimerical , and became more Bojadio-
dventurous. By their voyages to Madeira, the
ortuguefe were gradually accuflomed to a bolder
avigation, and inffead of creeping servilely
long the coaf , ventured into the open sea.
n consequence of taking this course, Gilianez,
who commanded one of prince Henry's flips,
oublcd Cape Bojador, the boundary of the
Portuguese navigation upwards of twenty years,
and which had hitherto been deemed unpaffable.
This successful voyage, which the ignorance of 1433.
the age placed on a level with the most famous
exploits recorded in history, opened a new sphere
to navigation, as it discovered the vast continent
of Africa, still washed by the Atlantic ocean, and
firetching towards the south. Part of this was
soon explored; the Portuguese advanced within Advance
the tropics, and in the space of a few years within the
they discovered the river Senegal , and all the r'"oi'"c
coast extending from Cape Blanco to Cape de
Verd.

Hitherto the Portuguese had been guided Asnni.shcd
in their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt ;"twhVtlehs

I1c1< vered

them, by the light and information which they tt.re.
received from the vwoks of the ancient mathe-
maticians and geographers. But , when they
bcgan to enter th: torrid zone , the notion
which prevailed among the ancients , that the
hcat, which reigned perpetually there, was so

1 4

s o o excessive as to render it uninhabitable, deterred

I. them, for some time, from proceeding. TIheir

own observations, when they firfl ventured into
this unknown and formidable region, tended to
confirm the opinion of antiquity concerning the
violent operation of the direct rays of the fun. As
far as the river Senegal, the Portuguese had found
the coalt of Africa inhabited by people nearly refer
bling the Moors of Barbary. When they advan.
ced to the south of that river , the human form
seemed to put on a new appearance. They
beheld men with kins black as ebony, with
short curled hair, flat noses, thick lips, and all
the peculiar features which are now known to
diftinguiflh the race of negroes. This surprising
alteration they naturally attributed to the influence
of heat, and if they should advance nearer to
the line, they began to dread that its effecs
would be still more violent. Those dangers were
exaggerated, and many other objecions againlt
attempting farther discoveries were proposed by
some of the grandees, who, from ignorance,
from envy, or from that cold timid prudence
which rejects whatever has the air of novelty or
enterprise , had hitherto condemned all prince
Henry's schemes. They represented, that it was
altogether chimerical to expect any advantage
from countries situated in that region which the
wisdom and experience of antiquity had pro.-ion-
ced to be unfit for the habitation of mcn ; that their
forefathers, satisfied with cultivating the ter.itory
which Providence had allotted them, did not wate

lhe strength of the kingdom by fruitless projects, o o K
n quell of new settlements; that Portugal was I.
Iready exhaulted by the expense of attempts to
ifcover lands which either did not exist, or
which nature destined to remain unknown; and
vas drained of men, who might have been
niployed in undertakings attended with more
ertain fuccef , and produdive of greater benefit.
ut neither their appeal to the authority of the
ncients, nor their reasonings concerning the
ntereFt of Portugal, made any imprefflon upon
le determined philosophic mind of prince Henry.
lie discoveries which he had already made
onvinced him that the ancients had little more
Ian a conjetural knowledge of the torrid zone.
e was no less satisfied that the political arguments
f his opponents with refped to the interest of
ortugal were malevolent and ill-founded. In
:ofe sentiments he was firenuoufly supported by
is brother Pedro, who governed the kingdom
s guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V. who
ad succeeded to the throne during his mino- 143-
ity; and instead of slackening his efforts, Henry
ontinued to pursue his discoveries with frelh
rdor.

But, in order to silence all the murmurs of apal grant
ppofition, he endeavoured to obtain the fandion to Portugal

ofwhat

f the highest authority in favor of his operations. contriesit
Vith this view, he applied to the Pope, and should dif-
eprefented, in pompous terms, the pious and cov
unwearied zeal, with which he' had exerted
imnfelf during twenty years, in difcovcring

o o K unknown countries, the wretched inhabitants of

which were utter strangers to true religion
wandering in heathen darkness, or led atray by
the delusions of lahomet. He besought the
holy father, to whom, as the vicar of Christ,
all the kingdoms of the earth were subjed , to
confer on the crown of Portugal a right to all
the countries possessed by Infidels, which Ihoul
be discovered by the industry of its fubjeds, and
subdued by the force of its arms. He entreate
him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the
highest penalties , not to molest Portugal while
engaged in this laudable enterprise, and to prohibit
them from fettling in any of the countries which
the Portuguese should discover. He promised that
in all their expeditions, it should be the chie
objec of his countrymen to spread the knowledge
of the Christian religion, to eftablith the authority
of the holy fee, and to increase the flock of the
universal pastor, As it was by improving with
dexterity every favorable conjunture for acquiring
ncw powers, that the court of Rome had gradually
extended its usurpations, Eugene IV. the pontif
to whom this application was made, eagerly seized
the opportunity which now presented itself. He
instantly perceived, that by complying with prince
Henry's request, he might exercise a prerogative
no less flattering in its own nature, than likely to
prove beneficial in its confequenccs. A bull wa
accordingly issucd, in which, after applauding il
the firongeft terms the palt efforts of the Portugtlfce
and exhorting them to proceed i that laudabli

areer on which they had entered, he granted o o K
hem an exclusive right to all the countries which i.
bey fiould discover, from Cape Non to the con-
nent of India.
Extravagant as this donation, comprehending
uch a large portion of the habitable globe, would
ow appear even in Catholic countries, no person

the fifteenth century doubted that the pope, in
he plenitude of his apostolic power, had a right
oconfer it. Prince Henry was soon sensible
f the advantages which he derived from this
ranfation. His schemes were authorized and
ncdified by the bull approving of them. The
irit of discovery was connected with zeal for
cligion , which, in that age, was a principle of
uch aivity and vigor, as to influence the conduct
f nations. All Chriltian princes were deterred
rom intruding into those countries which the
ortuguefe had discovered, or from interrupting
he progress of their navigation and conquets".
The fame of the Portuguese voyages soon Pame a',
)read over Europe. Men , long accustomed progrers ni
o circumscribe the aivity and knowledge of tglr^i
he human mind within the limits to which they veries.
ud been hitherto confined , were] aftonified to
chold the sphere of navigation so suddenly en-
:rgcdd, and a profped opened of visiting regions
f the globe, the existence of which was unknown
n former times. The learned and speculative
eafoned and formed theories conccrning those

" Sec NOTE. X.

B o o unexpeced discoveries. The vulgar inquired an

I. wondered.; while enterprising adventurers croude

from every part of Europe, soliciting prince Hen
to employ them in this honorable service. Mlan
Venetians and Genoese, in particular, who were
at that time, superior to all other nations in th
fcicnce of naval affairs, entered aboard the Po
tuguefe ships, and acquired a more perfect an
extensive knowledge of their profession in tha
new school of navigation. In' emulation of the
foreigners, the Portuguese exerted their own talents
q446. The nation seconded the designs of the princ

Private merchants formed companies, with a vie
to search for unknown countries. The Cape di
Verd islands, which lie off the promontory
that name, were discovered, and soon after tit
1449. isles called Azores. As the former of these art

above three hundred miles from the African coal,
and the latter nine hundred miles from any continen
it is evident, by their venturing so boldly into thi
open seas, that the Portuguese had , by thii
time, improved greatly in the art of. navigi
tion.

Death or While the passion for engaging in new under
r.il,-e takings was thus wvarm and ative, it received an
le1"1ry. unfortunate check by the death of prince Henry

whose fperior knowledge had hitherto diredte
all the operations of the difcovcrcrs , and whoft
patronage had encouraged and protceted them. Bu
notwithllanding all the advantages which thec
derived from these , the Portugucfe , during his
life, did not advance, in their utmost progre

wards the south, within five degrees of the B o o c
uinodial line; and, after their continued exer- I.
ons for half a century, hardly fifteen hundred

From q.Iz

iles of the coast of Africa were discovered. To to 463.
n age acquainted with the efforts of navigation in
sftate of maturity and improvement, those essays
f its,early years mufft necessarily appear feeble
nd unskilful. But, inconsiderable as they may be
eemed, they were sufficient to turn the curiosity
f the European nations into a new channel, to
xcite an enterprising spirit, and to point the way

future discoveries.
Alphonfo, who possessed the throne of Thepafion
ortugal at the time of prince Henry's death, for dircovery

languishes

as so much engaged in supporting his own forbtne,,
retentions to the crown of Castile, or in carrying time-
n his expeditions against the Moors in Barbary,
at the force of his kingdom being exerted in
ther operations, he could not prosecute the
ifcoveries in Africa with ardor. He committed the
ondud of them to Fernando Gomez, a merchant
n Lisbon, to whom he granted an exclusive right
f commerce with all the countries of which
rince Henry had taken possession. Under the
eftraint and oppression of a monopoly, the spirit
f discovery languifled. It ceased to be a national
bjet, and became the concern of a private man,
ore attentive to his own gain, than to the glory
f his country. Some progress, however, was
nade. The Portuguese ventured at length to cross 147.
he line, and, to their aflonifiment, found that
:gion of the torrid zone, which was supposed to

B 0 o ic be scorchcd with intolerable heat, to be not bnl

i. labitable, but populous and fertile.
,.q~. John II. who succeeded his father Alphonfo

Revives poflelTed talents capable both of forming an
with addi-
tional a executing great designs. As part of his revenue
dor. vwhile prince, had arisen from duties on the trad

with the newly discovered countries, this natural
turned his attention towards them, and fatisfi
him with refpcd to their utility and importanc
In proportion as his knowledge of these countri
extended, the poffeflion of them appeared to bc
of greater consequence. While the Portuguef
proceeded along the coast of Africa, from Cap
Non to the river of Senegal, they found all ti
extensive trac to be sandy, barren, and thini)
inhabited by a wretched people, profefling tl
IViahometan religion , and subjed to the va
empire of Morocco. But to the south of th
tiver, the power and religion of the Mlahometan
were unknown. The country was divided in
small independent principalities, the population va
considerable, the foil fertile", and the Portuguef
ioon discovered that it produced ivory, ric
gums , gol, and other valuable commodities. By
the acquisition of these, commerce was enlarged
and became more adventurous. Mlen, animated ani
rendered adive by the ccrtaint profpedt of gain
purfuled discovery swith greater cagernefs , thai

4 Navigatio Aloyfii Cadanmuili apud Novun Orben

Gr'n'mi,, p. . -8. Nalviga. all ' llbia di San Tonie pc
ul Pilutto Portugh. Raniufio, i. iij 5

hen they were excited only by curiosity and B K
ope. I.
IThis spirit derived no small reinforcermert of Its progretL
igor from the countenance of such a monarch
s John. Declaring himself the patrron of every
ttempt towards discovery, he promoted it with
1 the ardor of his grand-uncle prince Henry,
nd with superior power. The effeds of this were
mediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out, 14s4,
hich after discovering the kingdoms of Benin
nd Congo, advanced above fifteen hundred miles
eyond the line, and the Portuguese, for the
rft time, beheld a new heaven, and observed the
ars of another hemisphere. John was not only
licitous to discover, but attentive to secure the
offefion of those countries. He built forts on the
oast of Guinea; he sent out colonies to fettle
lere; he established a commercial intercourse with
he more powerful kingdoms; he endeavoured to
ender such as were feeble or divided, tributary to
he crown of Portugal. Some of the petty princes
oluntarily acknowledged themselves his vassals.
thers were compelled to do so by force of arms.
regular and well digefled system was formed
ith respect to this new objed of policy, and by
rmly adhering to it, the Portuguese power and
ommerce in Africa were cftablifhed upon a solid
oundation.
By their constant intercourse with the people of Hore of
frica, the Portuguese gradually acquired some diCcvering
:nowledge of those parts of that country which tnl.ie F.it
hey ha(d not visited. The information which they Inlite
ccivcd from the natives, added to what they had

o o K observed in their own voyages, began to open

. profpets more extensive, and to suggest the idea

of schemes more important, than those which had
hitherto allured and occupied them. They had
detected the error of the ancients concerning
the nature of the torrid zone. They found, as
they proceeded southwards, that the continent
of Africa, instead of extending in breadth, accord.
ing to the docdrine of Ptolemy 7 , at that time
the oracle and guide of the learned in the science
of geography, appeared sensibly to contradc itfelfi
and to bend towards the east. This induced
them to give credit to the accounts of the ancient
Phenician voyages round Africa, which had long
been deemed fabulous, and led them to conceive
hopes that by following the fame route, they
might arrive at the East Indies, and engross that
commerce which has been the source of wealth
and power to every nation possessed of it. The
comprehensive genius of prince Henry, as we may
conjecture from the words of the pope's bull, had
early formed some idea of this navigation. All
the Portuguese pilots and mathematicians now
concurred in representing it as practicable. The
king entered with warmth into their sentiments,
and began to concert measures for this arduous
and important voyage.

Schemes for Before his preparations for this expedition were
accomplish- finifsed, accounts were tranfinitted from Africa,
ing this.

Vide Nov. Orbis Tabul. Geograph. fecund. Ptolem,
Anft. 1730.

that

hat various nations along the coast had mentioned B o o c
mighty kingdom situated on their continent, at I.
great distance towards the east, the king of
hich , according to their description, professed
e Christian religion. The Portuguese monarch
mediately concluded , that this must be the
pcror of Abyfinia, to whom the Europeans,
uced by a mistake of Rubruquis, Marco Polo,
d other travellers to the east, absurdly gave the
ame Prester or Presbyter John; and as he
ped to receive information and affiflance from
Clhriftian prince , in prosecuting a scheme
at tended to propagate their common faith, he
solved to open, if pofible, some intercourse
ith his court. With this view, he made choice
Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo de Payva,
ho were perfect masters of the Arabic language,
d sent them into the east, to search for the
fidence of this unknown potentate, and to make
m proffers of friendfiip. They had it in charge
ewife to procure whatever intelligence the
tions which they visited could supply, with
fpet to the trade of India, and the course of
vigation to that continent ".
lWhile John made this new attempt by land, Voyage of
obtain some knowleldge of the country, which Bac'rthol
wilcd so ardently to discover, he did not m
gledC the profccution of this great design by sea.
lih condud: of a voyage for this pul-pole, the mo f
(luous and important which the Portuguese had

Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. Lafitau Do-
uv. dcs Port. x. 46.

VOL. 1. F

o o ever projected, was committed to Bartholomew
r. Diaz, an officer whose sagacity, experience, an

fortitude rendered him equal to the undertaking
He firetched boldly towards the south, an
proceeding beyond the utmost limits to which h
countrymen had hitherto advanced, difcovere
near a thousand miles of a new country. Neith
the danger to which he was exposed, by a fucce
sion of violent tempests in unknown seas, an
by the frequent mutinies of his crew, nor th
calamities of famine which he suffered from lofi
his florefhip, could deter him from profecutin
his enterprise. In recompence of his labors an
perseverance, he at lalt descried that lofty promo
tory which bounds Africa to the south. But t
descry it, was all that he had in his power
accomplish. The violence of the winds, ti
shattered condition of his flips, and the turbulen
spirit of his sailors, compelled him to return, afte
a voyage of sixteen months, in which he difcovere
a far greater extent of country than any forme
navigator. Diaz had called the promontory whic
terminated his voyage Cabo Tormentofo , or th
flormy Cape; but the king, his master, as t
now entertained no doubt of having found tbi
long desired route to India, gave it a name ino
inviting, and of better omen, The Cape of Goo
Hotpe '.

Moreccer. Those sanguine expetations of success were
tain ir. confirmed by the intelligence which John receive
fpccs ot
lucccl.a

9 ;Faria y SouPi Port. fiar, vol. i. p. 26.

over land , in consequence of his embanfy to Bo oK
Abyssinia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to I.
their master's inftrudions, had repaired to Grand
Cairo. From that city, they travelled along with
a caravan of Egyptian merchants, and embarking
on the Red Sea, arrived at Aden in Arabia. There
hey separated; Payva failed directly towards
byffinia; Covillam embarked for the East Indies,
and having iited Calecut, Goa, and other cities
on the Malabar coast, returned to Sofala, on the
aft fide of Africa, and thence to Grand Cairo,
vhich Payva and he had fixed upon as their place
f rendezvous. Unfortunately the former was cruelly
urdered in Abyflinia, but Covillam found at Cairo
wo Portuguese Jews , whom John, whose pro-
ident sagacity attended to every circumstance that
could facilitate the execution of his schemes, had
ifpatched after them, in order to receive a detail
f their proceedings, and to communicate to them
ew inftrutions. By one of these Jews, Covillam
ranfmitted to Portugal a journal of his travels by
ea and land, his remarks upon the trade of India,
ogether with exat maps of the coasts on which
c had touched; and from what he himself had
bferved , as well as from the information of
ilful seamen in different countries, he concluded,
hat by failing round Africa, a paflage might be
oulnd to the East Indies .
The happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion Prepara.

tlons for

another

5° Faria y Sousa Port. Anfia, vol i. p. 27. Lafitau De- voyage.
ouv. i. 48.

F 3

B o o l and report, with the discoveries which Diaz had

I> lately made, left hardly any shadow of doubt with

refped to the poflibility of failing from Europe to
India. But the vast length of the voyage, and the
fiurious storms hich Diaz had encountered near
the Cape of Good Hope, alarmed and intimidated
the Portuguese to such a degree, although by
long experience they were now become adventu.
rous and kilful mariners, that some time was
requisite to prepare their minds for this dangerous
and extraordinary voyage. The courage, however,
and authority of the monarch, gradually dispelled
the vain fears of his fubjets, or made it necessary
to conceal them. As John thought himself now
upon the eve of accomplifling that great design,
which had been the principal objec of his reign,
his earneflnefs in prosecuting it became so vehement,
that it occupied his thoughts by day, and bereaved
him of sleep through the night. While he was
taking every precaution that his wisd(om and experi.
ence could suggest, in order to ensure the fuccels
of the exl'dition, which was to decide concerning
the fate of his favorite projcdt, the fame of the
vas- dift:overics which the Portuguese had already
inad , the reporLs concerning the extraordinary
icligcnce which they had received from the Eat,

:'e :eti.

,;,,,,if,,,,,. ;ld the piortFpcqt of the voyage which they now
1,1 li:<ed ntl'di ttcd, dlew tlic attention of all the European
'l'" ' t. iltionil, land lheld tlhemt iln fn'penfe and expecation.

I;y fomc, thei narit.ime skill and navigations ol
thel 'ntllguefe wecre compared with those of the
I'lhcicianis and Cartllaginians, and exalted abovl

them. Others formed conjectures concerning the B o o K
revolutions which the success of the Portuguese I.
schemes might occasion in the course of trade,
and the political state of Europe. The Venetians
began to be disquieted with the apprehension of
losing their Indian commerce, the monopoly of
which was the chief source of their power as well
as opulence, and the Portuguese already enjoyed
in fancy, the wealth of the East. But, during this
interval, which gave such scope to the various
workings of curiosity, of hope and of fear, an Suddenly
account was brought to Europe of an event no t"urned t a
less extraordinary than unexpected, the discovery
of a New World situated in the weft; and the
eyes and admiration of mankind turned immedi-
ately towards that great objet.

*F

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK II.

THE
HI S TORY

OF

BOOK I.
B o o K AMONG the foreigners whom the fame of tht

discoveries made by the Portuguese had allured

Birtl and into their service, was Chriltopher Colon or Co.
edtcation of lumbus, a subjet of the republic of Genoa. Neither
columbs. the time nor place of his birth are known with

certainty '; but he was descended of an honorable
family, though reduced to indigence by various
misfortunes. His ancestors having betaken them.
selves for fbfiftence to a sea-faring life, Columbus
discovered, in his early youth , the peculiar cha.
rader and talents which mark out a man for that
profession. His parents, inflead of thwarting this
originnl propensity of his mind, seem to have en.
couraged and confirmed it, by the education which
they gave him. After acquiring some knowledge
of the Latin tongue, the only language in which
fcicnce was taught at that time, he was inftru6ecd
in geometry, cosmography, astronomy, and the
art of drawing. To these he applied with fuclh

1 See NOTE XI.

rdor and prediledion, on account of their con- B o c
exion with navigation, his favorite objet, that II.
le advanced with rapid proficiency in the study
f them. Thus qualified, he went to sea at the I461.
ge of fourteen, and began his career on that
lement which conducted him to so much glory.
is early voyages were to those ports in the
lediterranean which his countrymen the Genoese
requlented. This being a sphere too narrow for
is aive mind, he made an excursion to the 46t7.
orthern seas, and visited the coafls of Iceland,
o which the English and other nations had begurn
o resort on account of its fifiery. As navigation,
n every direction, was now become enterprising
e proceeded beyond that island, the Thule of
he ancients, and advanced several degrees within
he polar circle. Having satisfied his curiosity by
avoyage which tended more to enlarge his know-
edge of naval affairs, than to improve his fortune,
he entered into the service of a famous fea-captain,
of his own name and family. This man commanded.
a small squadron, fitted out at his own expense,
and by cruising sometimes againfl the lMahometans,
sometimes against the Venctians, the rivals of his
country in trade, had acquired both wealth and re-
putation. With him Columbus continued for several
years, no lcfs difringuifhed for his courage, than for
his experience as a ailor. At length, in an obftii;ite
engagement, off the coast of Portugal, with some
Venetian caravels, returning richly laden from
tile Low Countries, the vefecl on board which
he fcrved took ire, together with one o the

F 4

B o o r enemy's ships, to which it was fan grappled. In

II. this dreadful extremity his intrepidity and presence

of mind did not forsake him. He threw himself
into the sea, laid hold of a floating oar, and by
the fpport of it, and his dexterity in swimming
he reached the shore, though above two leagues
distant, and saved a life reserved for great under.
takings

He enters As soon as he recovered strength for the jour.
into the ney, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his
Portuguese
ftrice. countrymen were fettled. They soon conceived

such a favorable opinion of his merit, as well as
talents, that they warmly solicited him to remain
in that kingdom, where his naval skill and ex.
perience could not fail of rendering him confpi.
cuous. To every adventurer, animated either
with curiosity to visit new countries, or with
ambition to distinguish himself, the Portuguese
service was at that time extremely inviting. Co.
Jumbus listened with a favorable ear to the advice
of his friends, and having gained the eeem of a
Portuguese lady, whom he married, fixed his refi
dence in Lisbon. This alliance, instead of detaching
him from a sea-faring life, contributed to enlarge
the sphere of his naval knowledge, and to excite
a delire of extending it still farther. His wife
was a daughter of Bartholomew Percftrello, one
of the captains employed by prince Henry in his
early navigations, and who, under his protection,
had discovercd and planted the illands of Porto

Life of Columbus, c. v.

anto and IMadeira.' Columbus got pocfflion of B o
le journals and charts of this experienced navi- I.
ator, and from them he learned the course which
he Portuguese had held in making their difcove-
ies, as well as the various circumstances which
ruided or encouraged them in their attempts. The
udy of these soothed and inflamed his favorite
alfion; and while he contemplated the maps,
nd read the descriptions of the new countries
vhich Percftrello had seen, his impatience to visit
hem became irresistible. In order to indulge it,
e made a voyage to Madeira, and.continued
uring several years to trade with that island,
ith the Canaries, the Azores, the settlements in
uinea, and all the other places which the Por-
uguefe had discovered on the continent of
frica '
By the experience which Columbus acquired, The effects

of their dif-

uring such a variety of voyages, to almost every coveries
art of the globe with which, at that time, any upon him.
ntercourfe was carried on by sea, he was now
ecome one of the most kilful navigators in Eu-
ope. But, not satisfied with that praise, his am-
ition aimed at something more. The fucccfsful
rogrefs of the Portuguese navigators had awa-
ened a spirit of curiosity and emulation, which
t every man of science upon examining all the
ircumftances that led to the discoveries which
hey had made , or that affoi'ded a profpcd of
cceeding in any new and bolder undertaking'.

Life of Columbus, c. iv. v.

a o o The mind of Columbus, naturally inquisitive

II. capable of deep reflection, and turned to spec

lations of this kind, was so often employed
revolving the principles upon which the Port
guefe had founded their schemes of discovery, an
the mode in which they had carried them on
that he gradually began to form an idea of impro
ing upon their plan, and of accomplishing disc
veries which hitherto they had attempted
vain.

Hle forms To find out a passage by sea to the East Indi
theideaof was the great object in view at that period. Fron
course to the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape d
v.odka. Verd, this was the point at which they aimed i

all their navigations, and, in comparison withi
all their discoveries in Africa appeared inconf
derable. The fertility and riches of India had
been known for many ages; its spices and othes
valuable commodities were in high request through
out Europe, and the vast wealth of the Venetian
arising from their having engrossed this trade
had raised the envy of all nations. But hew intent
soever the Portuguese were upon difcoveringa
new route to those desirable regions, they searched
for it only by fleering towards the south, in hope
of arriving at India, by turning to the east, afte
they had failed round the farther extremity o
Africa. This course was still unknown, and, even
if discovered, was of such immrenfe length, that
a voyage from Europe to India mutl have appeare
an undertaking extremely arduous, and of ver
uncertain iuc. 1More than half a century hd

en employed in advancing from Cape Non to o o
e equator; a much longer space of time might u1.
apse before the more extensive navigation from
at to India could be accomplished. These reflec-
ns upon the uncertainty, the danger and tedious-
fs of the course which the Portuguese were pur-
ing, naturally led Columbus to confider whether
florter and more direct passage to the aft Indies
ight not be found out. After revolving long
d seriously every circumstance fuggcfled by his
perior knowledge in the theory as well as prac-
ce of navigation, after comparing attentively the
servations of modern pilots with the hints and
njedures of ancient authors, he at lat concluded,
at by failing directly towards the weft, across
e Atlantic ocean, new countries, which probably
rmed a part of the vast continent of India, must
fallibly be discovered.
Principles and arguments of various kinds, The prinL
nd derived from different sources, induced him pleso,
adopt this opinion , seemingly as chimerical as it hich
as new and extraordinary. The spherical figure tolllddt.
f the earth was known, and its magnitude afcer-
ained with some degree of accuracy. From this
twas evident, that the continents of urope,
fia, and Africa, as far as they were known at
hat time, formed but a small portion of the ter-
aqueous globe. It was suitable to our ideas con-
erLing the wisdom and beneficence of the Author
f Nature, to believe that the vast space, ldill
'explored, was not covered entirely by a waste
lzprofit;ble ocean, but occupied by countries fit

B o o for the habitation of man. It appeared likewiR

II. extremely probable, that the continent, on t

fide of the globe, was balanced by a proportion
quantity of land in the other hemisphere. The
conclusions concerning the existence of anothe
continent, drawn from the figure and ftrucireo
the globe, were confirmed by the observations an
conjedtures of modern navigators. A Portugue
pilot, having firetched farther to the weft th
was usual at that time, took up a piece of timb
artificially carved, floating upon' the sea; and
it was driven towards him by a westerly wind
he concluded that it came from some unknow
land, situated in that quarter. Columbus's brothe
in-law had found, to the weft of the Madei
isles, a piece of timber fashioned in the fame ma
ner, and brought by the fame wind; and had fee
likewise canes of an enormous size floating upo
the waves, which resembled those described b
Ptolemy as productions peculiar to the East Indies'
After a course of westerly winds , trees, torn uI
by the roots, were often driven upon the coal
of the Azores, and at one time the dead bodie
of two men, with singular features, resembling
neither the inhabitants of Europe nor of Africa
were car ahlore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising

from theoretical principles and pracical obfer
vations, led Columbus to exped the discovery
of new countries in the Western Ocean , other

Lib. i. c. 17.

afons induced him to believe that these mut be B o o
nneded wvith the continent of India. Though In.
e ancients had hardly ever penetrated into India

e than the banks of the Ganges, yet some
reek authors had ventured to describe the pro-
nces beyond that river. As men are prone, and
liberty, to magnify what is remote or unknown5
ey represented them as regions of an immense
tent. Ctefias affirmed that India was as large as
the refl of Asia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny the
turalift follows ', contended that it was equal
a third part of the habitable earth. Nearchus
erted, that it would take four months to march
a firaight line from one extremity of it to the
her ". The journal of Marco Polo who had
oceeded towards the Fast far beyond the limits
which any European had ever advanced,
emed to confirm these exaggerated accounts of
e ancients. By his magnificent descriptions of
e kingdoms of Catha/i and Cipango, and of many
her countries, the names of which were unknown
Europe, India appeared to be a region of vast
tent. From these accounts, which, however
feCive , were the molt accurate that the people
Europe had received at that period , with
fI)e to the remote parts of the East, Columbus
rew a just conclusion. He contended , that,
proportion as the continent of [ndia llretclcd
It towards the East, it mult:, iL cotnfequnc of

Nut. lJilt. lib. vi . c, I7.
$trab. 3Gcugr. lib. xv. p. ioii.

o o r the fphcrical figure of the earth, approach nea
ii. to the illands which had lately been difcove

to the weft of Africa; that the distance from
one to the other was probably not very consid
able; and that the most direct, as well as short
course, to the remote regions of the East, wvas
be found by failing due weft '. This notio
concerning the vicinity of India to the weft
parts of our continent , was countenanced
some eminent writers among the ancients,
fancdion of whose authority Was necessary, in t
age, to procure a favorable reception to a
tenet. Aristotle thought it probable that
Columns of Hercules, or Straits of Gibralta
were not far removed from the East Indies, a
that there might be a communication by sea betwe
them '. Seneca, in terms still more explicit, affir
that, with a fair wind, one might fail from Spi
to India in a few days . The famous Atlan
island described by Plato, and fippofed by manyt
be a real country, beyond which a vast unknow
continent was situated, is represented by him
lying at no great distance from Spain. Aft
weighing all these particulars, Columbus, in wvhol
character the niodefty and diffidence of true geni
was united with the ardent enthufiafin of a pr
jector, did not reft with such absolute affuranc
either upon his own arguments , or upon th

7 See NOTE XI.

Ariftot. de Celo, lib. ii. c. 14. edit. Du Val, PIr
1629, vol. i. p. 472.

9 Seneca Quxlt. Natur. lib. i. in procnl.

thority of the ancients, as not to confultfuch of o o K
s contemporaries as were capable of comprehend- II.
g the nature of the evidence which he produced
fpport of his opinion. As early as the year
e thousand four hundred and feventy-four, he
mmunicated his ideas concerning the probability
discovering new countries, by failing westwards,
Paul, a physician of Florence, eminent for his
owledge of cosmography, and who, from the
arning as well as candor which he discovers in
s reply, appears to have been well entitled to the
nfidence which Columbus placed in him. He
armly approved of the plan , suggested several
its in confirmation of it, and encouraged Colum-
s to persevere in an undertaking so laudable,
d which must redound so much to the honor
his country, and the benefit of Europe .
To a mind less capable of forming and of His chemes
ecuting great designs than that of Columbus, all forcarrying
fe reasonings, and observations, and authorities, itlntoete-
ould have served only as the foundation of
me plausible and fruitless theory, which might
ve furnished matter for ingenious discourse, or
nciful conjecture. But with his sanguine and
nterprifing temper, speculation led directly to
dion. Fully satisfied himself with refped to the
uth of his system, he was impatient to bring it
the test of experiment, and to set out upon a
oyage of discovery. The first ftep towards
is was to secure the patronage .o some of Lih.

' Life of Columbus, c. viii.

43 o o i considerable powers in Europe, capable of under

It. taking such an entcrprife. As long absence hat

not extinguished the affedtion which he bore t(
his native country, he wished that it fllould real

He applies the fruits of his labors and invention. With thi
tothe Ge. view, he laid his fcherne before the senate of Genoa,

Oee and making his country the first tender of hi

service, oflered to fail under the banners of the
republic, in quest of the new regions which h
expected to discover. But Columbus had resided for
so many years in foreign parts, that his countrymen
were unacquainted with his abilities and characer;
and, though a maritime people, were so little
accustomed to diltant voyages, that they could
form no just idea of the principles on which he
founded his hopes offuccefs. They inconsiderately
rejected his proposal, as the dream of a chimerical
projector, and loft for ever the opportunity ol
restoring their commonwealth to its ancient
splendor '.

totheking Having performed what was due to his country,
ofPortugal; Columbus was so little discouraged by the repulfl

which he had received, that, instead of relinquill
ing his undertaking, he pursued it with frefl ardor
He made his next overture to John II. king o
Portugal , in whole domlinions he had been 1onl
eftablified , and whom he confidered , on tha
account, as havilng the second claim to his service
Here every circnmfiance feerned to promise hin
a more favorable reception. 1-e appliod to

Herreralift. de las Indias Occid. Dcc.. li. i. ic.:

mnonarch

onarch of an enterprising genius, no incompetent B o o x
dge in naval affairs, and proud of patronising Ix.
,ery attempt to discover new countries. His
bjcts were the most experienced navigators in
urope, and the least apt to be intimidated either

the novelty or boldness of any maritime

cpedltion. In Portugal, the professional fill of
olumbus, as well as his personal good qualities,
ere thoroughly known; and as the former ren-
red it probable that his scheme was not alto-
ther chimerical, the latter exempted him from
e suspicion of any sinister intention in propoing
Accordingly, the king listened to him in the
oft gracious manner, and referred the confidera.
on of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bishop of Ceuta,
d two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers,
horn he was accustomed to consult in matters of
is kind. As in Genoa, ignorance had opposed and
fappointed Columbus; in Lisbon, he had to
rbat with prejudice, an enemy no less formid-
le. The persons, according to whose decision
s scheme was to be adopted or rejeted,
d ,been the chief direcdors of the Portuguese
vigations , and had advised to search for a
Iage to India, by steering a course directly
pofite to that which Columbus recommended
shorter and more certain. They could not,
erefore, approve of his proposal, without sub-
itting to the double mortification, of condemning
eir own theory, and of acknowledging his superior by whom Le
gacity. After tearing him with captious questions, is deceived.
1d ifarting innumerable Qbjedtions, with a view

VOL I. G

g o o considerable powers in Europe, capable of under.

II. taking such an enterprise. As long absence had

not extinguifled the affection which he bore to
his native country, he wished that it flould reap

He applie the fruits of his labors and invention. With this
to the Ge. view, he laid his scheme before the senate of Genoa,
noere; and making his country the first tender of his

service, offered to fail under the banners of the
republic, in quest of the new regions which he
expected to discover. But Columbus had resided for
so many years in foreign parts, that his countrymen
were unacquainted with his abilities and character;
and, though a maritime people, were so little
accustomed to distant voyages, that they could
form no just idea of the principles on which he
founded his hopes offuccefs. They inconsiderately
rejected his proposal, as the dream of a chimerical
projedtor, and loft for ever the opportunity of
restoring their commonwealth to its ancient
splendor T

totheking Having performed what was due to his country,
of Prtugal; Columbus was so little discouraged by the repulse

which he had received, that, instead of relinquifhl
ing his undertaking, he pursued it with frefl ardor.
He made his next overture to John II. king of
Portugal , in whose dominions he had been long
eftablified , and whom he confidered , on that
account, as haviing the second claim to his service.
Here every circumflance seemed to promise him
a more favorable reception. lie appliod to a

Herreralift. de las Indias Occid. Dec. . lii. i. c.

mnonarcli

onarch of an enterprising genius, no incompetent B o
udge in naval affairs, and proud of patronising 11.
very attempt to discover new countries. His
ubjcts were the most experienced navigators in
urope, and the least apt to be intimidated either
y te novelty or boldness of any maritime
xped;tion. In Portugal, the professional kill of
olumbus, as well as his personal good qualities,
rere thoroughly known; and as the former ren-
ered it probable that his scheme was not alto-
ether chimerical, the latter exempted him from
he suspicion of any sinister intention in proposing

Accordingly, the king listened to him in the
oft gracious manner, and referred the confidera-
ion of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bishop of Ceuta,
nd two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers,
horn he was accustomed to consult in matters of
his kind. As in Genoa, ignorance had opposed and
fappointed Columbus; in Lilbon, he had to
ombat with prejudice, an enemy no less formid-
ble. The persons, according to whose decision
is scheme was to be adopted or rejected,
ad,been the chief directors of the Portuguese
avigations, and had advised to search for a
afage to India, by fleering a course directly
ppofite to that which Columbus recommended
is horter and more certain. They could not,
berefore, approve of his proposal, without sub-
itting to the double mortification, of condemning
eir own theory, and of acknowledging his superior bywbom he
agacity. After tearing him with captious questions, Is eceived.
nd liarting innumerable objeCtions, with a viewv

VOL. I. G

B O O I of betraying him into fch a particular explanation

IT. of his ftcm , as might draw from him a fu

discovery of its nature, they deferred passing
final judgment with refped to it. In the mea
time, they conspired to rob him of the honor an
advantages which lie expected from the success o
lhis scheme, advising the king to dispatch a veffe
fccretly, in order to attempt the proposed di
covery, by following exadly the course whic
Columbus seemed to point out. John, forgettin
on ' this occasion the sentiments becoming
monarch, meanly adopted this perfidious counfe
But the pilot, chosen to execute Colurbus's plan,
-Lad neither the genius, nor the fortitude of its
author. Contrary winds arose, no fight of ap
proaching land appeared, his courage failed, and
he returned to Lisbon, execrating the projet as
equally extravagant andl dangerous .

He leaves Upon discovering this diflonorable tranfadioni
PortuglI; Columbus felt the indignation natural to an ingenu
and rpair:
to tleourt ous mind, and in the warmth of his refentmnen
oftpain. determined to break off all intercourse with

nation capable of such flagrant treachery. H
instantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spai
towards the cofe of the-year one thousand fou
hundred and eighty-four. As he was now at libert
to court the protedtion of any patron, whom hi
could engage to approve of his plan, and to carry
it into execution, he resolved to propose it ir
pcifon to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at tha

" Life of Colunmbls,.c. ki llerrerl, dccad r. lib. i. c. 7

time governed the united kingdoms of Castile and B o o
Arago. But as he had already experienced the II.
uncertain issue of applications to kings and ministers, Sends his

11 ,,11C~ il

l

r r1 r1 . ~

i . ,brother into

he took the precaution of fending into England England.
his brother Bartholomew, to whom he had fully
communicated his ideas, in order that he might
negociate, at the fame time, with Henry VII.
who was reputed one of the most sagacious as
well as opulent princes in Europe,

It was not without reason that Columbus en- Obftlalesto

tcrtailled doubts and fears with refpec to the hlisftccefsin
reception of his proposal in the Spanish court. Spain.
Spain was, at that juncture, engaged in a dan-
gerous war with Granada, the last of the Moorish
kingdoms in that country. The wary and fufpi-
cious temper of Ferdinand was not formed to
lelifl bold or uncommon designs. Isabella, though
more generous and enterprising, was under the
influence of her husband in all her ations. The
Spaniards had hitherto nade no efforts to extend
navigation beyond its ancient limits, and had
beheld the amazing progrcfs ds discovery among
their neighbours the Portuguese, without one
attempt to imitate or to rival them. The war with
the Inlidels afforded an ample field, to the national
activity and love of glory. Under circumftaices so
unfavorable, it was impollible for Columbus to
nmake rapid progress with a nation, naturally flow
and dilatory in forming all its resolutions. His
charadter, however, was admirably adapted to that
of the people, whose confidence and protecdion
le solicited. HIe was grave, though courteous in

G 12 1

B o O K his deportment; circumfpedt in his words and

II, adions; irreproachable in his morals; and exem.

plary in his attention to all the duties and funcions
of religion. By qalities so refpedable, he not
only gained many private friends, but acquired
such general esteem, that, notwithstanding the
plainness of his appearance, suitable to the medio.
crity of his fortune, he was not confidered as a
mere adventurer, to whor indigence had suggested
a visionary projet, but was received as a person
to whose propositions serious attention was due,

Ferdinand and Isabella, though fully occupied

cia'minedby their operations against the Moors, paid so
by unskilulmuch regard to Columbus, as to remit the con.
judges, .fideration of his plan to the queen's confessor,

Ferdinand de Talavera. He consulted such of his
countrymen, as were supposed best qualified to
decide with refped to a subjed of this kind. But
true science had, hitherto, made so little progress
in Spain, that the pretended philosophers, feleded
to judge in a matter of such moment, did noc
comprehend the firfl principles, upon which
Columbus founded his conjectures and hopes.
Some of them, from miltaken notions concerning
the dimensions of the globe, contended that a
voyage to those remote parts of the east, which
Columbus expeced to discover, could not be
performed in less than three years. Others con.
cluded, that either he would find the ocean to b(
of infinite extent, according to the opinion o
some ancient philosophers; or, if he filould perfil
in tfeering towards the eft beyond a ccrt.i

point, that the convex figure of the globe would B o o
prevent his return, and that he must inevitably 1l.
1erifh, in the vain attempt, to open a communica-
tion between the tw9 opposite hemispheres, which
nature had for ever disjoined. Even without
deigning to enter into any particular difcuflion,
many rejeced the scheme in general, upon the
cre(lit of a maxim, under which the ignorant and
unenterprifing shelter themselves in every age,
" That it is presumptuous in any person , to
fippofe that he alone possesses knowledge fupe-
rior to all the reft of mankind united." They
maintained , that if there were really any such
countries, as Columbus pretended, they could not
have remained so long concealed, nor would the
wisdom and sagacity of former ages have left th;e
glory of this invention to an obscure Genoese pilot.

It required all Columbus's patience and address who make
to negociate with men capable of advancing fich vorfbe
strange propositions. He had to contend not report coi.
only with the obstinacy of ignorance, but with ""cer'tig
what is still more intra&able, the pride of false
knowledge. After innumerable conferences, and
wating five years in fruitless endeavours to inform
and to satisfy judges so little capable of deciding
with propriety, Talavera, at last, made such an
infavorable report to Ferdinand and lfabella, as
induced them to acquaint Columbus, that until
the war with the Moors should be brought to a
period, it would be imprudent to engage in any
"lew and expensive enterprise.

Whatever care was taken to soften the

G 3

o o E harshness of this declaration, Columbus confidered
IX. it as a final rejection of his propolals. But happily

for mankind, that superiority of genius, which is
capable of forming great and uncommon (lefigns,
is fually accompanied with an ardent enthuiafm,
which can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped
by disappointment. Columbus was of this sanguine
temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel blow
given to his hopes, and retired immediately from
a court, where he had been amused so long with
vain expectations, his confidence in the justness
of his own system did not diminish, and his im-
patience to demonstrate the truth of it by an
acual experiment became greater than ever. Having
courted the protection of sovereign states without
success, he applied, next, to persons of inferior
rank, and addressed successively the dukes of
IVedina Sidonia, and Medina Celi, who, though
fubjeds, were possessed of power and opulence
more than equal to the enterprise which he pro.
jeced. His negociations with them proved as
fruitless, as those in which he had been hitherto
engaged; for these noblemen were either as little
convinced by Columbus's arguments as their
superiors, or they were afraid of alarming the
jealousy, and offending the pride of Ferdinand, by
countcnancing a fchemc which he had rejeced "

Negociation Amid the painful sensations occasioned by such
of his bro a fucceflion of (lifaippointments, Columbus had to
therinEng- fufiain the additional diltrcfs, of having received

Lif of Colu. c. . Ierrer dec. i. c
r; Life of Colunib. c. J1 3. errera , dec. I. lib. i. c. 7,

no accounts of his brother, whom he had ent to B o o K
the court of England. In his voyage to that LI.
country, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate as
to fall into the hands of pirates, who having
stripped him of every thing, detained him a
prisoner for several years. At length he made
his escape , and arrived in London , but in fch
extreme indigence, that he was obliged to employ
himself during a considerable time, in drawing and
fElling maps, in order to pick up as much money
as would purchase a decent drcfs , in which he
might venture to appear at court. He then laid
before the king the proposals, with which he had
been intru[ted by his brother , and , notwith-
flanding Henry's excessive caution and parsimony,
which rendered him averse to new or expensive
undertakings, he received Columbus's overtures.,
with more approbation , than any monarch to
whom they had hitherto been presented.

Meanwhile, Columbus being unacquainted withi CnlTiumus
his brother's fate, and having now no prospect pror^e,:o
of encouragement in Spain, resolved to visit the encourage.

nent il

court of England in pcrfonl, in hopes of meeting sain.
with a more favorable reception there. Hle had
already made preparations for this purpose , and
taken meafurcs for the disposal of his children
during his abfcn.ce, when Juan P'ercz, the guardian
of the monaflcry of Rabida, near Palos, in which
tlhey had been edlucated, alrnefly solicitcd him
to defer his journey for a short time. I'crez wV.s
a man of conilerable learning, and of some crcdit
with Queen Ifrbell , to whoml he was known

( 4

B o o R personally. He was warmly attached to Columbu,

It. with whose abilities as well as integrity he had

many opportunities of being acquainted. Prompted
by curiosity or by friendship, he entered upon an
accurate examination of his system, in conjunction
with a physician fettled in the neighbourhood,
who was a considerable proficient in mathematical
knowledge. This investigation satisfied them so
thoroughly, with refped to the solidity of the
principles on which Columbus founded his opinion,
and the probability of success in executing the plan
which he proposed, that Perez, in order to
prevent his country from being deprived of the
glory and benefit, which must accrue to the patrons
of such a grand enterprise, ventured to write to
Isabella, conjuring her to confider the matter anew,
with the attention which it merited.

Moved by the representations ofa person whom

she refpeded, Isabella desired Perez to repair im.
rvediately to the village of Santa Fe, in which,
on account of the siege of Granada , the court
resided at that time, that she might confer with
him upon this important subjed. The first effed
of their interview was a gracious invitation of
Columbus back to court, accompanied with the
present of a finall fum to equip him for the
journey. As there was now a certain profped,
that the war with the Moors would speedily be
brought to a happy issue by the reduction of
Granada, which would leave the nation at liberty
to engage in new undertakings; this, as well as
the mark of royal favor, with which Columbus

iad been lately honored, encouraged his friends B o o R
o appear with greater confidence than formerly II.
n support of his scheme. The chief of these,
lonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the finances
n Castile, and Luis de Santangel, receiver of the
cclefiaftical revenues in Aragon, whose meritorious
eal in promoting this great design entitles their
lames to an honorable place in history, introduced
olumbus to many persons of high rank, and
ntereftcd them warmly in his behalf.

But it was not an easy matter to inspire is again di
erdinand with favorable sentiments. He still aprointed
egarded Columbus's project as extravagant and
himerical, and in order to render the efforts of
is partisans ineffecual, he had the address to
mploy in this new negociation with him, some
f the persons who had formerly pronounced his
cheme to be impracicable. To their astonishment,
oluimbus appeared before them with the fame
onfident hopes of success as formerly, and insisted
pon the fame high recompence. He proposed
hat a small fleet should be fitted out, under his
ommand, to attempt the discovery, and demanded
o be appointed hereditary admiral and viceroy of
II the seas and lands which he fould discover,
nd to have the tenth of the profits arising from
hem, fettled irrevocably upon himself and his
efcndants. At the fame time, he offered to
lvancc the eighth part of the fum necessary for
ccomplifling his design on condition that he
hould be entitled to a proportional firare of benefit
om the adventure. If the enterprise fihould

B o o K totally miscarry, he made no stipulation for any

i1. reward or emolument whatever. Instead of viewing

this condudt as the clearest evidence of his full
persuasion with refped to the truth of his own
system, or being firuck with that magnanimity
which, after so many delays and repulses, wouli
sloop to nothing inferior to its original claims
the persons with whom Columbus treated, began
meanly to calculate the expense of the expedition,
and the value of the reward which he demanded
'I'he expense, moderate as it was, they represented
to be too great for Spain, in the present exhaued
fate of its finances. They contended, that the
honors and emoluments claimed by Columbus,
were exorbitant, even if he should perform the
utmost of what he had promised; and if all his
sanguine hopes flould prove illusive, such val
concelilons to an adventurer would 'be deemed'
not only inconsiderate, but ridiculous. In this
iinpofing garb of caution and prudence, their
opinion appeared so plausible, and was so warmly
supported by Ferdinand , that Isabella declined
giving any countenance to Columbus, and abruptly
broke off the negociation with him which she had
begun.

This was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the dif.ippointinenlt which he had hitherto met
'vith. ' lie invitation to court from Isabella , like
an unexpetcd ray of light, had opened such
prospeCts of fucccfs, as encouraged him to hope
that his libors were at an end ; but now darklc!
and tinccrtaiinty returned , and his minld, firn !

t was, could hardly support the shock of such an B o o t
nforefeen reverse. He withdrew in deep anguish 1I.
rom court, with an intention of prosecuting his

,oyage to England, as his last resource.
About that time Granada surrendered , and provesatlaft
erdinand and Isabella , in tiumplal pomp, took ruccefsful.
ofcltion of a city, the redudtion of which J14'-
xtirpated a foreign power from the heart of their
lominions, and rendered them masters of all the
)ro\inces, extending from the bottom of the
yrenees to the frontiers of Portugal. As the flow
f spirits which accompanies success elevates the
ind, and renders it enterprising, Quintanilla and
aantagel, the vigilant and discerning patrons of
Columbus, took advantage of this favorable fitta-
ion, in order to make one effort more in behalf
f their friend. They addressed themselves to
fabella, and, after expressing some surprise, that
e, who had always been the munificent patroness
fgenerous undertakings, filould hesitate so long
o countenance the most splendid fheme that
ad ever been proposed to any monarch ; they
eprefented to her, that Columbus was [a man of
found understanding and virtuous charadler,
'cll qualified, by his experience in navigation , as
well as his knowleldge of geometry , to form jufc
(ecas with refpedt to the fItrudtire of the globe and
e lituation of its various regions; that, by oft''ring
0 lilk his own life and fortune in the eyxecutiot
flls scheme, he gave the mofl lttiif sing evidence
oth of his integrity and hope of ficefs; that
he fium requisite for equipping such an armament

B o o as he demanded was inconsiderable, and th

n. advantages which might accrue from his under

taking were immense; that he demanded
recompence for his invention and labor, but wha
was to arise from the countries which he fhoul
discover; that, as it was worthy of her magnanimit
to make this noble attempt to extend the fpher
of human knowledge, and to open an intercourf
with regions hitherto unknown, so it would affor
the highest fatisfadtion to her piety and zeal, aft
re-eftablilhing the Christian faith in those province
of Spain from which it had been long banilhed,
to discover a new world, to which fle migh
communicate the light and blessings of divin
truth; that if now fie did not decide instantly,
the opportunity would be irretrievably loft; tha
Columbus was on his way to foreign countries,
where some prince, more fortunate or adventurous
would close with his proposals, and Spain would
for ever bewail the fatal timidity which had
excluded her from the glory and advantages thai
she had once in her power to have enjoyed.

These forcible arguments, urged by persons o

such authority, and at a jundure so well chosen
produced the desired effect. They dispelled all
Isabella's doubts and fears4 she ordered Columbus
to be instantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting
the low (late of her finances, generously offered
to pledge her own jewels, in order to raise s
much money as might be needed in making
preparations for the voyage. Santangel, in a

nfport of gratitude, kissed the queen's hand, B o o K
d in order to save her fi-om having recourse to 11.
ch a mortifying expedient for procuring money, 149z,
gaged to advance immediately the fum that was
qufite ".
Columbus had proceeded some leagues on his Thecondi.
urney, when the melfenger from Isabella overtook tione ofhis
, tT * * r

. . j agreement

m. Upon receiving an account of the unexpected withSpain.
volution in his favor, he returned directly to
nta F , though some remainder of diffidence
ill mingled itself with his joy. But the cordial
ception which he met with from Isabella, toge.
er with the near profped of setting out upon
at voyage which had so long been the object
his thoughts and wilhes, soon effaced the
membrance of all that he had suffered in Spain,
uriiig eight tedious years of solicitation and
fpeinfe. The egociation now went forward with
cility and dispatch, and a treaty or capitulation
ith Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of
pril, one thousand four hundred and ninety.two.
he chief articles of it were, 1. Ferdinand and
abella, as sovereigns of the ocean, constituted.
olumbus their high admiral in all the seas, islands,
nd continents which flould be discovered by his
(lullry; and stipulated, that he and his heirs
r ever flhould enjoy this office, with the fame
owers and prerogatives which belonged to the
igh admiral of Castile, within the limits of his
urifdidtion . . They appointed Columbus their

' lHcrrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8.

B o o viceroy in all the islands and continents whic

ii. he hould discover; but if for the better adminiftn
I49 . tion of affairs, it should hereafter be neceffiry t

eflablifh a separate governor in any of thof
countries, they authorized Columbus to nam
three persons, of whom they would chufe one so
that office; and the dignity of viceroy, with a
its immunities, was likewise to be hereditary in th
family of Columbus. 3. They granted to Columbu
and his heirs for ever the tenth of the free profi
accruing from the produdtions and commerce
the countries which he lfould discover. 4. The
declared, that if any controversy or law-suit fl
arise with refpedt to any mercantile tranfadion
the countries which should be discovered, it flioul
be determined by the sole authority of Columbus
or of judges to be appointed by him. The
permitted Columbus to advance one-eighth par
of what flould be expended in preparing for tht
expedition, and in carrying on commerce with tht
countries which he fllould discover., and entitled
him, in return, to an eighth part of the profit".

Though the name of Ferdinand appea

conjoined with that of I bella in this tranfadtioi
his difluii of Columbus was itill so violent tha
he refused to take any part in the enterprifc
king of Aagon. As the whole expense of the
expedition was to be ldefrayed by the crown 0
Castile, Ifabclla reserved for her fubjeds of, that
kingdom an exclusive right to all the benefit
which might redound from its success.

" Lift oFColu:nbus c. x i. lierrera,dec. . lib. i.c.9

As oon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, o o K
y her attention and ativity in forwarding the iI.
reparations for the voyage, endeavoured to The prepa-
ake some reparation to Columbus for the time his voyage
hich he had loft in fruitless flicitation. By the
elfth of Mlay, all that depended upon her was
djufted; and Columbus waited on the king and
ueen, in order to receive their final instructions.
very thing refpeting the destination and condut
the voyage, they committed implicitly to the
ifpofal of his prudence. But, that they might
void giving any just cause of offence to the king
f Portugal , they ftridly enjoined him not to
proach near to the Portuguese settlements on
e coast of Guinea, nor in any of the other
ountries to which the Portuguese claimed right
discoverers. Isabella had ordered the ships, of
hich Columbus was to take the command, to be
tted out in the port of Palos, a small maritime
wn in the province ofAndalufia. As the guardian
an Perez, to whom Columbus had already been
much indebted, refidetl in the neighbourhood
this place, he, by the influence of that good
cclelaftic, as well as by his own connexion
ith the inhabitants, not only raised among them
lat he wanted of the funm that he was bound by
caty to advance, but engaged several of them
accompany him in the voyage. The chief of
ere associates were three brothers of the name of
'inzon , of considerable wealth, and of great
Xpericnce in naval affairs, who were willing to
lzard their lives and fortunes in the expedition.

h o o K But, after all the efforts of Isabella and Colum,

iI. bus, the armament was not suitable, either to th
1492. dignity of the nation by which it was equipped

or to the importance of the service for which i
wvas destined. It confifed of three velfels. Th
largest, a sip of no considerable burden, wa
commanded by Columbus, as admiral, who gave
it the name of Santa ilaria, out of refpedt for th
Blefled Virgin, whom he honored with fingul
devotion. Of the second, called the Pinta, Martin
Pinzon was captain, and his brother Francis pilot
The third, named the Niqna, was under th
command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These to
were light vessels, hardly superior in burden o
force to large boats. This squadron, if it meri
that name, was victualled for twelve months, an
had on board ninety men, mofily sailors, togethe
with a few adventurers who followed the fortune
of Columbus, and some gentlemen of Isabella'
court, whom {he appointed to accompany him,
Though the expense of the undertaking was on
of the circumstances which chiefly alarmed th
court of Spain, and retarded so long the negocia
tion with Columbus, the fum employed in fitting
out this squadron did not exceed four thoufan
pounds.

As the art of flip- building in the fiftcentl

century was extremely rude, and the bulk
vefels was accommodated to the short and ea
voyages along the coast which they were accu
tomed to perform, it is a proof of the courage
well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that h

ventured,

ventured , with a fleet so unfit for a distant B O O K
navigation, to explore unknown seas, where he II
had no chart to guide him, no knowledge of the t49.
tides and currents, and no experience of the
dangers to which he might be exposed. His eager-
nest to accomplinf the great design which had so
long' engrossed his thoughts, made him overlook
or disregard every circumiftaice that would have
intimi(lated a mind less adventurous, He pushed
iorward the preparations with such ardor, and
was seconded so effetually by the persons to
whom Isabella committed the fuiperintendence of
this business, that every thing was soon in readi-
ness for the voyage. But as Columbus was deeply
impressed with sentiments of religion, he would
not set out upon an expedition so arduous, and
of which one great object was to extend the
knowledge of the Christian faith, without implor-
in publicly the guidance and protection of
Hcaven. With this view, he, together with all
the persons under his command, marched in
olemn procession to the monaflery of Rabida.
Alter confefling their fins, and obtaining abfolu-
tion, they received the holy sacrament from the
hands of the guardian, who joined his prayers to
theirs for the success of an enterprise which he
had so zcaloufly patronized.
Next morning, being Friday the third day of sicderar.
\Agul , in the year one thousand four hundlred tl"e frob
n(l ninety- two, Columbus set fail, a little before
1in-rile, in presence of a vast crowd of fpecCtators,
vho sent up their supplications to Heaven for the

VOL .
I. H

B o o K prosperous ifTue of the voyage, which they wiflied,

1I. rather than expedced. Columbus steered direcly
4v12. for the Canary Islands, and arrived there without
Anguit13. any occurrence that would have deserved notice

on any other occasion. But, in a voyage of such
expectation and importance, every circumflance
was the objec of attention. The rudder of the
Pinta broke loose , the day after he left the
harbour, and that accident alarmed the crew, no
less fuipertlitious than unskilful, 'as a certain omen
of the unfortunate destiny of the expedition. Even
iln the short run to the Canaries, the ships were
found to be so crazy and ill appointed, as to
be very improper for a navigation 'which was
expected to be both long and dangerous. Colun
bus refitted them, however, to the belt of his
power, and havilg supplied himself with freli
proviions, he took his departure from Gomera,
one of the most westerly of the Canary islands,
on the sixth day of September.

rihc:urfr Here the voyage of discovery may properly be
1:,l., lie said to begin; for Columbus holding his course due
ii. 'weft, left immediately the usual track of navigation,

and ltretched into unfrequented and unknown seas.
The first day, as it was very calm, he made but
little way; but on the second, he loft fight of the
Canarlcs; and many of the sailors, dejeced already
and (lifmaycd, when they contemplated the bold-
necfq of the undcrtaking, began to beat their
breasts, and to flied tears, as if they were never
more to bholl land. Columbus comforted themn
with affuranccs of fccefs, and the profpct of vt

wealth, in those opulent regions whither he was B o aK
condtding them. This early discovery of the spirit W.
f his followers taught Columbus, that he mruft '49-
)repare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable
ifficulties which might be expeted from the
ature of his undertaking, but with such as were
ikely to arise from the ignorance and timidity of
he people under his command; and he perceived
iat the art of governing the minds of men would
e no less requisite for accomplishing the disco-
eries which he had in view, than naval kill. and
ndaunted courage. Happily for himself, and for
he country by which he was employed, he joined
o the ardent temper and inventive genius of a
rojeor, virtues of another species, which are
arely united with them. He possessed a thorough
nowledge of mankind, an insinuating address, a
atient perseverance in executing any plan, the
erfed government of his own palfions, and the
alcnt of acquiring an ascendant over those of
ther men. All these qualities, which formed him
orcommand, were accompanied with that fupeior
iowledge of his profelion, which begets consid-
'lce in times of difficulty and danger. To unskilful
panilh failo.s, accustomed only to coasting voyages
i the MNediterranean', the maritime science of vigilance
olumbus, the fruit of thirty years experience, aind aein.

tion ofCo.

inproved by an acquaintance with all the inven- iul,Is.i
'ois of the Portuguese, appeared immcnfe. As
0on as they put to sea, he regulated every thing
y his sole authority; he superintended the execl-
Ion of every order; and allowing himself only a

t 2

B o o few hours for flecp, he was at all other times

It. upon deck. As his course lay through seas which
149.. had not formerly been visited, the founding line,

or instruments for observation, were continually
in his hands. After the example of the Portuguese
d(ifcovercrs, he attended to the motion of tides and
currents, watched the flight of birds, the appear,
ance of fishes, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that
floated on the waves, and entered every occurrence,
with a minute exadnefs, in the journal which he
kept. As the length of the voyage could not fail
of alarming sailors habituated only to flior excur,
sions, Columbus endeavoured to conceal from
them the real progress which they made. With
this view, though they run eighteen leagues on
the second day after they left Gomera, he gave
out that they had advanced only fifteen, and he
uniformly employed the fame artifice of reckoning
short during the whole voyage. By the fourteenth
of September, the fleet was above two hundred
leagues to the weft of the Canary Isles, at a
greater distance from land than any Spaniard ha

Apprchen. been before that time. There they were firuck
flo"nsia' with an appearance no less aftonifling than new.
is rw. They obfcrvecl that the magnetic needle, in their

compafes , did not point cxadtly to the polar
flar, but varied towards the weft; and as they
proceeded, this variation increaced. This appear-
ancc, which is now familiar, though it still remain
one of the myflcries of nature, into the cause of
which the sagacity of man hath not been able to
penetrate, filled the companions of Columbus with

terror. They were now in a boundless unknown R o o K
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation; It.
nature itfeJf seemed to be altered, and the only 9 .
guide which they had left was about to fail them.
Columbus, with no less quickness than ingenuity,
invented a reason for this appearance, which,
though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so,
plausible to them, that it dispelled their fears, or
silenced their murmurs.

He still continued to steer due weft, nearly
in the fame latitude with the Canary islands. In
this course he came within the sphere of the trade
wind, which blows invariably from east to wef,
between the tropics and a few degrees beyond
hem. He advanced before this eady gale with
uch uniform rapidity, that it was seldom necessary
o shift a fail. When about four hundred leagues
o the well of the Canaries, he found the sea fa
overed with weeds, that it resembled a meadow
fvaft extent; and in some places they were fa
hick, as to retard the motion of the vessels. This
range appearance occasioned new alarm and
ifquiet. The sailors imagined that they were now
rrived at the utmost boundary of the navigable
cean; that these floating weeds would oblirud
heir farther progress, and concealed dangerous
ocks, or some large trad of land, which had funk,
hey knew not how, in that place. Columbus
ndeavoured to persuade them, that what had
larmed, ought rather to have encouraged them,
ind was to be confidcrcd as a sign of approaching
!iad. At the fame time, a brilk gale arose , and

II 3

B O O I carried them forward. Several birds were seen

Ii. hovering about the flip " , and directed their
149. flight towards the weft. The dcfponding crew

refurned some degree of spirit, and began to
entertain fresh hopes.

Thf eil. Upon the first of October they were, according
crtafe. to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundred and

seventy leagues to the weft of the Canaries; but
left his men fllould be intimidated by the prodigi.
ous length of the navigation, he gave out that
they had proceeded only five hundred and eighty.
four leagues; and, fortunately for Columbus,
neither his own pilot, nor those of the other
fiips, had skill sufficient, to correc this error,
and discover the deceit. They had now been
above three weeks at sea; they had proceeded far
beyond what former navigators had attempted or
deemed possible; all their prognostics of discovery,
drawn from the flight of birds and other circum.
stances, had proved fallacious; the appearances of
land, with which their own credulity or the
artifice of their commander had from time to time
flattered and amused them, had been altogether
illusive, and their profped of success seemed now
to be as distant as ever. These refletions occurred
often to men, who had no other objct or occupa.
tion, than to reason and discourse concerningthe
intention and circumfanccs of their expedition,
They made impression, at irft, upon the ignoranl
and timid, and extending, by degrees, to fichi a

" See NOTE XIII.

were better informed or more resolute, the conta- B o o,-;!
gion spread at length from ship to ship. From In.
secret whispers or murmurings, they proceeded to 14y2-
open cabals and public complaints. They taxed
their sovereign with inconsiderate credulity, in
paying such regard to the vain promises and rash
conjedtures of an indigent foreigner, as to hazard
the lives of so many of her own fubjeds, in
prosecuting a chimerical scheme. They affirmed
that they had fully performed their duty, by
venturing so far in an unknown and hopeless
course, and could incur no blame, for refutingy to
follow, any longer, a desperate adventurer to
certain defirucdion. They contended, that it was
necessary to think of returning to Spain, while
their crazy vessels were fill in ,a condition to
keep the sea, but expressed their fears that the
attempt would prove vain, as the wind, which
had hitherto been so favorable to their course,
mut render it impoflible to fail in the opposite
direcdion.. A agreed that Columbus Tihould be
compcllcd by force to adopt a measure on which
heir common safety depended. Some of the more
audacious proposed, as the rnoft expeditious and
certain method for getting rid at once of his
eontrances, to throw him into the. sea, being
lrfuacled that, upon their return to. Spain, the
(enth of an unfucccfsful projector would excite
ittle concern, and be inquired into with no.
cUlrio ty.

C Iolun bus was fully fcnfib.e of Ilis I)eilo Tl,.rlir.r
fitt,;tiou. lIe had obfcrved, with Sgr.eat uncaflc ,fl,,i', h,

{ 4 tlil.

B o o x the fatal operation of ignorance and of fear in

11. producing difaffeclion among his crew, and sa\w
'l*- that it was now ready to burst out into open

mutiny. He retained, however, perfect presence
of mind. He affeced to seem ignorant of their
machinations. Notwithstanding the agitation and
solicitude of his own mind, he appeared with a
cheerful countenance, like a man satisfied with
the progress which he had made, and confident
of success. Sometimes he employed all the arts of
ininuation to sooth his men. Sometimes he
endeavoured to work upon their ambition or
avarice, by magnificent descriptions of the fame
and wealth which they were about to acquire. On
other occations, he assumed a tone of authority,
and threatened them with vengeance from their
sovereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour, they
should defeat this noble effort to promote the
glory of God , and to exalt the Spanifi name
above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious sailors, the words of a man whom they
had been accustomed to reverence, were weighty
and perfualive, and not only restrained them from
those violent excesses, which they meditated, but
prevailed with them to accompany their admiral
for fomc tine longer.

As they proceedcd, the indications of approach.

ing land fccmed to be more certain, and excited
hope in proportion. The birds began to appear ill
filo(ks, making towards the fouthwefl. Columbus,
il iitation of the Portuguefc navigators, Wvllc
had been guided, in fcvcral of their discoverics:

y the motion of birds, altered his course from B o o I
ue weft towards that quarter whither they pointed ir.
heir flight. But, after holding on for several days 140-
n this new diredion, without any better success
han formerly, having fecn no object, during
hirty days, but the sea and the ky, the hopes
f his companions subsided faster than they had
ifen; their fears revived with additional force; Their fears
mpatience, rage, and despair, appeared in every return.
ountenance. All sense of subordination was loft: )angerof
he officers, who had 'hitherto concurred with a mutiny
olumbus in opinion, and supported his authority,
ow took partwith the private men; they assembled
umultuoufly on the deck, expoftulated with their
ommander, mingled threats with their expoftula-
ions, and required him instantly to tack about
nd to return to Europe. Columbns perceived
that it would be of no avail to have recourse to
any of his former arts, which having been tried
o often, had loft their effect; and that it was
mpolfible to rekindle any zeal for the success of
the expedition among men, in whose breasts fear
had extinguished every generous sentiment. He Diftrefsof
aw that it was no less vain to think of employing Columnbus.
either gentle or severe mcafures, to quell a mutiny
o general and so violent. It was necessary, on all
tlhfe accounts, to sooth paflions whlich he could
no longer command, and to give way to a torrent
too impetuous to be checked. M-e prornifed solemnly
to his meci that hewould comply wild their rcqueft,
Providcd they would accompany him, and obey
his commands for three days longer, and if, during

B.o o X that time, land were not discovered, he won

Ii. then abandon the enterprise, and dired his cour
1492. towards Spain .

Enicouraging Enraged as the sailors were, and impatient to
appearances
f fucces. turn their faces again towards their native country

this proposition did not appear to them unreason
able. Nor did Columbus hazard much in confini
himself to a term so short. T he presages of difcovei
ing land were now so numerous and promising
that he deemed them infallible. For some days ti
founding line reached the bottom, and the o
which it brought up indicated land to be at no
great distance. The flocks of birds increased., ad
were composed not only of sea fowl, but of such
land birds as could not be supposed to fly fx
from the fi(ore. The crew of the Pinta observe
a cane floating, which seemed to have been newly
cut, and likewise a piece of timber artificially
carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna took up th
branch of a tree with red berries, perfectly frefi
T'he clouds around the setting fun assumed a nee
appearance; the air was more mild and warm,
and, during night, the wind became unequal and
variable. From all these symptoms, Columbus wav
so confident of being near land, that on the evenin!
of the elcventh of October, aftcr public prayers so
success, he ordered the fails to be furled, and thi
ships to lie by, keeping ftrid watch, left tlhe
fhoull be driven aftlore in the night. During thi
interval of suspense and expedation, no man fu

O' vicdo, Ilil. ap. Ranmu. vol. iii. p i. E.

is eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently B o o
owards that quarter where they expeted to II.
ifcover the land, which had been so long the I492z
bjed of their wilies.
About two hours before midnight, Columbus, Land disco.
anding on the forecastle, obfervel a light at a vered'
iltance, and privately pointed it out to Pedro
uttierez, a page of the queen's wardrobe. Gut-
ierez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comp.
roller of the fleet, all three saw it in motion,
s if it were carried from place to place. A little
fter midnight, the joyful found of land, land,
was heard from the Pinta, which kept always
head of the other ships. But, having been so
ften deceived by fallacious appearances, every
an was now become flow of belief, and waited,
n all the anguish of uncertainty and impatience,
or the return of day. As soon as morning dawned, friday,
11 doubts and fears were dispelled. From every o.12-.
ip an island was seen about two leagues to the
orth, whose flat and verdant fields, well stored
with wood, and watered with many rivulets,
resented the asped of a delightful country. The
rew of the Pinta instantly began the Te Deuim,
s a hymn of thanksgiving to God, and were
oined by those of the other flips , with tears of
oy and transports of congratulation. This office
f gratitude to Heaven was followed by an ad of
uftice to their commander. They threw them-
elves at the feet of Columbus, with feelings

self- condemnation mingled with reverence.
lhcy implored him to pardon their ignorance,

o o incredulity, and insolence, which had created hin
IT. so much unnecessary disquiet, and had so often
491` obftruded the prosecution of his well-concerte

plan; and passing , in the warmth of their ad
miration, from one extreme to another, they no\
pronounced the man, whom they had so lately
reviled and threatened, to be a person inspired
by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude more thai
human, in order to accomplish a design, so fa
beyond the ideas and conception of all formei
ages.

yirflinter. As soon as the fun arose, all their boats were
' i''th manned and armed. They rowed towards the

island with their colors displayed,. with warlike
music, and other martial pomp. As they ap.
proached the coast, they saw it covered witha
multitude of people, whom the novelty of the
spectacle had drawn together, whose attitudes
and gestures expressed wonder and aftoniffhment at
the firange objeds which presented themselves to
their view. Columbus was the first European who
set foot in the Ne ¢ World which he had dif'
covered. He landed in a rich dress, and with
a naked sword in his hand. His men followed,
and kneeling down , they all kissed the ground
which they had so long desired to fee. They next
creded crucifix , and proftrating thcmfelves
before it, returned th;nkls to God for conducting
their voya;.e to such ani happy issue. They the
took folenn polcffion of the country for the
crown of Ciaftile and Leon , with all the fornalitie!

hich the Portuguese were accustomed to observe B o o t
acts of this kind, in their new discoveries". II.
The Spaniards, while thus employed, were T492.
irrounded by many of the natives, who gazed, Theairmu,

silent admiration, upon ations which they nishment.

ould not comprehend, and of which they did
ot foresee the consequences. The dress of the
paniards, the whiteness of their kins, their
eards, their arms, appeared strange and fur-
rising. The vast machines in which they had
aversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon
he waters with wings, and uttered a dreadful
und resembling thunder, accompanied with
ghtning and smoke, struck them with such
error, that they began to refped their new guests
a superior order of beings , and concluded that
ey were children of the Sun, who had descended
o visit the earth.
The Europeans were hardly less amazed at the
ene now before them. Every herb,. and shrub,
nd tree, was different from those which flourished
Europe. The foil seered to be rich, but bore
w marks of cultivation. The climate, even to
panilards, felt warm, though extremely delightful.
he inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence of
ature,entirely naked. Their black hair, long and un-
:urled, floated upon their shoulders , or was bound

e trcles around their heads. 'Ilhcy had no beards, and
very part of their bodies was perfectly finoath.

Life of Columbus, c. za, 3. Herrcra, dec, . lib.
c. 13.

B o o Their complexion was of a duCky copper color,

li. their features singular, rather than disagreeable
149'. their asped gentle and timid. Though not tall

they were well haped, and ative. Their faces
and several parts of their body, were fantafically
painted with glaring colors. They were hy
first through fear, but soon became familiar with
the Spaniards, and with transports of joy received
from them hawks- bells, glass beads, or other
baubles, in return for which they gave such pro
visions as they had, and some cotton yarn, the
only commodity of value that they could produce.
Towards evening, Columbus returned to his flips,
accompanied by many of the islanders in their
boats, which they called canoes, and though
rudely formed out of the trunk of a ingle tree,
they rowed them with surprising dexterity. Thus,
in the first interview between the inhabitants of
the old and new worlds, every thing was con,
duded amicably, and to their mutual fatisfadion,
The former, enlightened and ambitious, formed
already vafl ideas with refp)cd to the advantages
which they night derive from the regions that
began to open to their view. The latter, simple
and undifcerning, had no foresight of the cala
mities and desolation which were apprtaching
their country.

Colunibus Columbus , who now afTumed the title and
afrtines the authority of admiral and viceroy, called the island
titl o at. which he had discovered San Salvador. It is better
miral and
viceroy., known by the name of Guanahalni, which te

natives gave to it, and is one of that large cllle

f islands called the Lucaya or Bahama isles. It is B o o I
tuated above three thousand miles to the weft of II
omera, from which the squadron took its depar- 149.
re, and only four degrees to the south of it;
little had Columbus deviated from the westerly
urfe, which he had chosen as the moil proper.
Columbus employed the next day in visiting Proceeds to
e coasts of the ifand; and from the universal wards the
overty of the inhabitants, he perceived that this
as not the rich country for which he fought.
ut, conformably to his theory concerning the
ifcovery of those regions of Asia which stretched
wards the east, he concluded that San Sal-
ador was one of the isles which geographers
efcribed as situated in the vast ocean adjacent to
dia". Having observcd that most of the people
horn he had seen wore small plates of gold, by
ay of ornament, in their nostrils, he eagerly
quired where they got that precious metal. They
ainted towards the south, and made him com-
rehend by signs, that gold abounded in coun-
ies situated in that quarter. Thither he imme-
iately determined to diredt his couife, in full
nfidence of finding there those opulent regions
hich had been the object of his voyage, and
ould be a recompence for all his toils and dangers.
e took along with him seven of the natives of
i, Salvador, that, by acquiring the Spanifn
'guage, they might serve as guides and intcr-
rctrs; and thufe innocent people confidered it

Pet. Mart. epilf. 13 .

o o o rk as a mark of diftincion when they Were felece

II. to accompany him.
.492. He fa fa everal iands , and touched at thr

Di[covers
Cuba. of the largeR, on which he bestowed the nam

of St. lMary of the Conception, Fernandina, an
Isabella. But as their foil, productions, and i
habitants, nearly refernbled those of San Salvado
he made no flay in any of them. He inquire
every where for gold, and the signs that wve
uniformly made by way of answer confirmed hi
in the opinion that it was brought from the foiut
HIe followed that course , and soon discovered
country of vast extent, not perfectly level, lik
those which he had already visited, but so diverfifi
Wvith rising grounds, hills, rivers, woods, an
plains, that he was uncertain whether it migh
prove an island, or part of the continent. Th
natives of San Salvador, whom he had on board
called it Cuba; Columbus gave it the name
Juanna. He entered the mouth of a large riv
with his squadron , and all the inhabitants fled t
the mountains as he approached the flore. Bu
as he resolved to careen his flips in that place,
sent forne Spaniards , together with one of tb
people of San Salvador, to view the interior par
of the countty. They, having advanced abov
fixtv miles from the lore , reported(, upon thei
return, that the foil w;is richer andl more cultivate;
than any they had hl itherto discovered ; tlhlt
bcfidcs many scattercd cottages, they had fotin
one village,, containing above a thousand inhab
tanits; that the people , thoLh naked , seemcd I

l.o

e more intelligent than those of San Salvador, B o K
ut had treated them with the fame refpedful 11.
tention, kifling their feet, and honoring them as 149:.
cred beings allied to Heaven; that they had
iven them to eat a certain root, the taste of which
fernbled roasted chefnuts, and likewise a singular
ecies of corn called maize, which, either when
afted whole or ground into meal , was abundantly
alatable; that there seemed to be no four-footed
nimals in the country, but a species of dogs,
hich could not bark, and a creature resembling
rabbit, but of a much smaller size; that they
ad observed some ornaments of gold among the
eople, but of no great value .
These messengers had prevailed with some of ilisconjec-

tures with

e natives to accompany them, who informed regard to it,
olumbus, that the gold of which they made
eir ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By this
ord they meant the middle or inland part of
iuba; but Columbus, being ignorant of their
nguage, as well as unaccustomed to their pronun-
ation, and his thoughts running continually upon
s own theory concerning the discovery of the
aft Indies, he was led, by the resemblance of
tinld, to suppose that they spoke of the Great
han, and imagined that the opulent kingdom of
at/ln, dcfcribed by Marco Polo, was not very
tnote. This induced him to employ some time
viewing the country. He visited almolt every

Life of Columbus, c. 4-8. Herrera, dec. t. lib
c. 14.

VOL. . .

s o o . harbour, fron Porto del Principe, on the nort

IJ. coalt of Cuba, to the eastern extremity of th
'9,' island; but, though delighted with the beauty

the scenes, which every were pr.fented themselves
and amazed at the luxuriant fertility of the foil
both which, from their novelty, made a no
lively impreflion pon his imagination" , he di
not find gold in such quantity as was fufficien
to fatisfv either the avarice of his followers,
thl: i:xpeclations of the court to which he was
recurn. The people of the country, as muc
altonilfed at his eagerness in quest of gold,
the uropeans were at their ignorance and si
plicity, pointed towards the east, where an ifla
which they called layti was situated, in whi
that metal was more abundant than among the
Columbus ordered his squadron to bend its couf
thither; but Martin Alonfo Pinzon, impatient
be the first who should take possession of ti
treasures which this country was supposed
contain, quitted his companions, regardless of
the admiral's signals to flacken fail until they flou
come up with him.

:)i,.r.rs Columbuls, retarded by contrary winds, di
1b,"''.1tl" not reach i layti till the lixth of December. 1

called the port where he first touchcd St. Nichola
-and the illand itself fpalgnola, in honor of th
kingdom by which he was employed; and it
the only country, of those he had yet difcovcred
which has retained the name that he gave it. P

= See NOT1I XV.

e could neither meet with the Pinta, nor have B o o K
[ny intercourse with the inhabitants, who fled in 1.
rcat conftcrnation towards the woods, he soon
uitted St. Nicholas , and failing along the northern
oaf of the island , he entered another harbour,
hich he called Conception. Here he was more
rtunate; his people overtook a woman who
vas flying from them, and after treating her with
reat gentleness, dismissed her with a present of
clh toys as they knew were most valued in those
cgions. The description which she gave to her
ountrymen of the humanity and wonderful quali-
ie, of the strangers; their admiration of the trinkets,
vhich he lhewed with exultation; and their
agernefs to participate of the fame favors; removed
11 their fears, and induced many of them to repair
o the harbour. The fange objecs which they
eheld, and the baubles which Columbus bestowed
pon them, amply gratified their curiosity and
ieir wifles. They nearly resembled the people
fGuanahani and Cuba. They were naked like
hem, ignorant, and simple ; and seemed to be
qually unacquainted with all the arts which appear
oift eceffary in polished societies; but they were
ernle, credulous, and timid, to a degree which
ndeicd it easy to acquire the ascendant over
em , elpecially as their excessive admiration led
cml into the fame error with the people of the
ther illands , in believing the Spaniards to be
ore llhan mortals, and descended immediately
om lHeaven. They possessed gold in greater
buldance than their neighbours, which they

1.

I o o readily exchanged for bells, beads, or pins; ad

11. in this unequal traffic, both parties were highly
14"3 pleased, each confidering themselves as gainers by

the transaction. Here Columbus was visited by a
prince or ctz2ique of the country. He appeared
with all the pomp known among a simple people,
being carried in a fort of palanquin upon the
shoulders of four menl, and attended by many of
his subjects, who served him with great refpedt,
His depnrtment was grave and flately, very reserved
towards his own people, but with Columbus and
the Spaniards extremely courteous. He gave the
admiral some thin plates of gold, and a girdle of
curious workrnanfip, receiving in return presents
of small value, but highly acceptable to him".

Columbus, fiill intent on discovering the mines

which yielded gold , continued to interrogate all
the natives with whom he had any intercourse
concerning their situation. They concurred in
pointing out a mountainous country, which they
called Cibao, at some ditfance from the sea, and
farther towards the east. Struck with this found,
which appeared to him the fame with Cipano,
the name by which Marco Polo, and other travel
/ lers to the east, distinguished the islands of Japan

he no longer doubted with rcfpet to the vicinitt
of the countries which he had discovered to th'
remote parts of Asia; and, in full expedation o
reaching soon those regions which had been ti

2 Life of Columbus, c. 3 . Hlerrera, dec. I. ib,
C. 15, &c.

object of his voyage, he direced his course towards B o o li
the east. He put into a commodious harbour, n.
which he called St. Thomas, and found that i49.,
district to be under the government of a powerful
cazique, named Guacanahari, who, as he afterwards
learned, was one of the five sovereigns among
whom the whole island was divided. He imme-
diately fcnt messengers to Columbus, who, in his
name, delivered to him the present of a malk
curiously faflioned , with the ears, noe , and
mouth of beaten gold, and invited him to the
place of his residence, near the harbour now called
Cape Franiois, some leagues towards the east.
Columbus dispatched some of his officers to visit
this prince, who, as he behaved himself with
greater dignity, seemed to claim more attention.
They returned, with fich favorable accounts
both of the country and of the people, as made
Columbus impatient for that interview with Gua-
canahari to which he had been invited.

He failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on One oFlis
the twenty-fourth of December, with a fair wind, Sli"' O-
and the sea perfecly calm ; and as, amidst the
multiplicity of his occupations, he had not slut
his eyes for two clays, he retircd at midnight in
order to take some repose , having committed the
helm to the pilot, with Itrid injundtion, not to
quit it for a moment. T'he pilot, dreading no
dalger, carelcfsly left the helm to an unexpericnced
cabin-boy, and the sip, carried away by a current,
was datlced againfl a rock. The violence of the
flock awakened Columbus. lie ran up to the

13

B o o K deck. There, all was confusion and despair. He

nI. alone retained presence of mind. He ordered some
492- of the sailors to take a boat, and carry out an

anchor astern; but, inflead of obeying, they made
off towards the Nigna, which was about half a
league distant. He then commanded the masts to
be cut down, in order to lighten the ship; but
all his endeavours were too late; the vessel opened
near the keel, and filled so faf with water, that
its loss was. inevitable. The smoothness of the
sea, and the timely assistance of boats from the
Nigna, enabled the crew to save their lives. As
soon as the ilanders heard of this disaster, they
crowded to the shore, with their prince Guacanahari
at their head. Instead of taking advantage of the
distress in which they beheld the Spaniards, to
attempt any thing to their detriment, they lamented
their misfortune with tears of sincere condolence,
Not satisfied with this unavailing expression oi
their sympathy, they put to sea a vaRl number ol
canoes, and, under the diredtion of the Spaniards,
afifted in saving whatever could be got out o
the wreck; and by the united labor of so many
hands, almost every ting of value was carried
ashore. As fast as the goods were landed, Gua
canahari in person took charge of them. By hi!
orders, they were all deposited in one place, ant
armed centinels were pofled, who kept the multitudi
at a distance, in order to prevent them not onl)
from embezzling, but from infpeding too curioufl,
;vhatbelonged to their gucis '. Next morning thi

' See NOTE XV.

prince visited Columbus, who was now on board B o o It
the Nigna, and endeavoured to console him for his n.
loss, by offering all that he possessed to repair fit . 14,2.

The condition of Columbus was such, that Diftrefsof

he stood in need of consolation. He had hitherto Columbus.
procured no intelligence of the Pinta., and no
longer doubted but that his treacherous affociace
had set fail for Europe, in order to have the
merit of carrying the first tidings of the extraordinary
discoveries which had been made, and to proe
occupy so far the ear of their sovereign, as to
rob him of the glory and reward to which he
was justly entitled. There remained but one
vessel, and that the smallest and molt crazy of
the squadron, to traverse such a.vast ocean, and
carry so many men back to Europe. Each of
those circumstances was alarming, and filled the
mind of Columbus with the utmost solicitude.
The desire of overtaking Pinzon, and of effacing
the unfavorable impressions which his mifrepre-
fentations might make in Spain, made it nccelfary
to return thither without delay. The difficulty Rerfovs to
of taking such a number of persons aboard the leave part
Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which the ""°'"'ir'",

, ~

. * in the ill.nió,

fertility of the country, and the gentle temper of
the people, had already induced him to form.
lHe resolved to leave a part of his crew in the
illind, that, by residing there, they might learn
the language of the natives, fludy their disposition,
examine the nature of the 'country, search fr'

" Herrera, dec. . lib. i. c. I8.

I4

o o K mines, prepare for the commodious settlement of
ii. the colony, with which he purposed to return,
149.2 and thus secure and facilitate the acquisition of

those advantages which he expected from his
discoveries. When he mentioned this to his men,
all approved of the design; and from impatience
under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the
levity natural to sailors, or from the hopes of
amassing vast wealth in a country which afforded
such promising specimens of its riches, many offered
voluntarily to be among the number of those who
should remain.

Obtains the Nothing was now wanting towards the exe,
sonrCnt of cution of this scheme, but to obtain the consent
the natives.

of Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious simplicity
soon presented to the admiral a favorable oppor.
tunity of proposing it. Columbus having, in the
best manner he could, by broken words and signs,
expressed some curiosity to know the cause which
had moved the islanders to fly with such precipi.
tation upon the approach of his fllips, the cazi
que informed him that the country was much in,
fested by the incursions of certain people, whom
he called Carribeans, who inhabited several islands
to the south ealt. These he describcd as a fierce
and warlike race of men, who delighted in blood,
and devoured the flesb of the prisoners who were
so unhappy as to fall into their hands; and as the
Spaniards, at their sirs appearance, were supposed
to be Carribeans, whom the natives, howevel
numerous, durt not face in battle, they had
rccourfe to their usual method of securing their

safety, by flying into the thickest and molt impe- o o
netrable woods. Guacanahari, while speaking of In.
hose dreadful invaders, discovered such symptoms 1493
ofterror, as well as such confcioufinefs of the in-
bility of his own people to resist them, as led
Columbus to conclude that he would not be alarm-
ed at the proposition of any scheme which afforded
im the profped of an additional security againfl
heir attacks. He inftastly offered him the afiftance
fthe Spaniards to repel his enemies; he engaged
to take him and his people under the protection
of the powerful monarch whom he served, and
ffered to leave in the island such a number of
is men as hould be sufficient, not only to defend
he inhabitants from future incursions, but to
venge their past wrongs.
The credulous prince closed eagerly with the Buildsa
ropofal, and thought himself already safe under fort-
lie patronage of beings sprung from Heaven, and
uperior in power to mortal men. The ground
as marked out for a small fort, which Columbus
alled Navidad, because he had landed there on
hriflmas day. A deep ditch was drawn around
t. The ramparts were fortified with pallifades,
nd the great guns, saved out of the admiral's ship,
ere planted upon them. In ten days the 'work
as finihed; that simple race of men laboring
ith inconsiderate afliduity in eredting this first
onument of their own servitude. During this
me Columbus, by his carcfis and liberality,
abored to increase the high opinion which the
tives entertained of the Spaniards. But while

o o he endeavoured to inspire them with confidence
II. in their disposition to do good, he wished likewise
4,2. to give them some friking idea of their power

to punish and defiroy such as were the objects ol
their indignation. With this view, in prefenc
of a vast assembly, he drew up his men in orde
of battle, and made an otentatious but innocen
display of the sharpness of the Spanish swords
of the force of their spears, and the operation o
their cross-bows. These rude people, strangers
the use of iron, and unacquainted with an
hoflile weapons, but arrows of reeds pointe
with the bones of fiftles, wooden swords, an
javelins hardened in the fire, wondered and tren
bled. Before this surprise or fear had time to abate
he ordered the great guns to be fired. The fudde
explosion struck them with such terror, that the
fell flat to the ground, cvering their faces wit
their hands; and when they beheld the aftoniflin
effec of the bullets among the trees, towards whic
the cannon had been pointed(, they concludedth
it was impossible to refif men, who had the co
mand of such defitructive instruments, and wv
came armed with thunder and lightning again
their enemies.

ilinflrtic. After giving fich impreflions both of t
"1' "'tO benclicence and power of the Spaniards, as migl
tihoc lie left
i,. t. Ilhave rendered it easy to preserve an ascendant OV

the minds of the natives, Columbus appointe
thirty-eight of his people to remain in the iflan
He intr(uted the command of these to Diego
Arada, a gentleman of Cordova, investing hi

Vith the fame powers which he himself had received B o o i
rom Ferdinand and Isabella; and furnished him nI.
vith every thing requisite for the fubfiflence or 49
efence of this infant colony. He ftritly enjoined
hem to maintain concord among themselves, to
ield an unreserved obedience to' their commander,
o avoid giving offence to the natives by any
iolence or exaction, to cultivate the friendship
f Guacanahari, but not to put themselves in his
ower by straggling in small parties, or marching
oo far from the fort. He promised to revifitthem
Qon, with such a reinforcement of strength as
ight enable them to take full possession of the
ountry, and to reap all the fruits of their disco-
eries. In the mean time, he engaged to mention
heir names to the king and queen, and to place
heir merit and.fervices in the most advantageous
ght ".1
Having thus taken every precaution for the
curity of the Colony, he left Navidad on the
urth of January, one thousand four hundred and 1493.
inety.three, and steering towards the east, dif-
overed, and gave names to mol of the harbours
n the northern coast of the island. On the sixth,
edefcried the Pinta, and soon came up with her,
ter.a separation of more than fix weeks. Pinzon
ndeavoured to justify his conduct, by pretending
at he had been driven from his codtrfe by stress
weather , and prevented from returning by con-

Oviedo ap. Ramufio, iii. 1. R , E. Ilerrera, dec, r.
bi.c. zo. Life of Columbus, c. 34.

. o o trary winds. The admiral, though he fill fufpete

II. his perfidious intentions, and knew well wh;
X493. he urged in his own defence to be frivolot

as well as false, was so sensible that this ;
not a proper time for venturing upon any hig
strain of authority, and felt such fatisfadion i
this jundion with his consort, which delivere
him from many disquieting apprehensions, th:
lame as Pinzon's apology was, he admitted of
without difficulty, and relfored him to favo
During his absence from the admiral, Pinzon ha
visited several harbours in the island, had acquire
some gold by trafficking with the natives, butha
made no discovery of any importance.

From the condition of his hips, as well as t

lefrolvesto temper of his men, Columbus now found it n
Etureto ceffary to haflen his return to Europe. The fc

mer, having suffered much during a voyage of fu
an unusual length, were extremely leaky. TI
latter expressed the utmost impatience to revi
their native country, from which they had bei
so long abfcnt, and where they had things so we
derful and unheard-of to relate. Accordingly,
the fixtecnth of January, he directed his coui
towards the north-east, and soon loft fight of lan
He had on board some of the natives, whom
had taken from the different islands which he
covered; and beridcs the gold, which was the ch
object of research, he had colleded specimens
all the produdtions which were likely to becoi
fubjedts of commerce in the several countries,

ell as many unknown birds, and other natural B o o K
riofities, which might attract the attention of the II.
arned, or excite the wonder of the people. The t493'
oyage was prosperous to the fourteenth of Fe-
rary, and he had advanced near five hundred
agues across the Atlantic Ocean, when the wind A violent
egan to rife, and continued to blow with increaf- form arifea.
g rage, which terminated in a furious hurricane,
very expedient that the naval kill and experience
Columbus could devise was employed , in order
save the ships. But it was impolible to with.
and the violence of the storm, and as they were
ill far from any land, deflrution seemed inevi-
ble. The sailors had recourse to prayers to Al.
ighty God, to. the invocation of faints, to vows
d charms, to every thing that religion dictates,
ifuperftition suggests, to the af.righted mind of
an. No profpet of deliverance appearing, they
andoned themselves to despair, and expected
ery moment to be swallowed up in the waves.
eides the palfions which naturally agitate and
arm the human mind in fich awful situations,
hen certain death, in one of his most terrible
rms, is before it, Columbus had to endure feel. Th con.
gs of distress peculiar to himself. He dreaded dua ofCo.
at all knowledge of the amazing discoveries lumbu.'
hich he had made was now to perish; mankind
ere to be deprived of every benefit that might
ve been derived from the happy success of his
emes , and his own name would descend to
Rerity as that of a ralh deluded adventurer,
ead of being transmitted with the honor dues

B o o to the author and conductor of the most noble en,

iI. terprife that had ever been undertaken. These
1493. reflecions extinguished all sense of his own person

al danger. Less affeced with the loss of life, than
solicitous to preserve the memory of what hehad
attempted and atchieved, he retired to his cabbin,
and wrote, upon parchment, a flort account of
the voyage which he had made, of the cour
which he had taken, of the situation and riches
the countries which he had discovered, and
the colony that he had left there. Having wrap
up this in an oiled cloth, which he inclosed in
cake of wax, he put it into a calk carefully ftoppe
up, and threw it into the sea, in hopes that fomi
fortunate accident might preserve a deposit of f
much importance to the world `.

Takeashel- At length Providence interposed, to save
teri the life reserved for. other services. The wind abated
Azors. /

the sea became calm, and on the evening of th
fifteenth, Columbus and his companions difcove
ed land; and -though uncertain what it was, the
made towards it. They soon knew it to be S
Mary, one of the Azores or western iles, fubje
to the crown of Portugal. There, after a violei
contcft with the governor, in which Columbui
displayed no less firit than prudence, he obtainec
a supply of fresh provisions, and whatever else h
needed. One circumftancc, however, greatlydil
quieted him. The Pinta, of which he had lol

I' Life of Columbus, c . ll7. rreru de. . lib. i
G. I, 2, See NOTE XVI.

ght on the first day of the hurricane, did not B o
ppear; he dreaded for some time that she had 1.
undered at sea, and that all her crew had pe.- 493.
ibed: afterwards, his ormer ffpicions recurred,
nd he became apprehensive that Pinzon had borne
way for Spain, that he might reach it before him,
nd, by giving the first account of his discoveries,
ight obtain some liare of his fame.
In order to prevent this, he left the Azores as Feb. 24.
on as the weather would permit. At no great Arrivesa
iftance from the coast of Spain, when near the
nd of his voyage, and seemingly beyond the
each of any disaster, another fiorm arose, little
nferior to the former in violence ; and after driving
efore it during two days and two nights, he was
rced to take shelter in the river Tagus. Upon
plication to the king of Portugal, he was allowed
ocome up to Lisbon ; and, notwithstanding the marcih .
nvy which it was natural for the Portuguese to
el, when they beheld another nation entering
pon that province of discovery which they had
itherto deemed peculiarly their own , and in its
r essay , not only rivalling but eclipsing their
me, Columbus was received with all the marks
diflindion due to a man who had performed
ings so extraordinary and unexpected. The king
dmitted him into his pretence, treated him
ith the highest refpedt, and listened to the ac-
Ount which he gave of his voyage with admi-
lion mingled with regret. While Columbus, on
Is part, enjoyed the fatisfadion of describing the
portance of his discoveries, and of being noW\

B o able to prove the solidity of his schemes to thof

nI. very persons, who, with an ignorance difgracefu
1493. to thernfelves , and fatal to their country, had

lately reeled them as the projeds of a vifionar
or designing adventurer"

Returnsto Columbus was so impatient to return to Spain
Spain. that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On th

fifteenth of Mlarch he arrived in the port of Pf0o
seven months and eleven days from the time whe
he set out thence upon his voyage. As foona
his flip was difcs'vered approaching the port, al
the inbabitants of Palos ran eagerly to the shore
h' order to welcome their relations and fello
citizens, and to hear tidings of their voyage. Whe
the prosperous issue of it was known when the
beheld the strange people, the unknown animals
and singular produdions brought from the coun
tries which had been discovered, the effusion 6
joy was general and unbounded. The bells wet
rung, the cannon fired; Columbus was receive
.at landing with royal honors, and all the peopl
in solemn proceflion , accompanied him and hi
crew to the church, where they returned thank
to Heaven, which had so wonderfully condude
and crowned with fucccfs , a voyage of greats
length and of more importance, than had been a
tempted in any former age. On the evening
the fame day, he had the satisfaction of feeing th
Pinta, which the violence of the tempest had drive
far to the north, enter the harbour.

=7 Life of Columbus, c. 40, 4 1 Herrera dec. . li

The

The first care of Columbus was to iform' the o oa

king and queen, who were then at Barcelona., of n.
his arrival and success. Ferdinand and Ifabelly no 1493;
less astonished than delighted with this unexpected iore"e
event, desired Columbus , in terms the moft're-
fpetful and flattering, to repair immediately to
court, that from his own mouth they might receive
a full detail of his extraordinary services and diif
coveries. During his journey to Barcelona , the
people crowded from the adjacent country, follow.
ing him every where with admiration and ap,
plause. His entrance into the city was conducted,
by order of Fcrdinand and Isabella, with pomp
suitable to the great event, which added such difti'n
guifhing lustre to their reign. The people whom
he brought along with him from the countries
vhich he had discovered, marched first, and by
their singular complexion, the wild peculiarity of
their features, and uncouth finery, appeared like
men of another species. Next to them were carried
the ornaments of gold, fafiioned by the rude art
of the natives, the grains of gold found in the
mountains, and dust of the fame metal gathered
in the rivers. After these appeared the various
commodities of the new discovered countries
together with their curious produdtions, Columbus
himself closed the procession, and attracted the eyes
of all the fpedators, who gazed with admiration
on the extraordinary man whose superior sagacity
and fortitude had conducted their countrymen,
by a route concealed from past ages, to the know-
ledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella

VOL. I. K

B o o K received him clad in their royal robes, and feated

ii. upon a throne, under a magnificent canopy. When
1493. he approached they flood up, and railing him as

he kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him
to take his feat upon a chair prepared for him,
and to give a circumstantial account of his voyage,
He delivered it with a gravity and composure no
less suitable to the disposition of the Spanifl nation,
than to the dignity of the audience in which he
spoke, and with that modest simplicity which
characterizes men of superior minds; who, satisfied
with having performed great actions, court not
vain applause by an ostentatious display of their
exploits. When he had finilhed his narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up solemn
thanks to Almighty God for the discovery of those
new regions, from which they expected so many
advantages to flow in upon the kingdoms subjed
to their government ". Every mark of honor that
gratitude or admiration could fuggefl was confer.
red upon Columbus. Letters patent were iffed,
confirming to him and to his heirs all the privi,
leges contained in the capitulation concluded at
Santa Fe; his family was ennobled; the king and
queen, and, after their example, the courtiers;
treated him, on every occasion, with all the cere
monious refped paid to persons of the higher
rank. But what pleased him molt, as it gratifiec
his active mind, bent continually upon great ob
jeds, was an oder to equip, without delay, a]

, Se NOTE XVII.

armament of such force, as might enable hind not an o o
only to take possession of the countries which he II.
had already discovered, but to go in search of 493.
those more opulent regions, which he still confi-
dently exp¢Led to find .

While preparations were making for this expe- Afonish-
(dition, the fame of Columbus's fuccefsfult voyage ""'eno

' r-' " '

. , , -.'- mankind at

spread over Europe, and excited general attention. his dirco.
The multitude, struck with amazement when they veries.
beard that a new world had been found, could
hirdly believe an event so much above their con-
ception. Men of science, capable of comprehend,-
ing the natuie, and of discerning the effects, of
this great discovery, received the account of it
with admiration and joy. They spoke of his voyage
with rapture, and congratulated one another upon
their felicity ,,in having lived in the period when,
by this extraordinary event, the boundaries of
human knowledge were so much extended, and
fch a new field of inquiry and obfervatiop opened;
s would lead- mankind to a perfect acquaintance
with the ftrudcure and produeions of the habitable
lobe . Various opinions and conjectures were
ormed concerning the new-found countries, and
what division of the earth they belonged to. Co-
umbus adhered tenaciously to his original opinion,
hat they flould be reckoned a part of those vast
egions in Asia, comprehended under the general

Life of Columbus, c. 42 , 4. Herrera, dec. r.
b. ii. c. ;

P. Mart. epift. 13;. 34. si;. See NOTE XVIIT,

.K

B o o K name of Inda. This sentiment was confirmed by

IL. the observations which he made concerning the
1493. productions of the countries he had discovered

Gold was known to abound in India, and he had
met with such promifingfamples of it in the islands
which he visited, as led him to believe that ricb
mines of it might be found. Cotton, another pro.
dudion of the East Indies, was common there,
The pimento of the islands he imagined to be
species of the Eaft-Indian pepper. He mistook
root, fmewhat resembling rhubarb, for that valu.
able drug, which was then supposed to be a plat
peculiar to the East Indies `. The birds brought
bome by him were adorned with the fame ric
plumage which distinguishes those of India. The
alligator of the one country appeared to be the
fame with the crocodile of the other. After weighin
all these circumstances, not only the Spaniards
but the other nations of Europe, seem to hav
adopted the opinion of Columbus. The countrie
which he had difcovcred were confidered as a pa
of India. In consequence of this notion, the namt
of Indies is given to them by Ferdinand and Ifa
bella', in a ratification of their former agreement
which was granted to Columbus upon his return"
Even afLr. the error lwhich gave rife to this op
nion was detcLte, and the true position of th

niliniguishi- reiWv Alorld was fcertaincd , the name has remait
ehby te ed and the appellation of IVeji Indis is given b

eiant (f the c
Welt Indiics.

' licrrcrin, lec. i. lib. i. c. 2o. Gomara lift. c. 1

Life of Columbus , c 44.

all the people of Europe to the country, and that B o o ir
of Indians to its inhabitants. II

The name by which Columbus di[tinguifhed 493.

i · * rprepara..

the countries which he had discovered was so tionsfora
inviting, the specimens of their riches and fertility, second
which he produced, were. so considerable, and the vge
reports of his companions, delivered frequently
with the exaggeration natural to travellers, so fa-
vorable, as to excite a wonderful spirit of enter.
prise amongthe Spaniards. Though little accufom.
ed to naval expeditions, they were impatient to
et out upon the voyage. Volunteers of every rank
flicited to be employed. Allured by the vast
rofpedcs which opened to their ambition and
avarice, neither the length nor danger of the navi-
ation intimidated them. Cautious as Ferdinand
was, and averse to every thing new or adven-
urous, he seems to have catched the fame spirit
with his fubjeds. Under its influence, preparations
or a second expedition were carried on with a
pidity unusual in Spain , and to an extent that
ould he deemed not inconsiderable in the presen.t
ge. The fleet consisted of seventeen bhips, some
f which were of good burden. It had on board
fteeni hundred persons, among whom were many
f noble families, who had frved in honorable
ations. 1'he greater part of these being defined
o remain in the country, were furniihed with
very thing requisite for conquest or settlement,
vith all kinds of European domestic animals, with
Uch feeds and plants as were most likely to thrive
11 the climate of the Wet Indies, with tenfils

K 3

6 o and iniflruments of every fort, and with such arti.
It. ficers as might be most useful in an infant colony".
ft93. But, formidable and well provided as this fleet
The right of
Spii, to the was, Ferdinand arid Isabella did not reft their title
Newv World t the poffeflion of the newly-difcovered countries
cytheonred upon its operations alone. The example of the

Portugiuefe, as well as the superstition of the age,
made it necessary to obtain from the Roman pontiff
a grant of those territories which they wished to
occupy. The Pope, as the vicar and representative
of Jesus Christ, was supposed to have a right of
dominion over all the kingdoms of the earth,
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime
which disgraces humanity, filled the papal throne
at that time. As he was born Ferdinand's subjed,
'and'very solicitous to secure the protection of
'Spain, in order to facilitate the execution of his
ambitious schemes in favor of his own family,
be was extremely willing to gratify the Spanilh
monarchs. By an ad of liberality which colt him
nothing, and that served to eftablifll the jurifdidion
and pretensions of the papal fee, he granted in
full right to Ferdinand and Isabella all the countrie!
inhabited by Infidels, which they had discovered
or flhould discover; and, in virtue of that powce
which he derived from Jesus Christ, he conferre
on the crown of Cartile valt regions, to the pol
feffon of which he himself was so far from havinl
any title, that he was unacquainted with thei
situation, and ignorant even of their existence

" Hcrrera, dec. x. lib. ii. c. . Life of Columbus, c. 4'

As it was necessary to prevent this grant from I o o t
interfering with that formerly made to the crown . I.
of Portugal, he appointed that a line, supposed 1493.
to be drawn from pole to pole, a hundred leagues
to the westward of the Azores, hould serve as
the limit between them; and, in the plenitude of
his power, bestowed all to the east of this imaginary
line upon the Portuguese, and all to the weft of
it upon the Spaniards ". Zeal for propagating the
Christian faith was the consideration employed by
Ferdinand in soliciting this bull, and is mentioned
byAlexander as his chief motive for issuing it. In
order to manifest some concern for this laudable
object, several friars, under the direction of Father
Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great reputation, as
apoftolical vicar, were appointed to accompany
Columbus, and to devote therfelves to the
inftrudion of the natives. The Indians whom
Columbus had brought along with him, having
received some tincdure of Christian knowledge,
were baptized with much solemnity, the king
himself, the prince his son, and the chief persons
of his court, standing as their godfathers. Those
first fruits of the New World have not been followed
by such an increase as pious men wiflled, and had
reason to expect.

Ferdinand and Isabella having thus acquired Secont voy.

a title, which was then deemed completely v'3lid, of ,Co..
to extend their discoveries, and to eflablifl their

'* Henera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 4. Torquemada Mon.
Ind lib. xviii. c. I.

K4

i o 0 K dominion over such a vast portion of the globe,

U. octhing now retarded the departure of the fleet.
1493 Columbus was extremely impatient to revisit the

colony which he had left, and to pursue that
career of glory upon which he had entered. He
set fail from the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth
of September. and touching again at the island of
Gomera, he fleered farther towards the south than
in his former voyage. By holding this course,
he enjoyed more steadily the benefit of the regular
winds, which reign within the tropics, and was
carried towards a large cluster of islands, situated
considerably to the east of those which he had
already discovered. On the twenty-fixth day after
Nov. , his departure from Gomera, he made land ", It was

one of the Caribbee or Leeward islands, to which
he gave the name of Defeada, on account of te
impatience of his crew to discover some part of
the New World. After this he visited fucceflively
Dominica , Marigalante , Guadalupe , Antigua,
San Juan de Puerto Rico, and several other islands,
scattercd in his way as he advanced towards the
north-w(ft. All these he found to be inhabited
by that lierce race of people whom Guacanahari
lld painted in such frightful colors. His defcrip.
tions appeared not to have been exaggerated. The
Spaniards never attempted to land without meeting
with fch a reception, as discovered the martial
and daring spirit of the natives; and in their habita
tions were found relics of those horrid feasts whic

" Ovicdo ap. Ramus iii. 8. B.

they had made upon the bodies of their enemies n 0o r
taken in war. II.

But as Columbus was eager to know the state 493,

Arrives at

of the colony which he had planted, and to sup- Hipaniola,
ply it with the necessaries of which he supposed Nov.z.
it to be in want, he made no flay in any of those
islands, and proceeded direcly to Hispaniola .
When he arrived offNavidad, the fiation in which
e had left the thirty.eight men under the command
of Arada, he was astonished that none of them
appeared, and expeced every moment to fee them
running with transports of joy to welcome their
countrymen. Full of solicitude about their safety,
and foreboding in his mind what had befallen
them, he rowed instantly to land. All the natives
rom whom he might have received information
had fled. But the fort which he had built was
entirely demolished, and the tattered garments,
the broken arms and utensils scattered about it,
eft no room to doubt concerning the unhappy
ate of the garrison ". While the Spaniards were
hedding tears over those fad memorials of their
ellow-citizens, a brother of the cazique Guacanahari
arrived. From him Columbus received a particular The feof
detail of what had happened after his departure whomlie
om the island. The familiar intcrcourfe of the left there
ildians with the Spaniards tended gradually to
limininf the superstitious vcneration with which

J' P. Martyr, dec. p. ix. 18. Herrera, dec. x. lib. ii.
7. Life of Columnbus, c. 46, &c.

hlilt. de Cura de los Palacios. AMS

o o x their first appearance had inspired that fimpte
II. people. By their own indiscretion and ill condut,
49s3. the Spaniards speedily effaced those favorable

imprellions, and soon convinced the natives, that
they had all the wants, and weaknesses, and pas.
sions of men. As soon as the powerful restraint
which the presence and authority of Columbus
imposed was withdrawn, the garrison threw off all
regard for the officer whom he had invested with
command. Regardless of the prudent inftrucions
which he had given them , every man became
independent, and gratified his desires without
control. The gold, the women, the provisions
of the natives, were all the prey of those licentious
oppressors. They roamed in small parties over the
island, extending their rapacity and insolence to
every corner of it. Gentle and timid as the people
were, those unprovoked injuries at length exhaulted
their patience, and roused their courage. The
cazique of Cibao , whose country the Spaniards
chiefly infested on account of the gold which it
contained , surprised and cut off several of them,
while they straggled in as perfect fecprity as if
their conduct had been altogether inoffensive. He
then afembled his fubjedss, andqfurrounding the
fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards wer(
killed in defcnding it, the reft perished in attempt
ing to make their escape by crofling an arm of th,
sea. Gacantahari, whom all their exadcions ha(
not alienated from the Spaniards, took arms i
their behalf, and , in endeavouring to protct them

had received a wound, by which he was frill B o K
confined 3. II.

Though this account was far from removing 1493.
the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained Hi"", ruent
with respect to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Colum bus
perceived so clearly that this was not a proper
jundure for inquiring into his conduct with fcru-
pulous accuracy, that he rejedted the advice of
several of his officers , who urged him to seize
the person of that prince, and to revenge the
death of their countrymen by attacking his fubjeels.
He represented to them the neceflity of securing
the friendhip of some potentate of the country,
in order to facilitate the settlement which they
intended, and the danger of driving the natives
o unite in some desperate attempt against them,
y such an ill-timed and unavailing exercise of
rigor. Instead of wafting his time in punishing past
wrongs, he took precautions for preventing any
uture injury. With this view, he made choice
of a situation more healthy and commodious than
that of Navidad. He traced out the plan of a
town in a large plain near a spacious bay, and
obliging every person to put his hand to a work
on which their common safety depended, the
houses and ramparts were soon so far advanced by
heir united labor, as to afford them flelter and
ecurity. This rising city, the sirs that the
Europeans founded in the New World, he named

P . Martyr, decad. p. 2 , &c. Herrera, dec. . lib. i.
7. 9. Life of Columbus, c. 49, 0o.

. o o i Isabella, in honor of his patroness the queen of

Ir. Castile ".
i14"9l In carrying on this necessary work, Columbus

Difiontet e i
ofihis oi- had not only to fuflain all the hardships, and to
\U\ra. encounter all the difficulties, to which infant

colonies are exposed when they fettle in an un.
cultivated country, but he had to contend with
what was more inftp.erable, the laziness, the irn.
patience, and mutinous disposition of his followers,
By the enervating influence of a hot climate, the
natural inaivity of the Spaniards seemed to increase,
Many of them were gentlemen, unaccustomed to
the fatigue of bodily labor, and all had engaged
in the enterprise with the sanguine hopes excited
by the splendid and exaggerated descriptions o
their countrymen who returned from the sirs
voyage, or by the mistaken opinion of Columbus,
that the country which he had discovered was
either the Cipango of Marco Polo, or the Ophir",
from which Solomon imported those precious
commodities which suddenly diffused such extraor
(dinary riches through his kingdom. But when,
inilead of that golden harvest which they had
expected to reap without toil or pains, the Spani
ards saw th:t their p.rofpecC of wealth was renmot
as well as. ncertain , and that it could not b
attainel but by the flow and persevering efforts 0
izndulhry, the dlifappoi.intment of those chimerica
hopes occasioncd such dejedtion of mind a

3' Lire ofColumbus, c. S t. Itrrera, dec. . lib. ii. c.

I' . MLrtyr, dec. p. 29,

bordered on derpair, and led to general discontent. B o o t
n vain did Columbus endeavour to revive their it.
firits by pointing out the fertility of the foil, and 1493.
exhibiting the specimens of gold daily brought in

romn -different parts of the island. They had not
patience to wait for the gradual retLrns which the
rmer might yield, and the latter they despised
s fcantv and inconsiderable. The spirit of dif-
afeion spread, and a conspiracy was formed,
which might have been fatal to Coltlmbus and the
colony. Happily he'difcovered it, and seizing the
ringleaders, punished some of them, sent others
prioners into Spain, whither he dispatched twelve
ofthe ships which had served as transports, with
n earnest request for a reinforcement of men and
large supply of provisions ".
Meanwhile, in order to banifl that idleness ,
hich, by allowing his people leisure to brood Examines
over their disappointment, nourished the spirit of into th

ttate of tile

ifcontent, Coltumbus planned several expeditions country.
nto the interior part of the country. He sent a
etachment, under the command of Alonfo de
Ojeda, a vigilant and enterprising officer, to visit
tle dirtrier of Cibao, which was said to yield the
reateft quantity of gold, and followed him in
erfon with the main body, of his troops. In
his expedition, he displayed all the pomp of larch2.
ilitary magnificence that he could exhibit, in
rder to strike the imagination of the natives. He
oarched with colors flying, with martial mui¢c,

' -crrcra, dec. i., lib, ii. c. 0o, lX.

B o o K and with a finall body of cavalry that paraded

lI. fiometimes in the front and sometimes ill the rear,

As those were the firfl horses which appeared in
the New World, they were objcdts of terror nq
less than of admiration to the Indians, who having
no tame animals thermfelves , were unacquainted
with that vast accefflon of power, which na
hath acquired by fubjedting them to his dominion,
They supposed themn to be rational creature
They imagined that the horse and the rider formed
one animal, with whose speed they were ao
nifledt, and whose impetnolity and strength the
confidered as irresistible. But while Columbu
endeavoured to inspire the natives with a dreal
of his power, he did not neglect the arts o
gaining their love and confidence. Hle adhere
scrupulously to the principles of integrity an
justice in all his tranfadtions with them, and tre
ed them, on every occasion, not only with human
ity, but with indulgence. The diftrid of Ciba
answercd the description given of it by the native
It was mountainous and uncultivated, but in ever
river and brook gold was gathered either in du
or in grains, ome of which were of confiderab
size. I he Indians had never opened any mines if
search of gold. To penetrate into the bowels 0
the earth, and to refine the rude ore, wer
operations too complicated and laborious for thei
talents and indufltyy, and they had no fuchhig
value for gold as to put their ingenuity andi
vention upon the stretch in order to obtain it

'i Oviedo, lib. ii. p. 90. A,

he finall quantity of that precious metal which B o O K
ey possessed, was either picked up in the beds n.
f the rivers, or washed from the mountains I494-
y the heavy rains that fall within the tropics.
it, from those indications, the Spaniards could
o longer doubt that the country contained rich
easures in its bowels, of which they hoped soon
be masters 4'. In order to secure the command
this valuable province, Columbus erected a
all fort, to which he gave the name of St. Thomas,
yway of ridicule upon some of his incredulous
Ilowers, who would not believe that the country
oduced gold, until they saw it with their own
es, and touched it with their hands ".
The account of those promifilng appearances of the difrers
ealth in the country of Cibao came very seasonably and difafec-

tion of the

comfort the desponding colony which wa? eolonyin.
feed with distresses of various kinds. The flock creae.
provisions which had been brought from Europe
asmoftly consumed; what remained was so much
rrupted by the heat and moiflture of the climate,
to be almost unfit for use ; the natives cultivated
small a portion of ground, and with so little
ill, that it hardly yielded what was ffficient
rtheir own subsistence; the Spaniards at Isabella
d hitherto neither time nor leisure to clear the
I, so as to reap any considerable fruits of their
Yninduftry. On all there accounts, they became

1 P. Martyr, dec. p. 2.

llerrera, dec. . lib. ii, c. 2. Life of Columbus, c.

o K afraid ofperilhing with hunger, and were redcei
Ix. already to a scanty allowance. At the fame time
1494. the diseases predominant in the torrid zone, an,

which rage chiefly in those uncultivated countries
where the hand of industry has not opened ti
woods, drained the marfies, and confined ti
rivers within a certain channel, began to fprea(
among them. Alarmed at the violence and unufua
fymptorns of those maladies, they exclaimed againf
Columbus and his companions in the former voyage
who, by their splendid but deceitful description
of Hispaniola, had allured them to quit Spain so
a barbarous uncultivated land, where they nuf
either be cut of by famine, or die of unknovJ
distempers. Several of the officers and perfonso
note, instead of checking, joined in those feditiod
complaints. Father Boyl, the apoftolical vicar
was one of the most turbulent and outrageous
It required all the authority and address of Colu
bus to re-establish subordination and tranquillityi
the colony. Threats and prornifes were alternatel
employed for this purpose; but nothing contribute
more to sooth the malcontents than the profped
finding, in the mines of Cibao, such a rich fto
of treasure as would be a recompence for all tht
sufferings, and efface the memory of former difa
poin tments.

Columbus When, by his unwearied endeavours, conco
attnepts and order were so far reflored, that he cot
new disco.
veries. venture to leave the island, Columbus resolved

pursue his discoveries, that he might be able
afccertain whether those new countries with wli

hb

he had opened a communication were connected n o x
with any region of the earth already known, or In.
whether they were to be confidered as a separate 1494.
portion of the globe hitherto unvisited. He
appointed his brother Don Diego, with the
ialiftance of a council of officers, to govern the
island in his absence; and gave the command of
a body of soldiers to Don Pedro Margarita, with
which he was to visit the different parts of the
iland, and endeavour to establish the authority
of the Spaniards among the inhabitants. Having
left them very particular inftrudions with refped
to their conduct , he weighed anchor on the
twenty-fourth of April, with one ship and two
fail barks under his command. During a tedious
voyage of full five months, he had a trial of almost
all the numerous hardships to which persons of his
profession are exposed, without making any dif.
covery of importance, except the island of Jamaica.
As he ranged along the southern coast of Cuba45,
he was entangled in a labyrinth formed by an
incredible number of small islands, to which he
gave the name of the Queen's Garden. In this
Unknown course, among rocks and fielves, he
vas retarded by contrary winds, assaulted with
urios storms, and alarmed with the terrible
tlhnder and lightning which is often almost incef-
ant between the tropics. At length his provisions
ell flort; his crew, exhaufed with fatigue, as
ell as hunger, murmured and threatened, and

4' Sec NOTE XIX.
VOL. I. L

B o o t were ready to proceed to the noft desperate

II. extremities against him. Beset with danger in such
1494. various forms , he was obliged to keep continual

watch, to observe every occurrence with his own
eyes, to ifue every order, and to superintend the
execution of it. On no occasion, was the extent
of his fill and experience as a navigator so much
tried. To these the fuadron owed its safety
But this unremitted fatigue of body, and intenf
application of mind, over-powering his constitution,
though naturally vigorous and robust, brought
on a feverish disorder, which termined in a lethargy,
that deprived him of sense and memory, and had
almost proved fatal to his life '.

sept. 27. But, on his return to Hispaniola, the fudde
Ol hii re. emotion of joy which he felt upon meeting it
hii brither his brother Bartholomew at Isabella, occafione
Barihuoo. such a flow of spirits as contributed greatly to hi
mnew at Ira.
bell. recovery. It was now thirteen years since th

two brothers,, whom similarity of talents unite
in close friendfhlip, had separated from each other
and during that long period there had been
intcrcourfe between them. Bartholomew, afte
finifling his negociation in the court of England
had set out for Spain by the way of France. A
Paris he received an account of the extraordinar
difcovcries which his brother had made in his fir
voyage, and that he was then preparing to embar
on a second expedition. Though this naturall

" Life of Columbus, c. s4, &c. Herrera, dec. .lib.
c. 13, 14. P. Martyr, dc. p. 34, &c.

induced him to pursue his journey with the utmofl B o o
dispatch, the Admiral had failed for Hispaniola 1I.
before he reached Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella 1494
received him with the refpet due to the nearest
kinsman of a person whose merit and services
rendered him so conspicuous; and as they knew
what consolation his presence would afford to his
brother, they persuaded him to take the command
of three hips, which they had appointed to carry
provisions to the colony at Isabella47.

He could not have arrived at any jundure when Tlhendi-
Columbus flood more in need of a friend capable antaa1it
of aifting him with his counsels, or of dividing the Spani-
with him the cares and burden of government. ards.
For although the provisions now brought from
Europe, afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards
fromn the calamities of famine, the supply was not
in such quantity as to fupFort them long , and the
iland did not hitherto yield what was sufficient
for their fultenance. They were threatened with
another danger , still more formidable than the
return of scarcity, and which demanded more
immediateattention. No sooner did Columbus leave
the island on his voyage of discovery , than the
soldiers under Nlargarita, as if they had been set
free from discipline and subordination , scorned all
rcetraint. Inflead of conforming to the prudent
inliictions of Columbus, they dispersed in straggling
parties over the island, lived at discretion upon
tle natives, wafted their provisions, seized their

" Hcrrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. Ij.

Lr

B o o K women , and treated that inoffensive race with all

iI. the insolence of military oppression .
2494. As long as the Indians had any profped thattheir

sufferings might come to a period by the voluntary
departure of the invaders, they submitted in silence,
and dissembled their sorrow; but they now perceived
that the yoke would be as permanent as it was
intolerable. The Spaniards had built a town, and
surrounded it with ramparts. They had erected
forts in different places. They had enclosed and
sown several fields. It was apparent that they came
not to visit the country ,but to fettle in it. Though
the number of those strangers was inconsiderable,
the state of cultivation among this rude people was
so imperfect, and in such exadt proportion to their
own consumption, that it was with difficulty they
could afford subsistence to their new guests. Their
own mode of life was so indolent and inactive, the
warmth of the climate so enervating, the constitution
of their bodies naturally so feeble, and so unac
culfomed to the laborious exertions of indutry,
that they were satisfied with a proportion of food
amazingly small. A handful of maize, or a little of
the inlipid bread made of the caffada-root, was
sufficient to support men, whose strength and
spirits were not exhausted by any vigorous efforts
either of body or mind. The Spaniards, though
the molt abstemious of all the European nations,
appeared to them excessively voracious. One
Spaniard consumcd as much as fevetal Indians

4 . artyr, dec. p. 47.

This keenness of appetite surprised them so much, B o x
and seemed to them to be so insatiable, that they II.
supposed the Spaniards had left their own country, 1494.
because it did not produce as much as was requisite
to gratify their immoderate desire of food , and had
come among them in quest of nourishment 4. Self-
preservation prompted them to wish for the
departure of guests who wafted so fast their slender
flock of provisions. The injuries which they suffered,
added to their impatience for this event. '1 hey
had long expected that the Spaniards would retire of
their own accord. They now perceived that, in
order to avert the deftrudion with vwhich they
were threatened, either by the flow consumption
of famine, or by the violence of their oppressors,
it was necessary to assume courage, to attack those
formidable invaders with united force, and drive
them from the fettlenents of which they had vio-
lently taken possession.

Such were the sentiments which universally warwith
prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus tlle.
returned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unprovoked
outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of rage
of which their gentle natures, formed to susser and
submit , seemed hardly susceptible , they waited
only for. a signal from their leaders to fall upon
the colony. Some of the caziques had already
surprised and cut off several frtngglers. The dread
of this impending danger united the Spaniards, and
re-cftablifled the authority of Columbus, as they

4 Herrera, dec. x. lib. ii c. .7.

L3

B o O 1 saw no profped of safety but in committing them.

II. selves to his prudent guidance. It was ndw ne.
149- ceffary to have recourse to arms , the employing

of which against the Indians, Columbus had hi.
therto avoided with the greatest solicitude. Unequal
as the colflict may seem, between the naked in.
habitants of the New World , armed with clubs,
flicks hardened in the fire, wooden swords, and
arrows pointed with bones or flints; and troops
gccuftomed to the discipline, and provided with
the instruments of destruCtion known in the Euro.
pean art of war, the situation of the Spaniards
was far from being exempt from danger. The vafl
superiority of the natives in number, compensated
xnany defets. An handful of men was about to
encounter a whole nation. One adverse event, or
even any unforeseen delay in determining the fate
of the war, might prove fatal to the Spaniards.
Conscious that success depended on the vigor and
rapidity of his operations, Columbus instantly as.
fembled his forces. They were reduced to a very
small number. Diseases, engendered by the warmth
and humidity of the country, or occasioned by
their own licentiousness, had raged among them
with much iolcnce; experience had not yet taught
them the art either of curing these, or the prccant
tions requisite for guarding againIn them; two
thirds of the original adventurers were dead, an(
many of those who survived were incapable o

,~oc. service '. The body which took the field confiftce
blarch 24.

O° Life of Columbus, c. 6x.

o;ly of two hundred foot, twenty horse , and B o o R
twenty large dogs; and how firange soever it m1.
im;y seem , to mention the last as compoing part 149s.
of a military force, they were not perhaps the least
formidable and deftrudive of the whole, when
employed against naked and timid Indians. All the
ciques of the iand , Guacanlahari excepted,
w\ho retained an inviolable attachment to the Spa-
niards, were in arms to oppose Columbus, with
forccs amounting, if we may believe the Spanish
historians, to a hundred thoulfnd men. Instead of
attempting to draw the Spaniards into the farfneffes
(f the woods and mountains , they were so im-
prudent as to take their station in the Vega Real,
the most open plain in the country. .;Columbus
dlid not allow them time to perceive their error,
or to alter their position. lie attacked them dur-
ing, the night, when undisciplined troops are least
capable of aing with uion and concert, and
obtained an easy and bloodless vidory. The con-
ieination with which the Indians were filled by
the noise and haivoc made by the fire-arms, by the
impettlous force of the cavalry, and the fierce onset
(d the dogs, was so great, that they threw down
their weapons, and fled without attempting resist-
;ilce. Jany were nflin ; more were tken prison-
is , and reduced to fvitude "; and so tho-
rnIuhly wcire the reft intimidated, that froml that
mloment they abandoned tlernfelves to despair,
rclin(uiflin g all thoughts of contending with a-
gr'llors whom they deemed invincible.

See NOTE XX.

L.4

B o o ' Columbus employed several months in marchin~

lr. through the island , and in fubjedting it to the
149A . Spanish government, without meeting with ani
pnfreltipon opposition. He inpofed a tribute upon all the
them. inhabitants above the age of fourteen. Each per.

son who lived in those diftridts where gold was
found, was obliged to pay quarterly as much gold
dupt as filled a hawk's bell; from those in other
parts of the country , twenty-five pounds of cotton
were demanded. This was the first regular taxa.
tion of the Indians, and served as a precedent for
exactions still more intolerable. Such an imposition
was extremely contrary to those maxims which
Columbus had hitherto inculcated with refpe to
the mode of treating them. But intrigues were
carrying o in the court of Spain at this jundure,
in order to undermine his power and discredit his
operations, which cotllrained him to depart from
his own system of administration, Several unfa.
vorable accounts of his conduct, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted
to Spain. MIargarita and Father Boyl were now
at court ; and in order to justify their own cons
duct, or to gratify their refcntment, watched with
malevolent attention for every opportunity to
fprcading insinuations to his detriment. Many of
the courtiers viewed his growing reputation and
power with envious eyes. Fonseca, archdeacon
of Seville, who was intrusted with the chief i
recion of Indian affairs, had conceived such
unfavorable opinion of Columbus, for ome reafor
.which the contemporary witcrs have not Ilncl

tioned, that he liflened with partiality to every-in- B o o
vedive against him. It was not easy for an un- In.
friended firanger, unpradifed in courtly arts, to 49
counterat the machinations of so many enemies.
Columbus saw that there was but one method of
upporting his own credit, and of silencing all his
adversaries. He mul: produce such a quantity of
gold, as would not only justify what he had re-
ported with refped to the richness of the country,
ut encourage Ferdinand and Isabella to persevere
n prosecuting his plans. The necefflity of obtain-
ng it, forced him not only to impose this heavy
ax upon the Indians, but to exad payment of it
vith extreme rigor; and may be pleaded in ex-
use for his deviating on this occasion from the
ildnefs and humanity with which he uniformly
reated that unhappy people .
The labor, attention, ad foresight which the Fatal ffrts
ndians were obliged to employ in procuring the "fthatmna.
ribute demanded of them, appeared the noft in-
olerable of all evils, to men accuflomed to pass
heir days in a careless, improvident indolence.
hey were incapable of such a regular and perse-
cring exertion of industry, and felt it such a
rievous refiraint upon their liberty, that they
adrecourfe to an expedient for obtaining deliver-
ice from this yoke, which demonstrates the ex-
cf of their impa'tience and despair. They for-
cd a scheme of starving tliofe oppressors whom
hey durff not attempt to expel; and from the

1T rrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.

B o o i opinion which they entertained with refped to the

i.. voracious appetite of the Spaniards, they concluded
149s. the execution of it to be very pracicable. With

this view they suspended all the operations of agri.
culture; they sowed no maize, they pulled up the
roots of the manioc or caffada which were planted,
and retiring to the most inaccessible parts of the
mountains, left the uncultivated plains to their
enemies. This desperate resolution produced in
some degree the effects which they expeced. Th
Spaniards were reduced to extreme want; but the
received such seasonable supplies of provisions fro
Europe, and found so many resources in their ow
ingenuity and indultry, that they suffered no grea
loss of men. The wretched Indians were th
victims of their own ill-concerted policy. A va
multitude, shut up among barren mountains, wit
out any food but the spontaneous productions
the earth, soon felt the utmost distresses offamin
This brought on contagious diseases ; and, in t
course of a few months, more than a third part
the inhabitants of the island perifbed, after eY
periencing misery in all its various forms ".

Tntrigs But while Columbus was thus ifuccefsfll

again(a.o. eftabliifing the foundations of the Spanif gra
the olt f decur in the New WVorld , his enemies labored vi
Spain. unwearied affiduitv to deprive him of the gl0

and rewards , which by his services and fulclri

"' Herrera , dec. r. lib. xi. c. . Life oF Colunius, c

Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 91. l e. lenzon Hilt. Novi Orbis, li
c9.. p. Martyr, dec. p. 48.

lie was entitled to enjoy. The hardShipsunavoid- n o o K
able in a new settlement, the calamities occasion- II.
ed by an unhealthy climate, the difaters attend- 149.
ing a voyage in unknown seas, were all repre-
ented as the effects of his restless and inconsiderate
ambition. His prudent attention to preserve difci-
line and fibordination was denominated excess
f rigor; the punishments which he inflicted upon
he mutinous and disorderly were imputed to
cruelty. These accusations gained such credit in a
ealous court, that a commrifioner was appointed
o repair to Hispaniola, and to infpet into the
onduc of Columbus. By the recommendation
fhis enemies, Aguado, a groom of the bedcham-
er, was the person to whom this important trust
as committed. But in this choice they seem
o have been more influenced by the obsequious
ttachment of the man to their interest, than by
is capacity for the station. Puffed up with such
dlden elevation, Aguado displayed, in the exer-
ize of this office, all the frivolous felf-importance,
n(l acted with all the disgusting insolence, which
re natural to little minds , when raised to unex-
ecded dignity, or employed in funcions to which
hey are not equal. By lifiening with eagerness
every accusation against Columbus, and encou-
ging not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even
el Indians, to produce their grievances, real or
laginary, he fomented the spirit of dissention in
e island, without establishing any regulation of
ublic utility, or that tended to redress the many
'ongs, with the odium of which he wilhed to

B o o K load the admiral's administration. As Columbus

1i. felt sensibly how humiliating his situation muff be,
1495. if he flhould remain in the country while such

partial infpetor observed his motions, and con.
trouled his jurisdiction, he took the resolution of
returning to Spain, in order to lay a full account
of all his tranfadions, particularly with refpedto
the points in dispute between him and his adver,
saries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from whose
juflice and discernment he expected an equal and
a favorable decision. He committed the adminiftn.
i49s. tion of affairs, during his absence, to Don Bar.

tholomew, his brother, with the title of Adean.
tado, or Lieutenant Governor. By a choice le
fortunate, and which proved the source of man
calamities to the colony, he appointed Francis Rol
dan chief juflice, with very extensive powers .

neturnsto In returning to Europe, Columbus held a course
Spain. different from that which he had taken in his forh

mer voyage. He steered almost due east from His.
paniola, in the parallel of twenty-two degrees of
latitude; as experience had not yet discovered the
more certain and expeditious method of itretchinl
to the north, in order to fall in with the south
weft winds. By this ill-advifed choice, which, ii
the infancy of navigation between the New an(
Old Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the admira
as a defec in naval Ikill, he was exposed to if
nite fatigue and danger, in a perpetual ftruggl
with the trade-winds, which blow without vari;

+ Herrera, dec. . lib.' ii. c. 18. lib. iii. c. .

tion from the east between the tropics. Notwithftand- B o o
ilg the almost insuperable difficulties of such a It.
navigation, he persisted in his course with his I496.
fual pticnce and tirmnefs, but made so little way,
hat he was three months without feeing land. At
ength, his provisions began to fail, the crew was
educed to the scanty all wance of fix ounces of
read a-day for each person. The admiral fared no
etter than the meanest sailor. But, even in this
xtreme distress, he retained the humanity which
iftilguifhes his characer, and refused to comply
vith the earnet solicitations of his crew, some of
vhom proposed to feed upon the Indian prisoners
vhom they were carrying over, and others insisted
othrow them over-board, in order to leflen the
onfumption of their small frock. He represented
at they were human beings, reduced by a corn
on calamity to the fame condition with them-
Ives, and entitled to hare an equal fate. His
thority and remonstrances difipated those wild
eas suggested by despair. Nor had they time to
'cur, as he came soon within fight of the coast of
ain, when all their fears and sufferings ended ".
Columbus appeared at court with the rnodeft His rcep.
ut determined confidence of a man conscious not
ly of integrity, but of having performed great
rvices. Ferdinand and lf.bella, afliamed of their
vn facility in lending too favorable an ear to
volous or ill-founded accusations, received him
ith such diflinguified marks of refpec, as covered

Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. . Life of Columbus,
46.

BO O K his enemies with shame. Their censures and

ii. calumnies were no more heard of at that junture,
1496. The gold, the pearls, the cotton, and other con

modities of value which Columbus produced
seemed fully to refute what the malcontents had
propagated with refped to the poverty of th
country. By reducing the Indians to obedience
and imposing a regular tax upon them, he ha
secured to Spain a large accession of new fubjeds
and the establishment of a revenue that promise
to be coniderable. By the mines which he ha
found out and examined, a source of wealth i
more copious was opened. Great and unexpede
as those advantages were, Columbus reprefente
them only as preludes to future acquisitions, an
as the earnest of more important discoveries, whic
he still meditated, and to which those he hada
ready made would conduct him with ease an
certainty '.

Aplati The attentive consideration of all these ci
formedfor curnftances made such impression, not only upo
the mo re- Isabella, who was flattered with the idea of beii
gular efta- blishmentofthe patroness of all Columbus's enterprises, bu
acolony even upon Ferdinand, who having originally e

pressed his disapprobation of his schemes, was ti
apt to doubt of their success, that they resolve
to supply the colony in Hispaniola with ever
thing which could render it a permanent ellc
liniment, and to furnifl Columbus with such

" Life of Columbus, c. 6 . Herrera, dec. . lib,
C. 1.

eet, that he might proceed to search for those B o o I
ev countries, of whose existence he seemed to be n.
onfident. The measures mofl proper for accom- l49C-
lifing both these designs were concerted with
olumbus. Discovery had been the sole object of
e first voyage to the New World ; and though,
the second, settlement had been proposed, the
recautions taken for that purpose had either been
sufficient, or were rendered ineffetual by the
utinous spirit of the Spaniards, and the unfore-
en calamities arising from various causes. Now
plan was to be formed of a regular colony, that
ight serve as a model in all future establishments.
very particular was confidered with attention,
nd the whole arranged with a scrupulous accu-
acy. The precise number of adventurers who
ould be permitted to embark was fixed. They
ere to be of different ranks and professions; and
he proportion of each was eflablifhed, according
otheir usefulness and the wants of the colony.
suitable number of women was to be chosen to
company these new settlers. At it was the first
bjec to raise provisions in a country where scar-
ity os/sood had been the occasion of so much
illrefs, a considerable body of husbandmen was
o be carried over. As the Spaniards had then no
Inception of deriving any benefit from those pro-
ucions of the New World which have since
ielded such large returns of wealth to Europe,
uit had formed magnificent ideas, and entertained
guine hopes with refped to the riches contained
11 the mines which had been discovered, a band

o K of workmen , skilled in the various arts employe
n. in digging and refining the precious metals, w
1496. provided. All these emigrants were to receivepa

and fubfifince for some years, at the public
penfe .

A dleeain Thus far the regulations were prudent, an
ic well adapted to the end in view. But as it w

forefecn that few would engage voluntarily t
fettle in a country, whose noxious climate h
been fatal to so many of their countrymen, C
lurn bus proposcd to transport to Hispaniola sue
malefaiors as had been convicted of crimes, whic
though capital, were of a less atrocious nature
and that for the future a certain proportion ofth
offenders usually sent to the gallies, should beco
deinned to labor in the mines which were tob
opened. This advice, given without due refledio
was as inconsiderately adopted. The prisons
Spain were drained , in order to collet membe
for the intended colony ; and the judges wer
inftruced to recruit it by their future sentences.
is not, however, with such materials, that th
foundations of a society, destined to be perm
nent, fliould be laid. Indufiry, sobriety, patienc
and mutual confidence are indispensably requif
i n ;i ifant settlement, where purity of mor
mul contribute more towards eftablifliing order
than the operation or authority of laws. But vwc
such a mixture of what is corrupt is admitted int
the original conflitution of the political body, tl

" Herrcra, dec. . lib. ili. c. .

vices

vices of those unsound and incurable members will B K
robably insed the whole, and must certainly be II.
rodudive of violent and unhappy effects. This 1496.
he Spaniards fatally experienced ; and the other
uropean nations having fucceflively imitated the
raftice of Spain in this particular, pernicious con-
quences have followed in their settlements, which
an be imputed to no other cause 8.
Though Columbus obtained, with great faci- Executed
ty and dispatch, the royal approbation of every slowly.
easure and regulation that he proposed , his en-
eavours to carry them into execution were so
ng retarded, as must have tired out the patience
f any man, less accuflomed to encounter and to
rmount difficulties. Those delays were occasion.
dpartly by that tedious formality and spirit of
rocraftination, with which the Spaniards conduct
ufinefs; and partly by the exhausted state of the
eafury, which was drained by the expense of
lebrating the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's
nly son with Margaret of Austria, and that of
anna, their second daughter, with Philip arch-
uke ofAuftria ; but must be chiefly imputed to
e malicious arts of Columbus's enemies. Aflton-
ed at the reception which he met with upon
return, and overawed by his presence, they
ave way, for some time, to a tide of favor too
rong for them to oppose. Their enmity , how.
er, was too inveterate to remain long inactive.

Herrera, dec. . lib, iii, c. z. Touron Hilt. Gener.
l Amerique, i p. s I.

s P. Martyr, epilt. 16g.
VOL. . M

B o They resumed their operations, and by the aftilt

n. ance of Fonseca, the minister for Indian affairs,
I496. who was now promoted to the bishopric of Ba.

dajos, they threw in so many obstacles to pro.
trad the preparations for Columbus's expedition,
that a year elapsed before he '° could procure two
ships to carry over a part of the supplies destined
for the colony , and almost two years were spent
before the small squadron was equipped of which
he himself was to take the command '.

149s. This squadron consisted of fix hfips only, of no
Thirdvoy. great burden, and but indifferently provided sot
age cl Co.
lumbus. a long Or dangerous navigation. T he voyage which

he now meditated was in a course different from
any he had undertaken. As he was fully persuaded
that the fertile regions of India lay to the south
weft of those countries which he had discovered,
he proposed, as the most certain method of finding
out these , to Rand diredtly south from the Canar)
or Cape de Verd islands, until he came under thi
equinodial line, and then to stretch to the elt
before the favorable wind for such a course, whic
blows invariably between the tropics. With th

May 30. idea he fct fail, and touched first at the Canary
J,,ly 4. and then at the Cape de Vcrd islands. From ti

former he dispatched three of his iips with
supply of provisions for the colony in Hifpaiol
with the other three, he continued his voyal
towards the south. No remarkable occurren
happened until they arrived within five degrees

6 ILife of Columhust , c. 6.
' Hc irr -a, dec. . lib. ii. c. 9.

he line. There they were becilmed, and at the B o K-
me time the heat became so xcelfive, that mary iI.
ftheir wine calks burst, the liquor in others four- 1498
(1, and their provisions corrupted . The Spa-
iards, who had never ventured so far to the south,
ere afraid that the flips would take fire, and
egan to apprehend the reality of what the an-
ients had taught concerning the deftruive qia-
ties of that torrid region of the globe. They were
lieved, in fonme mcafire , from their fears by a
.afonable fall of rain. This, however, though
heavy and unitermitting that the men could
arliy keep the deck, did not greatly mitigate the
tenseness of the heat. The admiral, who with
is usual vigilance had in person direced every
eration, from the beginning of the voyage,
as so much exhausted by fatigue and want of
eep, that it brought on a violent fit of the gout,
companied with a fever. All these circumftan-
s constrained him to yield to the importunities
his crew, and to alter his course to the north
et , in order to reach some of the Caribbee
ands, where he might refit, and be upplied
ith provisions.
On the firit of August , the man flationed in nifcovers
e round top surprised them with the joyful cry nent ofA,
land. They ftood'towards it, and discovered a nierica.
nfdcrable island, which the admiral called Tri-
dad, a name it fill retains. It lies on the coast
Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,

P. Martyr, dec. p. 7.

VI a

B o though a river only of the third or fourth mnagi.

In. tude in the New World, far surpasses any of the
49f. Breams in our hemisphere. It rolls towards the

ocean such a vast body of water, and rufles into
it with such impetuous force, that when it meets
the tide, which on that coast rites to an uncoin.
mon height, their collision occasions a swell and
agitation of the waves no less surprising than for.
nidable. In this conflict, the irresistible torrent of
the river so far prevails, that it freshens the ocean
many leagues with its flood . Columbus, before
be could perceive the danger, was entangled
among those adverse currents and tempefhious
waves, and it was with the utmost difficulty that
he escaped through a narrow firait, which appeared
so tremendous, that he called it La Boca del Drago.
As soon as the consternation which this occasion.
ed permitted him to reflect upon the nature of
an appearance so extraordinary, he discerned init
a source of comfort and hope. He justly conclu-
ded , that such a vast body of water as this river
contained, could not be supplied by any island,
but must flow through a country of immense ex
tent, and of consequence that he was now arrived
at that continent which it had long been the objeó
of his wifies to discover. Full of this idea, h
Rtood to the weft along the coast of those provin
ces which are now known by the names of Pari
,and Cumana. He landed in several places, al
had some intercourse with the people, who refer

Cumilla. if. ide I'Orenoquc, tom. i. p. r4.

bled those of Hispaniola in their appearance and B o o K
manner of life. They wore, as ornaments, small in.
lates of gold, and pearls of considerable value, ,490
wich they willingly exchanged for European toys.
hey seemed to possess a better understanding,
nd greater courage , than the inhabitants of the
sands. The country produced four-footed ani--
nals of several kinds, as well as a great variety
f fowls and fruits '. The admiral was so much
elighted with its beauty and fertility , that with
he warm enthusiasm of a discoverer, he imagined
t to be the paradise described in Scripture, which
he Almighty chose for the residence of man,
vhile he retained innocence that rendered him
rorthy of such a habitation . Thus Columbus
ad the glory not only of discovering to. mankind
he existence of a New World, but made confi-
erable progress towards a perfect knowledge of
t; and was the first man who conducted the Spa.
iards to that vast continent which has been the
hief feat of their empire, and the source of their
reafires in this quarter of the globe. The hat.
ed condition of his ships, scarcity ofprovifions,
isown infirmities, together with the impatience
his crew, prevented him from pursuing his dif-
overies any farther, and made it necessary to
ear away for Hispaniola. In his way thither he
fcovered the islands of Cubagua and Margarita,

Ilerrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9, o, I . Life of Co-
1hu, c. 66-7;.

H5 errera, dec. . . lib. iii, c, 12. Gomara, c. 84.
NOTE XXI.

1V13

o o which afterwards became remarkable for thei
nI. pearl.fifhery. WAhen he arrived at Hispaniola, h
'~ 4. ,was wafted to an extreme degree with fatigue an
Aug.O. sickness; but found the affairs of the colony

such a situation, as afforded him no profpet
enjoying that repose of which he stood so mu
in need.

State of Hir Many revolutions had happened in that countr
isarival during his absence. His brother the adelantado
tbere. in consequence of an advice which the admir

gave before his departure, had removed the colon
from Isabella to a more commodious flation,
the opposite fide of the island, and laid the foun
dation of St. Domingo 6", which was long th
most considerable European town in the Ne
World, and the feat of the supreme courts in th
Spanish dominions there. As soon as the Spaniard
-were eflablifhed in this new settlement, the ad
lantado, that they. might neither languish in i
activity, nor have leisure to form new cabals
marched into those parts of the island which h
brother had not yet viilted or reduced to obed
ence. As the people were unable to refilt, the
submitted every where to the tribute which h
imposcd. But they soon found the burden to b
so intolerable , that , overawed as they were b
the superior power of their oppressors, they too
arms against them. Those infurredions, however
were not formidable. A conflict with timid an

' P. Martyr, dec. p. 56.

aked Indians was neither dangerous nor of doubt- B o K
ful issue. lI.

But while the adelantado was employed against 1498
them in the field, a mutiny, of an asped far more Moultan.
larming, broke out among the Spaniards. The
ingleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom Co-
umbus had placed in a fation which required
im to be the guardian of order and tranquillity
n the colony. A turbulent and inconsiderate am-
ition precipitated him into this desperate measure,
o unbecoming his rank. The arguments which
e employed to seduce his countrymen were fri-
olous and ill-founded. He accused Columbus and
is two brothers of arrogance and severity; he
retended that they aimed at establishing an inde-
endent dominion in the country; he taxed then
ith an intention of cutting off part of the Spa-
iards by hunger and fatigue, that they rmiglt
ore easily reduce the remainder to fubjedtion; he
cprefented it as unworthy of Caflilians, to remail}
le tame and passive saves of three Geroefe ad.
eniturers. As men have always a propensity tq
Plpute the hardships of which they feel the pref-
re, to the mifcondud of their rulers; as every
Iation views with a jealous eye the power an(
xaltation of foreigners, Roldan's infinuatioll
ade a deep imprcfTion on his countrymen. His
harnaer and rank added weight to them. A con-
lerable number of the Spaniards made choice of
Hn as their leader, and taking arms againf the
Idellntl(lo and his brother, seizcd the king's maw
tinelc of provisions , and cndeavoured to furprif¢

M 4

o o K the fort at St. Domingo. This was preserved by
1I. the vigilance and courage of Don Diego Colun.
1498. bus. '1 he mutineers were obliged to retire to the

province of Xaragua, where they continued not
only to disclaim the adelantado's authority them.
selves, but excited the Indians to throw off the
yoke '.

Such was the diftraded slate of the colony

when Columbus landed at St. Domingo. He was
astonished to find that the three ships which he
had dispatched from the Canaries were not yt
arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, and
the violence of currents, they had been carried a
hundred and sixty miles to the weft of St. Domingo,
and forced to take shelter in a harbour of the
province of Xaragua, where Roldan and his
seditious followers were cantoned. Roldan carefully
concealed from the commanders of the sips his
infurredion against the adelantado, and employing
his utmolt address to gain their confidence, per.
fuaded them to set on shore a considerable part
of the new settlers whom they brought over,
that they hIight proceed by land to St. Domingo.
It required but few arguments to prevail with tho
men to espouse his cause. They were the refu
of the jails of Spain, to whom idleness, licentiou
ness, and deeds of violence were familiar; and
they returned eagerly to a course of life nearly
resembling that to which they had been accustomcd
The commanders of the flips perceiving, when ii

" Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. --8. Life of Columbus
c. 74-77. Gomura, c. 23. P. Martyr, p. 78.

was too late, their imprudence in djfembarking so B o o K
many of their men, flood away for St. Domingo, lI.
and got safe into the port a few days after the 1498.
admiral; but their flock of provisions was so
wafted during a voyage of such long continuance,
that they brought little relief to the colony"

By this juntion with a band of such bold and Compared.
desperate associates , Roldan became extremely bythepuo.
formidable, and no less extravagant in his demands. duaofco.
Columbus, though filled with resentment at his in. lumbus
gratitude, and highly exasperated by the insolence
of his followers, made no haste to take the field.
He trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames
of a civil war in which, whatever party prevailed,
the power and flrength of both must be so much
wafted, as might encourage the common enemy
to unite and complete their deflrution. At the
fame time, he observed, that the prejudices and
paflions which incited the rebels to take arms,
had so far inseted those who still adhered to
him, that many of them were adverse, and all
cold to the service. From such sentiments, with
refped to the public interest, as well as from this
view of his own situation, he chose to negociate
rather than to fight. By a seasonable proclamation,
offering free pardon to such as flould merit it by
returning to their duty, he made impression upon
some of the malecontents. By engaging to grant
such as hould desire it the liberty of returning to
Spain, he allured all those unfortunate adventurers,

" Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. Iz. Life of Columbus,
c. 78, 79.

I o o who, from sickness and disappointment, were

n1. difguted with the country. By promising to re.
1498. establish Roldan in his former office, he soothed

his pride; and by complying with.moft of his
demands in behalf of his followers, he satisfied
their avarice. .Thus , gradually and without
bloodlhed, but after many tedious negociations,
he dissolved this dangerous combination which
threatened the colony with ruin; and restored the
appearance of order, regular government, and
tranquillity '.

A ew mode In consequence of this agreement with the
of ettle. mutineers, lands were allotted them in different

s",edfa. parts of the island, and the Indians fettled in each

diftrid were appointed to cultivate a certain por.
tion of ground for the use of those new masters.
The performance of this work was substituted in
place of the tribute formerly imposed; and how
necessary soever such a regulation might be in a
fickty and feeble colony, it introduced among
the Spaniards the Repartimienlos , or difiributions
of Indians eflablifhed by them in all their fettle.
ments, which brought numberless calamities upon
that unhappy people, and fubjedted them to the
most grievous oppression . This was not the only
bad effed of the infurredlion in Hispaniola; it
prevented Columbus from prosecuting his disco-
vcrics on the continent, as felf-prefervation obliged
him to keep near his person his brother the adel

6' llcrrera, dec, r. lib. iii. c. 1 , 4. Life of Colujnbus,
C. 80. &c.

7i lr a, dec. I. lib, iii. c. 14, &Q,

antado, and the sailors whom he intended to have B o o I
employed in thrt service. As oon as his affairs l.'
would permit, he sent some of his (hips to Spain L49%
with a journal of the voyage which he had made,
a difcription of the new countries which he had
discovered, a chart of the coast along which he
had failed, and specimens of the gold , the pearls,
and other curious or valuable produdions which
he had acquired by trafficking with the natives.
At the fame time he transmitted an account of
the infurredion in Hispaniola; he accused the
mutineers not only of having thrown the colony
into such violent convulsions as threatened its
dissolution, but of having obftruded every attempt
towards discovery and improvement, by their
unprovoked rebellion against their superiors, and
proposed several regulations for the better govern-
ment of the island, as well as the extinction of
that mutinous spirit, which, though suppressed at
present, might soon burst out with additional rage.
Roldan and his associates did not neglect to convey
to Spain, by the fame Ihips, an apology for their
own condut, together with their recriminations
upon the admiral and his brothers. Unfortunately
for the honor of Spain , and the happiness of
Columbus, the latter gained molt credit in the ,
court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and produced
unexpedted efftcds '

But, previous to these, events had happened Tfhevoyage

of Vas o do

7 Ilerrera, 'dec. i. lib. iii. c. 14. Benzon. 1-lil. Nov.
Orb. lib. i. c. 3.

B o 0 it which merit attention, both on account of their

n1. own importance, and their connetion with the
G499tole history of the New World. While Columbus
Gama to the
East lidip, was engaged in his fucceflive voyages to the welt,
hythe ape the spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal,
Hope. the kingdom where it firlt acquired vigor, and

became enterprising. Self-condemnation and regret
were not the only sentiments to which the success
of Columbus and reflecion upon their own im.
prudence in rejecting his proposals, gave rife
among the Portuguese. They excited a generous
emulation to surpass his performances, and an
ardent desire to make some reparation to their
country for their own error. With this view,
Emmanuel, who inherited the enterprising genius
of his predecessors, persisted in their grand scheme
of opening a passage to the East Indies by the
Cape of Good Hope; and soon after his accession
to the throne, equipped a squadron for that import.
ant voyage. He gave the command of it to Valco
de Gama, a man of noble birth, possessed of
virtue, prudence, and courage, equal to the flation.
The squadron, like all those fitted out for discovery
in the infancy of navigation, was extremely feeble,
confifling only of three vessels, of neither burden
nor force adequate to the service. As the Euro.
peans were at that time little acquainted with the
course of the trade-winds and periodical monsoons
which render navigation in the Atlantic ocean,
as well as in the sea that separates Africa from
India, at fomc fcafons easy, and at others
not only dangerous, but almost impracticable, the

time chosen for Gama's departure was the noft B o o
improper during the whole year. He set fail I1.
from Liflon on the ninth of July, and fianding 1497.
towards the south, had to struggle for four months
with contrary winds, before he could reach the
Cape of Good Hope. Here their violence began Nov. o.
to abate; and during an interval of calm weather,
Gama doubled that formidable promontory, which
bad so long been the boundary of navigation,
and directed .his course towards the north-east,
along the African coast. He touched at several
ports; and after various adventures, which the
Portuguese historians relate with high but just
encomiums upon his condudt and intrepidity, he
came to anchor before the city of Melinda.. Through-
out all the vast countries which extend along the
coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the
confines of Zanguebar, the Portuguese had found
a race of men rude and uncultivated, tfrangers to
letters, to arts and commerce , and differing from
the inhabitants of Europe no less in their features
and complexion, than in their manners and inftitu-
tions. As they advanced from this, they observed,
to their inexpreflible joy, that the human form
gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic features
began to predominate, marks of civilization
appeared, letters were known, the Mahometan
religion was eftablified, and a commerce, far from
being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time fveral vessels from India were in the port
of Melinda. Gama now pursued his voyage with
almost absolute certainty of success, and, under

g o o X the conduti of a lahometan pilot, arrived at

II. Calecut, upon the coast of Malab;r , on the
1499. twenty-fecond of May, one thousand four hundred

and ninety-eight. What he beheld of the Wealth,
the populousness, the cultivation, the industry
and arts of this highly civilized country, far fur.
passed any idea that he had formed, from the
imperfect accounts which the Europeans had
hitherto received of it. But as he possessed neither
sufficient force to attempt a settlement, nor proper
commodities with which he could carry on comr
rerce of any consequence, he hastened back to
Portugal, with an account of his success in per.
forming a voyage the longest, as well as moR
difficult, that had ever been made since the firR
invention of navigation. He landed at Lisbon on
the fourteenth of September, one thousand four
hundred and ninety-nine, two years two months
and five days from the time he left that port".

Thus, during the course of the fifteenth century,

mankind made greater progress in exploring the
state of the habitable globe, than in all the ages
which had elp)fcd previous to that period. The
spirit of discovery, feeble at first and cautious,
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made
its efforts with hesitation and timidity. Encouraged
by fuc.-efs, it became ad(ventuttols, and boldl)
extended its operations. In the course of its pro
greflion, it continued to acquire vigor, an
advanced at length with a rapidity and force whicl

' Ramufo,vol. i. p. 19, D.

nrft through all the limits within which ignorance B o 0 t
nd fear had hitherto circumscribed the ativity of ix.
he human race. Almost fifty years were employed I499-
y the Portuguese in creeping along the coast of
frica from Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the
atter of which lies only twelve degrees to the
outh of the former. In less than thirty years they
entured beyond the equinotial line into another
emifphere, and penetrated to the southern extre-
ity of Africa, at the distance of forty-nine degrees
rm Cape de Verd. During the lalt seven years
f the century, a New World was discovered in
he weft, not inferior in extent to all the parts of
he earth with which mankind were at that time
cquainted. In the east, unknown seas and counz
ries were found out, and a communication, long
efired, but hitherto concealed, as opened
etween Europe and the opulent regions of India.

comparison with events so wonderful and
nexpected, all that had hitherto been deemed
reat or splendid, faded away and disappeared.
aft objects now presented themselves. ?''he hu-
an mind, roused and interefled by the profpedt,
ngaged with ardor in pursuit of them, and exerted
ts acive powers in a new direcion.
This spirit of enterprise , though but newly nirfoveries
wakened in Spain, began soon to operate exten- carricd oni

Spia by

vely. All the attempts towards discovery made private ad.
that kingdom, had hitherto been carried on vetturers.
Columbus alone, and at the expense of the
vcrcign. But now private adventurers, allured
tlhe magnificent descriptions he gave of the

B o K regions which he had visited, as well as by the

It. specimens of their wealth which he produced,
1499. offered to fit out fquadrous at their own risk, and

to go in quest of new countries. The Spanil
court, whose scanty revenues were exhausted by
the charge of its expeditions to the New World,
which, though they opened vast profpeds of
future benefit, yielded a very sparing return of
present profit, was extremely willing to devolve
the burden of discovery upon its fubjedts. It seized
with joy an opportunity of rendering the avarice
the ingenuity, and efforts of projecors, infiru
mental in promoting designs of certain advantag
to the public, though of doubtful success vit

Ojedathe refpedt to themselves. One of the first proposition
firlofthefr. of this kind was made by Alonfo de Ojeda,

gallant and aive officer, who had accompanie
Columbus in his second voyage. His rank an
character procured him such credit with the me
chants of Seville, that they undertook to equi
four hips, provided he could obtain the roya
licence, authorising the voyage. The powerfu
patronage of the bishop of Badajos easily fe
cured success in a suit so agreeable to the court
Without consulting Columbus, or regarding th
rights and jurifdidion which he had acquire
by the capitulation in one thousand four hundre
and ninety-two, Ojeda was permitted to set ou
Mnit. for the New World. In order to direct his course

the biflhop communicated to him the admiral
journal of his last voyage, and his charts of th
countries Wyhich he had discovered. Ojeda ftiru

out

out into no new path of navigation, but adhering B o o
servilely to the route which Columbus had taken, II.
arrived on the coast of Paria. He traded with r4s9.
the natives, and flanding to the weft, proceeded
as far as Cape de Vela, and ranged along a
conliderable extent of coast beyond that on which
Columbus had touched. Having thus ascertained
the opinion of Columbus, that this country was a
part of the continent , Ojeda returned by way
of Hispaniola to Spain, with some reputation as a oaober.
discoverer, but with little benefit to those who
ihad raised the funds for the expedition".

Anerigo Vespucci, a Florentine gentleman, Isaccompa.
accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what niedhy
flation he served , is uncertain; but as he was an A"erigo
experienced sailor, and eminently skilful in all the
sciences subservient to navigation, he seems to
have acquired such authority among his companions,
that they willingly allowed him to have a chief
share in directing their operations during the voyage.
Soon after his return, he transmitted an account
of his adventures and discoveries to one of his
countrymen; and laboring with the vanity of a
traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had the
iaddrefs and confidence to frame his narrative, so
as to make it appear that he had the glory of
haiing first discovered the continent in the New
\o1 Id. Amerigo's account was drawn up not
oily with art, but with some elegance. It contained
in aiuling hiltory of his voyage, and judicious

7' Ierren , dec. i. lib v. . . , 2, 3.
XVL. I. N

u o o K observations upon the natural produdions, the

IT. inhabitants, and the cufloms of the countries which
.SE. he had visited. As it was the first description of

any part of the New World that was published, a
performance so well calculated to gratify the
passion of mankind for what is new and marvellous,
circulated rapidly, and was read with admiration,

From whom The country of which Amerigo was supposed to
the nanleof be the discoverer, came gradually to be called by
America is
givento the hbis name. The caprice of mankind, often as
ew world. unaccountable as unjust, has perpetuated this error,

By the universal consent of nations, America is
the name beflowed on this new quarter of the
globe. The bold pretensions of a fortunate
inipoftor have robbed the discoverer of the New
World of a diftindion which belonged to him. The
name of Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbus,
and mankind may regret an ad of injustice, which,
having received the fandion of time, it is now
too late to redress 7.

Voyageor During the fame year, another voyage ol
Alonro discovery was undertaken. Columbus not only

introduced the spirit of naval enterprise into Spain,
but all the first adventurers who dirfinguifled
themfclvcs in this new career, were formed by
his inftiruiions, and acquired in his voyages thf
skill and information which qualified them tc
imitate his example. Alonfo Nigno, who hat
fcrved under the admiral in his last expedition
Itted out a ingle hip, in conjundtion Will

74 See NOTE XXJl.

Chrifoplher Guerra, a tnerchant of Seville, and B o o x
ailed to the coast of Paria.. This voyage seems in.
to h;ve been concduded with greater attention to I499.
private emolument, than to any general or national
objec. Nigno and Guerra -nade n discoveries
of any importance; but they brotght home such
a return of gold and pearls, as inflamed their
cotryrnen writh the desire of engaging in fimilat
adventures 7.
Soon after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the ¢oo.
admiral's companions in his first voyage, failed January 3.
from Palos with four ihips. He stood boldly Ofe inn
towards the south, and was the first Spaniard zon.
who ventured to cross the equinodial line; but
le seems to have landed on o part of the coast
beyond the mouth of the Maragnon, or fiver of
the Amazons. All these navigators adopted the
erroneous theory of Columbus, and believed that
the countries which they had discovered Were part
ol tle valt continent of India 7.

Dlinrng the las year of the fifteenth century, The PortU.
tlit frtile diftridt of America, on the confines of guefedirco.
Iillch Pinzon had ftopt flort, was more fully vet B1ral.
df,ovcred. The successful oyage of Gama to
the faf Ilndies having encouraged the king of
l'oitltal to it out a fleet so powerful, as not
only to carry on trade, but to attempt conquest,
h g;ive the command of it to Pedro Alvarez
Clbr,il. In order to avoid the coast of Africa,

" 1'. Mlartyr, dec. p. 87. Icer.era, dec. r. li. iv. c. .
' llerrera, dec, i. lib, iv. c. 6. P. l Martyr, dec. p. 9 .

.N

n o o K where he was certain of meeting with variable

ni. breezes, or frequent calms, which might retard
1¶O?. his voyage, Cabral flood out to sea , and kept

so far to the weft, that, to his surprise, he
found himself upon the shore of an unknown
country, in the tenth degree beyond the line. He
imagined, at sirs , that it was some island in the
Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved; but, pro
ceeding along its coast for several days, he wa
led gradually to believe, that a country so extenfiv
formed a part of some great continent. This latte
opinion was well founded. The country wit
which he fell in belongs to that province in Sout
America, now known by the name of Brasil. H
landed; and having formed a very high idea o
the fertility of the foil, and agreeableness of th
climate, he took possession of it for the crown o
Portugal, and dispatched a ship to Lilbon wit
an account of this event, which appeared tob
no less important than it was unexpected77. C
lurbus's discovery of the New World was th
effort of an active genius, enlightened by science
guided by experience, and ating upon a regul
plan, executed with no ess courage than perfevc
ance. But from this adventure of the Portuguf
it appears that chance might have accomplile
that great design, which it is now the pride
human reason to have formed and perfected.
the sagacity of Columbus had not condudc
mankind to America, Cabral, by a fortunat

77 Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 7.

accident, might have led them, a few years B o o K
later, to the knowledge of that extensive con- IT.
tinent 7. I

While the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those Machina-
fucceflive voyages, were daily acquiring more en- tions"again"
larged ideas of the extent. and opulence of that
quarter of the globe which Columbus had made
known to them, he himself, far from enjoying the
tranquillity and honors with which his services
Thould have been recompenfed, was. struggling
with every distress in which the envy and malevo-
lence of the people under his command, or the
ingratitude of the court which he served, coul-d
involve him. Though the pacification with Rol-
dan broke the union and weakened the force of
the mutineers, it did not extirpate the feeds of
discord out of the island. Several of the malecon-
tents continued in. arms, refuting to submit to the
admiral. He and his brothers were obliged to
take the field alternately, in order to check their
incursions , or to punish their crimes. The per-
petual occupation and disquiet which this created,
prevented him from giving due attention to the
dangerous machinations of his enemies in the court
of Spain. A good number of such as were most
difiratisfied with his administration, had embraced
the opportunity of returning to Europe with the
ihips which he dispatched from St. Domingo. The
final disappointment of all their hopes inflamed
the rage of these unfortunate adventurers against

78 lHerrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. .

N3

B o o K Columnbus to the utmost pitch. Theii poverty

II. and distress , by exciting ompafion , rendered
10oo. their accusations credible, and their complaints in

teresting. 'I hey teaze'd Ferdinand and Isabella in.
celTantly with memorials, containing the dtail of
their own grievances, and the articles of their
charge against Columnbus. Whenever either tie
king or queen appeared inpublic, they surrounded
them in a tumultuary manner, infiting with im.
portunate clamors for payment of the arrears due
to them, and demanding vengeance upon the au.
thor of their sufferings. They insulted the admi
ral's sons wherever they met them, reproachinl
them as the offspring of the proje&or, whose fta
curiosity had discovered those pernicious region
which drained Spain of its wealth-, and woul
prove the grave of its people. These avowe
endeavours of the malecontents from America to
ruin Columbus, were seconded by the secret, bu
more dangerous insinuations of that party arnon
the courtiers, wlich had always thwarted hi
schemes, and envied his success and credit ".

Theirin. Ferdinand was disposed to liften, not onl
fluenceon with a willing, but with a partial ear, to these
rdirfabein accusations. Notwithstanding the flattering ac.

counts which Columbus had given of the riches
of America, the remittances from it had hithbertc
been so scanty,; that they fell far flort of defrayine
the expense of the armaments fitted out. Theglor~
of the discovery, together with the profpet

79 Life of Columbus, c. 85.

remote commercial advantages, was all that Spain B o o
bad yet received in return for the efforts which fie n1.
had made. But time had already diminiled the 5O0
first sensations of jo.y which the discovery of a New
World occasioned, and fame alone was not an
object to satisfy the cold interested mind of Ferdi-
nand. The nature of commerce was then so little
understood, that, where immediate gain was not
acquired, the hope of distant benefit, or of flow
and moderate returns, was totally disregarded. Ser-
dinand confidered Spain, on: this account, as having
loft by the enterprise of Columbus, and imputed
it to his mifcondud and incapacity for govern-
ment, that a country abounding in gold had yielded
nothing of value to its conquerors. Even lfabella,
who, from the favorable opinion which he enter-
tained of Columbus, had uniformly protedted him,
was fhakenat length by the number andb.oldnefs
of his accusers, and began to suspect that a difaf.
feion so general must have been occasioned by
real grievances, which called for redress. The
bishop of Badajos, with his usual animosity agaiun
Columbus, encouraged these ufpicions", and con-
firmed them ,,':

As soon as the queenbeogan to give way to Fatalecffc
the torrent of calumny i'a rfolution fatal to Co- o' hts.
lumbus was taklen. Francis de Bovadilla,a knight
of Calatrava, was appointed to repair to.Hifpanioda,
with full powers to inquir .into the conduct of
Columbus i and, if he flauld, find the charge of
mal-adminiftratioh proved.,.,to,.fuperfede him, and
assume the government of the iland. It was

N4

o o I impossible to escape condemnation, when this pre.
II. pofterous commifiion made it the interest of the
o50. judge to pronounce the person whom he was fen

to try, guilty. Though Columbus had now cor
posed all the dissentions in the island; though he
had brought both Spaniards and Indians to submit
peaceably to his government; though he had made
such effectual provision for working the mines,
and cultivating the country, as would have secured
a considerable revenue to the king, as well as large
profits to individuals; Bovadilla, without deigning
to attend to the nature or merit of those services
discovered, from the moment that he landed in
Hispaniola, a determined purpose of treating him
as a criminal. He took poffelfion of the admiral's
house in St. Domingo, from which its mafler hap.
pened at that time to be absent, andJfeized his
effects, as if his guilt had been already fully pro.
ved; he rendered himself matter of the fort nd
of the king's stores by violence ; he required all
persons to acknowledge him as supreme governor;
he set at liberty the prisoners confined by the ad.
miral, and fumrnoned him to appear before his
tribunal, ini order to answer for his conduit ;: tranf.
mitting to him , together with the summons, a
copy of the royal mandate, by which Columbus
was enjoined to yield implicit obedience. to his
commands. ,

Co0lmbus Columbus, though deeply affected. with the
fnt in t ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinahdand Isabella,
chains to
Spain. did not befitate a romernt about his own conduct.

He submitted to the will of his sovereigns with a

efpedful silence, and repaired directly to the court B o o K
that violent and partial judge whom they had . .
uhorifed to try him. Bovadilla, without admit- 'Is
ng him into his presence, ordered him instantly
be arrested, to be loaded with chains , and
urried on board a ship. Even under this October.
umiliating reverse of fortune, the firmness of
nd which distinguishes the charaCter of Colum-
us, did not forsake him. Conscio.us of his own
tegrity, and solacing himself with refleCting upon
egreat things which he had achieved, he en-
ured this insult offered to his character, not only
ith composure, but with dignity. Nor had he
econfolation of sympathy to mitigate his susser-
gs. Bovadilla. had already rendered himself so
tremely popular, by granting various immuni-
esto the colony, by liberal donations of Indians
all who applied for them, and by relaxing the
ins of discipline and government, that the Spa-
ards, who wei'e moftlyadventurers, whom their
digence or crimes had impelled to abandon their
tive country,. expressed the most indecent satis-
sion with the disgrace and imprisonment of Co-
mbus. They flattered themselves, that now
cy should enjoy an uncontrouled liberty, more
itable to their disposition and former habits of
. Among persons thus prepared to cenfitre the
oceedings, and to asperse the charader of Co.
mbus, Bovadilla collected materials for a charge
aint him. All accusations, the most impioba-
, as well as inconsistent, were received. 'No
ormer, however infamous, was rejeded. 'he

B o o result of this inquest, no less indecent thanpari

11. be transmitted to Spain. At the fame time,
so0o.. ordered Columbus, with his two brothers, to

carried thither in fetters; and, adding cruelty
insult , he confined them in different hips, a
excluded them from the comfort of that frien
intercourse which might have soothed their co
mon distress. But while the Spaniards in Hip
niola viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedi
of Bovadilla with a general approbation, whi
refleds dishonor upon their name and counts
one man still retained a proper sense of the gre
actions which. Columbus had performed, andw
touched with the sentiments of veneration and pi
due to his rank, his age, and his merit. Alon
-de Vallejo, the captain of the vessel on boa
which the admiral was confined, as oon as he
clear of the island, approached his prisoner wi
great refpedt, and offered to release him from t
fetters with which he was unjustly loaded.. "N
replied Columbus, with a generous indignatio
" I wear these irons i;n consequence of an or
'from my sovereigns. They hall find me as o
dient to this as to their other injunctions. By th
command I have been confined, and their c
Wand alone liall set me at liberty ".

N,,. 2. Fortunately, the voyage to Spain was extren
et at liber- ly lort. As soon as Ferdinand and Ifabe
ty , but de-
riv'd ofufll were informed that Coluimbus was brought ho
authority.

" Life of Columbus, c. R6. Herrer a, dec. i. lib.i
c. 8.- 1 i. Gomara Hilt. c. 2 . Qviedo, lib iii. c. 6

1

prisoner, and in chains, they perceived at nce B o o ^
hat universal. astonishment this event must cca- i,
n, and what an impression to their disadvantage IS-
must tnake, All Europe, they foresaw, would
filled with'indignation at thi's ungenerous requi.
I of a riati who had performed adiotns worthy
the higheftl recompence, and would exclaim
aift the injustice of the nation , to which he
d been such. an eminent benefador, as well as
ainft the ingratitude of the princes whose reign
had rendered illustrious. Afiamed of their own
ondudt and eager not only to make sone repa.
ion for this injury, but to efface the slain which
might fix upon their charafter, they instantly
ued orders to set Columbus at liberty, invited Iec. 17.
im to court~ and remitted money to enable him
appear there in a manner suitable to his rank.
hen he entered the royal presence, Columbus
rew himself at the feet of his fovereigus. He
mained for fonie time silent; the various paflions
hich agitated his mind suppressing hisa power of
tterance.:, At length he recovered hinrfelf, and
indicated .his condut in a long difcourf , produ-
ing the mos satisfying proofs of his own integrity
well as good intention, and evideoce, no. less
car, of the malevolence of his enemies, who,
t satisfied with having ruined his fortune , labor-'
to deprive him of what alone was now left,
is honor and his fame. Ferldinand received him
ith decent civility, and Ifabclla with tendericls
(1 respect. They both expressed their sorrow
rwhat had happened, disavowed their knowlcdg

B o o K of it, and joined in promising him. protection an

iI. future favor. But though they instantly degrade
ICO. Bovadilla, in order to remove from themfelv,

any suspicion of having authorised his violent pn
ceedings, they did not restore to Columbus h
jurifdicion and privileges as viceroy of those COul
tries which he had discovered. Though willin
to appea: the avengers of Columbus's wrongs
that illiberal jealousy which prompted them
invest Bovadilla with such authority as put iti
his power to treat the admiral with indignity li
fubfifled. They were afraid to trust a man
whom they had been so highly indebted, and
taining him at court under various pretexts., the
appointed Nicholas de Ovando, a.knight of tl
military order of Alcantara, governor of ,lisp
niola "

Columbus was deeply affeced with' thisne

injury, which came from hands that seemed. to.l
employed in making reparation for his past suss
ings. The sensibility with which great mindss(
every thing that implies any suspicion of theiri
tegrity, or that wears the afpedt of an affront,
exquisite. Columbus had experienced both frc
the Spaniards; and their ungenerous conduct ex
perated him to such a degree,* that he coujd
longer conceal the sentiments which it exciti
Wherever he went, he carried about with hi
as a memorial of their ingratitude, those sett

" Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. o10-2. Life of Col
bus, c 87.

ith which he had been loaded. They were con- B o o x
antly hung up in his chamber, and he gave or- 1n.
rsthat when he died they should be buried in
grave
Meanwhile, the spirit of discovery, notwith- isor.
ading the severe check which it received by the Progress of

difovery.

generous treatment of the man, who first excited
in Spain, continued active and vigorous. Rode-
o deBallidas, a person of diftindion, fitted out January.
o ships in co-partnery with John de la Cosa,
o having served under the admiral in two of
s voyages , was- deemed the most kilful pilot in
ain. They fleered direly towards the conti-
nt, arrived on the coast of Paria, and proceed-
gto the weft, discovered all the coast of the
vince, now known by the name ofTierra Firme,
0m Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not
ng after Ojeda, with his former associate Ame-
oVefpucci, set out upon a second voyage, and
ng unacquainted with the destination of Bafti
, held the fame course, and touched at the
eplaces. The voyage of Baftidas was prosper-
sand lucrative, that of Ojeda unfortunate. But
th tended to increase the ardor of discovery;
in proportion as the Spaniards acquired a more
enfive knowledge of the American continent,
eiridea of its opulence and fertility increased'.
Before these adventurers returned from their Ova do ap.
yages, a fleet was equipped, at the public peotelgo.u

Hiflanllola.

Life of Columbus, , 86. p. 77.
lHerenra, dec . . lib. iv. c. Is.

o 6 ;r expense, for carrying over Ovando, the netK g
ir. vernor, to Hispaniola. His presence there wi

s- extremely requisite, in order to fop the in.coij

derate career of Bovadilla , whose imprudenta
minitration threatened the settlement with rui
Conscious of the violence and iniquity of his pr
ceedin.gs against Columbus, he continued to
it his sole object to gain the favor and support
his countrymen, by accommodating himelf
their paflions and prejudices. With this view,
established regulations, in every point the eve
of those which Columbus deemed essential to
prosperi.ty of the colony. Instead of the fev
(lircipline, necessary in order to habituate the d
iolute and corrupted members of which the foci
was composed to the restraints of law and sub
dination, he suffered them to enjoy such tinc
trouled licence, as encouraged the wildest exce
Inflead of proteding the Indians , he gave ale
fandion to the oppression of that unhappy peop
He took the exadt number of such as survived th
past calamities, divided them into diftinet claf
dilributed them in property among his adhere
and reduced all the people of the iland to a ft
of conplete servitude. As the avarice of theS
niards was too rapacious and impatient to try
method of acquiring wealth ut that of fearchi
for gold, this servitude' became as grievous as
was ujult. l'he Indians were driven in crov
to the mountains, and compelled to work in
tnines by maflcrs, who imposed their taks with,
mercy or discretion. Labor, so difproportio0

their strength and former habits of life, wafted B o o it
tfeeble race of men, with fich rapid con. Ir.
ption, as muif have soon terminated in the ilot.
er extindtion of the ancient inhabitants of the
untry
The necefity of applying a speedy remedy t6 Newregula.
fe disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. He tilnsheta-
the command of the most refpedable arma.
nt hitherto fitted out for the New World. It
sifted of thirty-two, ships, on board of which
o thousand five hundred persons embatked,
h an intention of fettling in the cuntry. Upon
arrival of the new governor with this powerful i6i.
nforcement to the colony, Bovadilla resigned
charge, and was commanded to return inflantly
pain, in order to answer for his conduct. Rol.
and the other ringleaders of the ,mutiheers,
o had been most adtive in oppofing,Columbus,
re required to leave the island at the fame time.
roclamation was issued, declaring the natives
be free fubjeds of Spain, of whom no service,
to be exadted contrary to their own inclina-
, and without paying them an adequate price
their lab.or. With refpdec to the Spaniards
mrelves, various regulations were made, tending
upprefs the licentious spirit which had been so
to the colony, and to eflablill that reverence
law and order on which society is founded,
to which it is indebted so' its incteafe and

'Hetrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. i , &c. Oviedo Hist. lib,
6. p. 97. Benzon. Hilt, lib. i. c, m. p.
p i.

B o o fability. In order to limit the exorbitant g

n. which private persons were fuppofed:to make
1o-. working the mines , an ordinance was publifl

directing all the gold to be brought to a pub
fmelting-houfe, and declaring one half of it to
the property of the crown "
The dirf While these steps were taking for securing

tir,, tof tranquillity and welfare of the colony which.
Columbus. lumbus had planted, he himself was engaged

the unpleasant employment of soliciting the sav
of an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding
his merit and ferviees, he solicited in vain.
demanded, in terms of the original capitulation
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, to
reinfltated in his office of viceroy over the co
tries which he had discovered. By a ftrangefa
ity, the circumstance which he urged in fupp
of his claim, determined a jealous monarch
rejet it. The greatness of his discoveries, and
profpet of their ihcreafing value, made Ferdina
confider the conceslions in the capitulation as
travagant and impolitic. He was afraid of intr
ing a fubjedt with the exercise of a jurifdidi
that now appeared to be so extremely extends
and might grow to be no less formidable. He
spired lfabella with the fame fifpicions; and
der various pretexts, equally frivolous and unji
they eluded all Columbus's requisitions to perfo
that which a solemn treaty bound them to accc

' Solorzano Politica Indiana, lib. i. c. 12. flerr
dec. . lib. iv. c. 12.

plif

plilh. After attending the court of Spain for ear B o o It
two years, as an humble suitor, he found it im- 1n.
polfible to remove Ferdinand's prejudices and ap- 1502.
prehensions; and perceived, at length, that he la-
bored in vain, when he urged a claim of justice
or merit with an interested and unfeeling prince.

But even this ungenerous return did not difcou- Heforms
rage him from pursuing the great objed which ew fcheeneu
firt called forth his inventive genius, and excited
him to attempt discovery. To open a new passage
to the East Indies was his original and favorite
cheme. This still engrossed his thoughts; and
either from his own observations in his voyage to
Paria, or from some obscure hint of the natives,
or from the accounts given by Baftidas and de a
Cosa, of their expedition, he conceived an opinion
hat, beyond the continent of America, there was
a sea which extended to the Ealt Indies, arid
oped to find some strait or narrow neck of land,
y which a communication might be opened with
tand the part of the ocean already known. By a
ery fortunate conjecture, he supposed this strait
rithmus to be situated near the gulf of Darien.
ull of this idea, though he was now of an ad-
anced age, worn out with fatigue, and broken
ith infirmities, he offered, with the alacrity of
youthful adventurer, to undertake a voyage which
ould ascertain this important point, and perfed
he grand scheme which from the beginning he
ropofed to accomplilh. Several circurnftances
oncurred in disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to
rd a favorable ear to this proposal. They were

VOL. . 0

i o o glad to have the pretext of any honorable employ.

II. ment for removing from court a man with whole
s501 demands they deemed it impolitic to comply., and

whose services it was indecent to neglect. Though
unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not
insensible of his merit, and from their experience
of his kill and conduot, had reason to give credit
'to his conjecures, and to confide in his success,

To these considerations, a third must be added
of till more powerful influence. About this time
the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral, arrived from
the Indies; and, by the richness of its cargo, gave
the people of Europe a more perfect idea, than
they had hitherto been able to form, of the opu.
lence and fertility of the eat. The Portuguese
had been more fortunate in their discoveries than
the Spaniards. They had opened a communica.
tion with countries where indtitry, arts, and ele
gance flourifled; and where commerce had been
longer established, and carried to greater extent,
than in any region of the earth. Their first voy.
ages thither yielded immediate, as well as vast re
turns of profit, in commodities extremely precious
and in great requet. Lisbon became immediately
the feat of commerce and of wealth; while Spair
had only the expectation of remote benefit, ando
future gain, from the western world. Nothing
then, could be more acceptable to the Spaniard
than Columbus's offer to conduct them to the eaf
by a route which he expected to be florter,a
well as less dangerous, than that which the Po
tuguefe bad taken. Even Ferdinand was roust

byi fch a profpee, and warmly approved of the B o o x
undertaking. I.

But, interesting as the object of this voyage [,0o.

was to the nation, Columbus could procure oly voyage.
four fnall barks, the largest of which did not
exceed seventy tons in burden, for performing it.
Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in
arduous undertakings with inadequate force, he
did not hesitate to accept the command of this
pitiful squadron. His brother Bartholomew, and
his second son Ferdinand, the historian of his
aetions, accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz
on the ninth of May, and touched, as usual, at
the Canary Islands; from thence he purposed to
have flood directly for the continent; but his larg-
eft vessel was so clumsy and unfit for service, as
constrained him to bear away for Hispaniola, in
hopes of exchanging her for some hip of the fleet
that had carried out Ovando. When he arrived June 29.
off St. Domingo, he found eighteen of these. hips
ready loaded, and on the point of departing for
Spain. Columbus immediately acquainted the go.'
vernor with the destination of his voyage, and the
accident which had obliged him to alter his route.
e requested permiflion to enter the harbour, not
only that he might negociate the exchange of his
lip, but that he might take flelter during a vio;.
lent hurricane, of which he discerned the approach
rom various prognostics, which his experience
nd sagacity had taught him to observe. On that
ccount, he advised him likewise to put off for
me days the departure of the fleet bound for

0

B o o K Spain. But Ovando refused his request, ad del.

in. pifed his counsel. Under circumstances in which
ISo0. humanity would have afforded refuge to a firan-

ger, Columbus was denied admittance into a
country of which he had discovered the existence,
and acquired the possession. His salutary warning,
which merited the greatest attention, was regarded
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arro.
gantly pretended to predict an event beyond the
reach of human foresight. The fleet set fail for
Spain. Next night the hurricane came on with
dreadful impetuosity. Columbus, aware of the
danger, took precautions against it, and saved
'his little squadron. The fleet destined for Spain
met with the fate which the raffnefs and obstinacy
of its commanders deserved. Of eighteen hips
two or three only escaped. In this general wreck
perilhed Bovadilla, Roldan, and the greater part
of those who had been the molt ative in perse.
cuting Columbus, and opprcffing the Indians. To.
gether with themselves, all the wealth which they
had acquired by their injustice and cruelty was
swallowed up. It exceeded in value two hundred
thousand pesos ; an immense fum at that period,
and sufficient not only to have screened them from
any severe scrutiny into their conduct, but to have
secured them a gracious reception in the Spanill
court. Among the fliips that escaped, one hd or
board all the effets of Columbus which had beet
recovered from the ruins of his fortune. Hiitorialn
st'ruck with the exact discrimination of characters
as well as the just distribution of rewards an

punishments, confpicuousin those events, universally o o K
attribute them to an immediate interposition of di- II.
vine Providence, in order to avenge the wrongs oZ.
of an injured man, and to punish the oppressors
of an innocent people. Upon the ignorant and
superstitious race of men, who were witnesses of
this occurrence, it made a different impression.
From an opinion, which vulgar admiration is apt
to entertain ith refped to persons who have dif.
tinguifhed themselves by their sagacity and inven-
tions, they believed Columbus to be possessed of
supernatural powers, and imagined that he had
conjured up this dreadful torm by magical art,
and incantations, in order to be avenged of his
enemies s

Columbus foor left Hispaniola, where he met July i4.
with such an inhospitable reception, and flood Searches in

vain fora

towards the coritinent. After a tedious and dan* paflage to
gerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an island the Indian
not far distant from the coals of Honduras. There ocean.
he had an interview. with some inhabitants of the
continent, who arrived in a large canoe. They
appeared to be a people more civilized, and who
had made greater progress in the knowledge of
ufeftl arts, than any whom he had hitherto disco.
vered. In return to the inquiries which the Spa-
niards made, with their usual eagerness , concern-
ing the places where the Indians got the gold
Which they wore by way of ornament, they

" Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. Herrera, dec. . lib. ,
Ci, 2. Life of Columbus c, 88.

3

B o o K directed them to countries situated to the weft, in

IT. which gold was found in such profusion, that it
°1o. was applied to the most common uses. Inflead of

fleering in quest of a country so inviting, which
would have conducted him along the coast of
Yucatan to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus
was so bent upon his favorite scheme of finding
out the firait which he supposed to communicate
with the Indian ocean, that he bore away to the
east towards the gulf of Darien. In this naviga.
tion he discovered all the coast of the continent,
from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbour which, on
account of its beauty and security, he called Porto
Bello. He searched, in vain, for the imaginary
strait, through which he expected to make his
way into an unknown sea; and though he went
on hore several times, and advanced into the
country, he did not penetrate so far as to cross
the narrow isthmus which separates the gulf of
Mexico from the great southern ocean. He was
so much delighted, however, with the fertility of
the country, and conceived such an idea of its
wealth, from the specimens of gold produced by
the natives, that he resolved to leave a small co.
lony upon the river Belem, in the province of
1w03. Veragua, under the command of his brother, and

to return himself to Spain, in order to procure
what was requisite for rendering the eftabliflmenll
permanent. But the ungovernable spirit of tl
people under his command , deprived Columbti
of the glory of planting the first colony on thl
continent of America. Their insolence and rapa

cioufnefs provoked the natives to take arms, and B o o r
as these were a more hardy and warlike race. of j,
inen than the inhabitants of the islands', they cut Iso3.
off part of the Spaniards, and obliged the reft to
abandon a station which was found to be un-
tenable 7.

This repulse, the firfi that the Spaniards met Shipwrecik
with from any of the American nations, was not e onthe
the only misfortune that besel Columbus; it was maica,
followed by a succession of all the disasters to
which navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes,
with violent storms of thunder and lightning, threat-
ened his leaky vessels with deftrudion ;iwhile his
discontented crew, exhausted with 'fatigue, and
destitute of provisions, was unwilling or unable
to execute his commands. One of his 'sips pe-
rilhed; he was obliged to abandon another, as
unfit for service; and with the two which remain-
ed, he quitted that part of the continent which
in his angnifh he named the Coast ofVexation t, Junea4.
and bore away for Hispaniola. New diflrefTes
awaited him in this voyage. He was driven back
by a violent tempelt from the coast of Cuba, his
Ihips fell foul of one another, and were so much
bhattered by the hock, that with the utmoff diffi-
culty they reached Jamaica, where he was obliged
to run them aground, to prevent them from fink-
ing. The measure of his calamities seemed ow

" Herrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. t , &c. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 89, &c. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9.

" La Colta de los Contrastes.

04

B o c to be full. He was call ashore upon an island ate

Ix. considerable distance from the only settlement of
io53. the Spaniards in America. His hips were ruined

beyond the possibility of being repaired. To con,
vey an account of his situation to Hispaniola, ap,
peared impracicable; and without this it was vain
to expect relief. His genius, fertile in resources,
and most vigorous in those perilous extremities
when feeble minds abandon themselves to despair,
discovered the only expedient which afforded any
profpet of deliverance. He had recourse to the
hospitable kindness of the natives, who confider.
ing the Spaniards as beings of a superior nature,
were eager, on every occasion, to minister to their,
wants. From them he obtained two of their
canoes, each formed out of the trunk of a finglq
tree, hollowed with fire, and so mis-shapen and
aukward as hardly to merit the name of boats.
In these, which were fit only far creeping along
the coast, or crofling from one fide of a bay to
another, MVendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a
Genoese, two gentlemen particularly attached to
Columbus, gallantly offered to set out for Hifpa-
niola, upon a voyage of above thirty leagues ".
This they accomplished in ten days, after fur-
mounting incredible dangers, and enduring such
fatigue, that several of the Indians who accompa.
nied them funk under it, and died. The attention
paid to them by the governor of Hispaniola was
neither such as their courage merited no , the

Oviedo. lib. iii. c. 9.

diffrefs of the persons from whom they came, re- B o o
uircd. Ovando, from a mean jealousy of Colum- I.
us, was afraid of allowing him to set foot in the 1503:
iland under his government. -This ungenerous
paftion hardened his heart against every tender fen-
iment, which reflection upon the services and
isfortunes of that great man, or compassion for
is own fellow-citizens involved in the fame cala"
ities, muff have excited. Mendez and Fiefchi
ent eight months in soliciting relief for their
romander and associates, without any profped
obtaining it.
During this period, various passions agitated Hisdiftrers
e mind of Columbus , and his companions in a"nlruf:r-
dverfhty. At first the expecation of speedy
eliverance, from the success of Mendez and
efchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of the most
efponding. After some time the more timorous
egan to fufpe6t that they had miscarried in their
ariug attempt. At length, even the most sanguine o04.
included that they had perilhed. 'Ihe ray of
ope which had broke in upon them, made their
ndition appear now more dismal. Despair, heighr
ned by disappointment, fettled in every breast.
heir las resource had failed, and nothingremained
t the profped of ending their miserable days
ong naked savages, far from their country and
eir friends. The seamen, in a transport of rage,
fe in open mutiny, threatened the life of Colum-
s, whom they reproached as the author of all
cir calamities , fcized ten canoes, which he had
rchafed. from the Indians, and defpifilg his

o o K remnnftrances and entreaties, made off with themn
11. to a distant part of the island. At the fame time
7$o4i the natives murmured at the long residence of t

Spaniards in their country. As their industry w
nrot greater than that of their neighbours in l
paniola, like them, they found the burden
supporting so many fArangers to be altogeth
intolerable. They began to bring in provision
with reludance, they furnished them with afparin
hand, and threatened to withdraw those fuppli
altogether. Such a resolution must have bee
quickly fatal to the Spaniards. Their fafet
depended upon the good will of the Indians; an
unless they could revive the admiration and reve
ence with which that simple people had at si
beheld them, deftrudion was unavoidable. Thou
.the licentious proceedings of the mutineers ha
in a great measure, effaced those impressions whi
had been so favorable to the Spaniards, the in
nuity of Columbus fuggef(ed a happy artifice, th
not only restored but heightened the high opini
which the Indians had originally entertained
them. By his (kill in astronomy, he knew tb
there was shortly to be a total eclipse of the mo
He assembled all the principal persons of the dift
around him on the day before it happened, an
after reproaching them for their fickleness in wi
drawing their affedion and alfiftance from m
whom they had lately revered, he told the
that the Spaniards were servants of the Gr
Spirit who dwells in heaven, who made ai
governs the ..world; that lie, offended at th

lufing to support men who were the objedc of B o o
is peculiar favor, was preparing to punish this li.
ime with exemplary severity, and that very '04

.

ight the moon hould withhold her light, and
pear of a bloody hue, as a sign. of the divine
rath, and an emblem of the vengeance ready
fall upon them. To this marvellous prediction
me of them listened with the careless indifference
eculiar to the people of America; others, with
e credulous astonishment natural to barbarians.
ut when the moon began gradually to be dark.
ed, and at length appeared of a red color, all
ere struck with terror. They ran with confterna-
on to their houses, and returning instantly to
olumbus loaded with provisions, threw them at
s feet, conjuring him to intercede with the
reat Spirit to avert the deftrution with which
ey were threatened. Columbus, seeming to be
oved by their entreaties, promised to comply
ith their desire. The eclipse went off, the
oon recovered its splendor, and from that day
e Spaniards were not only furnilhed profauely
ith provisions, but the natives, with fuperlfitious
tention, avoided every thing that could give
em offence '".
During thoCe tranfacdions , the mutineers had A cruel ad.
ade repeated attempts to pass over to Hispaniola dition to
the canoes which they had seized. But, from
eirown mifcondud, or the violence of the winds

e Life of Columbus, c. 0 o. Herrera, dec. . lib. i,
6. Benzon, Hist. lib. i. c. 4.

B O O K and currents, their efforts were all unsuccess

]I. Enraged at this disappointment, they march
'Sc4. towards that part of the island where Colurb

remained, threatening him with new insults an
danger. While they were advancing, 'an eve
happened, more cruel and affliding than a
calamity which he dreaded from them. T
governor of Hispaniola , whose mind was
filled with some dark suspicions of Columbu
sent a small bark to Jamaica, not to deliver
distressed countrymen, but to spy out theircon
tion. Left the sympathy of those whom he e
ployed hould afford them relief, contrary to
intention, he gave the command of this vessel
Efcobar, an inveterate enemy of Columbus, w
adhering to his inftruCions with malignant accura
cast anchor at some distance from the island,
proachedthe shore in a small boat, observed
wretched plight of the Spaniards, delivered a let
of empty compliment to the admiral, received
answer, and departed. When the Spaniards
descried the vessel standing towards the ifla
every heart exulted, as if the long expeted h0
of their deliverance had at length arrived;
when it disappeared so suddenly, they funk i
the deepest dejedion, and all their hopes di
away. Columbus alone, though he felt molt fenfi
this wanton insult which Ovando added to
palt neglet, retained such composure of m'i
as to he able to cheer his followers. He afstr
them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had reached
paniola in safety; that they would speedily proct

ips to carry them off; but as Efcobar's vessel B o o K
ould not take them all on board, that he had 11.
fused to go with her, because he was determined so04.
ever to abandon the faithful companions of his
ifrefs. Soothed with the expectation of speedy
eliverance , and delighted with his apparent
enerofity in attending more to their preservation
an to his own safety, their spirits revived, and
regained their confidence'.
Without this confidence, he could not have
ifted the mutineers, who were now at hand.
1 his endeavours to reclaim those desperate men
ad no effec but to increase their frenzy. Their
mands became every day more extravagant, and
eir intentions more violent and bloody. The
mmon safety rendered it necessary to oppose
em with open force. Columbus, who had been
ngafflided with the gout, could not take the field.
s brother, the Adelantado , marched againt them. May40.
ey quickly met. The mutineers rejected with
orn terms of accommodation, which were once
ore offered them, and rushed on boldly to the
tack. They fell not upon an enemy unprepared
receive them. In the first hock, several of
eir most daring leaders were slain. The Adelantado,
hose strength was equal to his courage, closed
t their captain, wounded, disarmed, and took

prisoner ". At fight of this, the reft fled

Life of olumbus, c. 104. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi.
17;,

Life of Columbus, c. o107 Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi.
iI.

o o K with a dastardly fear, suitable to their form
IT. insolence. Soon after, they submitted in a bod
&°4* to Columbus, and bound themselves by the m

solemn oaths to obey all his commands. Hardl
was tr.inquillity re-established, when the fhi
appeared, whose arrival Columbus had promise
with great address, though he could foresee
with little certainty. With transports of joy, t
Spaniards quitted an island in which the unfeelin
jealousy of Ovando had suffered them to langui
above a year, exposed to misery in all its vario

Aug. . forms.
HIis deliver- When they arrived at St. Domingo, the governo
act. aaid with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, th
tarrival at
biipalioia. labors to atone for insolence by servility, fawn

on the man whom he envied, and had attempt
to ruin. He received Columbus with the n
studied refpe t, lodged hit in his own hou
and distinguished him with every mark of hon
But, amidst those overated demonfirations
regard, he could not conceal the hatred a
malignity latent in his heart. lie set at liberty
captain of the mutineers, whom Columbus h
brought over in chains, to be tried for his crime
and threatened such as had adhered to the admil
with proceeding to a judicial inquiry into th
conduct. Columbus submitted in silence to l
he could not redress; but discovered an extre
impatience to quit a country which was ul
the jurifdidion of a man who had treated i
Sptm on every occasion, with inhumanity and injula

His preparations were soon finiffed, and he

il for Spain with two flips. Disasters similar to B o o x
iofe which had accompanied him through life 1X.
otinued to pursue him to the end of his career. 1,o0.
e of his vessels being disabled, was soon forced
ck to St. Domingo; the other, fattered by violent
orms, failed seven hundred leagues with jury- December,
ifts, and reached with difficulty the port of St.

91

ucar .
There he received the account of an event the Delth of
oft fatal that could have befallen him, and which. lrabella.

Nov. &,

mpleted his misfortunes. This was the death .
his patroness queen Isabella, in whose justice,
manity, and favor, he confided as his last
furce. None now remained to redress his wrongs,
to reward him for his services and sufferings,.
tFerdinand, who had so long opposed and so
en injured him. To solicit a prince thus prejudiced
ainft him was an occupation no less irksome
an hopeless. In this, however, was Columbus
omed to employ the close of his days. As soon
his health was in some degree re established, he
aired to court; and though he was received
ere with civility barely decent, he plied Ferdi.
nd with petition after petition, demanding the
niment of his opprefors , and the restitution
all the privileges beltowed upon him by the
itulation of one thousand four hundred and
ney-two. Ferdinand anmufed him with fair
rds and unmeaning promises. Inflead of grant.

Life of Columbus, c. o. Herrera, dec. . lib. vi.
1I,

ao o ing his claims, he proposed expedients in ord

r1. to elude them, and spun out the affair with fuc
1to4 apparent art, as plainly discovered his intenti

Death of
Columbus. that it should never be terminated. The declini

health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand with t
hopes of being soon delivered from an importuna
suitor, and encouraged him to persevere in t
illiberal plan. Nor was he deceived in his exped
tions. Disgusted with the ingratitude of a noonarc
whom he had served with such fidelity and fucce
exhausted with the fatigues and hardships whic
he had endured, and broken with the infirmiti
which these brought upon him, Columbus ende
his life at Valladolid on the twentieth of M
one thousand five hundred and fix, in the sis
ninth year of his age. He died with a compofu
of mind suitable to the magnanimity which difti
guifbed his character, and with sentiments
piety becoming that supreme refpedt for religio
which he manifested in every occurrence of
life ".

Life of Columbus, c. Io8. Herrera, dec. . lib.
c.i?, )14 I'

TH

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK III.

THE
H I S T O R Y

F
A M E R ICA.

BOOK III.

HILE Columbus was employed in his ai B o o

oyage, several events worthy of notice happened I.
a Hispaniola. The colony there, the parent ,04.
nd nurse of all the subsequent establishments of State of the
pain in the New World, gradually acquired the cionyioa.
rm of a regular and prosperous society. The
umane solicitude of Isabella to protect the Indians
om oppreflion, and particularly the proclamation,
ywhich the Spaniards were prohibited to compel
hen to work, retarded, it is true, for some time,
progress of improvement. The natives, who
nfidered exemption from toil as supreme felicity,
orned every allurement and reward by which
ey were invited to labor. The Spaniards had
ot a sufficient number of hands either to work
he mines or to cultivate the foil. Several of the
t colonists, wvho had been accustomed to the
rvice of the Indians, quitted the island, when
eprived of those instruments, without which they
new not how to carry on any operation. Many

VOL. I. P

B 0 0 K of the new settlers who came over with Ovando,

in. were seized with the distempers peculiar to the
''04* climate, and in a flort space above a thousand of

them died. At the fame time, the exading one half
of the produd of the mines as the royal fliare, \vas
found to be a demand so exorbitant, that no ad.
venturers would engage to work them upon such
terms. In order to save the colony from ruin,
t5os. Ovando ventured to relax the rigor of the royal

edids. fIe made a new distribution of the Indians
among the Spaniards, and compelled them to
labor, for a tated time, in digging the mines, or.
in cultivating the ground; but, in order to screen
himself from the imputation of having fubjeded
them again to servitude, he enjoined their mailers
to pay them a certain furn, as the price of their
work. He reduced the royal share of the gold
found in the mines from the half to the third part,
and soon after lowered it to a fifth , at which it
long remained. Notwithstanding Isabella's tender
concern for the good treatment of the Indians,
and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve the royal
revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to approve
of both these regulations'.
War mwith But the Indians, after enjoying respite fror

oppression, though during a short interval, now
felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, tha
they made several attempts to vindicate their owl
liberty. This the Spainiards confidered as rebellion
and took arms in order to reduce them to fubjedion

llerrera, dec. I. lib. v. c. .

hen war is carried on between nations whose B o o
ate of improvement is in any degree similar, IT.
e means of defence bear some proportion to those lios.
mployed in the attack; and in this equal contest
ch efforts must be made, such talents are displayed,
nd such passions roused, as exhibit mankind to
iew in a situation no less striking than interesting.
is one of the noblest fundtions of history, to
erve and to delineate men at a juncture when
eir minds are most violently agitated, and all
eir powers and passions are called forth. Hence
operations of war, and the struggles betweenr
ntending states, have been deemed by historians,
cient as well as modern, a capital and important
tide in the. annals of human adions. But in a
nteft between naked savages, and one of the
oft warlike of the European nations, where
ence, courage, and discipline on one fide, were
posed by ignorance, timidity, and disorder on
other, a particular detail of events would be
unpleasant as uninftrutive. If the simplicity
dinnocence of the Indians had inspired the
aniards with humanity, had softened the pride
superiority into compafnion, and had induced
em to improve the inhabitants of the New
orld, instead of opprefling them, some sudden ads
Violence, like the too rigorous chastisements of
patient inftrudors, might have been related
ihout horror. But, unfortunately, this con.
olfnefs of superiority operated in a different
liner. The Spaniards were advanced o far
yond the natives of America in improvement

P

B o o K of every kind, that they viewed them with cor

111. tempt. They conceived the Americans to b
l505 animals of an inferior nature, who were no

entitled to the rights and privileges of men. I
peace, they fubjeted them to servitude. In war
they paid no regard to those laws, which, by a taci
convention between contending nations, regulate
hostility, and set some bounds to its rage. The)
confidered them not as men fighting in defenc
of their liberty, but as slaves, who had revolte
against their masters. Their caziques, when taken
were condemned, like the leaders of, banditti,t
the most cruel and ignominious punilhments; an
all their fubjedts, without regarding the difin
tion of ranks eftablifled among them, were reduce
to the fame state of abjet slavery. With such
spirit and sentiments were hostilities carried
against the cazique of Higuey, a province at th
eastern extremity of the illand. This war wa
occasioned by the perfidy of the Spaniards,
violating a treaty which they had made with th
natives, and it was terminated by hanging up tb
cazique, who defended his people with bravery
far superior to that of his countrymen, as entitle
him to a better fate

The ruel The condut of Ovanido, in another part
anltreacher. the island, was still more treacherous and crue
ouis coeilut
ofOvaiido. The province anciently named Xaragua, whlc

extends from the fertile plain where Leoganc
i}ow situated., to the western extremity of tlil

Hcrrera. dec. i. lib. vi. c. 9, io

land, was fubjedt to a female cazique, named B O o 4
nacoana, highly refpeded by the natives. She, I.
rom that partial fondness with which the women 15sQ.
f America were attached to the Europeans (the
aufe of which shall be afterwards explained).,
ad always courted the friendsbip of the Spaniards,
nd loaded them with benefits. 'But some of the
dherents of Roldan having fettled in her country,
vere so much exasperated at'her endeavouring to
eftrain their excesses, that they accused her of
aving formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and
o exterminate the Spaniards. Ovando, though
e knew well how little credit was due to such
rofligate men, marched, without further inquiry,
towards Xaragua, with three hundred foot and
eventy horsemen. To prevent the Indians from
aking alarm at this hostile appearance, he gave
ut that his sole intention was to visit Anacoana,
o whom his countrymen had been so much.
indebted, in the most refpedful manner, and to
regulate with her. the mode of levying the tribute
payable to the king of Spain. Anacoana, in order
to receive this illustrious guest with due honor,
aTembled the principal men in her dominions, to
the number of three hundred, and advancing at
the head of these, accompanied by a vast crowd
of prfons of inferior rank, The welcomed Ovando
with songs and dances, according to the: mode of
the country, and conducted him to the place of
her residence. There he was feasted for some days,
with all the kindness of simple hospitality, and
amnufed with the games and fpedacles usual among

P3.

B 0 0 K the Americans upon.occafions of mirth and festivity

1I. But, amidst the security which this inspired, Ovand(

50 was meditating the deftrudion of his unfufpiciou!

entertainer and her fubjets; and the mean perfidy
with which he executed this scheme, equalled his
barbarity in forming it. Under color of exhibiting
to the Indians the parade of an European tourn
ment, he advanced with his troops, in batt
array, towards the house in which Anacoana an
the chiefs who attended her were assembled. Th
infantry took pbffefiion of all the avenues whic
Jed to the village. The horsemen encompafe
the house. These movements were the objedt
admiration without any mixture of fear, until
upon a signal which had been concerted, th
Spaniards suddenly drew their swords, and rulhe
upon the Indians, defenceless, and astonished a
an adt of treachery which exceeded the conceptio
of undesigning men. In a moment Anacoafia wa
secured. All her attendants were seized and boun
Fire was set to the house; and, without examin
tion or convidion, all these unhappy persons, th
rnoft illustrious in their own country, were consume
in the flames. Anacoana was reserved for a mor
ignominious fate. She was carried in chains t
Saint Domingo, and, after the formality of a tri
before Spanish judges , he was condemned, upo
the evidence of those very men who had betraye
her, to be publicly hanged '.

' Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Herrera, dec. r. lib. vi. c. 4

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. elacion de deflruyc. de las In
dias, por Bart. de las Cafits, p. 8.

Overawed and'humbled by this atrocious treat. B 0 0

o

ment of their princes and nobles , who were ir.
objects of their highest reverence, the people in Rel;n o
all the provinces of Hispaniola submitted, withotut the Indians,
arther resistance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon the and its es-
death of Isabella , all the regulations tending to
mitigate the rigor of their servitude were forgotten.
The small gratuity paid to them as the price of
their labor was withdrawn; and at the fame time
the talks imposed upon them were increased.
Ovando, without any restraint, difiributed Indians I'o6.
among his friends in the iland. Ferdinand, to
whom the queen had left by will one half of the
revenue arising from the settlements in the New
World, conferred grants of a similar nature upon
his courtiers, as the leat .expenlive mode of
rewarding their services. They farmed, out the
Indians, of whom they were rendered proprietors,
to their countrymen fettled in Hispaniola; and that
wretched. people, being, compelled to labor in
order to satisfy the rapacity of both, the exations
of their oppressors no longer knew any bounds;
But, barbarous as their policy was, and fatal
to the inhabitants of Hispaniola, it produced, for
some time, very considerable effe'ts. By calling
forth the force of a whole nation , and exerting
it in one direction, the working of the mines
was carried on with amazing rapidity and success.
During several years, the gold brought into the
royal fmelting-.hou'es in Hispaniola amounted
annually to four hundred and sixty thousand pesos,
above a hundred thousand pounds Rerling.; which,

P4

B 0 o K if we attend to the great change in the value o

III. money since the beginning of the sixteenth centur
1506. to the present time, must appear a confiderab

fum. Vast fortunes were created, of a sudden, b
some. Others diflipated in ostentatious profusion
what they acquired with facility. Dazzled by
both, new adventurers crowded to America, with
the most eager impatience, to share in those
treasures which had enriched their countrymen
and, notwithstanding the mortality occafione
by the unhealthiness of the climate, the- colon
continued to increase4.

Progrer of Ovando governed the Spaniards with wifdo
the colony. and justice, not inferior to the rigor with whic

he treated the Indians. He established equal laws
and, by executing them with impartiality, accuf
tomed the people of the colony to reverenc
them. He founded several new towns in differen
parts of the island, and allured inhabitants to then
by the coqceffion of various immunities. He en
deavoured to turn the attention of the Spaniard
to some branch of industry more useful than tha
of searching for gold in the mines. Some flips 0
the sugar-cane having been brought from th
Canary islands by way of experiment, they wer
found to thrive with such increase in the rich so
and warm climate to which they were transplanted
that the cultivation of them soon became an obje
of commerce. Extensive plantations were begun
sugar- works, which the Spaniards called ingjnio'

. Herrera, deq. . lib. vi. c. 8, &c.

rom the various machinery employed in them, B o xc
eerereded, and in a few years the manufacture II.
f this commodity was the great occupation of the '0ó.
nhabitants of Hispaniola, and the molt considerable
olrce of their wealth .
The prudent endeavours of Ovando, to pro- Political re.
ote the welfare of the colony, were powerfully gulationsof
conded by Ferdinand. The large remittances Ferdilan.
hich he received from the New World, opened
is eyes, at length, with refpedt to the importance
those discoveries, which he had hitherto affected
undervalue. Fortune, and his own address,
aving now extricated him out of those difficulties
which he had been involved by the death of his
ueen, and by his disputes with his fon-in-law
bout the government of her dominions', he had asor.
ll leisure to turn his attention to the affairs of
merica. To his provident sagacity, Spain is
ndebted for many of those regulations which
radually formed that system of profound, but
ealdus policy, by vhich he governs her dominions
the New World. He erected a court, diltin-
uifhed by the title of the Casa de Contratacion, or
oard of Trade, composed of persons eminent for
nk and abilities, to whom he committed the
dminiftration of American affairs. This board
fembled regularly in Seville, and was inverted
ith a diflindt and extensive jurifdition. He gaive
regular form to ecclefialtical government in

Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8.
liilt. of the Reign of Charles V. vol. ii. p, 6, &c,

o o K America, by nominating archbishops , bishops,
iTt. deans, together with clergymen of subordinate
h0?7,- ranks,. to take charge of the Spaniards eftablifed

there, as well as of the natives who hould embrace
the Christian faith. But ,. notwithstanding the
obsequious devotion of the Spanish court to the
Papal See, such was Ferdinand's solicitude to
prevent any foreign power from claiming jurif
didion, or acquiring influence, in his new domni
nions, that he reserved to the crown of Spaii
the sole right of patronage to the benefices ir
America, and tipulated that no papal bull o
mandate should be promulgated there, until
was previously examined and approved of by hi
council. With the fame spirit of jealousy, h
prohibited any goods to be exported to America
or any person to fettle there, without a fpecia
licence from that council7.

The number' But, notwithstanding this attention to the polic
ofthe In. and welfare of the colony, a calamity impende
d:dfm'. ;wvhich threatened its dissolution. The origin

inhabitants, on whose labor the Spaniards in Hi
piniola depended for their prosperity, and eve
their exiltence, wafted so fat, that the extindio
of the whole race seemed to be inevitable. Whc
Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the number
its inhabit.nts was computed to be at lea
million '. They were now reduced to sixty, thoufan

7 errera. dec. . lib. vi c. 19. 20.
' bid. dec. i. lib. x. c. i a.

in the space of fifteen years. This confumptionof B o o
the human species, no less amazing than rapid, was in.
the effe offeveral concurring causes. The natives of I 50
heAmerican islands were of a more feeble conftitu-
tion than the inhabitants of the other hemisphere.
They could neither perform the fame work, nor
endure the fame fatigue, with men whose organs
were of a more vigorous conformation. The listless
ndolence in which they delighted to pass their
ays, as it was the effed of their debility, con-
ributed likewise to increase it, and rendered them,
rom habit as well as constitution, incapable of
ard labor. The food on which they subsisted,
forded little nouriffment, and they were ac-
ftomed to take it in small quantities, not sufficient
oinvigorate a languid frame, and render it equal
o the efforts of aive industry. The Spaniards,
ithout attending to those peculiarities in the
:onfitution of the Americans, imposed talks upon
hem so disproportioned to their strength , that
any funk nder the fatigue, and ended their
retched days. Others, prompted by impatience
nd defpairr, cut hort their own lives with a
iolent hand. Famitie, brought on by compelling
uch numbers to abandon the cvdrture of their lands,
order to labor in the mines, proved fatal to
iany. Dieadfes of various kinds, some occasioned
y the hardlhips to which they were exposed, and
lhcrs by their intercoure with 'the Europenns, who
mLmunicated o them some of their peculiar mala.
les, completed the dcfolation of the ifand. The
i;niilds' being thus deprived of the irumentq

B o o c which they were accustomed to employ, founc

in, it impossible to extend their improvements
o57. or even to carry on the works which they had

already begun. In order to provide an immediati
remedy for an evil so alarming, Ovando proposec
to transport the inhabitants of the Lucayo island
to Hispaniola, under pretence that they might b(
civilized with more facility, and inftruded with
greater advantage in the Christian religion if the)
were united to the Spanish colony, and placed undei
the immediate infpedion of the miflionaries fettled
there. Ferdinand, deceived by this artifice, 01
willing to connive at an ad of violence whict
policy represented as necessary, gave his assent t(
the proposal. Several vessels were fitted out for
the Lucayos, the commanders of which informec
the natives, with whose language they were nov
well acquainted, that they came from a deliciou
country, in which the departed ancestors of th
Indians resided, by whom they were sent toinvit
their descendants to resort thither, to partake a
the bliss enjoyed there by happy spirits. Tha
simple people listened with wonder and credulity
and, fond of visiting their relations and friends i
that happy region, followed the Spaniards wit
eagerness. By this artifice, above forty thoufan
were decoyed into Hispaniola, to hare in th
sufferings which were the lot of the inhabitani
of that island, and to mingle their groans an
sears with those of that wretched race of men'.

' Herrera, dec. . lib, vii. c. 3. Ovieclo lib, iii. c.
Gomara Hilt. c. 4.

The Spaniards had, for some time, carried on B o
heir operations in the mines of Hispaniola with in.
uch ardor as well as success, that these seemed ,sos.
ohave engrossed their whole attention. The Ne dO'

veries and

pirit of discovery languished; and, since the last fettlcments,
oyage of Columbus, no enterprise of any mo-
ent had been undertaken. But as the decrease of
e Indians rendered it impossible to acquire wealth
n that island with the fame rapidity as formerly,
his urged them to search for new countries,
here their avarice might be gratified with more
cility. Juan Ponce de Leon, who commanded
nder Ovando in the eastern diftric of Hispaniola,
ased over to the island of St. Juan de Puerto
ico, which Columbus had discovered in his
cond voyage, and penetrated into the interior
artof the country. As he found the foil to be
rtile, and expected, from some symptoms, as
well as from the information of the inhabitants,
o discover mines of gold in the mountains, Ovando
erritted him to attempt making a settlement in
he iland. This was easily effected by an officer
miuent for condudt no less than for courage. In
few years Puerto Rico was fubjeded to the
panifli government, the natives were reduced to
ervitude; and, being treated with the fame in-
onfiderate rigor as their neighbours in Hispaniola,
he race of original inhabitants, worn out with
tigue and sufferings, was soon exterminated '.

Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. --4. Gomara Hill.
44. Relacian de B. de las Casas, p. zo.

B O O K About the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in

III. conjuncion with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one ol
50os. Columbus's original companions, made a voyage

to the continent. They held the fame course which
Columbus had taken, as far as the island of
Guanaios; but, standing from thence to the weft,
they discovered a new and extensive province,
afterwards known by the name of Yucatan, and
proceeded a considerable way along the coast of
that country ". Though nothing memorable oc~
curred in this voyage, it deserves notice, because
it led to discoveries of greater importance. For the
fame reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo
must be mentioned. By the command of Ovando,
he failed round Cuba, and first discovered, with
certainty, that this country, which Columbus once
supposed to be a part of the continent, was a
large island ".

DiegoCo. This voyage round Cuba was one of the last
poluied g occurrences under the administration of Ovando,
vernorot Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Don
Hispaniola. Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand

to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other im
munities and profits which descended to him b)
inheritance, in consequence of the original capitu
lation with his father. But if there dignities an(
revenues appeared so considerable to Ferdinand
that, at the expense of being deemed unjust, a

" Ierrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 17.
llrrera, dcc. x. lib. vii. c. ,..

ell as ungrateful, he had wrested them from Co- B o o I
uinbus, it is not surprising that he hould be ir.
awilling to confer them on his son. Accordingly, isos.
oin Diego wafted two years in incessant but
uitlefs importunity. Weary of this, he endea-
rored at length to obtain, by a legal sentence,
hat he could not procure from the favor of an
terested monarch. He commenced a suit against
erdinand before the council which managed In-
13n affairs, and that court, with integrity which
edes honor upon its proceedings, decided againfl
le king, and fulfained Don Diego's claim of the
iceroyalty, together with all the other privi-
ges fipulated in the capitulation. Even after
is decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a sub-

in possession of such extensive rights, might
ave thrown in'new obstacles, if Don Diego had
Ot taken a ftep which interested very powerful
arsons in the ficcefs of his claims. The sentence
the council of. the Indies gave him a title to
rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent, that
found no difficulty in concluding a marriage
th Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand
Toledo, great commendator of Leon, and(
other of the duke of Alva, a nobleman of the
rank, and nearly related to the king. The
ke and his family espoused so warmly the cause
their new ally, that Ferdinand could not resist
ir solicitations. He recalled Ovando , and
pointed Don Diego his successor, though, even
conferring this favor, he could not coinceal his

z o K jealousy; for he allowed him to assume onlj

l,. the title of governor, not that of viceroy, whicl
x0os. had been adjudged to belong to him .
He repairs to Don Diego quickly repaired to Hispaniola, at
Hispaniola. tended by his brother, his uncles, his wife, whon

the courtesy of the Spaniards honored with th,
title. of vice-queen, and a numerous retinue o
persons of both sexes, born of good families
He lived with a splendor and magnificence h
therto unknown in the New World; and
family of Columbus seemed now to enjoy th
honors and rewards due to his inventive genius
of which he himself had been cruelly defraud
The colony itself acquired new lustre by the
cession of so many inhabitants, of a differ
rank and character from most of those who ha
hitherto migrated to America, and many of
most illustrious families in the Spanish fettlemen
are descended from the persons who at that ti
accompanied Don Diego Columbus 1*.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives fro

this change of governors. Don Diego was n
only authorized by a royal edid to continue td
repartimientos, or difiribution of Indians, but t
particular number which he might grant to ever
person, according to his rank in the colony, w
specified. He availed himself of that permillior
and soon after he landed at St. Domingo, I

" Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii, c. 4, &c.
' Oviedo, lib. iii. c. x.

divided

divided fch Indians as were still unappropriated, B o o
among his relations and attendants . Il.

The next care of the new governor was to 1509.
comply with an inftrudion which he received Pearlfishery
from the king, about fettling a colony in Cuba- Cubau
gua, a final island which Columbus had disco.
vered in his third voyage. Though this barren
spot hardly yielded subsistence to its wretched in-
habitants, such quantities of those oyflers which
produce pearls were found on its coast, that it did
not long escape the inquisitive avarice of the Spa-
niards, and became a place of considerable resort.
Large fortunes were acquired by the fishery of
pearls, which was carried on with extraordinary
ardor. The Indians, especially those from the
Lucayo islands, were compelled to dive for them;
and this dangerous and unhealthy employment was
an additional calamity, which contributed not
a little to the extinction of that devoted race .

About this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pin- Newvoy.
zon set out, in conjunction, upon a second voyage. ages
They stood direcly south, towards the equinoc-
tial line, which Pinzon had formerly crossed, and
advanced as far as the fortieth degree of southern
latitude. They were astonished to find that the
continent of America stretched , on their right hand,
through all this vast extent of ocean. They land.
ed in different places, to take poffeflion in name

" Reoopilacion de Leyes, lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. , 2. Her.
rera, dec. . lib. vii. c. o.

" Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara Hist. c. 78.
VOL. I. Q

n o o K of their sovereign; but though the country ap,

in. peared to be extremely fertile and inviting, their
is59. force was so finall, having been fitted out rather

for discovery than making settlements, that they
left no colony behind them. Their voyage served,
however, to give the Spaniards more exalted and
adequate ideas with refped to the dimensions of
this new quarter of the globe. 7.

A ettlement Though it was above ten years sin'ce Colur.
on ihe con. bus had discovered the main land of America, the
tinent at-
tcmpted. Spaniards had hitherto made no settlement in any

part of it. What had been so long iegleded was
now seriously attempted; and with considerable
vigor, though the plan for this purpose was nei-
ther formed by the crown, nor executed at the
expense of the nation, but carried on by the
enterprising spirit of private adventurers. This
ftheme took its rife from Alonfo de Ojeda, whd
had already made two 'voyages as a discoverer,
by which he acquired considerable reputation,
but no wealth. But his charater for intrepidity
and condndlt easily procured him associates, hd
advanced the money requisite to defray the char-
ges of the expedition. About the fame time,
Diego de Nicieffa , who had acquired a large
fortune in H-ispaniola¥ formed a imilat design.
Ferdinand encouraged both; and though he refu-
fRd to advance the fmilleft fiim, was etremely
liberal of titles and patents. ie erected two go-
terhments on the continent0 one exteuding from

"' lIcrrera, dec . li . vii. c. 9.

Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the B 0 a
othcr from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The r,
former was given to Ojecia, the latter to Nicueffa. isow9
Ojeda fitted out a fhp and two brigantines, with
three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix vessels, with
fcven hundred and eighty men. They failed about
the fame time from St. Doiningo for their refpetive
governments. In order to give their title to those
countries some appearance of validity, several
of the most eminent divines and lawyers in Spain
were employed to prescribe the mode in which
they should take possession of them '. There is
not in the history of mankind any thing more
singular or extravagant than the form which they
devised for this purpose. They inftrucled those
invaders, as fbon as they landed on the continent,
to declare to the natives the principal articles of
the Christian faith; to acquaint them , in particular,
with the supreme jurifdidion of the Pope over
all the kingdoms of the earth; to inform them
of the grant which this holy pontiff had made of
their country to the king of Spain; to require
them to embrace the doCtrines of that religion
which the Spaniards made known to them; and
to submit to the overeign whose authority they
proclaimed. If the natives refused to comply with
this requisition the terms of which must have
been utterly incomprehensible to uninftruded In-
dians, then Ojeda and Nicueffa were authorized
to attack them with fire and sword; to reduai

" Hcrrera, dec. . lib. vii: c. 5

a

Bo o It them, their wives and children, to a state of ser.

Ill. vitude; and to compel them by force to recognise
09. the jurifdidtion of the church, and the authority

of the monarch, to which they would not volun.
tarily subjed themselves ".

The diafters As the inhabitants of the continent could not
attendingit at once yield assent to docrines too refined for

their uncultivated understandings, and explained
to them by interpreters imperfecly acquainted
with their language; as they did not conceive
how a foreign priest, of whom they had never
heard, could have any right to dispose of thei
country, or how an unknown prince hould claim
jurifdidion over them as his fubjets; they fiercely
opposed the new invaders of their territories. Ojed
and Nicueffa endeavoured to effect by force wha
they could not accomplish by persuasion. Th
contemporary writers enter into a very minut
detail in relating their tranfadions; but as the
made no discovery of importance, nor eftablifhe
any permanent settlement, their adventures are no
entitled to any considerable place in the genera
history of a period, where romantic valor, ftrug
gling with incredible hardships, distinguish ever
effort of the Spanish arms. They found the na
tives in those countries of which they went to a
fume the government, to be of a charater ver
different from that of their countrymen in th
islands. They were fierce and warlike. Thei
arrows were dipped in a poison so noxious, tha

" Sce NOTE XXIII.

every wound was followed with certain death. In i o o
one encounter they flew above seventy of Ojeda's Ir.
ollowers, and the Spaniards, for the first time, 1509
were taught to dread the inhabitants of the New
World. Nicueffa was opposed by people equally
tefolute in defence of their possessions. Nothing
could soften their ferocity. Though the Spaniards
employed every art to sooth them, and to gain
their confidence, they refused to hold any inter-
course, or to exchange any friendly office, with
men whose residence among them they confidered
asfatal to their liberty and independence. This ar<es
implacable enmity of the natives, though it ren-
dered an attempt to eftablilh a settlement in their
country, extremely difficult as well as dangerous,
might have been surmounted at length by the per-
everance of the Spaniards, by the superiority of
their arms, and their kill in the art of war. But
very disaster which can be accumulated upon the
unfortunate, combined to complete their ruin.
The loss of their ships by various accidents upon
n unknown coast, the diseases peculiar to a climate
the most noxious in all America, the want of pro.
vifons, unavoidable in a country imperfectly cul-
tivated, dissension among themselves, and the
nccfiint hostilities of the natives, involved them
n a fucceflion of calamities, the bare recital of
which [trikes one with horror. Though they re-
ceived two considerable reinforcements from His-
aniola , the greater part of those who had engag.
d in this unhappy expedition, perished, in less
tlI;'i a year, in the most extreme mirery. A few

C Q3

B o o who survived, fettled as a feeble colony at Santa

Il. Maria el Antlgua, on the gulf of Darien, unde
"'o. the command of Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, who

in the mosl desperate exigencies, diplliycd such
courage and conduc , as first gained the coni.
dence of his countrymen, and marked hin out as
their leader in more fplendlid and successful under.
takings. Nor was he the onlY adventurer in this
expedition who will appear with lultre in more
important scenes. Francisco Pizarro was one ol
Ojeda's companions, and in this fchol of adverfit
acquired or improved the talents which fitted him
for the extraordinarv actions which he afterwards
performed Hernan Cortes, whose name became
still more famous, had likewise engaged early in
this enterprlfe, which Toufed all the adive youth
of Hispaniola to arms; but the good fortune that
accompanied. him in his subsequent adventures,
interposed to save him from the disasters to which
his companions were exposed He was taken ill
at St. Domingo before the departure of the fleet,
and detained there by a tedious indisposition `.

lonqueftof Notwithstanding the unfortunate issue of thi!
.uba. expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred frorr

engaging in new schemes of a similar nature
When wealth is acquired gradually by the per
fevering hand of industry , or accumulated by thi
flow operations of regular commerce, the meanl

' Herrera, dec. r. lib. vii. c. iT, &c. Gomara Hilt

c. 57, 58, 59. Beazon slilt. lib. i. cap. 19-23. P. la
tyr, decad. 122.

employed are so proportioned to the end attained, o o
that there is nothingto strike the imagination, and III.
little to urge on the active powers of the mnind I'5
to uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes
were created almost intantaneoufly; when gold
and pearls were procured in exchange for baubles;
when the countries which produced these rich
commodities, defended only by naked savages,
might be seized by the first bold invader; objects
so singular and alluring, roused a wonderful spirit
of enterprise among the Spaniards, who ruffed
with ardor into this new path that was opened
to wealth and dillindion. While this spirit con-
tinued warm and vigorous, every attempt either
towards discovery or conquelf was applauded,
and adventurers engaged in it with emulation.
The passion for new undertakings, which cha-
racerizes the age of discovery in the latter part as
the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury, would alone have been sufficient to prevent
the Spaniards from tfopping liort in their career.
But circumstances peculiar to Hispaniola at this
juncture, concurred with it in extending their nat
vigation and conquefs. The rigorous treatment
of the inhabitants of that island having almost
extirpated the race, many of the Spanifi planters,
as I have already observed, finding it irppofible
to carry on their works with the fame vigor and
profit, were obliged to look ot for fettlemcnts iu
some country whose people were not yet wased
by opprefflion. Others, with the inconsiderate lev.
ty natural to men upon whomn wealth potirs ir

'

'

Q
~~~ 4,

B o o K with a sudden flow, had squandered, in thought.

in. less prodigality, what they acquired with ease,
1510. and were driven by necessity to embark in the

most desperate schemes, in order to retrieve their
affairs. From all these causes, when Don Diego
Columbus proposed to conquer the island of Cuba,
and to eltablifh a colony there, many persons of
chief diflindion in Hispaniola engaged with ala.
crity in the measure. He gave the command of
the troops deflined for that service to Diego Ve-
lafquez, one of his father's companions in his
second voyage, and who, having been long fettled
in Hispaniola, had acquired an ample fortune,
with such reputation for probity and prudence,
that he seemed to be well qualified for conducing
an expedition of importance. Three hundred men
were deemed sufficient for the conquest of an if-
land above seven hndred miles in length, and
filled with inhabitants. But they were of the fame
unwarlike characer with the people of Hispaniola.
They were not only intimidated by the appear-
ance of their new enemies, but unprepared to
resist them. For though, from the time that the
Spaniards took possession of the adjacent island,
there was reason to expect a descent on their
territories, none of the small communities into
which Cuba was divided; had either made any
prQvifion for its own defence, or had formed any
concert for their common safety. The only ob-
fitruion the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey,
a cazique, who had fled from Hispaniola, and had
taken possession of the eastern extremity of Cuba.

e stood upon the defensive at their first landing, o o
nd endeavoured to drive them back to their iii.
ips. His feeble troops, however, were soon st"
roken and dispersed; and he himself being taken
rifoner, Velasquez, according to the barbarous
axim of the Spaniards, confidered him as a slave
ho had taken arms against his mafler, and con-
mned him to the flames. When Hatuey was
lened to the stake,, a Franciscan friar laboring
convert him, promised him immediate admit-
nce into the joys of heaven, if he would em-
race the Chrillian faith. " Are there any Spa.
ards," fays he, after some pause, " in that
egion of bliss which you describe ? "Yes, replied
e monk, " but only such as are worthy and
ood. " " The belt of them," returned the in-
ignant cazique, " have neither worth nor good-
ifs; I will not go to a place where I may meet
ith one of that accursed race ". This dreadful
sample of vengeance struck the people of Cuba
ith such terror, that they scarcely gave any op-
0fition to the progress of their invaders; and
elafquez, without the loss of a man, annexed
his extensive and fertile island to the Spanish
onarchy *.
The facility with which this important conquest Dirovery of
as completed, served as an incitement to Florida.
ther undcrtakings. Juan Ponce de Leon, having

" B. de las Casas, p. 40.

-lerrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. , 3,&c. Oviedo,lib.
. c. 3. P. 179.

o o acquired both fame and wealth by the redudi(
III. of Puerto Rico, was impatient to engage in for
I,2=- new enterprise. He fitted out three sips at

own expense, for a voyage of discovery, ai
his reputation soon drew together a refpectal
Pody of followers. He direded his course towar
the Lucayo islands ; ald after touching at fever
of them, as well as of the Bahama isles, he aoc
to the southwest, and discovered a country t
therto unknown to the Spaniards, which he cal
Florida, either because he fell in with it on Pal
Sunday, or on account of its gay and beautif
appearance. He attempted to. land in different pl
ces, but met with such vigorous opposition fro
the natives, who were fierce andwarlike, as coj
vinced him that an increase of force was requifi
to effect a settlement. Satisfied with having ope
ed a communication with a new country,
wihofc value and importance he conceived vet
faiguinp hopes, he returned to Puerto Ric(
through the channel nowy knowyn by the nanre
the Gulf of Florida.

It was not merely the paffipnl of feachling f!

!ew countricS that prompted Ponce de Leon I
undertake this voyage; he was influenced by o0
of thole visionary ideas, w.hich at that time ofti

ingled witi tlhe fpiit of discovery , and rendert

it more afivc. A tradition prevailed atnong t!
lintives of lPucnto Ric , that in the isle of Birin
oiie of the L.ucayos, tlere was a fountain of fu
Vondciful virtue as to renew the youth , and rec
the vigor of every pcrfon who bathed in its faluta

aters. In hopes of finding this grand reflorative, B o o K
once de Leon and his followers ranged through ii.
heilands, searching, with fruitless solicitude and lsl2.
abor, for the fountain, which was the chief ob-
eEt of their expedition. That a tale so fabulous
ould gain credit among simple uninftruded In-
ians is not surprising. That it flould make any
mpreffion upon an enlightened people appears,
in the present age, altogether incredible. The
fa, however, is certain; and the mnft authentic
pnifh historians mention this extravagant sally
oftheir credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at
hat period, were engaged in a career of ativity
which gave a romantic turn to their imagination,
and daily presented to them strange and marvellous
bjeds. A New World was opened to their view.
hey visited islands and continents of whose
existence mankind in former ages had no con-
eption. In those delightful countries nature seemed
to aTume another form; every tree and plant and
animal was different from those of the ancient
hemisphere. They seemed to be transported into
enchanted ground; and, after the wonders which
they had seen, nothing, in the warmth and no-
velty of their admiration, appeared to them so
extraordinary as to be beyond belief. If the rapid
fucceflion of new and striking scenes made such
imprcffion even upon the found underffanding of
Columbus, that he boasted of having found the
feat of Paradise, it will not appear firange that
Ponce de Leon hould dream of discovering the
fountain of youth '.

' P. Martyr, decad p. ao2. Enfayo Chronol. para 1a

o o K Soon after the expedition to Florida, a discover
in. of much greater importance was made in anothe
'sI-. part of America. Balboa having been raised to th
BrroreSof government of the small colony at Santa Mari
Darien. in Darien, by the voluntary suffrage of his affoc

ates, was so extremely desirous to obtain fro
the crown a confirmation of their election, th
he dispatched one of his officers to Spain, in ord
to solicit a royal commission, which might inve
him with a legal title to the supreme comman
Conscious, however, that he could not expet fu
cess from the patronage of Ferdinand's minifler
with whom he was unconnected, or from neg
ciating in a court to the arts of which he was
stranger, he endeavoured to merit the dignity
which he aspired, and aimed at performing so
signal service that would secure him the preferen
to every competitor. Full of this idea, he ma
frequent inroads into the adjacent country, fu
dued several of the caziques, and colleced a co
fiderable quantity of gold, which abounded mo
in that part of the continent than in the iflan
In one of those excursions, the Spaniards co
tended with such eagcrnefs about the division
forne gold, that they were at the point of p
ceeding to ads of violence against one another.
young cazique, who was present, atonifhed
the high value which they set upon a thing
which he did not discern the use, tumbled

Iift. de la Florida, por D. Gab. Cardenas, p. . Ovic
lib. xvi. . ix Herrera, dec. r. lib. ix. c. 5. Hilt.
Conq. de la Florida, par Garc. de la Vega, lib. i. c

Od out of the balance with indignation; and,
rning to the Spaniards, "Why do you quarrel
lays he) about such a trifle ? If you are so pas- l
onately fond of gold, as to abandon your own
ountry, and to disturb the tranquillity of distant
tions for its fake, I will condud you to a region
here the metal which seems to be the chief objec
fyour admiration and desire, is so common that
emeaneft utensils are formed of it." Transported
th what they heard, Balboa and his companions
quired eagerly where this happy country lay, and
w they might arrive at it. He informed them that
the distance of fix funs, that is of fix days
rney toward the south, they should discover
other ocean, near to which this wealthy king-
m was situated ; but if they intended to attack
t powerful late, they muff assemble forces far
erior in number and strength to those with
ich they now appeared`.
This was the sirs information which the Spa- Thercheme,
rds received concerning the great southern whih hie
an, or the opulent and extensive country known forms.
rwards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now
ore him objedts suited to his boundless ambition,
the enterprising ardor of his genius. He im-
iately concluded the ocean which the cazique
ntioned, to be that for which Columbus had
ched without success in this part of America,

4 Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c, . Gomara, c. 6. P.
tyr, decad. p. 149.

a o o K in hopes of opening a more direEt communicatic

ill. with the East Indies; and he conjedured that tl
15rt. rich territory which had been described to hin

must be part of that vast and opulent region
the earth. Elated with the idea of performir
what so great a man had attempted in vain; ar
eager to accomplilh a discovery which he kne
would be no less acceptable to the king than ben
ficial to his country, he was impatient until hecoul
set out upon this enterprise, in comparison
whicl all his former exploits appeared inco
fiderable. But previous arrangement and pre
ration were requisite to ensure success. He beg
with courting and securing the friendship of
neighbouring caziques. He sent some of his offic
to Hispaniola with a large quantity of gold, as
proof of his palt fccefs, and an earnest of
future hopes. By a proper distribution of t
they secured the favor of the governor, and
lured volunteers into the service. A confidera
reinforcement from that island joined him, and
thought hirnfelf in a condition to attempt the
covery.

Difficultyof The ilihrnms of Darien is not above sixty m
executingit. in breadth; but this neck of land, which binds

gether the continents of North and South Amer
is [trelgthened by a chain of lofty mountains ftret
ing through it. whole extent, which render
a barrier of solidity sufficient to rcfift the imp
of two opposite oceans. The mountains are
vered with foreis ;ilmofl inacceflible. The vail
in that moist climate, where it rains during

irdsof the year, are marshy, and so frequently B o o K0
erflowed, that the inhabitants find it necessary, III.
many places, to build their houses upon trees,
order to be elevated at some diftarce from the
mp foil, and the odious reptiles engendered in
putrid waters . Large rivers ruth down with
impetuous current from the high grounds. In
region thinly inhabited by wandering savages,
hand of indtitlry had done nothing to mitigate
correct those natural disadvantages. To march
ofs this unexplored country, with no other guides
[Indians, whose fidelity could be little trusted,
, on all those accounts, the boldest enterptife
which the Spaniards had hitherto ventured in
New World. But the intrepidity of Balboa
such as diftinguifled him among his coun-
en, at a period when every adventurer wat
fpicuous for daring courage. Nor was bravery
only merit; he was prudent in condut, ge-
Ius, affable, and possessed of those popular
nts whith, in the most desperate undertakings,
ire confidence and ecure attachment. Even
the junction of the volunteers from Hifpa-
a, he was able to muster only an hundred
ninety men for his expedition. But they were
y veterans, inured.to the clinnate of America;
ready to follow him thrbugh every danger.
Ioufand Indians attended them to carry their
'ilons; and to complete their warlike array,
tookl with them several of those fierce ctogsi
P. Martyr, decad, p. 5 8.

B o o I which were no less formidable than deftruCive

Hi. their naked enemies.
s113. Balboa set out upon this important expediti

Dicoversthe on the first of September, about the time that
South Sea.

periodical rains began to abate. He proceeded
.sea, and without any difficulty, to the territor
of a cazique whose friendflip he had gained;
no sooner did he begin to advance into the
terior part of the country, than he was retard
by every obstacle, which he had reason to
prehend, from the nature of the territory,
the disposition of its inhabitants. Some of
caziques, at his approach, fled to the mounta
with all their people, and carried off or deftro
whatever could afford subsistence to his troo
Others colledted their fubjeds, in order to opp
his progress, ani he quickly perceived what
arduous undertaking it was, to conduct fuc
body of men through hostile nations, acr
swamps and rivers, and woods, which had ne
been passed but by straggling Indians. But
haring in every hardflhip with the meanest soldi
by appearing the foremofl to meet every dang
by promising confidently to his troops the ej
ment of honor and riches superior to what
been attained by the most successful of their co
trymen, he inspired them with such enthufia
resolution, that they followed him without r
muring. When they had penetrated a good
into the mountains, a powerful cazique appea
in a narrow pass, with a numerous body of
fubjeds, to obftrudt their progress. But men

h1a

had surmounted so many obstacles, despised the B o o KI
opposition of such feeble enemies. They attacked In.
them with impetuosity, and having dispersed them Ia3.
with much ease and great slaughter, continued
their march. Though their guides had represented
the breadth of the isthmus to be only a journey
of fix days, they had already spent twenty -five
in forcing their way through the woods and mount
tains. Many of them were ready to fink under
such uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry climate,
several were seized with the diseases peculiar to the
country, and all became impatient to reach the
period of their labors and sufferings. At length
the Indians assured them, that from the top of
the next mountain they should discover the ocean
which was the object of their wishes. When,
with infinite toil, they had climbed up the greater
part of that steep afccnt, Balboa commanded his
men to halt, and advanced alone to the summit,
that he might be the first who flould enjoy a
fpecacle which he had so long desired. As soon
as he beheld the South Sea tretching in endless
profped below him, he fell on his knees, and
lifting up his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to
God, who had conducted him to a discovery so
beneficial to his country, and so honorable to
himself. His followers, obfcrving his transports
of joy, rushed forward to join in his wonder.,
exultation and gratitude. They held orr their
course to the shore with great alacrity, when
Balboa advancing up to the middle in the waves
with his buckler and ford, took poffeffon of

VOL. . R

B o o K that ocean in the name of the king his master,

Hi. and vowed to defend it, with these arms, against
l513. all his enemies '.

That part of the great Pacific or Southern

ocean, which Balboa first discovered, still retains
the name of the Gulf of St. Mlichael, which he
gave to it, and is situated to the ealt of Panama.
From several of the petty princes, who governed
in the diflrids adjacent to that gulf, he extorted
provisions and gold by force of arms. Others sent
them to him voluntarily. To these acceptable
presents, some of the caziques added a considerable
quantity of pearls; and he learned from them,
with much fatisfadion, that pearl oysters abounded
in the sea which he had newly discovered.

Hereceives Together with the acquisition of this wealth,
information which served to sooth and encourage his fol.
concerning lowers , he received accounts which confirmed
a more opl-
lent coun his sanguine hopes of future and more extensive
try. benefits from the expedition. All the people on

the coast of the South Sea concurred in informing
him that there was a mighty and opulent king.
dom situated at a considerable distance towards
the south - east, the inhabitants of which had tame
animals to carry their burdens. In order to give
the Spaniards an idea of these, they drew upon
the sand the figure of the Llamas or sheep, after.
wards found in Peru, which the Peruvians had
taught to perform such services as they described.
As the Llama, in its form, nearly resembles a

"' Herrera, dec. r. lib. x. c. , &c. Gomara, q, 6
&c. P. Miartyr, decad. p. o05, &c.

camel, a beast of burden deemed petcliari to B O d t
Asia, this circumstance, in conjnti'ation With:the ifxl.
discovery of the pearls, another noted produd-ionr I¶s3.
of that country, tended to confirm the Spa-niards
in their mistaker theory with esped to the vicinity
of the New World to the East Indies '. ;

, o

But though the information which Balboa re- obligedto
ceived from the people on the coast, as well, as his return.
own conjetures and hopes, rendered him;ex-
tremely impatient to visit this unknown country,
his prudence restrained him from attempting-to
invade it with an handful of men, exhausted by
fatigue, and weakened by diseases . He: deter-
mined to lead back his followers, at present, to
their settlement at Santa Maria in Darien, and to
return next season with a force more adequate to
such an arduous enterprise. In order to acquire a
more extensive knowledge of the isthmus, he
marched back by a different route, which he found
to be no less dangerous and difficult than that
which he had formerly taken. But to men elated
with success, and animated with hope, nothing
is insurmountable. Balboa returned to Santa
IIaria, from which he had been absent four xs4'
months, with greater glory and more treasure than
the Spaniards had acquired in any expeditiorr in
the New World. None of Balboa's officers diftin4
guifhed himself more in this service than Francisco
lizarro, or assisted with greater courage and

" Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. .
I' See NOTE XXIV.

R r

a o K ardor 'il opening a communication. with thofg

III. countries, in which he was destined to adt soo
i ,!4. a most illustrious part". *

Pedrarias ,Balboa's firfi care was to fend informatio to
appointed Ps.: '.of the ipotapnt discovery which he had
lgovernor o made; and to demand a reinforcemept of a thou
Darien.

sand men, in order to attempt the. conq,uef of
tht, opulent coltFy,, concer.ipg, which he had
received such iviting intelligence. The first. ac.
count of the discovery of the -,New World hardly
9ccafioned greaeri joy, than the pnexpedled
tidings, that, a pffage was at laft!,found to the
great. southern ocean. The communication with
the East Indies, by.a course to the westward of
the line of denarcation, drawn by the Pope,
seemed now to be certain. The vast wealth which
gowe,d,-into Portugalfrom its settlements and on,
quests in that country excited he envy and cal,
ikd forth the emplation of other ftites. Ferdiand
boped now to come :in for a (iare. in this lucrative
cpmmerce,, andinl his eagerness to, obtain it, was
willing: to make an .effort beyond. what Balboa re.
quired., Btit even in this exertion,, his jealous
policy, as well as. the fatal antipathy of. Fonseca,
ow bifnlp of Bgos,- to every man of merit
who, diftinguiflied himself in the New Worl.d',
were conspicuous. Notwithstanding Balboa's recent
services, which marked him out, as the molt pro,
per person to finifi that great undertaking which
he had begun , Ferdinand was so ungenerous a

" Herrera, dc'c. i. lib. x. c. 3-6. Gomara, c. 64
P. Martyr, dec. p. 229, &,c.

to overlook these, and to appoint Pedrarias n o o 1
Davila governor of Darien. He gave him the II,
command of fifteen flout vessels, and twelve rs14.
hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at the
public expense, with a liberality which Ferdinand
had never displayed in any former armament deft
tined for the New World; and such was the
ardor of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a leader
who was about to conduct them to a countryi
where, as fame reported, they had only to throw
their nets into the ea and draw out gold'", that
fifteen hundred embarked on board the fleet,
and if they had not been retrained, a much
greater number would have engaged in the
service .

Pedrarias reached the gulf of Darien without
any remarkable accident, and immediately sent
some of his principal officers alhore to inform Balboa
of his arrival, with the king's commiflion, to be
governor of the colony. To their astonishment,
they found Balboa,, of whose great exploits they
had heard so much, and of whose opulence they
had formed such high ideas, clad in a canvas
jacket, and wearing coarse hempen sandals used
only by the meanest peasants, employed, together
with some Indians, in thatching his own hut with
reeds. Even in this simple garb, which corref-
ponded so ill with the expectations and wilhes of

' Ierrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 14.

Ibid. dec. i. lib. x. c. 6, 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. 177.
;96.

R 3

is o o his new guelts, Balboa received them with dignity.

Ir, The fame of his discoveries had drawn so many
514. adventurers from the islands, that he could now

muster four hundred and fifty men. At the head
of those daring veterans, he was more than a
match for the forces which Pedrarias brought with
him. But though his troops murmured loudly at
the injustice of the king in superseding their corn.
mander, and complained that strangers would now
reap the fruits of their toil and success, Balboa
submitted with implicit obedience to the will of
his sovereign, and received Pedrarias with all the
deference due to his characer'=.

Dirfenfion Notwithstanding this moderation, to which
be'ween him Pedrarias owed the peaceable possession of his
and Balboa.

government, he appointed a judicial inquiry to be
made into Balboa's conduct, while under the com.
mand of Nicueffa, and imposed a considerable
fine upon him, on account of the irregularities
of which he had then been guilty. Balboa felt
sensibly the mortification of being fubjedted to
trial and to punilhment in a place where he had
so lately occupied the first station. Pedrarias could
not conceal his jealousy of his superior merit; so
that the resentment of the one, and the envy of the
other, gave rife to dissensions extremely detri-
mental to the colony. It was threatened with a
Jlly. calamity fill more fatal. Pedrarias had landed in

Darien at a molt unlucky time of the year, about
the middle of the rainy season , in that part of

s' Herrera, dec. I. lib. x, c. 13, 14.

the torrid zone where the clouds pour down such B o O X
torrents as are unknown in more temperate cli- III.
mates". The village of Santa Maria was feated Ii14.
in a rich plain, environed with marshes and woods.
The constitution of Europeans was unable to
withlfand the pestilential influence of such a
situation, in a climate naturally so noxious and
at a season so peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and
detrudtive malady carried of many of the soldiers
who accompanied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity
of provisions augmented this distress, as it rendered
it impossible to find proper refreshment for the
sick, or the necessary fiftenance for the healthy 4.
In the space of a month, above fix hundred per.
sons perilhed in the utmost misery. Dejeion and
despair spread through the colony. Many principal
persons solicited their difiniflon, and were glad
to relinquish all their hopes of wealth, in order to
escape from that pernicious region. Pedrarias en-
deavoured to divert those who remained from
brooding over their misfortunes, by finding them
employment. With this view, he sent several
detachments into the interior parts of the country,
to levy gold among the natives, and to feareh
for the mines in which it was produced. Those
rapacious adventurers, more attentive to present
gain than to the means of facilitating their future
progress, plundered without diftindion wherever
they marched. Regardless of the alliances which

" Richard lif. Nuturellc dc l'Air, tom. i. p. 204.
' Herrera, dec. Ib.lib. c. 1.
1 M .rtyr, dec. p. 2 2.

R 4

B o o KI Balboa had made with several of the caziques

IrI. they stripped them of every thing valuable, anc
I¶14. treated them, as well as their fubjeds, with th(

utmost insolence and cruelty. By their tyranny
and exactions, which Pedrarias, either from want
of authority or of inclination, did not restrain,
all the country from the gulf of Darien to the
lake of Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spa.
niards were inconsiderately deprived of the ad.
vantages which they might have derived from
the friendship of the natives, in extending their
conquests to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with
concern that such ill-judged proceedings retarded
the execution of his favorite scheme, sent violent
remonstrances to Spain against the imprudent govern.
ment of Pedrarias, which had ruined a happy and
flourishing colony. Pedrarias, on the other hand ac.
cufed him of having deceived the king, by magnify.
ing his own exploits, as well as by a false repre.
fentation of the opulence and value of the
country ".

Violent pro. Ferdinand became sensible at length of his
ccedigs a. imprudence in superseding the most aive and
bi^" Bal. experienced officer he had in the New World, and,

by way of compensation to Balboa, appointed
him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the
countries upon the South Sea, with very extensive

' Herrera, dec. r. lib. x. c. . dec. 2. c. , &c. Go;

mara, c. 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. o. Relacion de
3. de las Casas, p. 12.

rivileges and authority. At the fame time he B o o K
noined Pedrarias to support Balboa in all his IT.
perations, and to consult with him concerning 1xs.
very measure which he himself pursued. But to
'set such a sudden transition from inveterate
nmity to perfect confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's
ower. Pedrarias continued to treat his -rival
ith neglect; and Balboa's fortune being exhausted
ythe payment of his fine, and other exactions
fPedrarias, he could not make suitable prepara.
ons for taking possession of his new government.
t length, by the interposition and exhortations
the bishop of Darien, they were brought to a
conciliation ; and , in order to cement this
nion more firmly, Pedrarias agreed to give his
aughter in marriage to Balboa. The first effedt
their concord was, that Balboa was permitted
make several small incursions into the country.
hefe he conducted with such prudence, as added
the reputation which he had already acquired.
any adventurers resorted to him, and, with the
ountenance and aid of Pedrarias, he began to
repare for his expedition to the South Sea. In
rder to accomplish this, it was necessary to build
elfels capable of conveying his troops to those
rovinces which he purposed to invade. After
Lrmounting many obstacles, and enduring a
'ariety of those hardships which were the portion
the conquerors of America, he at length finished
our small brigantines. In these, with three hundred
hofcn men, a force superior to that with which
izarro afterwards undertook the fame expedition,'

B o he was ready to fail towards Peru, when he receive

III. an unexpeded message from Pedrarias ". As hi
151r7. reconciliation with Balboa had never been cordial

the progress which his fon-in-law was makin
revived his ancient enmity, and added to it
rancor. He dreaded the prosperity and elevatio
of a man whom he had injured so deeply. H
fufpeded that success would encourage him ti
aim at independence upon his jurisdiction; an(
so violently did the passions of hatred , fear, ant
jealousy, operate upon his mind, that, in orde
to gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to defea
an enterprise of the greatest moment to his country
Under pretexts which were false, but plaufibl
he desired Balboa to postpone his voyage for
fliort time, and to repair to Acla, in order th
he might have an interview with him. Balbo
wvith the unfufpicious confidence of a man confciou
of no crime, iftantly obeyed the summons; b
as soon as he entered the place, he was arrete
by order of Pedrarias, whose impatience to fatia
his revenge did not susser him to languih longi
confinement. Judges were immediately appointe
to proceed to his trial. An accusation of diloyal
to the king, and of an intention to revolt again
the governor, was preferred against him. Senten
of death was pronounced; and though the judg
who passed it, seconded by the whole colon
interceded warmly for his pardon, Pedrarias co
tinued inexorable; and the Spaniards beheld, wi

"' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. 1. 3. 2

afonifhment and sorrow, the public execution of B o o
a man whom they universally deemed more capable II.
tban any who had borne command in America, 1i'
of forming and accomplifling great designs 7.
Upon his death, the expedition which he had
planned was relinquished. Pedrarias, notwithfland-
ing the violence and injustice of his proceedings,
was not only screened from punishment by the
powerful patronage of the bishop of Burgos and
other courtiers, but continued in power. Soon
after, he obtained permission to remove the colony,
from its unwholfome fiation at Santa Maria to
Panama, on the opposite fide of the ithmus; and
though it did not gain much in point of healthfulness
by the change, the commodious situation of this
new settlement contributed greatly to, facilitate
he subsequent conquests of the Spaniards in the
extensive countries situated upon the Southern
Ocean '.
During these tranfadtions in Darien, the history Nr

New difce.

of which it was proper to carry on in all ninter- veries.
rpted tenor, several important events occurred
with refpecl to the difovery, the conquest, and
government of other provinces in the New World.
erdinand was so intent upon opening a communi-
cation with the Mlolucca or Spice Islands by the
weft, that, in the year one thousand five hundred
and fifteen, he fitted out two sips at his own
expense, in order to attempt fucl a voyage, and
gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de Solis,

17 HIerrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 2 ,22. " Ibid. lib. iv. c. ,

o o' r who was deemed one of the most skilful navigator
III. in Spain. He stood along the coast of South America
I5A7. and on the first of January one thousand fivi

hundred and sixteen , entered a river which hi
called Janeiro, where an extensive commerce is non
carried on. From thence he proceeded to a spacious
bay, which he supposed to be the entrance intc
a strait that communicated with the Indian ocean;
but upon advancing farther, he found it to b
the mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vast river
by which the southern continent of America
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent
this country, De Solis and several of his crew
were slain by the natives, who, in fight of th
ships, cut their bodies in pieces, roasted an
devoured them. Discouraged with thelofs ofthei
commander, and terrified at this hocking fpedacle
the surviving Spaniards set fail for Europe, withou
aiming at any farther discovery . Though thi
attempt proved abortive, it was not without benefit
It turned the attention of ingenious men to thi
course of navigation, and prepared the way for
more fortunate voyage, by which, a few year
posterior to this period, the great design tha
Ferdinand had in view was accomplished.

Statenfthe Though the Spaniards were thus atively em
colony in ployed in extending their discoveries and fettlerents
rifpaniiola in America, they still confidered Hispaniola as

their principal colony, and the feat of government.
Don Diego Columbus wanted' neither inclination

'P Herrera,dec. 2. lib. i. c. 7. P. Martyr, dec p.3 17.

or abilities to have rendered the members of this B o o K
olony, who were most irnmediately under his in.
urifdition, prosperous and happy. But he was 1517.
ircumfcribed in all his operations by the suspicious
olicy of Ferdinand, who on very occasion, and
nder pretexts the most frivolous, retrenched his
rivileges, and encouraged the treasurer, the
udges, and other subordinate officers, to coun-
erad his measures, and to dispute his authority.
The most valuable prerogative which the governor
pofeffed, was that of distributing Indians among
the Spaniards fettled in the iland. The rigorous
servitude of those unhappy men having been but
ittle mitigated by all the regulations in their
favor, the power of parcelling out such necessary
infruments of labor at pleasure, secured to the
governor great influence in the colony. In order
to trip him of this, Ferdinand created a new
office, with the power of iftributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a
relation ofZapata, his confidential minister. Mor-
tified with the injustice, as well as indignity, of
hisinvafion upon his rights, in a point so essential,
Don Diego could no longer remain in a place
where his power and consequence w(ere almost
anihilated. He repaired to Spain with the vain
hopes of obtaining redress °. Albuquerque entered
upon his office with all the rapacity of an indigent
adventurer, impatient to amass wealth. He began
ith taking the exad number of Indians in h

* He-rrera , dec. . lib. ix.j;. . lib. X. c. x32,

B 0 0 K island, and found, that from sixty thousand, vwhr

ill. in the year one thousand five hundred and eight
;I". survived after all their sufferings, they were not

reduced to fourteen thousand. These he threw into
separate divisions or lots, and bellowed then
upon such as were willing to pu'rchase them al
the highest price. By this arbitrary distribution
several of the natives were removed from theii
original habitations, many were taken from theii
ancient masters, and all of them fubjeded to
heavier burdens, and to more intolerable labor,
in order to reimburse their new proprietors. Those
additional calamities completed the misery, and
hastened on the extincion of this wretched and
innocent race of men .

Controvrriv The violence of these proceedings, togethei
wrth rerpec with the fatal consequences which attended them,
to th 'ret not only excited complaints among such as thoughl
rnent of the
Indians. themselves aggrieved, but touched the hearts ol

all who retained any sentiments of humanity. From
the time that Ecclesiastics were sent as instructor
into America, they perceived that the rigor witd
which their countrymen treated the natives, ren
dered their ministry altogether fruitless. The mif
fionaries, in conformity to the mild spirit of tha
religion which they were employed to publilh
early remonstrated against the maxims of the plan
ters with refped to the Americans, and condemn
ed the rlpartimicntos, or dijiributions, by whicl
they were given up as slaves to their conquerors

Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. x1.

sno less contrary to natural jufice and the pre- B o o o
pts of Christianity, than to found policy. The ln.
ominicans, to whom the inftrudion of the Ame- sl'7'
icans was originally committed, were most vehe-
ent'in teffifying against the repartimientos. In the
ear one thousand five hundred and eleven, Mon-
"ino, one of their mofl eminent preachers, in-
eighed against this pradice in the great church
tSt. Domingo, with all the impetuofsty of popu-
ar eloquence. Don Diego Columbus, the prin-
pal officers of the colony, and all the laymen
ho had been his hearers, complained of the monk
ohis superiors; but they, instead of condemning,
pplauded his dodcrine, as equally pious and sea-
nable. The Franciscans, influenced by the spirit
opposition and rivalfhip which subsists between
e two orders , discovered some inclination to
ke part with the laity, and to espouse the de-
nce of the repartimientos. But as they could not
ith decency give their avowed approbation to a
fem of oppreflion, so repugnant to the spirit of
ligion, they endeavoured to palliate what they
uld not justify, and alleged, in excuse for. the
ndud of their countrymen, that it was impof-
ble to carry on any improvement in the colony,
less the Spaniards possessed such dominion over
he natives, that they could compel them to
bor ".
The Dominicans, regardless of. such political Cl'traryde
ad interelted considerations, would not relax in cerning this

point.

4 lHerrera, dec. I. lib. viii. c. xi. Oviede, lib. iii.
6. p. 97.

o o It any degree the rigor of their sentiments, and evel
II. refused to absolve, or admit to the sacraments
izr. such of their countrymen as continued to holdthj

natives in servitude 4'. Both parties applied t
the king for his decision in a matter of sucd in
portance. Ferdinand empowered a committee
his privy-council, assisted by some of the mo
eminent civilians and divines in Spain, to he
the deputies sent from Hispaniola, in support
their refpedive opinions. After a long difcuffio
the speculative point in controversy was determ
ned in favor of the Dominicans, the Indians we
declared to be a free people, entitled to all the n
tural rights of men; but, notwithstanding th
decision, the repartimientos were continued up
their ancient footing *4. As this determinati
admitted the principle upon which the Domi
cans founded their opinion, they renewed the
efforts to obtain relief for the Indians with ad
tional boldness and zeal. At length, in order
quiet the colony, which was alarmed by th
remonstrances and censures, Ferdinand issued
decree of his privy-council, declaring, that aft
mature consideration of the Apofltolic Bull, a
St other titles by which the crown of Castile claim

a right to its possessions in the New World,
servitude of the Indians was warranted both
the laws of God and of man; that unless th
~were fubjeded to the dominion of the Spaniard

' Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97.
4 Herrera, dec. i. lib. viii. c. 12. lib. ix. c. 5.

and

nd compelled to reside under their infpetion, it B o o t
would be impossible to reclaim them from idolatry, II..
r to inftrud them in the principles of the Chris- lsir.
tian sith ; that no fartfer cruple ought to be en-
tertained concerning tbe.lawfulnefs of the reparti.
intos , as the king an4 council were willing to
take the charge of that upon their own confcien-
es; and that therefore the Dominicans, and monks
f other religious orders, hould abstain, for the
utre , from those invectives, which, from an
xcefs of charitable, bt:ill-informed. zeal, they
ad uttered against that pradice *.
That his intention of adhering to this decree
ight be fully underftop4, Ferdinand conferred
mw grants of Indians upon several of his cour-
tiers". But, in order that he might not seem
together inattentive to the rights of humanity,
epublifhed an edid, in which he endeavoured
toprovide for the mild treatment of the Indians
oder the yoke to which he fubjeded them; he
egulated the nature of the work which they hould
erequired to perform, he prescribed the mode
which they hould be clothed and fed, and gve
iredions with refpet to their infirution in the
inciples of Christianity '7.
But the Dominicans , who, from their expe- Effet of
ence of what was palt, judged concerning the tllef.
iture, soon perceived the inefficacy of those pro-
lons, and foretold, that as long as it was the

Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14. 'See NOTE XXV,
Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. . 14.
VOL. I.

B o o K interest of individuals to treat the Indians with

rn. rigor, no public regulations could render their ser.
][l. vitude mild or tolerable. They confidered it as

vain to waste their own -time and strength in at.
tempting to commtiniate the sublime truths of
religion to men, whose spirits were broken, and
their faculties impaired by oppression. Some of
them, in despair, requested the permiiflon of their
fuperiots' t remove to the continent, and to put.
sue the objedt of their mission , among such of the
nativess as were not hitherto corrupted by the
example of the Spaniards, or alienated by their
cruelty from the Christian faith. Such as re.
rhained. in Hispaniola ontinued to remonstrate,
with decent firmness, against the fcrvitude of the
Indians'"

Bartiolo- The violent operations of Albuquerque , the newv
mew de las distributor of Indians , revived the zeal of the
Casas ap-
pears ine. Dominicans against the re)artimientos, and called
fenceofthe forth an advocate for that oppressed people, whc

diai. possessed all the courage, the talents, and ativit)

requisite in supporting filch a desperate cause. Thi
was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of Seville
and one of the clergymen sent otlt with Columbu
in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in order tl
fettle in that illand. He early adopted the opiniol
prevalent among ecclesiastics, with refped to th
unlawfulness of reducing the natives to fervltude
and that he might dcronftrate the sincerity of hi

4 Hlerrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14, Touron. Hist. Gene
de l'Amrique, tom. i. p. 2 2.

convicion, he relinquished all the Indians who B o o K
had fallen to his own share in the division of the In.
inhabitants among their conquerors, declaring that its7r
he flould ever bewail his own misfortune and
guilt, in having exercised for a moment this im-
pious dominion over his fellow-creatures . From
that 'time, he became the avowed patron of the
Indians; and by his. bold interpositions in their
behalf, as well as by the refpedt due to his abilities
and chatader, he had often the merit of setting
some bounds to the excesses of his countrymen.
He did not fail to remonfrate warmly against the
proceedings of Albuquerque, and, though he soon
found that attention to his own interest rendered
that rapacious officer deaf to admonition, he did
not abandon the wretched people whose cause he
had espoused. He instantly set ot sot Spain, with
the most sanguine hopes of opening the eyes and
softening the heart of Ferdinand, by that striking
picure of the oppression of his new fubjeds, which
he would exhibit to his view 5.

He easily obtained admittance to the king, whom is,.
he found in a declining state of health. With Solicits their

cause in the

much freedom , and no less eloquence, he tepre- courtof
sented to him all the fatal cffecs of the reparti- Spain.
micntos in the New World, boldly charging him
with the guilt of having authorized this impious

Fr. Aug. Davila Padilla Hist. de la Fundacion de la

Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, p. 30o, 304. Herrera,
dec. . lib. x c. 12.

5 lerrera, dec, r. lib. x. c .

12 C. c. . lib. i. c. xi.
Davila Padilla Hilt. p. 3o4.

s 3

B O O K iritereft of individuals t treat the Indians with

nl. rigor, no public regulations could render theit ser
ir.- vitude mild or tolerable. They confidered it a

vain to waste their own'-time and strength in at
tempting to communicate the sublime truths o
religion to men, whose spirits were broken, an
their faculties impaire(t by oppression. Some o
them, in despair, requested the pernmiflion of thei
superiors 'tC remove to the continent, and to put
sue the objet of their miifion , among fuich of th
natives as Were not hitherto corrupted by th
example of the Spaniards , or alienated by thei
cruelty from the Christian faith. Such as re
mrained. in Hispaniola continued to remonstrate
with decent firmners, against the servitude of th
Indians' ".

Bartholo- The violent operations of Albuquerque , the neu
mew delas distributor of Indians, revived the zeal of th
Casas ap.
pearsinlde. Dominicans againfl the repartimientos, and calle
fenceofthe forth an advocate for that oppressed people, wh

In is possessed all the courage, the talents, and aivit

requisite in supporting such a desperate cause. Thi
was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of Seville
and one of the clergymen sent otit with Columbu
in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in order t
fettle in that island. He early adopted theopinio
prevalent among ecclesiastics, with refped to th
unlawfulness of reducing the natives to servitude
anid that he might. dcmonftrate the sincerity of hi

" Herreta, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14, Touron. Hit. Gene
de l'Amirique, tom. i. p. 2a.

conviction, he relinquifled all the Indians who B o o
had fallen to his own share in the division of the mi
inhabitants among their conquerors, declaring that isrz7
he fiould ever bewail his own misfortune and
guilt, in having exercised so a moment this im-
pious dominion over his fellow-creatures '. From
that 'time, he became the avowed patron of the
Indians; and by his. bold interpositions in their
behalf, as well as by the refped due to his abilities
and chatader, he had often the merit of setting
some bounds to the excesses of his countrymen.
He did not fail to remonstrate warmly against the
proceedings of Albuquerque, and, though he soon
found that attention to his own interest rendered
that rapacious officer deaf to admonition, he did
not abandon the wretched people whose cause he
had espoused. He instantly set ot sot Spain, with
the molt sanguine hopes of opening the eyes and
softening the heart of Ferdinand, by that triking
picture of the oppreflion of his new fubjeds, which
he would exhibit to his view s.

He easily obtained admittance to the king, whom Ise.
he found in a declining state of health. With Solicits teit

cause in the

much freedom, and no less eloquence, he tepre- court of
sented to him all the fatal effeds of the reparti- Spain.
micntos in the New World, boldly charging him
with the guilt of having authorized this impious

' Fr. Aug. Davila Padilla Hit. de la Fundacion de la

Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, p. 3o3, 304. Herrera,
'lec. . lib. x c. 12.

-lerrera, dec, f. lib. x. . .

12 . 2. lib. i. c. it.
Davil Padilla Hilt. p. 304.

S 2

.u o o measure, which had brought misery and defrution

I11. upon a numerous and innocent race of men, whom
ii57. Providence had placed under his protection. Ser.

dinand, whose mind as. well as body was much
enfeebled by his distemper, was greatly alarmed
at this charge of impiety, which at another junc-
ture he would have despised. He listened with
deep compuntion to the discourse of Las Casas,
and promised to take into serious consideration
the means of redressing the evil of which he corn
plained. But death prevented him from executing
his resolution. Charles of Aultria, to whom all
his crowns devolved, resided at that time in his
paternal dominions in the Low Countries. Las
Casas, with his usual ardor, prepared immedi.
ately to set out for Slanders, in order to occupy
the ear of the young monarch, when cardinal
Ximenes, who, as regent, affumned the reins of
government in Castile, commanded him to desist
from the journey, and engaged to hear his com-
plaints in person.

Theretula. He accordingly weighed the matter with atten-
tions of car- tion equal to its importance; and as his impetuous

xinan. miind delighted in schemes bold and uncommon,

he soon fixed upon a plan which aftonifled the
minifers, trained up under the formal and cau-
tious adminitration of Ferdinand. Without re-
garding either the rights of Don Diego Columbus,
or the regulations cltablifhcd by the late king, he
resolved to fend three persons to America as fu-
perintendents of all the colonies there, with autho-
rity, after examining all circumnltances on the spot,

to decide finally with respect to the point in quef- B o I-
tion. It was a matter of deliberation and delicacy ili.
to chufe men qualified for such an important fta- 17.
tion. As all the laymen fettled in America, or
who had been consulted in the administration of
that department, had given their opinion that the
Spaniards could not keep pofeflion of their new
settlements, unless they were allowed t6 retain
their dominion over the Indians, he saw that he
could not rely on their impartiality, and deters
mined to commit the trust to ecclesiastics. As the
Dominicans and Franciscans had already espoused
opposite fides in the controversy, he, from the
fame principle of impartiality, excluded both these
fraternities from the commiflion. He confined his
choice to the monks of St. Jerome, a small, but
refpedable order i Spain. With the assistance of
their general, and in concert with Las Casas, he
soon pitched upon three persons whom he deemed
equal to the charge. To them he joined Zuazo,
a private lawyer of diftinguifled probity, with
unbounded power to regulate all judicial proceed-
ings in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to
accompany them, with the title of Protedor of
the Indians '.

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might The manne
at once overturn the system of government eftab- in which

they were

lilied in the New World , in four persons, who, executeta
from their humble condition in life, were little
entitled to possess this high authority, appeared to

I Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. ,

S 3

Q o R Zapata, and other ministers of the lae king, a
111. measure so wild and dangerous, that they refused
p7*, to issue the dispatches necessary for carrying itinto

execution. But Ximenes was not of a temper
patiently to brook opposition to any of his fche-
res. He sent for the refractory ministers, and ad.
dressed them in such a tone, that in the utmolt
confteiration they obeyed his orders . The fu.
perintendents, with their associate Zuazo, and Las
Casas, failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival,
the first at of their authority was to set at liberty
all the Indians who had been granted to the Spanifl
courtiers, or to any perfan not residing in Ame.
rica. his, together with the information which
had been received from Spain concerning the objec
of the commission, spread a general alarm. The
colonists concluded that they were to be deprived
at once of the hands with which they carried on
their labor, and that, of consequence, ruin was
unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome pro.
ceeded with such caution and prudence, as soon
dissipated all their fears. They discovered, in
every ftep of their conduct, a knowledge of the
world, and of affairs, which is seldom acquired
in a cloister, and displayed a moderation as wel
as gentlenfs still more rare among persons trained
up in the solitude and austerity of a monastic life
Their ears were open to information from ever)
quarter, they compared the different account!
which they received, and , after a.mature confi

I' Herrra, deq. . lib. ii. c. 6.

deration of the whole, they were fully satisfied B o o X
that the late of the colony rendered it impossible in.
to adopt the plan proposed by Las Casas, and re- l5t7.
commended by the Cardinal. They plainly per-
ceived that the Spaniards fettled in America were
so few in number, that they could neither work
the mines which had been opened, nor cultivate
the country; that they depended for effecting
both upon the labor of the natives, and if deprived
of it , they must instantly relinquish their con-
quests, or give up all the advantages which they
derived from them; that no allurement was so
powerful as to surmount the natural aversion of
the Indians to any laborious effort, and that nothing
but the authority of a master could compel them
to work ; and if they were not kept constantly
under the eye and discipline of a superior, so great
was their natural listlessness ad, indifference, that
they would neither attend to religious inftrudion,
nor observe those rites of Christianity which they
had been already taught. pon all those accountsi
the super-intendents found it necessary to tolerate
the repartimientos, and to fffer the Indians to re-
main under fubjedion to their Spanish masters.
They used their utmost endeavours, however, to
prevent the fatal effects of this eftabliflment, and
to secure to the Indians the consolation of the bes
treatment compatible with a tlate of servitude. Foe
this purpole , they revived former regulations,
they prescribed new ones, they negleced no cir-
cumi-nance that tended to mitigate the rigor of
the yoke ; and by their authority, their example,

S4

o and their exhortations, they labored to infpir

II. their countrymen with sentiments of. equity ant
5 17. gentleness towards the unhappy people upon whos(

industry they depended. Zuazo, in his depart
rnent, fecondedthe endeavours of the superintend.
ents. He reformed the courts of justice, in such
a manner as to render their decisions equitable as
well as expeditious, and introduced various regu.
ations, which greatly improved the interior
police of the colony. The fatisfadion which his
conduct, and that of the superintendents gave,
was now universal among the Spaniards fettled
in the New World , and all admired the boldness
of Ximenes , in having departed from the or.
dinary path of business in forming his plan, as
well as his sagacity, in pitching upon persons,
whose wisdom, moderation, and disinterestedness
rendered them worthy of this high trust .

Las Casas alone was dissatisfied. The pruden.

lascara tial considerations which influenced the superintend-
dif'dtisfied ents, made no impression upon him. He regarded
ith them. their idea of accommodating their cndud to the

state of the colony, as the maxim of an unhallowed
timid policy, which tolerated what was unjust,
because it was beneficial. He contended, that the
Indians were by nature free, and, as their protec,
tor, he required the superintendents not to be-
reave them of the common privilege of humanity,

Herrera, ec. . lib. ii. . x s. Remefal Hist. Gener
jib. ii. p. 4. , < *

They received his most virulent remonstrances B o o Ir
without emotion , but adhered firmly to their hi.
own system. The Spanish planters (lid not bear 1517.
with him so patiently, and were ready to tear him
in pieces for insisting in a requisition so odious to
theln. Las Casas , in order to screen himself from
their rage, found it necessary to take fLelter in a
convent; and perceiving that all his efforts in
America were fruitless, he soon set out for Europe,
with a fixed resolution not to abandon the pro-
tedtion of a people whom he deemed to be cruelly
oppressed ".

Had Ximenes retained that vigor of mind with iis negoci.
which he usually applied to business, Las Casas taions with

the ninifters

must have met with no very gracious reception ofCharltsV.
upon his return to Spain. But he found the Car-
dinal languishing under a mortal distemper, and
preparing to resign his authority to the young king,
who was daily expected from the Low Countries.
Charles arrived, took pomfeffion of the government,
and, by the death of Ximenes, loft a minister,
whose abilities and integrity entitled him to direct
his affairs. Many of the Flemish nobility had ac-
companied their sovereign to Spain. From that
warm prediletion to his countrymen, which was
natural at his age, he consulted them with rcfped
to all the tranfadions in his new kingdom, and
they, with an indiscreet eagerness , ,intruded them-
felvcs into every business, and seized almost every

" Herrera, dec. 2. lib, ii, c. 6.

B o K department of adminifiration ".' The direcion of

lib. American affairs was an object too alluring to
{il7. escape their attention. Las Casas observed their

growing influence, and though projetors are usually
too sanguine to condut their schemes with much
dexterity, he pofTeflcd a butling indefatigable
acivity, which sometimes accomplishes its purpo.
fes with greater success, than the most exquisite
discernment and address. He courted the Flemih
ministers with assiduity. He represented to them
the absurdity of all the maxims hitherto adopted
with refpecq to the government of America, and
particularly the defedts of that arrangement which
Ximenes had introduced. The memory of Ferdi-
nand .was odious to the Flemings. The superior
virtue and abilities of Ximenes had long been the
objedt of their envy. They fondly wished to have
a plausible pretext for condemning the measures,
both of the monarch and of the minister, and of
refleding some discredit on their p.olitical wisdom.
The friends of DonDiego Columbus, as well as
the Spanish courtiers, who had been dissatisfied
with the Cardinal's adminilration, joined LasCafas
in cenfiuring tle cheme of fending superintendents
to America. This union of so many interefis and
pafions was irrefiRible ; and, in co.nsequence of
it, the fathers of St. Jerome, together with their
afTociate Zualzo, were recalled. Koderigo de Si.
gueroa, a lawyer of fore eminence, was appointed
chief judge of the ifand , and received infirucions,

" 1ill. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 4.

in compliance with the request of Las Casas, to o o
examine once more, with the utmost attention, nll.
the point in controversy between him and the 1l17.
people of the colony, with refpet to the treat-
ment of the natives; and in the mean time to do
every thing in his power to alleviate their susser-
ings, and prevent the extinction of the race .

This was all that the zeal of Las Casas could Scheme o
procure, at that juncture , in favor of the Indians. fipplying

the colonies

The impossibility of carrying on any improvement with ne.
in America, unless the Spanish planters could corn- groes,
mand the labor of the natives, was an inflperable
objeion to his plan of treating them as free sub-
jeds. In order to provide some remedy for this,
without which he found it was in vain to mention
his scheme, Las Casas proposed to purchase a
sufficient number of negroes from the Portuguese
settlements on the coast of Africa, and to transport
them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and
cultivating the ground. One of the first advan-
tages which the Portuguese had derived from their
discoveries in Africa, arose from the trade in slaves.
Various circumstances concurred in reviving this
odious commerce, which had been long abolished
in Europe , and which is no less repugnant to the
feelings of humanity, than to the principles
religion. As early as the year one thousand five
hundred and three, a few negro slaves ad been

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 6. 19. z i. lib. iii. c. 7, 8,

o o K sent into the New World ". In the year on
m. thousand five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand per.
tl7. .mintted the importation of them in greater um

bers . They were found to be a more robuf
and hardy race than the natives of America. They
were more capable of enduring fatigue, more pa.
tient under servitude, and the labor of one negro
was computed to be equal to that of four Indians"
Cardinal Ximenes, however, when solicited to
encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejeted
the proposition, because he perceived the iniquity
of reducing one race of men to slavery, while he
was consulting about the means of restoring liberty
to another '. But Las Casas, from the inconfif.
tency natural to men who hurry with headlong
impetuosity towards a favorite point, was incapa.
ble of making this difiindion. While he contended
earnestly for the liberty of the people born in one
quarter of the globe, he labored to enslave the
inhabitants of another region; and in the warmth
of his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke,
pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to im.
pose one frill heavier upon the Africans. Unfor.
tunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan was adopt.
ed. Charles'granted a patent to one of his Flemish
favorites, containing an exclusive right of import.
tng four thousand negroes into America. The
favorite fold his patent to some Genoese merchants

" Herrera, dec. r. lib. v. c. 12, " Ibid. lib. viii.

c. 9. (o Ibid. lib. ix. c. . ' Ibid. dec. 2. lib,
ii. c. 8.

or twenty-five thousand ducats, and they were B o o K
he firfl who brought into a regular form that in.
commerce for slaves between Africa and America, 1517.
which has since been carried on to such an ama-
ing extent .
But the Genoese merchants, conducting their ope. iss.
ations, at first, with the rapacity of monopolifis, Las Casas
demanded such an high price for negroes, that fending
the number imported into Hispaniola made no laborers to
great change upon the tate of the Colony. Las Hifpiniola
Casas, whose zeal was no less inventive than in-
efatigable, had recourse to another expedient for
therelief of the Indians. He observed, that most
fthe persons who had fettled hitherto in Ame-
ica, were tailors and soldiers employed in the
lfcovery or conquest of the country; the younger
ons of noble families, allured by the profpedt of
cquiring sudden wealth, or desperate adventur-
rs, whom their indigence or crimes forced to
bandon their native land. Infltead of such men,
who were dissolute, rapacious, and incapable of
hat fober persevering industry which is requisite
n forming new colonies, he proposed to supply
he settlements in Hispaniola and other parts of
he New World with a sufficient number of la-
orers and husbandmen, who should be allured
y suitable premiums to remove thither. These,'
they were accustomed to fatigue, would be
le to perform the work, to which the Indians,
oin the feebleness of their constitution, were

lIcrrera, dec. r, lib. ii. c, o.

o o 0 unequal, arid might soon become useful and opui
II. lent citizens. But though Hispaniola stood mut
51?7. in need of a recruit of inhabitants, having bee

visited at this time with the small pox, hic
swept off almost all the natives who had futvive(
their long continued oppreflion, and though La
Casas had the countenance of the Flemish ministers
this scheme was defeated by the bishop of Burgo
who thwarted all his projects .

Forms the Las Casas now despaircd of procuring any relie
idea ofa for the Indians in those places where the Spa
ew Ct'ony. niards were already fettled. The evil was be

come so inveterate there, as not to admit f acur
But such discoveries were daily making in th
continent, as gave an high idea both of its ex
tent and populousness. In all those vast region
there was but one feeble colony planted; an
except a small spot on the isthmus of Darien
the natives still occupied the whole country
This opened a new and more ample field so
the humanity and zeal of Las Casas, who flattet
ed himself that he might prevent a perniciou
system from being introduced there, though h
had failed of success in his attempts to overtur
it, where it was already eflablifhed. Full of thi
idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccupie
country, flretching along the sea-coast from th
gulf of Paria to the western fiontier of that prc
vince now known by the name of Santa IVa
tha. He proposed to fettle there with a colon

Herrera, dec . lib. ii. c. 21.

composed of husbandmen, Iaborers; and eccle- B o o
fiaftics. He engaged, in the space of two years, iI:
to civilize ten thousand of the natives, and to s"-
inftrutd them so thoroughly in the arts of social
life, that, from the fruits of their idufiry, an
annual revenue of fifteen thousand ducats should
arise to the king. In ten years he expected that
his improvements would be so far advanced, as
to yield annually sixty thousand ducats. He fti
pulated, that no sailor or soldier should ever be
permitted to fettle in this ditridt; and that no
Spaniard whatever hould enter it without his per-
mission. He even projeded to clothe the people
whom he took along with him in some peculiar
garment, which did not resemble the Spanifi
dress, that they might appear to the natives to be
a different race of. men from those who had
brought so many calamities upon their country 6'.
Frorm this scheme, of which I have traced only
the great lines, it is manifest that Las Casas had
formed ideas concerning the method of treating
the Indians, similar to those by which the Jefuiits
afterwards carried on their great operations in
another part of the fame continent. He supposed
that the Europeans, by availing themselves of that
ascendant which they possessed in consequence of
their superior progress in science and improve-
ment, might gradually form the minds of the
Americans to relish thore comforts of which they
Were dcftitute, might train them to the arts of

Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. .

o o x civil life, and render them capable of its func.
II. tons.
1M7 . But to the biflop of Burgos and the council of
Favorably the Indies this project appeared not only chime.

rical, but dangerous in a high degree. They
deemed the faculties of the Americans to be na.
turally so limited, and their indolence so excessive,
that every attempt to inftrut or to improve them
would be fruitless. They contended , that it would
be extremely imprudent to give the command of
a country extending above a thousand miles
along the coast, to a fanciful presumptuous en-
thufialt, a flranger to the affairs of the world, and
unacquainted with the arts of government. Las
Casas, far from being discouraged with a repulse,
which he had reason to exped, had recourse once
more to the Flemish favorites, who zealously pa.
tronifed his scheme, merely because it had been
rejected by the Spanith ministers. They prevailed
with their mailer, who had lately been raised to
the Imperial dignity, to refer the consideration of
this measure to a fele number of his privy-coun-
fellors; and Las Casas having excepted against
the members of the council of the Indies, as pa
tial and interested, they were all excluded. The
decision of men chosen by recommendation of the
Flemings, was perfectly conformable to their fen.
timents. They warmly approved of Las Cafas's
plan; and gave orders for carrying it into execu.
tion, but reftriAed the territory allotted him to
three hundred miles along the coast of Cumana,
allowing him, however, to extend it as far as e

pleated

pleased towards the interior part of the coun- n'o o a
try III.

This determination did not pass uncenfured. I5s.:
Almost every person who had been in the Weft iA ole" n

deli beratiort

In(lies exclaimed against it, and fpported their concerning
opinion so confidently , and with such plausible them

treawing thó

icafons, as made it advisable to paufi and to re- Indians.
tiew the subjed more deliberately. Charles him-
self, though accustomed, at this early period of
his life , to adopt the sentiments of his ministers,
with such fublniffiVe deference as did not promise
that decisive vigor of mind which distinguished his
riper years, could not help fufpeding that the
eagerness with which the Flemings took part in
every affair relating to America, flowed from foine
improper motive, and began to discover an incli-
nation to examine in person into the slate of the
question concerning the character of the Americans,
and the proper manner of treating them. An op- u
portunity of making this inquiry; with great ad-
vantage, soon occurred. Quevedo, the bishop of
Darien, who had accompanied Pedrarias to the
continent in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirteen, happened to land at Barcelona,
xhcre the court then residcd. It was quickly
known, that his fentirnents concerning the talents
and disposition of the Indians differed from those
of Las Casas; and Chadecs naturally concluded,
that by confronting two refpedable persons, who,

'* Gomara Hilt. Cener. c, 77. IHerrera,dec. 2. lib. i.
. Oviedo, lib. xix, c. 5.
VOL. I. T

o o during their residence in America, had full lei.

tll. sure to observe the manners of the people whom
I17l. they pretended to describe, he might be able to

discover wvhich of them had formed his opinion
with the greatest discernment and accuracy.

A day for this solemn audience was appointed.

The emperor appeared with extraordinary pomp,
and took his feat on a throne in the great hall of
the palace. His principal courtiers attended. Don
Diego Columbus, admiral of the Indies, was fumn
rnoned to be present. The bilhop of Darien was
called upon firll to deliver his opinion. He, in a
hort discourse, lamented the fatal desolation of
America, by the extinction of so many of its
inhabitants; he acknowledged that this must be
imputed, in some degree, to the excefive rigor
and inconsiderate proceedings of the Spaniards;
but declared, that all the people of the New
World, whom he had seen either in the conti-
nent or in the islands, appeared to him to be a
tace of men marked out, by the inferiority of
their talents, for servitude, and whom it would
be impossible to inftrutu or improve, unless they
were kept under the continual inspection of a
master. Las Casas, at 'greater length, and with
more fervor, defended his own system. He rc-
je(tcd wvith indignation the idea that any race of men
was born to servitude, as irrcligious and inhuane.
He asserted, that the faculties of the Americans
were not naturally delpicable, but unimproved;
that they were capable of receiving itruction in
the principles of religion, as well as of acquiring

the industry and arts which would qualify them B o o K
for the various offices of social life; that the mild- iI.
ness and timidity of their nature rendered them isi7
so submissive and docile, that they might be led
and formed with a gentle hand. He profeffedi,
that his intentions in proposing the scheme now
under consideration were pure and disinterested 5
and though, from the accomplishment of his designs,
inestimable benefits Would result to the crown of
Castile, he never had claimed, nor ever would
receive any recompence on that account.

Charles, after hearing both, and consulting with The cheme
his miniftets, did not think himself sufficiently o Las aras

approtedof.

informed to etabliih any general arrangement with io.
refpedc to the state of the Indians; but as he had
perfect confidence in the integrity of Las Casas
and as even the bifflop of Darien admitted his
scheme to be of such importance, that a trial should
be made of its effects, he issued a patent, grant-
ing him the ditrid in Cumana formerly mention-
ed, with full power to elablif a colony there
according to his own plan '.

Las Casas pushed on the preparations for his His prepara.

voyage with his usual ardor. But, either from tionsCf'e
his own inexperience in the conduct of affairs, or exegti
from the secret opposition of the Spanilh nobility,
who universally dreaded the success of an infsitu-
tion that might rob them of the industrious and

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 3 4, . Argenfola An.

nnles d'Aragon, 74. 97. Remifal Hiftl Gener. lib ii
c. 19, o20

T?

B o o useful haids which cultivated their efiatts, his

Hi. progress in engaging husbandmen and labofers was
it7u. extremely flow, and he could not prevail on more

than two hundred to accompany im to Cu.

mIan .

Dparts for Nothing, however, could damp his zeal. With
Amnerica, this slender train , hardly sufficient to take posses.
andmeets sion of such a laree territory, and altogether une-
xvwith formi. '
dahle o0)- qual to any effccual attempt towards civilizing
lalIes. its inhabitants , he set fail. The firt place at which

he touched was the island of Puerto Rico. There
he received an account of a new obstacle to the
execution of his cherne, more insuperable than
any he had hitherto encountered. 'When he left
America in the year one thousand five hundred
and sixteen, the Spaniards had little intercourse
with any part of tile continent, except the cotn-
tries adjacent to the gulf of Darien. But as every
species of internal indLflry began to stagnate in
Hispaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the
-xativs , the Spaniards were deprived of those
hands with which they had hitherto carried o.n
their opcratiols , this prompted them to try various
expedients for fnpplying that loss. Considerable num-
bers of ngroes were importcd; but, on account
of their co,>rbitant pice, many of the planters
could not aflord to purcl:lfe them. In order to
procure aves at n eaficr rate, sone of the Spa-
nIiaruds in Hispaniola itted out vcffels to cru ife
along the coast of the continent. In places where
they found thenfelvcs infcrior i fircngth, they
traded with the natives, and gave Europcan toys

ii exchange for the plates of gold worn. by them B o o 1
as ornaments; but, wherever they could surprise Il.
or overpower the Indians, they carried them off 1I7.
by force, and fold them as slaves ". In those
predatory excursions, the most atrocious ads of
violence and cruelty were committed. The Spa-
nifh name was held in detestation all over the con-
tinent. Whenever any flips appeared ,the inha-
bitants*either fled to the woods, or rushed down
to the shore in arms, to repel those hated disturb-
ers of their tranquillity. They forced some par-
ties of the Spaniards to retreat with precipitation;
they cut of others ; and in the violence of their
resentment against the whole nation, they mur-
dered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal.had
prompted them to fettle in the province of Cu-
mana ". This outrage against persons revered for
their fandity, excited such indignation among the
people of Hispaniola w , whonotwithltanding all
their licentious and cruel, proceedings, were po(-
sessed with a wonderful zeal for religion,, and a
fuperflitious refped for its ministers, that they de.
termined to inflict exemplary punifhmnent, no;
only upon the perpetrators of that crime, bu
upon the whol.e race. With this view, they
gave the comrald of five, bips and three hundred
men to Diego Ocarnpo, with.orders to lay wafle
the country of Cumana with fire and sword
apd to transport all the inhiabitants as hlaves t..

I' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. ;.
7 Oviedo iit. lib. xix.. c. t.

' ' '* , TY .

B O O K Hispaniola. This armament Las Casas found at

ITI. Puerto Rico, in its way to the continent; and as
517. Qocampo refused to defer his voyage, he imme,

diately perceived that it would be impossible to
attempt the execution of his pacific plan in a country
destined to be the feat of war and desolation ".

jlth April. In order to provide against the effecs of this
Labors to unfortunate incident, he set fail directly for St.
futrmoun Domingo, leaving his followers cantoned out

among the planters in Puerto Rico. From many
concurring causes, the reception which Las Casa$
met with in Hispaniola was very unfavorable. In
his negociations for the relief of the Indians, he
had cehfured the conduct of his countrymen fettled
there with such honest severity, as rendered hini
universally odious to them. They confidered
their own ruin as the inevitable consequence of
his success. They were now elated with hope
of receiving a large recruit of slaves from Cumana,
which must be relinquished if Las Casas were
assisted in fettling his projected colony there. Si-
gueroa, in consequence of the inftrudions which
he had received in Spain, had made an experiment
concerning the capacity of he Indians, that was
represented as decisive against the system of Las
Casas. He collected in Hispaniola a good numbei
of the natives, and fettled them in two villages,
leaving them at perfet liberty, and with the un.
controuled diredtion of their own ations. But
that people, accustomed to a mode of life extremely

" errera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

different , incapable of auming new habits B o o i
at once, and dejeded with their own misfortunes iin.
as well as those of their country, exerted so little &sti.
industry in cultivating the ground, appeared so
devoid of solicitude or foresight in providing for
their own wants, and were such itrangers to ar-
rangement in conduding their affairs, that the
Spaniards pronounced them incapable of being
formed to live like men in social life, and confi-
dered them as children who should be kept un-
der the perpetual tutelage of persons superior to
themselves in wifdorm and sagacity ".

Notwithstan'ding all those circumstances, which Finalmir-

alienated the persons in Hispaniola to whom Las his rcheie.
Casas applied from himself and from his measures,
he by his acivity and perseverance, by some con-
cessions, and many threats, obtained at length a small
body of troops to proted him and his colony at
their firll landing. But upon his return to Puerto
Rico, he found that the diseases of the climate
had been fatal to several of his people; and that
others having got employment in that iflandt
refused to follow him. With the handful that
remained, he set fail and landed in Cumana,
Ocampo had executed his commilion i that pro-
vince with such barbarous rage, having massacred
many of the inhabitants, sent others in chains to
Hispaniola, and forced the reft to fly for shelter to.
the woods, that the people of a small colony,
which he had planted at a place which he namenC

t Hcrrera, dec. . lib. x. c. .

T 4

B o o I( Toledo, were ready to perish for want in a defo.

in. lated country. There, however, Las Casas was
15 7. obliged to fix his residence, though deserted both

by the troops appointed to proted him, and by
those under the command of Ocampo, who fore.
saw and dreaded the, calamities to which he must
be exposed in that wretched Ration. He made
the bft provision in his power for the safety and
fubfiflence of his followers; but as his utmost
efforts a\vaile] little towards securing either the
one or the other, he returned to Hlfp:lniola , in
older to flicit more tfie..' su,

l aid for the prefer-

Tation of men, who from conltiene i him had
ventured into a poti of so much danger. Soon
after hi dp rtnre , the native , having d(rlcovered
the fetble and defenceless slate of tl-e Spaniards,
alremblcd secretly, attacked them with the fury
natural-to men cxafperated by many injuries, cut
off a good number and compelled the reft to fly
in the utmoOl conrlernation to the island of Cu-
bagna. ' he fnall colony fettled there, on account
of the pearl fifhlry, catching the panic with which
their countrymen had been seized, abandoned
the ifnd (l, and not a Spaniard remained in any
part of the continent, or adjacent islands, fron
the gulf of Pari, to the borders of )arien. Afto-
nified at such a fcccffion o'f difftcrs, Las Casas
wvas aniamed to flew his face after this fatal ter-
minatioln of all his fplcndid schemes. He slut
'ijmfelf up in the convelnt of the Dorminicans at

St. Domingo, and soon after assumed the habit of B o o K
that order . III.

Though the expulsion of the colony from Cu- 1517-
mana happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace
the progrcfs of Las Cafas's negociations from their
first rife to their final issue without interrup-
tion. His system was the object. of long and atten-
tive difcufflon; and though his efforts in behalf
of the oppressed Americans, partly from his own
rafhnef, and imprudence, and partly from the ma-
levolent opposition of his adversaries, were not
attended with that success which he-promifed with
too sanguine confidence, great praise is due to his
humane activity, which gave rife to various regula-
tions that were of some benefit to that unhappy
people. I return now to the history of the Spa-
nifh discoveries, as they occur in the order of
time 7

Diego Velasquez, who conquered Cuba in the New disco-
year one thousand five hundred and eleven, ftil veries to-

wartds thoe

retained the. government of that iand, as the wea.
deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though he seldom
acknowledged his fuip.erior, and aimed at rendering
his own authority altogether independent . Under
lis prudent administration, Cuba' became one of

'° Herrera, dec. z; lib. x. c. <;. dec. )}.lib. ii. c. , 4,

s. Oviedo ift. lib. xix. c. , Gomara, c. 77. Davila
Padilla, lib. i. c. 97. Remifal Hitt Gen. lib. xi. c.
23.

7 TTerrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c.. . p. 29.
' Ibid. lib. ii c. 19.

B o o K the most flourishing of the Spanish fettlemnentg.

I.. The fame of this allured thither many perfans
1S7. from the other colonies, in hopes of finding either

some permanent establishment, or some employment
for their activity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all
the islands occupied by the Spaniards, and as the
ocean, which firetches beyond it towards that
quarter, had not hitherto been explored, these
circumstances naturally invited the inhabitants to
attempt new discoveries. An expedition for this
purpose, in which aivity and resolution might
conduct to sudden wealth, was more suited to the
genius of the age, than the patient industry requisite
in clearing ground, and manufacturing sugar.
Infligated by this firit, several officers, who had
served under Pedrarias in Darien, entered into an
association to undertake a voyage of discovery.
They persuaded Francisco. Hernandez Cordova,
an opulent planter in Cuba, and a man of diftin.
guifhed courage, to join with them in the adventure,
and chose him to be their commander. Velasquez
not only approved of the design, but assisted in
carrying it on. As the veterans from Darien were
extremely indigent, he and Cordova advanced
money for prchafing three small vessels, and
furnishing them with every thing requisite either
for traffic or for war. A hundred and ten men
embarked on board of them, and failed fron
St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of February one
thousand five hundred and seventeen. By the
advice of their chief pilot, Antonio Alaminos,
who had served under the first admiral Columbus

they fRood directly weft, relying on the opinion a o o K
of that great navigator, who uniformly maintained ii.
that a westerly course would lead to the most 157.
important discoveries.

On the twenty first day after their departure

from St. Jago, they.faw land, which proved to
be Cape Catoche, the eastern point of that large
peninsula projecting from the continent of America,
which fiill retains its original name of Tucatan. yupatan.
As they approached the shore, five canoes came
off full of people decently clad in cotton garments;
an astonishing fpetacle to the Spaniards, who
had found every other part of America possessed
by naked ravages. Cordova endeavoured by small
presents to gain the good-will of this people. They,
though amazed at the 1trange objects now presented
for the first time to their view, invited the Spani-
ards to visit their habitations, with an appearance
of cordiality. They landed accordingly, and as they
advanced into the country, they observed with
new wonder some large houses built with tone.
But they soon found that, if the people of Yucatan
had made progress in improvement beyond their
countrymen, they were likewise more artful and
warlike. For though the Cazique received Cordova
with many tokens of friendship, he had polled a
considerable body of his fubjedts in ambush behind
a thicket, who, upon a signal given by him,
rushed put and attacked the Spaniards with great
boldness, and some degree of martial order. At
the first flight of their arrows, fifteen of the
Spaniards were wounded; but the Indians were

B o o K firuck with such terror by the sudden explosion

II. of the fire-arms, and so furpried at the execution

done by therp by the cross-bows, and by. the
other weapons of their new enemies, that they
. fled precipitately. Cordova quitted a country

where he had met with such a fierce receptions
carrying off two prisoners, togethcr with the
ornaments of a finall temple, which be plundered
in his retreat.

He continued his courie towards tho weft with-

out losing fight of the coast, and o the sixteenth
Campeachy. day arrived at Campeachy. There the natives

received them more hospitably; but the Spaniards
were much furprfed , that on all the extensive
coafl along which they had failed , and which
they imagined to be a large iflin.d, they had not
-observed any river"7. As their water began to
fail, they advanced, in hopes of finding a supply;
-and at length they discovered the mouth ofa river
.at Potonchan, fore leagues beyond Campeachy.

Cordova landed all his troops in order to prote&t

the sailors while employed in filling the cks; but
notwithhanding thi.s precaution, the natives rulhed
down upon them with such fury, and in fch num-
bers that forty-feven of the Spaniards were killed
upon thefpot, and one man onlyof the whole body
cfcaped unhurt. Their commander, though wound-
ed in twelve different places, diredted the retreat
v'h presence of mind equal to the courage. with
vrhich he had led thenm on in the engagceent, anl

" See NOTE X VI,

with much difficulty they regained their ships. After B o o
this fatal repulse, nothing remained but to haften back In.
to Cuba with their liattered forces. In their passage 1
thither they suffered the most exquisite distress for
want of water, that men wounded and sickly,
shut up in small vetels, and exposed to the heat
of the torrid zone, can be supposed to endure.
Some of them, finking under these calamities, died
by the way; Cordova, their commander, expired
soon after they landed in Cuba7.

Notwithstanding the dfaftrous conclusion of Voyage oP

this expedition, it contributed rather to animate Grijaivr
than to damp a spirit of enterprize among the
Spaniards. They had discovered an extensive
country, situated at no great distance from Cuba,
fertile in appearance, and possessed by a people
far superior in improvement to any hitherto known
in America. Though they had carried on little
commercial intercourse with the natives, they had
brought off some ornaments of gold, not con-
fiderble in value, but of singular fabric. These
circumstances, related with the exaggeration natural
to men dcfirous of heightening the merit of their.
own exploits, were more than sufficient to excite'
rnmantic hopes and expectations. Great numbers
offered to engage in a new expedition. Velafqucz
solicitous to diflinguifh himself by some service so
meritorious, as might entitle him to claim the

74 Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii . . -, 18. Hiftor. Vcrdadera-

iec la Conquifta de la Nueva Etina por Bernal Diaz del
Caltillo, cap. t- 7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c . 3. Conira;
c. S2. P, Martyi' dc Iniulic nuper iVentisj p.-t3s,

o i government of Cuba independent of the admiral,
tII not only encouraged their ardor, bus at his own
520. expense fitted out four hips for the voyage. TWo

hundred and forty volunteers, among whom were
several persons of rank and fortune, embarked in
this enterprise. The command of it was given to
Juan de Grijalva, a young man of known merit
and courage, with inrfttudtions to observe ith
attention the nature of the countries which he
Tould discover, to barter for gold, and if cir.
cumftances were inviting, to fettle a colony in
:,,. some proper station. He failed from St. Jago de

Cuba on the eighth of April, one thousand five

Dircovers hundred and eighteen. The pilot Alaminos held
NewSpaiu. the fame course as in the former voyage; but the

violence of the currents carrying the ships to the
south, the first land which they made was the
lIay 3. island of Cozumel, to the east of Yucatan. As all

the inhabitants fled to the woods and mountains
at the approach of the Spaniards, they made.no
long flay there, and without any remarkable
occurrence they reached Potonchan on the opposite
fide of the peninsula. The desire of avenging
their countrymen who had been slain there,
concurred with their ideas of good policy, in
prompting them to land, that they might chaflife
the Indians of that diflric with such exemplary
tigor, as would strike terror into all the people
around them. But thoygh they disembarked all
their troops, and carried ashore some field-pieces,
the Indians fought with such courage, that the
Spaniards gained the victory with difficulty, and

were confirmed in their opinion that the inhabitants B o o K
of this country would prove more formidable iI.
enemies than any they had met with in other irg.
parts AniAmerica. From Potonchan, they continued
their voyage towards the weft, keeping as near
as poflible to the shore, and caling anchor every
evening, from dread of the dangerous accidents
to which they might be eposed in an unknown
sea. During the day their eyes were turned
continually towards land, with a mixture of surprise
and wonder at the beauty of the country, as well as
the novelty of the objects which they beheld. Many
villages were scattered along the coast, in which
they could distinguish houses of stone that appeared
white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth
of their admiration, they fancied these to be cities
adorned with towers and pinacles; and one of the
soldiers happening to remark that this country
resembled Spain in its appearance, Grijalva with
universal applause called it New Spain, the name
which still diftinguifhes'this extensive and opulent
province of the Spanish empire in America`. They J,,,e 9
landed i a river which the natives called Tabasco, Tbalio.
and the fame of their. vidcory at Potonchan having
reached this place, the cazique not only received
them amicably, but bestoWcd pefents upon them
of stich value, as confirmed the high ideas which
the Spaniards had formed with respect to the
wealth and fertility of the country. Thcfk
ideas were raised still higher by what occurred

" See NOTE XXVIL

o o K at the place were they next touched. This wvas
ir. considerably to the weft of Tabasco, in the province
ISI8. since known by the name of Guaxaca. There
Guaxaca.

they were received with the refpet paid to superior
beings. The people perfumed them as they landed
with incense of gum copal, and presented to them
as offerings the choicest delicacies of their country,
They were extremely fond of trading with their
new visitants, and in fix days the Spaniards obtained
ornaments of gold , of curious workmanflip, to
the value of fifteen thousand pesos, in exchange
for European toys of finall price. The two pri.
foners whom Cordova had brought from Yucatan,
had hitherto served as interpreters; but as they
(lid not underfiand the language of this country,
the Spaniards learned from the natives by signs,
that they were fubjets of a great monarch called
Montezuma, whose dominion extended over that
and many other provinces. Leaving this place,
with which he had so much reason to be pleased,
Grijalva continued his course towards the weft.
He landed on a small ifand , which he named the
June 19. Ife of Sacrifices, because there the Spaniards beheld,

for the firR time, the horrid fpetacle of human
victims, which the barbarous fuperflition of the
natives offered to their gods. He touched at
Ul;a" another fimall island, which he called St. Juan de

Ulua. From this place he lifpatched Pedro de
Alvarado, one ofhis oficers, to Velasq(uez, with a
full account of the important discoveries. which
he had made , and vith all the treasure that he
had acquired by trafficking with the natives, After

thel

the departure of Alvarado, he himself, with the B K
remaining vessels, proceeded along the coast as llr.
far as the river Panuco, the country till appearing I18
to be well peopled, fertile, and opulent.

Several of Grijalva's officers contended , that it Reaons for
was not enough to have discovered those delightful not leaviin

a colony

regions, or to have performed, at their different there,
landing-places, the empty ceremony of taking
poffefion of them for the crown of Castile, and
that their glory was incomplete, unless they planted
a colony in some proper fiation, which might
not only secure the Spanish nation a footing in the
country, but , with the reinforcements which
they were certain of receiving, might gradually
subjed the whole to the dominion of their
sovereign. But the squadron had now been above
five months at sea; the greatest part of their pro-
visions was exhaufled, and what remained of their
stores so much corrupted by the heat of the climate,
as to be almost unfit for use; they had loft some
men by death; others were sickly; the country
was crowded with people who seemed to be
intelligent as well as brave; and they were under
the government of one powerful monarch, who
could bring them to ad against their invaders
with united force. To plant a colony under so
many circumstances of disadvantage, appeared a
scheme too perilous to be attempted. Grijalva,
though possessed both of ambition and courage,
was destitute of the superior talents capable of
forming or executing such a great plan. He judged
it more prudent to return to Cuba, having fulfilled

VOL. I. V

B O o K. the purpose of his voyage, and accomplished all

HII. that the armament which he commanded enabled
1518. him to perform. He returned to St. Jago de Cuba,

on the twenty- sixth of Odober, from which
he had taken his departure about fix months
before 76

Preparations This was the longest as well as the moR successful
for another voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto made in
epedition. the New World. They had discovered that

Yucatan was not an illand as they had supposed,
but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their course for
many hundred miles along a coast formerly unex-
plqred, stretching at first towards the weft, and
then turning to the north; all the country which
they had discovered appeared to be no less valuable
than extensive. As soon as Alvarado reached
Cuba, Velasquez, transported with success so far
beyond his most sanguine expectations, immediately
dispatched a person of confidence to carry this
important intelligence to Spain, to exhibit the
rich producions of the countries which had been
discovered by his means, and to solicit such an
increase of authority, as might enable and encourage
him to attempt the conquest of them. Without
waiting for the return of his messenger, or for
the arrival of Grijalva, of whom he was become
so jealous or difrufiful, that he resolvcd no longer
to employ him, he began to prepare such a powerful

7` Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. , 2, 9, o. Bcrnal Dia,
c. . 17. Oviedo liit. lib. xvii. c. 9. o2. Gomara, c. 49.

armament, as might prove equal to an enterprise B o o K
of so much danger and importance. III.

But as the expedition upon which Velasquez 1iss.

was now intent, terminated in conquests of greater
moment than what the Spaniards had hitherto
achieved, and led them to the knowledge of a
people, who, if compared with those tribes of
America, with whom they were hitherto acquainted,
may be confidered as highly civilized; it is proper
to pause before we proceed to the history of events
extremely different from those which we have
already related, in order to take a view of the
state of the New World when first discovered,
and to contemplate the policy and manners of the
rude uncultivated tribes, that occupied all the
parts of it, with which the Spaniards were at this
time acquainted.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 8.

T YRE was situated at such a distance from the Arabian
Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impracicable to convey com-
modities from thence to that city by land - arriage. This
induced the Phenicians to render themselves masters of
Ebhinocrura , or Rbinocohlra, the nearest port in the
Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They landed the cargoes
which they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at
Elath, the safest harbour in the Red Sea towards the north.
Thence they were carried by land to Rhinocolura, the
diflance not being very considerable; and being reflipped
in that port, were transported to Tyre, and distributed over
the world. Strabon. Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p. II zgS
Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hiftor. Edit. Weffelingi, lib. i.
p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 12.

THI E Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic monument
of the Carthaginian skill in naval affairs, and one of the
molf curious fragments transmitted to us by antiquity.
The learned and industrious Mr. Dodwell, in a difTertation
prefixed to the Periplus of anno, in the edition of the
Minor Geographers published at Oxford, endeavours to
prove that this is a spurious work, the composition of some
(;reck, who aflumed Hanno's name. But M. de Mlontefquieu,
in his l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bou-
gainville, in a dissertation published tom. xxvi. of the Me-
moires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have eftablilhed

V 3

its authenticity by arguments which to me appear unanswerable,
Ramutio has accompanied his translation of this curious
voyage with a dissertation tending to illustrate it. Racolte de
Viaggi, vol. i p. II2. M. de Bougainville has, with great
learning and ability, treated the fame fubjefts. It appears
that Hanno, according to the mode of ancient navigation,
undertook this voyage in small vessels, so conftruded that
he could keep close in with the coast. He failed from
Gades to the island of Cerne, in twelve days. This is
probably what is known to the moderns by the name of the
Isle of Arguim. It became the chief station of the Cartha.
ginians on that coast; and M. de Bougainville contends,
that the cisterns found there are monuments of the Cartha.
ginian power and ingenuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and
still following the winding of the coast, he arrived, in
seventeen days, at a promontory which he called The Weft
Horn, probably Cape Pallnas. From this he advanced to
another promontory, which he named The South Horn,
and which is manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about five
degrees north of the line. All the circumstances contained
in the short abftraft of his journal, which is handed down
to us, concerning the appearance and state of the countries
on the coast of Africa, are confirmed and illustrated by a
comparison with the accounts of modern navigators. Even
those circumitances, which, from their Teeming improbability,
have been produced to invalidate the credibility of his rela-
tion, tend to confirm it. He observes, that in the country
to the south of Cerne, a profound silence reigned through
the day; but during the night, innumerable fires were kindled
along the banks of the rivers, and the air resounded with
the noise of pipes and drums, and cries of joy. The fame
thing, as Ramufio observes, still takes place. The exceflive
heat obliges the negroes to take shelter in the woods, or
in their houses, during the day. As oon as the fun sets,
they sally out, and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure of
music and dancing, in which they spend the night. Rumnf.
i. i , F. In another place, he mentions the sea as
burning with torrents of fire. What occurred to M. Adanfoi,

on the fame coast, may explain this. " As soon, " fays
he, " as the fun dipped beneath the horizon, and night
overspread the earth with darkness, the sea lent us its
friendly light. While the prow of our vessel ploughed the
foaming surges, it seemed to set them all on fire. Thus
we failed in a luminous inclofure, which surrounded us like
a large circle of rays, from whence darted in the wake of
the hip a long fiream of light. " Voy. to Senegal, p. r76.
The Periplus of Hanno has been translated, and every point
with rerpect to it has been illustrated with much learning
and ingenuity in a work published by Don Pedr. Rodrig.
Campomanes, entitled, Auligie dad Maritima de Cartago,
con el Periplo de fu General Hannon traducido iluftrado.
lad. 1756. 4?

NOTE III. p. 13.

L ONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intelligent and;
best informed historian of antiquity, and particularly diftin-
guifhed by his attention to geographical researches, affirms,
that it was n known, in his-time, whether Africa was a
continued continent, stretching to the south, or whether it
was encompassed by the seq. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny
the naturalist afterts, that there can be no communication
between the southern and northern temperate zones. Plinii
Hist. Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to. lib. ii. c. 68. If
they had given full credit to the accounts of those voyages,
the former could not have entertained such a doubt, the
latter could not have delivered such an opinion. Strabo
mentions the voyage of Eudoxus, but treats it as a fabulous
tale, lib. ii. p. S i ; and, according to his account of it,
no other judgment can be formed with refpet to it. Strabo
seems not to have known any thing with certainty concerning
the form and ilate of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr.
lib. xvii. p. X lgo. Ptolemy, the most inquisitive andc
learned of all the ancient geographers, was equally unac,
ullainted with any part of Africa situated a few degrees

'1

beyond the equinoctial line ; for he supposes that this great
continent was not surrounded by the sea, but that it
ltretched, without interruption, towards the south pole:
and he so fr mistakes its true figure, that he describes
the continent as becoming broader and broader as it
advanced towards the south. Ptolomaei Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9.
Brietii Parallela Geogr. veteris et novas, p. 86.

NOTE IV. p. o.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very firong and
singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients with refped
to the situation of the various parts of the earth. When
Alexander marched along the banks of the Hydafpes and
Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into the Indus, he
observed that there were many crocodiles in those rivers,
and that the country produced beans of the fame species
with those which were common in Egypt. From these
circumtances , he concluded that he had discovered the
source of the Nile, and prepared a fleet to fail down the
Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1020. This
amazing error did not arise fiom any ignorance of geography
peculiar to that monarch; for we are informed by Strabo,
that Alexander applied with particular attention in order to
acquire the knowledge of this science, and had accurate
maps or descriptions of the countries through which he
marched. Lib. ii. p. 120. Btrt, in his age, the knowledge
of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits of the
Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 20.

A S the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great
at the mouth of the river Indus, this would render the
phenomenon more formidable to the Greeks. Varen. Geogr.
Vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE V. p. 23.

IT is probable that the ancients were seldom induced
to advance so far, either by motives of curiosity, or views
of commercial advantage. In consequence of this, their
idea concerning the position of that great river was very
erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch of the Ganges
which he distinguishes by the name of the Great Mouth,
in the ,hundred and forty - sixth degree of longitude from
his first meridian in the Fortunate Islands. But its true
longitude, computed from that meridian, is now determined
by aronomical observations to be only a hundred and five,
degrees. A geographer so eminent must have been betrayed
into an error of this magnitude by the imperfection of the
information which he had received concerning those distant
regions; and this affords a striking proof of the intercourse
with them being extremely rare. With respect to the
countries of India beyond the Ganges, his intelligence was
still more defective, and hi errors more enormous. I shall
have occasion to observe in another place, that he has
placed the country of the Seres, or China, no less than
sixty degrees farther east than its true position. M. d'Anville,
one of the most learned and intelligent of the modern
geographers, has set this matter in a clear light in two
dissertations published in Mem. del'Academ. des Infcript. &c.
tom. xxxii. p. 573. 604.

NOTE VII. p. 24.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
were made chiefly by land; those of the moderns are carried
on chiefly by sea. The progress of conquest led to the
former, th t of commerce to the latter. It is a judicious
observation of Strabo, that the conquests of Alexander the
Great made known the East, those of the Romans opened
the Weft, and those of Mithridates king of Pontus the
North. Lib. i. p. 26. When discovery is carried on by
land alone , its progress must be flow, and its operations

'Si

confined. When it is carried on only by sea, its phere
may be more extensive, and its advances more rapid; hut
it labors under peculiar defects. Though it ray make
known the position of different countries, and ascertain
their boundaries as far as these are determined by the
ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with refpe to their
interior state. Above two centuries and a half have elapsed
since the Europeans failed round the southern promontory
of Africa, and have traded in most of its ports; but, in a
considerable part of that great continent, they have done
little more than survey its coasts, and mark its capes and
harbours. Its interior regions are in a great measure un-
known. The ancients, who had a very imperfect knowledge
of its coasts, except where they are washed by the Mediter.
ranean or Red Sea, were accustomed to penetrate into its
inland provinces, and, if we may rely on the testimony of
Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, had explored many parts
of it now altogether unknown. Unless both modes of
discovery be united, the geographical knowledge of the earth
must remain incomplete and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 28

T HE notion of the ancients concerning such an ex-
celive degree of heat in the torrid zone, as rendered it
uninhabitable, and their persisting in this error long after
they began to have ome commercial intercourse with several
parts of India lying within the tropics, must appear so
singular and absurd, that it may not be unacceptable to
some of my readers to produce evidence of their holding
this opinion and to account for the apparent icontiflence
of their theory with their experience. Cicero, who had
beltowed attention upon every part of philosophy known to
the ancients, seems to have believed that the torrid zone
was uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there could
be no intercourse between the northern and southern temperate
zones lie introduces Africanus thus addressing the younger
Scipio: " You fee this earth encompassed and as it were

bound in by certain zones, of which, two, at the greatest
distance from each other, and sustaining the opposite poles
of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle one,
and the largest of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun;
two are habitable, the people in the southern one are
antipodes to us, with whom we have no conneaion."
Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek philosopher,
contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fame doctrine, not
in a popular work, but in his Eo-acywyt uc (ptiopaEtvCy,
a treatise purely scientific. " When we speak, " fays he,
" of the southern temperate zone, and its inhabitants,
and concerning those who are called antipodes, it must be
always understood, that we have no certain knowledge or
information concerning the southern temperate zone, whether
it be inhabited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the
tropics, we conclude that there is another zone, situated
to the south, which enjoys the fame degree of temperature
with the northern one which we inhabit, " Cap. xiii. p. 3 .
ap. Petavii Opus de Dodr. Tempor. in quo Uranologium
five Syftemata var. Audtorum. Amft. 1705. vol. iii. The
opinion of Pliny the naturalist, with refped to both there
points, was the fame: ' There are five divisions of the
earth, which are called zones. All that portion which lies
near to the two opposite poles is oppressed with vehement
cold, and eternal frolt There, unblest with the afpe of
milder tars, perpetual darkness reigns, or at the utmost a
feeble light refleced from surrounding snows. The middle
of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun, is scorched
and burnt up with flames and fiery vapor. Between there
torrid and frozen diftrifts lie two other portions of the
earth, which are temperate; but, on account of the
burning region interposed, there can be no communication
between them. Thus Heaven has deprived us of three parts
if the earth. " Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers his opinion
to the fame effec, in terms no less explicit: " The portion
of the earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid
zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat. " Lib. ii. p. 154.

To there I might add the authority of many other refpedable
philosophers and historians of antiquity.

In order to explain the sense in which this doctrine

was generally received, we may observe, that Parmenides
as we are informed by Strabo, was the first who divided
the earth into five zones, and he extended the limits of
the zone which he supposed to be uninhabitable on account
of heat, beyond the tropics. Aristotle, as we learn like-
wife from Strabo, fixed the boundaries of the different
zones in the fame manner as they are defined by modern
geographers. But the progress of discovery having gradually
demonstrated that several regions of the earth which lay
within the tropics were not only habitable, but populous
and fertile, this induced later geographers to circumscribe
the limits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to ascertain
with precision the boundaries which they allotted to it.
From a passage in Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the
only author of antiquity from whom we receive any hint
concerning this subjed, I should conjeture, that those
who calculated according to the measurement of the earth
by Eratosthenes, supposed the torrid zone to comprehend
near sixteen degrees, about eight on each fide of the equator;
whereas such as followed the computation of Pofidonius
allotted about twenty- four degrees , or somewhat more than
twelve degrees on each fide of the equator to the torrid
zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. i;i. According to the former
opinion , about two- thirds of that portion of the earth
which lies between the tropics was confidered as habitable;
according to the latter, about one half of it. With this
reftricion, the doctrine of the ancients concerning the torrid
zone appears less absurd; and we can conceive the reason
of their afterting this zone to be uninhabitable, even after
they had opened a communication with several places within
the tropics. When men of fcicnce spoke of the torrid
tone, they confidered it as it was limited by the definition
of geographers to sixteen, or at the utmost to twenty - four
degrees ; and as they knew almost nothing of the countries

nearer to the equator, they might still suppose them to be
uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse, the name of
the torrid zone continued to be given to all that portion
of the earth which lies within the tropics. Cicero seems to
have been unacquainted with those ideas of the later geogra-
phers, and adhering to the division of Parmenides, describes
the torrid zone as the largest of the five. Some of the
ancients rejected the notion concerning the intolerable heat
of the torrid zone as a popular error. This, we are told
by Plutarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we
learn from Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had
adopted the fame opinion, lib. ii. 154. Ptolemy seems to
have paid no regard to the ancient doctrine and opinions
concerning the torrid zone.

NOTE IX. p. 5p.

T HE court of inquisition, which effeually checks a
spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improvement,
wherever it is established., was first introduced into Portugal
by John 111. who began his reign A. D. z 21.

NOTE X. p. 59.

A N instance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon the
authority of the Portuguese historian Garcia de Refende.
Some Englilh merchants having resolved to' open a trade
with the coast of Guinea, John II. of Portugal dispatched
ambafradors to Edward IV., in order to lay before him
the right which he had acquired by the Pope's bull to the
dominion of that country, and to request of him to prohibit
his fubjeCfs to prosecute their intended voyage. Edward
was so much satisfied with the exclusive title of the Portuguese,
that he issued his orders in the terms which they desired.
Hackluyt, Navigations, voyages, and Traffics of the Eng-
lifl, vol.ii. part. ii. p. 2.

NOTE XI. p. 70.

T HE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly ascertained
by the following circumstances. It appears from the frag-
ment of a letter, addressed by him to Ferdinand and
faibella, l. D. iSol, that he had, at that time. been
engaged forty years in a ea - faring life. In another letter,
he informs them, that he went to ea at the age of
fourteen; from those fads it follows, that he was born
A. D. 1447. Life of Christ. Columbus, by his son Don
Ferdinand. Churchill's Colledion of Voyages, vol. ii,
P. 484, 485.

NOTEXII. . 78.

T H E spherical figure of the earth was known to the
ancient geographers. They invented the method, still in
use, of computing the longitude and latitude of different
places. According to their dotrine, the equator, or
imaginary line which encompafles the earth, contained three
hundred and sixty degrees; these they divided into twenty-
four parts, or hours, each equal to fifteen degrees. The
country of the Srer or Sin , being the farthest part of
India known to the ancients, was supposed, by Marihus
Tyrius, the most eminent of the ancient geographers before
Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and twenty-
five degrees to the east of the first meridian, passing through
the Fortunate islands. Ptolomai Gcogr. lib. i. c. i . If
this supposition was well-founded , the country of the
Seres, or China, was only nine hours, or one hundred
and thirty- five degrees weft from the Fortunate or Canary
flands; and the navigation, in that direcdion, was much
shorter than by the course which the Portuguese were
pursuing. Marco Polo , in his travels , had described
countries, particularly the iland of Cipango or Zipangri,
supposed to be Japan, considerably to the e;af of any part
of Asia, known to the ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region.
Oriental. lib. ii.' c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this

country, as it extended further to the east, was still
nearer to the Canary Islands. The conclusions of Columbus,
though drawn from inaccurate obfetvations, were just. If
the suppositions of Marinus had been well founded, and if
the countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been
situated to the east of those whose longitude Marinus had
ascertained, the proper and nearest course to the East Indies
must have been to fleer directly wet. Herrera, dec. i.
lib. i. c. 2. A more extensive knowledge of the globe has
now discovered the great error of Marinus, in supposing
China to be fifteena hours, or two hundred and twenty-five
degrees east from the Canary Islands, and that even Ptolemy
was mistaken, when he reduced the longitude of China to
twelve hours, or one hundred and eighty degrees. The
longitude of the western frontier of that valt empire is seven
hours, or one hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian
of the Canary Islands. But Columbus followed the light
which his age afforded,, and relied upon the authority of
writers, who were , at that time, regarded as the in-
ftrudors and guides of mankind in the science of geography,

NOTE XIII p, 102.

A s the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did
not depart far from the coast of Africa, they concluded that
birds, whose flight they observed with great attention, did
not venture to any considerable diflance from land. In the
infancy of navigation , it was not known, that birds often
Itretch their flight to an immense diltan.ce from any shore.
In failing towards the Weft-Indian islands, birds are often
seen at the distance of two hundred leagues from the nearest
coast. Sloane's Nat. Hilt. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. ;o. Catesby
saw an owl at sea, when the ship was fix hundred leagues
distant from land. Nat. Hilt. of Carolina, pref. p. 7.
lilt. Naturelle de M. Buffon , tom. xvi. p. 32. From
which it appears, that this indication of land, on which
Columbus seems to have relied with ome confidence, was
extremely uncertain. This observation is confirmed by

Captain Cook, the most extensive and experienced navigator
of any age or nation. No one yet knows ( fays he ) to
what distance any of the oceanic birds go to sea; for my
'own part, I do not believe that there is one in the whole
tribe that can be relied on in pointing out the vicinity of
land. " Voyage tow-ards the South Pole, vol. i. p. 275.

NOTE XIV. p. 114.

T.
IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Iabella, he
describes one of the harbours in Cuba, with all the enthu.
fiaftic admiration of a discoverer. -" I discovered a river
which a galley might easily enter; the beauty of it induced
me to found, and I found from five to eight fathoms of
water. Having proceeded a considerable way up the river,
every thing invited me to fettle there. The beauty of the
river, the clearness of the water, through which I could
fee the sandy bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of dif-
ferent kinds, the tallest and fine I hadfeen, and an infinite
number of other large and flourishing trees, the birds, and
the verdure of the plains, are so wonderfully beautiful,
that this country excels all others as far as the day furpatfes
the night in brightness and splendor, so that I often said,
that it would be in vain for me to attempt to give your
highnesses a full'account of it, for neither my tongue nor
my pen could come up to the truth, and indeed I am so
much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that I know
not how to describe it. " Life of Columb. c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. I18.

T HE account which Columbus gives of the humanity
and orderly behaviour of the natives on this occasion is very
flriking. " The king (iays he, in a letter to Ferdinand and
Isabella ) having been informed of our misfortune , expressed
great grief for our loss, and immediately sent aboard all
the people in the place in many large canoes; we soon
unloaded the flip of every thing that was upon deck, a

the

the king gave us great affifance: he himself, with his
brothers and relations, took all possible care that every thing
Thould be properly done both aboard and on hore. And,
from time to time, he ent ome of his relations weeping,
to beg of me not to be dejeded, for he would give me
a11 that he had. I can assure your highnesses, that o much
cire would not have been taken in securing our effefts irt
any part of Spain, as all our property was put together in
one place near his palace, until the houses which he wanted
to prepare for the custody of it, were emptied. He imme-
diately placed a guard of armed men, who watched during
the whole night, and those on shore lamented as if they
had been much interested in our loss. The people are o
affeionate, so tratable, and so peaceable, that I swear
to your highnesses, that there is not a better race of men,
nor a better country in the world. They love their neigh-
bour as themselves; their conversation is the sweetest and
nnildeft in the world, cheerful, and always accompanied
with a smile. And although it is true that they go naked,
yet your highnesses may be assured that they have many
very commendable customs; the king is served with great
state, and his behaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant to
fee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful memory
which there people have, and their desire of knowing every
thing, which leads them to inquire into its causes and
effets. Life of Columbus, c. 2 z. It is probable that
the Spaniards were indebted for this officious attention, to
the opinion which the Indians entertained of them as a
superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. 126.

EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus is valuable.
A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and lfabAlla, defcrib,
ing what pafled on this occaion, exhibits a molt striking
Piture of his intrepidity, his humanity, his public spirit,
;nd courtly address. " I would have been lets concerned
for this misfortune, had I alone been in danger, both

Vol. I. X

because my life is a debt that I owe to the Supreme
Creator, and because I have at other times been exposed
to the most imminent hazard. But what gave me infinite
grief and vexation was, that after it had pleased our Lord
to give me faith to undertake this enterprise, in which [
had now been so successful, that my opponents would have
been convinced, and the glory of your highnesses, and
the extent of your territory increased by me; it should
please the Divine Majesty to flop all by my death. All
this would have been more tolerable, had it not been
attended with the loss of those men whom I had carried
with me, upon promnif of the greatest prosperity, who
feeing themfe!ves in such diltrefs, cursed not only their
coming along with me, hut that fear and awe of me,
which prevented them from returning as they often had
resolved to have done. But belides all this, my sorrow
was greatly icretafel, by recolleci:g that I had left my
twto so:,s at school at Cordova, destitute of friends, in a
foreign country, when it could not in all probability be
known that I had done such services as might induce your
highnessss to remember them. And though I comforted
mlfelf with the faith that our Lord would not permit that,
which tended so much to the glory of his church, and
which I had brought about with so much trouble, to remain
imperfect, yet 1 confidered that, on account of my fins,
it was his will to deprive me of that glory, which I might
have attained in this world. While in this confused fRate,
I thought on the good fortune which accompanies your
highnclics, and imagined, that although I should perish,
and the vlTe be llt, it was pollible that you might
somehow come to the knowledge of my voyage,
and the success with which it was attended. For that
rdufon I wrote upon parchment with the brevity which the
situation required, that I had discovered the lands which I
promised, in how many days I had done it, and what
coLurfc 1 hadl tllowed. I mentioned the goodness of the
country, the charadter of the inhabitants , and that your
highncls's fubjedts were left in polltelion of all that I had
difiovcrcd. slaving fealed this writing, I addrnffed it to

Sour highnesses, and promised a thousand ducats to ant
perfun who hould deliver it fealed, so that if any foreighet§
found it, the pronmifed reward might prevail o thtni not
to give the inform.;tion to another. 1 then caused a great
afck to be brought to me, and wrapping up he parchment
in an oiled cloth, and afterwards in t eaklt of wax, I put
it into the cask, and having flopt it well, I caf it into
the sea. All the men believed that it was onime at of
devotion. Inlagining that this might hevet chance td be takes
up. as the ships approached itearer to Spain, 1 made anothe~
packet like the firit, and placed it at the top of the poop,
so that if the flip funk, the cask reniaining above water
might be committed to the guidance of fortune. '

NOTE XVII. p. I3d.

SOME Spanish authors, with the nimeanefs of hattonal
jealousy, have endeavoured to detrant froth the glory of
Columbus, by insinuating that he was led to the discovery
of the New World, not .by his own inventive or enterprising
genius, but by information which he had received. Accor-
ding to their account, a vessel having been driven front
its course by easterly winds, was carried before them far
to the weft, and landed on the coast of an unknown country,
from which it returned with difficulty; the pilot, and three
sailors, being the only persons who survived the distresses
which the crew suffercd, from want of provifidns, and
fatigue in this long voyage. In a few days after their
arrival, all the four died; but the pilot having been received
into the house of Columbus, his intimate friend, disclosed
to him, before his death, the secret of the discovery which
he had accideltally made, and left hini his papers containing
a journal of the voyage, which served as a guide to
Columbus n his undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know,
is the first author who published this story, Hist. c. .
Every circumitance is destitute of evidence to support it.
Neither the name of the veflel nor its dellination is known.
Some pretend that it belonged to one of the fea-por

X a

towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to the Canaries,
br to Madeira; others, that it was a Bifcayner in its way
to England; others, a Portuguese ship trading on the coaf
of Guinea. The name of the pilot is alike unknown, as
well as that of the port in which he landed on his return.
According to ome, it was in Portugal; according to others,
in Madeira, or the Azores. The year in which this voyage
was made is no less uncertain. Monfon's Nav. Tra.ts.
Churchill, iii . No mention is made of this pilot,
or his discoveries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Ilartyr, the
contemporaries of Columbus. Herrera,, with his usual
judgment, pafnes over it in silence. Oviedo takes notice
of this report, but confiders it as a tale fit only to amuse
the vulgar. Hilt. lib. ii c. 2. As Columbus held his
course directly weft from the Canaries, and never varied it,
some later authors have supposed, that this uniformity is a
proof of his being- guided by some previous information.
But they do not recolled the principles on which he founded
all his hopes of success, that by holding a westerly course,
he must certainly arrive at those regions of the east described
by the ancients. His firm belief of his own fyfteni led
tim to take that course, and to pursue it without deviation.

The Spaniards are not the only people who have called

in question Columbus's claim to the honor of having disco-
vered America. Some German authors ascribe this honor
to Martin Behaim, their countryman. He was of the noble
family of the Behaims of Schwartzbach, citizens of the
first rank in the Imperial town of Nuremberg. Having
studied under the celebrated John luller, better known by
the name of Rcgiomontanus, he acquired such knovledge
of cosmography, as prompted him to explore those regions,
the situation and qualities of which he had been accustomed
to investigate and defcribc. Under the patronage of the Duches
of Burgundy he repaired to Lisbon, whither the iame of the
Portuguese discoveries invited all the adventurous spirits of
the age. There, as we learn from -ernmian Schedel, of
whose Chronicon Aluidi a German translation was printed at
Nuremberg A. D. 1493, his merit as a colmiographcr railed
him, in conjundcion with Diego Cano, to the commaln

of a squadron fitted out for difcoveiy in the year 48!.
In that voyage, he is said to have discovered the kingdom
of Congo. l-ie fettled in the island of Fayal, one of the
Azores, and was a particular friend of Columbus. Herrera,
dec. i. lib. i. c. z. Magellan had a terrestrial globe made
by Behaim, on which he demonstrated the course that he
purposed to hold in search of the communication with the
South Sea, which he afterwards discovered. Gomara Hist.
c. 19. Herrera decnx. . il. c. 9. In the year 492,
Behaim visited his relatins in Nuremberg, and left with them
a map drawn witb---is ownhand, which is still preserved
among the archives of the family. Thus far the tfory
of Martin Behaim seems to be well authenticated; but the
account of his having difcoveredany part of the New World
appears to be merely conjectural.

In the first edition, as had at that time hardly any

knowledge of Behaim but what I derived from a frivolous
I)ifflrtation de vero Novi Orbis Inventore, published at
Francfort, A^ D. 1714, by Jo. Frid. StuveniuS, I was
induced, by the authority of Herrera, to suppose that
Behaim was not a native of Germany; but from -more full
and accurate information, communicated to me by the
learned Dr. John Reynold Forster, I am now satisfied that
I was mistaken. Dr. Forster has been likewise so' good as
to favor me with a copy of Behairm's map, as' pubflihed
by Doppelmayer in his Account of the Mathematicians and
Artists of Nuremberg. From this map, the imperfetion of
cosmographical knowledge at'that period, is manifest. Hardly
one place is' laid down in its true ituation. Nor can I
discover from it any reason to suppose that Behaim had the
Icaft knowledge of any region in America. He delineates,
indeed, an ifiand to which he gives the name of St. Brandon.
This, it is imagined , may be some part of Guiana, supposed
at firit to be an island. He places it in the fameI latitude
vith the Cape Verd isles, and I fufped it to be an
iinaginary island which has been admitted into ome ancient
maps on no better authority than the legend of the Irish

X }

St. Brandnn or Brendan, wvofe story is so childishly fabuloup
gs to be unworthy of any notice (;irald. Cambrienis ap.
Mifingharri Florilegium Sandtorum, p. 427.

The pretensions of the 'Welsh to the discovery of America

seem not to rft n aa foundation much more solid. In the
twelfth century, according to Powell, a dispute having
arisen among the sons of Owen Guyneth, king of North,
\Wales, concerning the succeSsion to his crown, Madoc,
one of their number, weary of this contention, betook
hiinfelf to ea in quest of a mure quiet fettdment. He
peered due weft, leaving Ireland to the north, and arrived
in an unknown country, which appeared to him so desirable,
that he returned to Wales, and carried thither several of
his adherents and companions. This is said to have happened
about the year 1170, arnd after that, he and his colony
were heard of no more. But it is to be observed, that
Powell, on whufe testimony the authenticity of this story
refts, published his history above four centuries from the
date of the event which he relates. Among a people as
rude and as illiterate as the Welsh at that period, the
memory of a tranfadion. so remote must have been very
imperfectMy preserved, and would require to be confirmed
by forpe .author of greater credit, and nearer to the aera of
Madpc's voyage than Powell. Later antiquaries have indeed
ppeeqled to the testimony of Meredith ap Rhees a Welsh
bard, who died A. D. 1477. But he too lived at such
liftance of titne from the event, that he cannot be confidered
as a Witness of much more credit than Powell. Betides,
his verses published by Halu4yt, vol. iii. p. . convey no
information, but that ladoc, dissatisfied with his domestic
situation, employed himfelc in searching the ocean for new
poffcffiuns. But even if we admit the authenticity of Powell's
flory, it does not follow that the unknown country which
Madoc discovered by fleering weft, in such a course as to
leave Ireland to the north, was any part of Amlerica. The
naval skill of the Welsh in the twelfth century was hardly
equal to such a voyage. If he made any discovery at all,
it is more probable that it was Madeira, or fbme other of

the western isles. The affinity of the Welsh language with
some dialedts spoken in America, has been mentioned as a
circumflance which confirms the truth of Mladoc's voyage.
But that affinity has been observed in so few instances, and
in some of these is so obscure, or so fanciful, that no
conclusion can be drawn from the casual resemblance of a
finals number of words. There is a bird, which, as far as
is yet known, is found only on the coafs of South America,
from Port Delire to the Straits o Magellan. It is diftin-
guifhed by the name of Penguin. This word in the Wellh
language signifies fYbite-head. Almost all the authors who
favor the pretensions of the Welsh to the discovery of
America, mention this as an irrefragable proof of the affi-
nity of the Welsh language with that spoken in this region
of America. But Mr. Pennant, who has given a scientific
description of the Penguin, observes, that all the birds of
this genus have black heads, " so that we must resign
every hope (adds he) founded on this hypothesis of retrieving
the Cambrian race in the New World. " Philof. Tranfadt.
vol. lviii. p. 9, &c. Betides this, if the \elfh, towards
the close of the twelfth century, had fettled in any part of
America, ome remains of the Christian doctrine and rites
must have been found among their descendants, when they
were discovered about three hundred years posterior to their
migration; a period so short, that, in the course of it, we
cannot well suppose that a'l European ideas and arts would
be totally forgotten. Lord Lyttelton, in his notes to the
fifth book of his lliftory of Henry 1l. p. 7'. has examined
what Powell relates concerning the discoveries made by
Madoc, and invalidates the truth of his itory by other
arguments of great weight

The prerenlions of the Norwegians to the discovery of

America, seem to he better founded than those of the
Germans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scandinavia were
remarkable in the middle ages for the boldness and extent
of their maritime excursions. In 874, the Norwegians
dis:covered, and planted a colony in Iceland. In 98:, they
discovered Greenland, and cftablifhed settlements there.

X 4

From that, some of their navigators proceeded towards the
weft, and discovered a country more inviting than those
horrid regions with which they were acquainted. According
to their representation, this country was sandy on the coasts,
but in the interior parts level and covered with wood, on
which account they gave it the name of Hella-land, and
llark-land, and having afterwards found some plants of
the vine which bore grapes, they called it Wiin-land,
The credit of this story refts, as far as I know, on the
authority of the Jaga, or chronicle of king Olaus, comnpoed
by Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturltfons, published by Perin,
kiold at Stockholm A. D. 697. As Snorro was born in
the year 1179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
centuries after the event which he relates. His account of
the navigation and discoveries of Biorn , and his companion
Lief, is averyrude confused tale, p. 104. 110. 326. It is
impossible to discover from him, what part of America it
was in which the Norwegians landed. According to his
account of the length of the days and nights, it must have
been as far north as the fifty-eighth degree of latitude, on
some part of the coast of Labradore, approaching near to
the entry of Hudson's Straits. Grapes, certainly, are not
the production of that country. Torfeus supposes that there
is an error in the text, by redifying of which, the place
where the Norwegians landed may be supposed t he situated
in latitude 49°. But neither is that the region of the
vine in America. From perusing Snorro's tale, I hould
think that the situation of Newfoundladd corresponds belt
with that of the country discovered by the Norwegians,
Grapes, however, are not the production of that barren
island. Other conjectures are'mentioned by . Mallet,
Introd. a l'Hift. de Danner. 17S, &c. am not flfficiently
acquainted with the literature of the north, to examine
them. It eems manifest, that if the Norwegians did discover
any part of Aerica at that period , their attempts to plant
colonies proved unsuccessful, and all knowledge of it was
soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. i x.

PETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentleman,
residing at that time in the court of Spain, whose letters
contain an account of the transactions of that period, in
the order wherein they occurred, describes the sentiments
with which he himself and his learned correspondents were
affedted, in very firiking terms. " Pra latitia profiluiffe
te, vixque a lachrymis prae gaudio temperafe, quando literas
adfpexifti meas quibus, de antipoduin orbe latenti haCtenus,
te certiorem feci, mi fuaviffime Pomponi, infinuafti. Ex
tuis ipfe literis coiligo, quid fenferis. Senfifti autem, tantique
rem fecifti, quanti virunim umma dodrina infignitum decuit.
Quis namque cibus fublimibus priftari poteft ingeniis, ifto
fuavior ? quod condimentum gratius ? A me facio conjedturam.
Beari fentio spiritus meos, quando accitos alloquor prudentes
aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt provincia. Implicent animos
pecuniarum .cumulis augendis miferi avari , libidinibus
obfcoeni; noftras nos mentes, poftquam Deo pleni aliquando
fuerimus, contemplando, hujufcemodi rerum notitia demul.
ciamus." Epift. z. Pomponio Leto..

NOTE XIX. p. 45.

SO firmly were men of science, in that age, persuaded
that the countries which Columbus had discovered were
conneted with the East Indies, that Bernaldes, the Cura
de los Palacios, who seems to have been no inconsiderable
proficient in the knowledge of cosmography, contends that
Cuba was not an island, but a part of the continent, and
united to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he delivered
as his opinion to Colimbus himself, who was his guest for
some time on his return from his second voyage; and he
supports it by several argument , moitly founded on the
authority of Sir John Mandeville. MS. penes me. Antonio
Gallo, who was secretary to the magiltracy of Genoa
towards the close of the fifteenth century, published a
thort account of the navigations and discoveries of his
Cquntryman olunmbus, .nnexed to his Opufcula Hiltorica

de rebus populi Genuenfis; in which he informs us, from
letters of Columbus which he himself had seen, that it
was his opinion, founded upon nautical observations, that
one of the islands he had discovered was diftfnt only two
hours or thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts
of the geographers of that age, was laid down, upon the
authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. . as the most easterly
place in Aia. From this he concluded, that if rome
unknown continent did not obstruct the navigation, there
must be a short and easy access, by holding a weflerly
courre, to this extreme region of the East. Muratori
Scriptores Rer. talicarum, vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. Sx1.

BERNALDES, the Cura or Redor de los Palacios, a
eontemporary writer, fays, that five hundred of these
captives were ent to Spain, and fold publicly in Seville
as laves; but that, by the change of climate, 'and their
inability to bear the fatigue of labor, they all died in a
fhoit time. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. 6S.

COLUMBUS seems to have formed some very singular
opinions concerning the countries which he had now discovered.
The violent swell and agitation of the waters on the coast
of Trinidad led him to conclude this to be the highefi
part of the terraqueous globe, and he imagined that variou
circuniftances concurred in proving that the ea was here
visibly elevated. Having adopted this erroneous principle,
the apparent beauty of the country induced him to fall in
with a notion of Sir John llandeville, c. o12 that the
terrestrial pradife was the highest land in the earth; and
he believed that he had been so fortunate as to discover
this haply abode. Nor ought we to think it firange that
a person of so much fitgacity fiould he influenced by the
opinion or reports offuch a fabulous author as Mandeville.
Columbus and the other discoverers were obliged to follow

such guides as they could find; and it appears from several
paifages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend
of Columbus that no inconsiderable degree of credit was
given to the testimony of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes
frequently quotes him, and always with .respect.

NOTE XXII. p. 178.

AT is remarkable,, that neither Gomara nor Oviedo, the
most ancient Spanish historians of America, nor H-errera;
confider Ojed , or his companion Vespucci , as the first
dilcoverers of the continent of America. They uniformly
ascribe this honor to Columbus. Some have supposed
that national resentment againit Vespucci, for deserting the
service of Spain, and entering into that of Portugal, may
have prompted these writers to conceal the actions which he
performed. But Martyr and Benzoni, both Italians, could
not be warped by the fame prejudice. Martyr was a
contemporary author; he resided in the court of Spain,
and, had the best opportunity to be exactly informed with
refped to all public tranfations; and yet, neither in his
Decads, the firfl general history published of the New
World, nor in his Epistles, which contain an account of
all the remarkable events of his time., does he ascribe to
Vespucci the honor of having first discovered the continent.
Benzoni went as an adventurer to America in the year 1 4 r,
and resided there a considerable time. He appears to have
been animated with a warm zeal for the honor of Italy,
his native country, and yet does not mention the exploits
and discoveries of Vespucci. Hlerrera, who compiled his
general history of America from the most authentic records,
not only follows those early writers, but accuses Vespucci
of fhllifying the dates of both voyages which he made to
the New World, and of confounding the one with the other,
in order that he might arrogate to himnfelf the glory of
having discovered the continent. H-er. dec. . lib. iv. c.
2. He afTerts, that in a judicial inquiry into this matter by
the royal fiscal, it was proved by the teflimony of Ojeda
himrflf, that he touched at iifpaniola when returning to

Spain'from his firfl voyage; whereas Vefpucc gave out that
they returned directly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria,
and touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage; and
that he had finished the voyage in five months; whereas,
according to Vespucci's account, he had employed seventeen
months in performing it. Viaggio primo de All. Vespucci,
p. 36. Viag. fecundo, p. 4;. Herrera gives a more full
account of this inquelt in another part of his book, anti
to the fame effet. Her. dec. . lib vii c. . Columbus
was in Hlifpaniola when Ojeda arrived there, and had by
that time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed
Ojeda's attempt to excite a new infurretion, and, of
consequence, his voyage, must have beenpoflerior to that of
the admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84 According to
Vespucci's account', he, se't out on his-firit voyage May
ioth, I497. Viag. primo, p 6. At that time Columbus
was in the court of Spain preparing for his voyage, and
seems to have enjoyed a considerable degree.of favor.' The
affairs of the New World were at this juncture under the
dired ton of Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbus. It is
not probable, that at that period a commilion would be
granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral, by
undertaking a voyage wvhich he himself intended to perform.
Fonseca, who patronised Ojeda, and granted the licence
for his voyage, was not recalled to court, and reinstated
in the diretion of Indian affairs, until the death'of princo
John, which happened September 1497, P. Martyr, Ep.
8gz2. several months poflerior to the time at which Vespucci
pretends-to have set out upon his voyage. A life of Vespucci
was published at Florence by the Abate Bandini, A. D.
174 , 4to. It is a work of no merit, written with littl{i
judgment, and less candor. lie contends for his country-
man's title to the discovery of the continent with all the
blind zeal of national partiality, but produces no new evi.
dence to support it We learn fomn him, that Vespucci's
account of his voyage was published as early as the year
1 Sio, and probably sooner. Vita di Am. Vefp. p. s2.
At what time the name of AMnERICA camne to be firy given
to the. New World, is not certain.

NOTE XXIIL. p. 228t

T HE form employed on this occasion served as a model
to the Spaniards in all their subsequent conquests in America.
It is so extraordinary in its nature, and gives us such an
idea of the proceedings of the Spaniards, and the principles
upon which they founded their right to the extenlive
dominions which they acquired in the New World, that
it well merits the attention of the reader. " I Alonfo de
Ojeda, servant of the moil high and powerful kings of
Castile and Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations,
their messenger and captain, notify to you and declare, in
as ample form as I am capable, that God our Lord, who
is one and eternal, created the heaven and the earth, and
one man and one woman, of whom you and we, and all
the men who have been or fiail be in the world, are
'descended. But as it has come to pass, through the number
of generations during more than five thousand years, that
they have been dispersed into different parts of the world,
and are divided into various kingdoms and provinces, because
one country was not able to contain them, nor could they
have found in one the means of fubfiflence and preservation;
therefore God our Lord gave the charge of all those people
to one man, named St Peter, whom he constituted the
lord and head of all the human race, that all men, in
wvhatevtr place they are born, or in whatever faith or
place they are educated, might yield 'obedience unto him.
lie hath fubjeded the whole world to his jurisdiction, and
commanded him to establish his residence in Rome , as the
molt proper place for the government of the world. He
likewise promised anti gave him power to elablifl his
authority in every other part of the world, and to judge
and govern all Chrillians, Moors, .ews, Gentiles, and all
other people, of whatever set or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope , which hlgnifies admirable,
great father and guardian, because he is tie father and
governor of all men. Those who lived in the time of this
holy father obeyed and acknowledged him as their lord and
king, and the superior of the univere. The filne has been

observed with refped to them who, since his time, have
been chosen to the pontificate. Thus it now continues,
and will continue to the end of the world.

"One of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath made

a grant of these illands, and of the Tierra Firme of the
ocean sea, to the Catholic kings of Castile, Don Ferdinand
and Donna Isabella, of glorious memory, and their successors,
"our foyereigns, with all they contain, as is more fully
exprefled in certain deeds pased upon that occasion, which
you may fee, if you desire it. Thus his majesty is king
and lord of these islands, and of the continent, in virtue of
this donation; and , as king and lord aforeaid, most of
the islands to which his title hath been notified, have
recognised his nmajefty, and now yield obedience and
subjection to him as their lord, voluntarily and without
retiftance; and inflantly, as soon as they received information,
they obeyed the religious men sent by the king to preach
to them, and to iriltrudt them in our holy faith; and all
these, of their on free-will, without any ecompence or
gratuity, became Christians, and continue to be so; and
his mafelty having received them graciously under his
protection, has commanded that they hould be treated in
the fame manner as his other fubjeds and vaflals. You are
bound and obliged to ad in the fame manner. Therefore
I now entreat and require you to confider attentively what
I have declared to you; and that you may more perfectly
comprehend it, that you take such time as is reasonable,
in order that you may acknowledge the Church as the
fiperior and guide of the universe, and likewise the holy
father called the Pope, in his own right, and his majesty
by his appointment, as king and sovereign lord of these
islands, and of the Ticrra Firme; and that you content that
the aforcfaid holy fithers shall declare and preach to you
the doctrines above mentioned. If you do this, you ad
well, and perform that to which you are bound and obliged;
and his majesty, and I in his name , will receive you with
love and kindness , and will leave you, your wives and
children, free and exempt from servitude, and in the
enjoyment of all you possess, in the fame manner as the

inhabitants of the islands. Besides this, his majesty will
bestow upon you many privileges, exemptions, and rewards.
1But if you will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey
my inJuntion , then, with the help of God, I will entet
your country by force, I will carry on war against you with
the utinoft violence, 1 will fubjedt you to the yoke of
obedience to the church and the king, I will take your wives
and children, and will make them laves, and fell or dispose
of them according to his majesty's pleasure; I will seize
your goods, and do you all the mischief in my power, as
rebellious fubjedts, who will not acknowledge or fubiit to
their lawful sovereign. And I protest, that all the bloodshed
and calamities which shall follow are to be imputed to you,
and not to his majesty, or to me, or the gentlemen who
serve under me; and as I have now made this declaration
and requisition unto you I require the notary here present
to grant me a certificate of this, subscribed in proper
form. " Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 14.

NOTE XXIV. p. 24.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes, that of
the hundred and ninety men whom he took with him, there
were never above eighty fit for service at one time. So much
did they susser from hunger, fatigue, and sickness. Herrera,
dec. i. lib. x. c. 16. P. Mlart. decad. 2A6.

NOTE XXV. p. 27.

FONSECA , bishop of Palencia, the principal director of
American affairs, had eight hundred Indians in property;
the commendator Lope de Conchillos, his chief arociate
in that department, eleven hundred; and other favorites
had considerable numbers. They fnt overseers to the islands,
and hired out those slaves to the planters, Herr. dec. i.. lib.
ix. c. 14 . 32 .

NOTE XXVt. p. 294.

I THO UGH America is more plentiully fiipplied witl
water than the other regions of the globe, there is no river

or stream of water in Yucatan. This peninsula projets
from the continent a hundred leagues, but, where broadelt,
does not extend above twenty-five leagues. It is a fiat plain,
without mountains. The inhabitants are supplied with water
from pits, and wherever they dig them, find it in abund-
ance. It is probable, from all those circumltances, that
this country was formerly covered by the sea. Herrera
Defcriptio Indiz Occidentalis, p. 4. Hiftoire Naturelle,
par I. de Buffon, tom. i. p. 593

NOTE XXVII. p. 287.

M I. CLAVIGERO censures me for having represented the
Spaniards who failed with Cordova and Grijalva, as fancying,
in the warmth of their imagination, that they saw cities on
the coafi of Yucatan adorned with towers and cpolas. I
know not what translation of my history he has consulted,
(for his quotation from it is not taken from the original),
but I never imagined that any building erected by Americans
could suggest the idea of a cupola or dome, a ftrudture
which their utmost skill in architecture was incapable of
rearing. My words are, that they fancied the villages which
they saw from their ships " to be ciies adorned with towers
and pinacles. " By pinacles I meant some elevation above
the reft of the building; and the palTage is tranflatedalmoft
literally from Herrera. Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. . In almost all
the accounts of new countries given by the Spanish disco-
verers in that age, this warmth of admiration is conspicuous;
and led them to describe these new objects in the most
splendid terms. When Cordova and his companions first
beheld an Indian village of greater magnitude than any they
had beheld in the islands, they dignified it with the name
of Grand Cairo. B. Diaz, c. 2. From the fame cause
Grijalva and his associates thought the country along the
coast of which they held their course, entitled to the name
of New Spain.

END OF THE, 0-m VOLUME,

1,*, C 77
