'r H E

H I S T O R Y

OF

SCOTLAN D,

DURING THE REIGNS OF

QUEEN MARY, and of KING JAMES VI.

TILL

His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO

HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

TO WHICH IS NOW ADDED,

A concise State of the Controversy refpeEling Q. MARY,

Not in any former Edition of this Work.

VOLUME IL.

EDINBURGH:

. P'nted for C.MUDIE, J. ELDER, A. GUTHRIE, J. HUNTER, J. & J. FAIRBAIRN-

T. BAowN. J. ROBERTSON, and LAWRIE & SYMINGTON, Edinburgh;

W. COKE, Leith; and W. ANDERSON, Stirling.

Id DCCXCI.

THE great fame which our Author has so justly acquired in the

literary world, and the part he has taken in a matter of so much
importance in Scots history, seems to require some apology for
our attempt to elucidate the controversy refpefting Queen Mary,
a question which has long been an objet of political inquiry. Dr.
Robertfon's chara&er, as an hiflorian, is no doubt fufficient to es-
tablifh, or at least to give a very considerable weight to any ar-
gument he makes use of but in the present cafe, so many able.
writers have espoused the cause of Mary, that we thought it
necessary to give some account of what has been said by both
parties; and, if we have differed from our learned Author, we
hope that the reader will attribute it entirely to the force of evi-
dence lying on the other fide of the question. The Statement
which we have added to the present volume, contains the fum of
most of the arguments that have been used at any time upon the
fubje&, and indeed almost the whole that seem possible to be made
use of by either party. Partioular notice has been taken of the
assertions of Buchanan, and Lefly Bishop of Ross; who, being the
first that formally debated the cause, may reasonably be thought
to have almost exhausted what, at that time, could be urged upon
the fubje&. Succeeding events and discoveries, however, have
brought to light many dark tranfadions and machinations which
in those days were carefully concealed. These have now been
announced to the public by various elegant and splendid writ-
ers ; all of whom have been consulted on the present occasion;
so that, on the whole, the Editors hope that this edition will be
considered as the most valuable ever offered to the public, as it
supersedes, in a great measure, the necessity of recurring to many
volumes of considerable size, which our readers, perhaps, may
have neither time nor opportunity to peruse.

# BOOK SEVENTH.

'tHE

HISTORY

0 F

SCOTLAND.

BOOK SEVENTH.

CONTENTS.

THROOMORTON'S conspiracy. Designs of Mary's adherents. Severe proceed.

ings against the banished Lords. Against the Clergy. Conspiracy against
Elizabeth. Opposition to Mary. Gray, a new favourite. His interest.
Arran's corruption. Parry's conspiracy. Severe statute against Mary. A
league against Elizabeth. Her wife condua. Arran's power undermined.
The banished Lords return to Scotland. A parliament. Church affairs.
League with England. Babington's confpiracy.-Difcovered. Mary accu-
fed. Her domeflics and papers seized. Her trial. Her defence. Her fen-
tence confirmed by parliament. Elizabeth's dissimulation. France inter-
poles in behalf of Mary. James endeavours to save his mother. Mary's
sentence published. Mary treated with great rigour. James solicits in her
behalf. Of Elizabeth's anxiety. Warrant for Mary's execution signed.
Her behaviour at death. Her charafaer. Elizabeth endeavours to sooth James.
Disgrace of Gray. Annexation of church lands. Of the Lesser Barons. Of
the Spanilh armado. Condul of James on that occasion. ,A national cove-
nant. The armado defeated. Intrigues of Philip and the Popith nobles.
James's lenity to the conspirators. His marriage.

W HrILE Scotland was torn by those intestine fafions, Elizabeth BooKVIL
was alarmed with the rumour of a proje&t in agitation for setting L
Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheshire gentleman, Thg r-
was fufpeaed of being deeply concerned in the design, and on ton's con-
that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among his papers were fpilacy a-
found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in the kingdom, zabeth.
with an account of their situation, and of the depth of the water
in each ; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catholics in Eng-
land. This circumstance confirmed the suspicion against him,
and some dark and desperate conspiracy was supposed just ready
to break out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and de-
clared that the two papers were forged by the Queen's Miniflers,

Volume II. A

BooK VII. in order to intimidate or ensnare him ; and he even endured the

rack with the utmost fortitude. But being brought a second time

1584" to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not only

acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with the
Queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to invade
England. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnish troops,
and to condu& the enterprise. The Pope and King of Spain were
to supply the money, necessary for carrying it on; all the English
exiles were eager to take arms ; many of the Catholics at home
would be ready to join them, at their landing; Menduza the Spa.
nifh ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no
pains in fomenting the spirit of difaffe&ion among the English, or
in hastening the preparations on the Continent and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poffeflion. This confeffion he retracted at his trial;
returned to it again, after sentence was pafled upon him ; and re-
tra&ed it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our opi-

nion of this matter, by the light which time and history have
thrown upon the designs and charaders of the Princes of Guise,
many circumflances in Throgmorton's confeffion appear to be ex-
tremely remote from truth, or even from probability. The Duke
of Guise was, at that junaure, far from being in a situation to un-
dertake foreign conquests. Without either power or office at
court; hated by the King ; and persecuted by the favourites ; he
had no leisure for any thoughts of diflurbing the quiet of neigh-
bouring fiates, and his vaif and ambitious mind was wholly occu.
pied in laying the foundation of that famous league, which shook
the throne of France. But about the time Elizabeth dete&ed
this conspiracy, the close union between the house of Guise and
Philip II. was remarkable to all Europe, and as their great en.
terprife against Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
deavoured to conceal that under their threatenings to invade Eng-
land, Throgmorton's discovery appeared to be extremely probable;
and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently all the parties mention-
ed by him wished her downfal, thought that she could not guard
her kingdom with too much care. The indiscreet zeal of the

Deigns of English exiles increased her fears. Not satisfied with incessant
Mary's ad- outcries against her severity towards the Scottish Queen, and her
ga;nt Eli- cruel persecution of her Catholic fubje&s, nor thinking it enough
zabeth. that Qne Pope had threatened her with the sentence of excomuni-

Slolingfhed, 1370.

ration, and another had a&ually pronounced it, they now began BooK VII.
to disperse books and writings, in which they endeavoured to
persuade their disciples, that it would be a meritorious action to 1584.
take away her life; they openly exhorted the maids of honour to
treat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by such an illustrious
deed, to render their own names honourable and sacred in the
Church, throughout all future ages*. For all these reasons, Eli-
zabeth not only infliced the punishment of a traitor on Throg-
morton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador instantly to leave
England; and that she might be in no danger of being attacked
within the island, she determined to use her utmost efforts, in or-
der to recover that influence over the Scottish councils, which the
had for some time entirely loft. -

There were three different methods, by which Elizabeth might Sheendea-

hope to accomplish this; either by furnishing such effecual aid voursMre-
to the banished nobles, as would enable them to resume the chief influence in
direction of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Mary, taindArb
as might intimidate her son, who being now accustomed to govern, ran.
would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than resign the sceptre
or admit an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of
Arran, to secure the direcion of the King his master. The
last was not only the easiest, and fpeedieft, but the most certain
of success. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without lay-
ing the other two altogether aside. With this view, she sent
Davison, one of her principal secretaries, and a man of abilities
and address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hat-
ed by his own countrymen, and holding his power by the most
precarious of all tenures, the favour of a young prince, accepted
Elizabeth's offers without hesitation, and esteemed the acquifi-
tion of her prote&ion to be the most solid foundation of his own
greatness. Soon after, he consented to an interview with Lord August 3.
Hunfdane the Governor of Berwick, and being honoured with
the pompous title of Lieutenant General for the King, he appear.
ed at the place appointed, with a splendid train. In Hunfdane's
presence, he renewed his promises of an inviolable and faithful
attachment to the English interest, and assured him that James
should enter into no negociation, which tended to interrupt the
peace between the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth began to en-
tertain the fame fears and jealousies concerning the King's mar-
riage, which had formerly difquieted her with regard to his me-
;her's he undertook to prevent James from listening to any over-

* Camd 497.

BooK VII. ture of that kind, till he had previously obtained the Queen of

- England's consent*.
58^4* The banished Lords and their adherents soon felt the effeas of

Severe pro-
ceedings a Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
gainft the them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her Mini-
banished.
Lords. fiers were of opinion that she ought to employ her arms in de-

fence of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which
restrained James and his favourite, from proceeding to such ex-
tremities against them, as might have excited the pity or indig-
nation of the English, and have prompted them to exert them-
selves with vigour in their behalf. But every apprehension of
this kind being now removed, they ventured to call a parliament,

uguit22. in which an as was passed, attainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and

a great number of their followers. Their estates devolved to the
Crown, and according to the pradice of the Scottish Monarchs,
who were obliged to reward the fadion which adhered to them,
by dividing with it the spoils of the vanquished, James dealt out
the greater part of these to Arran, and his associates+.

Against the Nor was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. All mii
Clergy. nifters, readers, and profeffors in Colleges were enjoined to sub,.

scribe, within forty days, a paper teffifying their approbation of
the laws concerning the Church, ena&ed in last parliament.
Many, overawed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience;
others stood out. The flipends of the latter were, fequeflered,
some of the more aftive committed to prison, and numbers com-
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the
suspicion of aating from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those
who fuffered, acquired high reputation, by giving such convin-
cing evidence of their firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of
the Church were almost entirely suppressed. In some places, scarce
so many Ministers remained, as to perform the duties of religious
worship ; they soon funk in reputation among the people, and being
prohibited not only from discoursing of public affairs, but obliged,
by the jealousy of the adminifqration, to frame every sentiment and
expression in such a manner, as to give the court no offence, their
sermons were deemed languid, insipid, and contemptible. And
it became the general opinion, that together with the most vir-
tuous of the nobles, and the most faithful of the clergy, the power
and vigour of religion were now banished out of the kingdomt

,

Meanwhile, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitlefq

nogociations with the Queen of Scots, which it had become al

Cald. 3 491. Mclv. 3T5. See Append. No. IX.

SCald. 3- 527 Ibid. 589.

mnofi matter of form to renew every year. They served not on- EooK VII.
ly to amuse that unhappy princess with some profpe& of liberty; -
but furnished an apology for eluding the folicitations of foreign 1584.
powers in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by
fhewing him that she could, at any time, set free a dangerous ri-
val to dispute his authority. These treaties the fuffered to pro-
ceed to what length she pleased, and never wanted a pretence
for breaking them off, when they became no longer necessary.
The treaty now on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than ma-
ny which preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered it
ineffectual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scot- New con.

fpiracy a-

land, the ship on board of which he was a passenger happened to gainft Eli-
be chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infefled the narrow zabeth.
seas. Crichton in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in
his custody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary
accident, the wind blew them back into the Ihip, and they were
immediately taken up by some of the passengers, who carried them
to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great in-
duftry and patience, joined them together, and they were found
to contain the account of a plot, formed by the King of Spain,
and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The people were
not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the
conspiracy, .in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and as
his discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by additional evi-
dence, not only all their former apprehensions recurred, but the
consternation became general and excessive. As all the dangers,
with which England had been threatened for some years, flowed
either immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who made
use of her name to juffify their infurrefdions and conspiracies, this
gradually diminished the compassion due to her situation, and the
English, infltead of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
beth, under whose wife and pacific reign the English enjoyed
tranquillity; and had opened sources of wealth unknown to their
ancestors, was extremely beloved by all her people, and regard
to her safety, not less than to their own interest, animated them
against the Scottith Queen. In order to discourage her adherents, Occasions
it was thought necessary to convince them, by some public deed, an atrocia.

tion in op-

of the attachment of the Englifl to their own Sovereign, and position to
that any attempt against her life would prove fatal to her rival. Vary.
With this view, an Afjociation was framed, the subscribers of oalober iT.
ywhich bound themf-rves by the mcft solemn oaths, " to defend

BooK VIT. " the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and domeflici and

" if violence should be offered to her life, in order to favour the

+84" " title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only engaged

44 never to allow or acknowledge the person, or persons, by
" whom, or for whom, such a detestable a& thould be commit-
" ted, but vowed, in the presence of the Eternal God, to prose-
" cute such person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue them,
" with their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow and ex.
" tirpation *." Persons of all ranks subscribed this combination,
with the greatest eagerness and unanimity f.

Which Mary considered this combination, not only as an avowed de-
gread'ya- a1a-.er. sign to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the certain

and immediate forerunner of her deftruaion. In order to avert
this, file made such feeble efforts as were fill in her power, and
sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers of more entire re.
fignation to the will of Elizabeth, in all points, which had been
the occasion of their long enmity, than her past fufferings had
been hitherto able to extort t. But whether Mary adhered in-
flexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sovereign, or yield-
ing to the necessity of her situation, endeavoured, by concessions,
to sooth her rival, the was equally unfuccesful. Her firmness
was imputed to obflinacy,'or to the secret hope of foreign assist-
ance; her concessions were either believed to be infiacere, or to
flow from the fear of some present danger. Her willingness,
however, to comply with any terms was so great, that Walfing.
ham warmly urged his mifirefs to come to a final agreement
with her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that it was the spirit
raised by the association, which had rendered her so passive and
compliant. She always imagined that there was something my-
fierious and deceitful in all Mary's aaions, and fufpe&ed her of
carrying on a dangerous correspondence with the English Catho-
lics, both within and without the kingdom. Nor were her sus-
pieions altogether void of foundation. Mary had, about this
time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to
hasten the execution of what she calls the Great plot or Def/in-
ment, without hesitating on account of any danger in which it
might involve her life, which she would most willingly part with,
if, by that sacrifice, (he could procure relief for so great a num-

WShe is treat- ber of the oppressed children of the Church jl. Instead, there-
ed with
gnrater ri- fore, of hearkning to the overtures which the Scottish Queen

gour. * State Trials, i. 122. t Canr. 499. l Id. ibid.

f Strype, 3. 246.

made, or granting any mitigation of the hardihips of vwhich she Boox Vu.
complained, Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and I584"
Sir Drue Drury, to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged
his trust with great fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the
fame time, had treated Mary with gentleness and refpea, and
had always sweetened har(h commands, by the humanity, with
which he put them in execution. The fame politeness was not
to be expeded from men of an inferior rank, whole severe vigi-
lance, perhaps, was their chief recommendation to that employ-
ment, and the only merit, by which they could pretend to gain
favour or preferment *.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the banibh- Gray,i

ed nobles of Elizabeth's prote&ion, he appointed the Master of "new fav"n
Gray his ambassador to the court of England, and intrufted him King's.
with the condua of a negociation for that purpose. An honour
for which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl
of Arran. Gray poffeffed all the talents of a courtier; a grace-
ful person, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a reft-
less and intriguing spirit. During his residence in France, he
had been admitted into the molt intimate familiarity with the
Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his favour, had renounced
the Protestant Religion, and profeffed the utmost zeal for the cap-
tive Queen, who carried on a secret correspondence with him,
from which she expected great advantages. On his return into
Scotland, he paid court to James with extraordinary assiduity,
and his accompliflhments did not fail to make their usual impref-
sion on the King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him, began
quickly to dread his growing favour, and flattering himself, that
absence would efface any sentiments of tenderness from the mind
of a young prince, pointed him out by his malicious praises, as
the molt proper person in the kingdom, for an embassy of such
importance ) and contributed to raise him to that high dignity,
in order to hasten his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable
dexterity in discovering the proper infiruments for carrying on
her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and by presents, to secure
Gray to her interest. The former flattered his vanity, which
was great; the latter fupplycd his profufenefs, which was still
greater. He abandoned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's
directions, and not only undertook to preserve the King under
the influence of England, but aded as a spy upon the Scottith

* Camd. 500.

BooK VII Queen, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could

- draw from her, by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.

Si584s Gray's credit with the English court was extremely galling to

with the the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing
court of her power to reflore them; she found it easy to govern Scotland,

by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with
Gray's folicitations, she commanded the exiles to leave the north

Decerm. 31. of England, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This

rendered it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with
their partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible to return thither
without her perminlion. Gray, by gaining a point which James
had so much at heart, rivetted himself more firmly than ever in
his favour; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable
of serving Elizabeth with greater success f.

1585. Arran had now poffeffed, for some time, all the power, the

Arran'scor- riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could de-
Fnmtion, and
ij ence, fire, or the fondness of a prince, who set no limits to his liberali-

ty towards his favourites, could befllow. The office of Lord
Chancellor, the highest and most important in the kingdom, was
conferred upon him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll,
who fuccedeed Athol in that dignity . And the public beheld,
with alaonifhnment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of
fortune, ignorant of law, and a contemner of jufice, appointed to
preside in parliament, in the privy council, in the court of fef-
sion, and intrufted with the supreme disposal of the property of his
fellow fubje&s. He was, at the fame time, Governor of the caf-
tles of Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scot-
land; Provost of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all these
accumulated dignities his merit had not been fufficiently recom-
penfed, he was created Lieutenant General over the whole
kingdom. No person was admitted into the King's presence
without his permission; nio favour could be obtained but by his
mediation. James, occupied with youthful amusements, devolv-
ed upon him the whole regal authority. Such unmerited ele-
vation increased his natural arrogance, and rendered it intoler-
able. He was no longer content with the condition of a fubje&,
but pi etended to derive his pedigree from Murdo Duke of Alba-
ny, and boasted, openly, that his title to the crown was prefer-
able to that of the King himnfelf. EBt, together with these
thoughts of royalty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his pri-

Strype, 3. 302. Melv. 316.

t Crawf. Offic. of State, App. 447. - Cald. 3. 643.

hnitive slate. His venality as a judge was scandalous, and was Boox VII.
-exceeded only by that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, '' '
made herself a party in almost every question which came to be i585.
decided, employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe the
judges, and almost openly di&ated their decisions*. His rapaci-
oufnefs as a minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the reve-
nues of so many offices; with the estate and honours which be-
longed to the house of Hamilton ; or with the greater part of
Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his share; he grasped at the
poffeffions of several of the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell
to exchange part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil;
and because he was unwilling -to quit an ancient inheritance for
a poffeffion so precarious, he stirred up against him, his old rival,
the Laird of Johnffon, and involved that corner of the kingdom
in a civil war. He committed to prison, the Earl of Athole,
Lord Home, and the Mafler of Caffils; the firfi, because he
would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the Earl of Gowrie,
and entail his estate on him; the second, because he was unwil-
ling to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his estates ; and
the third, for refusing to lend him money. His spies and in-
formers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves into
every company. The nearest neighbours difIrufled and feared
each other. All familiar society was at an end. Even the com-
mon intercourfes of humanity were interrupted, no man knowing
in whom to confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is
not perhaps in hiflory, any example of a minister so universally
detestable to a nation, or who more juffly deserved its detefta-

tion f.

Arran, notwithiflanding, regardless of the sentiments, and de-

fpifing the murmers of the people, gave a ioofe to his natural tem-
per, and proceeded to aas still more violent. David Home of
Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banished Lords, about private'bufinefs, were condemn-
ed and put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels.
Cunninghame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gen-
tlemen of honour and reputation, were accused of having confpi-
red, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A single
witness only appeared; the evidence they produced of their inno-
cence was unanswerable ; their accuser himself not long after ac-
knowledged that he had been suborned by Arran ; and all men

* Cald. 3. 331. Scotflarvet'. S&aggering State, 7.
t Spots 337, 333.
Volume II. B

Boi V1. believed the charge against them to be groundless: they were

found guilty, notwithfianding, and fuffered the death of traitors*.

February 9. About the fame time, that these gentlemen were punished for a
IParry'scon- pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was endangered by a real one.

raftiya- Parry, a Do&or of laws, and a member of the House of Commons,

zabeth, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit, had lately been re-

conciled to the Church of Rome, and fraught with the zeal of a
new convert, he offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his attach-
ment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Elizabeth.
Cardinal Allen had publifhted a book, to prove the murder of an ex-
communicated Prince to be not only a lawful, but a meritorious
a&ion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both there and
at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the design. The Pope
himself exhorted him to persevere; and granted him, for his en-
couragement, a plenary indulgence, and remission of his fins. Car-
dinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But though
he-often got access to the Queen, fear, or some remaining sense of
duty, restrained him from perpetrating the crime. Happily, his in-
tention was at last discovered by Nevil, the only person in Englandi
to whom he had communicated it ; and he himself having voluntarily

starch 4, confeffed his guilt, he fuffered the punifliment which it deserved-.
A severe These repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened

tterov- the indignation of the English Parliament, and produced a very

ed fatal to extraordinary statute, which, -in the end, proved fatal to the
Mary. Queen of Scots. By this law the Association in defence of Eli-

zabeth's life was ratified, and it was further ena&ed; " that if
" any rebellion lhall be excited in the kingdom, or any thing
" attempted to the hurt of her Majefty's person, by or for any
" person pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen shall em-
" power twenty four persons, by a commitfion under the great
" feal, to examine into, and pass sentence upon such offences;
" and after judgment given, a proclamation shall be issued, de-
" daring the persons whom they find guilty, excluded from any
" right to the Crown ; and her Majefty's fubjeds may lawfully
" pursue every one of them to the death, with all their aiders
" and abettors. And if any design against the life of the Queen
" take effe&, the persons, by or for whom, such a detestable at
" is executed, and their ifTues, being any wife assenting or privy
" to the fame, shall be disabled .for ever from pretending to
" the Crown, and be pursued to death in the like manner I."
This a& was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots; and whe.

SSpotfw. 338. Caldv 3. 794. f State Trials, Vol. x, io3. , t lbid. x23.

ther we confider it as a voluntary expreffien of the zeal and con- BooK VII.
cern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we impute *
it to the influence, which that artful Princess preserved over her I-85.
parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles of juflice, or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered
accountable not only for her own actions, but for those of others;
in consequence of which, flie might forfeit her right of fuccef-
sion, and even her life itself.

Mary jufily considered this a&, as a warning to prepare for the The rigour

worst extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had re- fih wias
solved, by this time, to take away her life; and fuffered books treated, in
to be published, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel creased.
and unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but just *.
Even that short period of her days which remained, they render-
ed uncomfortable, by every hardfllhip, and indignity, which it was
in their power to inflict. Almost all her servants were dismiss-
ed; the was treated no longer with the refpea due to a Queen;
and though the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had brok-
en her conflitution, the was confined to two ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer, by reason of
cold. Notwithstanding the scantiness of her revenue, she had
been accustomed to distribute regularly some alms among the poor
in the village adjoining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her
liberty to perform this pious and humane office, which had afford-
ed her great consolation, amidst her own fufferings. The cafile,
in which the resided, was converted into a common prison; and
a young man fufpeaed of Popery, was confined there, and treat-
ed with such rigour, under her eye, that he died of the ill usage.
She often complained to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries,
and expoftulated as became a woman, and a Queen; but as no
political reason now obliged that Princess to amuse her any longer
with fallacious hopes, far from granting her any redress, she did
not even deign to give her any answer. The King of France,
closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for assistance,
was afraid of espousing Mary's cause, with any warmth ; and all
his folicitations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and ineffica-
cious. But Caftelnau, the French ambassador, whose compaflion
and zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the defeas in his in-
Efru&ions, remonstrated with such vigour against the indignities,
to which the was exposed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed
at length to have her removed to Tuthbury ; though The was

* Strype, 3. 299.

BOOK VII. confined, the greater part of another winter, in her present

wretched habitation*.

Abreach Neither the insults of her enemies, nor the neglect of her
b tween friends, made such an impression on Mary, as the ingratitude of
Nlarv and
her oin. her son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpe&,

and had even enterecd into negociations with her, which gave
umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this
good correspondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return
into Scotland, found his favour with the king greatly increased
by the success of his embassy, persuaded him to write a harsh and
undutiful letter to his mother, in which he expressly refused
to acknowledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider
his affairs as connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel re-
quital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-

March-24. row and despair. " Was it for this, said she, in a letter to the

" French ambassador, that I have endured so much, in order to
" preserve for him the inheritance, to which I have a just right?
" I am far from envying his authority in Scotland. I desire no
" power there; nor wiih to set my foot in that kingdom, if it
" were not for the pleasure of once embracing a son, whom I
" have hitherto loved with too tender affeclion. Whatever he
" either enjoys, or expecls, he derived it from me. From him,
" I nevcr received affiftanee, supply, or benefit of any kind.
" Let not my allies treat him any longer as a King; he holds
' that dignity by my confenti and if a speedy repentance does
" not appease my jitft resentment, I will load him with a parent's
" curse, and farrender my Crown, with all my pretensions, to
" one, who will receive them, with gratitude, and defend them
" with vigour+-." The love which James bore to his mother,
whom he had never known, nay whom he had been early taught
- t: confider as the most abandoned person of her sex, cannot be

supposed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
pains to iegain her favour. But whether her indignation at his
undutiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Pope-
ry, prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of disinheriting
her son ; or whether these threatenings were uttered in a fuddea
sally of disappointed affedion ; it is now no easy matter to deter-
mine. Some papers which are till extant seem to render the
former not improbable 1.

Dangerous Cares of another kind, and no less disquieting, occupied Eliza-
fitaition of beth's thoughts. The calm, which (he had long enjoyed, seemed
t'lizaberi,

? Jtbb, Y.2. 576-98. f Ibid . 57 1. See Append. No. X. j Ib. No. XI,

mow to be at an end ; and such florms were gathering in every Boor vii.
quarter, as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring na-
tions had undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. I 585
The great qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his
youth, and which railfed the expetations of his subjects so high,
vanished on his ascending the throne ; and his acquiring fu-
preme power seems not only to have corrupted his heart, but to
have impaired his underflanding. He soon loit the efleem and
affeaion of the nation; and a life, divided between the aufleri-
ties of a superstitious devotion and the extravagancies of the
molt dissolute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible, as he
was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his profusion, and the
fondness with which he doated on two unworthy minions. On
the death of his only brother, those sentiments of the people burst
out with violence. Henry had no children, and though but thir-
ty-two years of age, the fucceflion of the Crown was already con-
fidered as open. The King of Navarre, a diflant descendent of from the
the royal family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was progress of

the league;

a zealous Protestant. The profpea of an event, so fatal to
their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France, alarm-
ed all the Catholics in Europe. And the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romifli faith, and the affertor of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. 'In order to unite
the party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diflinguilbed by
the name of the 11-y League. All ranks of men joined in it wxith
emulation. The spirit spread with the irresistible rapidity, which
was natural to religious paflions, ia that age. The detlruaion of
the Reformation not only in France, but all ever Europe, seem-
ed to be the ohjed and with of the whole party. And the Duke
of Guise, the head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired au-
thority in the kingdom, far superior to that, which the King
himself poffif'ed. Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had from the
greatly increased the naval power of Spain, and had at last redu- Powcr o
ced under his dominion that portion of the Continent, wshich lies Ihilip I.
beyond the Pyrenean mountains, and which nature seems to have
deflined to form one great Monarchy. William Prince of 0-
range, who first encouraged the inhabitants of the Netherlands
to assert their liberties, and whose wisdom and valour formed and
proteaed the rising commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of
an affaffin. The superior genius of the Prince of Parma had
given an entire turn to the fate of the war in the Low Countries;

Booiz VI. all hit enterprises concerted with consummate skill, and execut.
1 V ed with equal bravery, had been attended with uninterrupted sue.
1585. cess; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on the

point of falling under the dominion of their ancient master.

lHer wife None of those circumflances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto
'ndvigo- owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no ad-
rous con-
dust. vantage from the jealousy, which had subsisted between France

and Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Gtiife, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms.
The Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the
league and little could be expe&ed from any diversion they
might create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long occupy the arms, or divide the strength of Spain. In this
situation of the affairs of Europe, it became neceflary for Eliza.
beth to form a new plan of condut& and her wisdom in forming
it, was not greater than the vigour, with which she carried it on.
The measures, most suitable to her natural temper, and which
she had hitherto pursued, were cautious and safe; those, she now
adopted, were enterprising and hazardous. She preferred peace,
but was not afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by
necessity, not only of defending herself with spirit, but of attack-
ing her enemies with a boldness, which averted danger from her
own dominions. She immediately furnished the Hugonots with a
considerable supply in money. She carried on a private negocia-
tion with Henry III. who though compelled to join the league,
hated the leaders of it, and wilTied for their deftrudion. She
openly undertook the protedion of the Dutch commonwealth, and
sent a powerful army to its assistance. She endeavoured to form
a general confederacy of the Protestant Princes, in opposition to

~tef'olvto the Popi(h league. She determined to proceed with the utmost
punilh Ma- rigour against the Queen of Scots, whose fufferings and rights as-
ry, and to
gainthe forded her enemies a specious pretence for invading her domi-
King. nions. She resolved to redouble her endeavours in order to effeft

a closer union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate her
influence over the councils of that nation.

She found it no difficult matter to induce most of the Scottish

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary, which his
brother formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Justice Clerk,

tmay 29 who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at London, were

the persons in whom flie chiefly confided. In order to dire& and
quicken their motions, flhe'difpatched Sir Edward Wotton along

wvith Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, BOOK VII.
and entertaining; he excelled in all the exercises, for which 8
James had a passion ; and amused the young King, by relating Is85.
the adventures he had met with, and the observations he had
made, during a long residence in foreign countries; but under
the veil of these superficial qualities, he concealed a dangerous
and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high favour with James,
and while he was seemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-
fions, he acquired influence over the public councils, to a degree
which it was indecent for a stranger to possess *.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to the nation, Proposes a

than the proposal he made of a firil alliance between the two seague it
kingdoms, in defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid and
alarming progress of the Popish league seemed to call on all Pro-
teftant princes, to unite for the preservation of their common faith.
James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention of July9g.
estates empowered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament f. The alacrity, with which James con-
curred in this meafore, muff not be wholly ascribed either to his
own zeal, or to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to Eli-
zabeth's liberality. As a mark of her motherly affe&ion for the
young King, she fettled on him an annual peufion of five thousand
pounds; the fame fum which her father had allotted her, before
she ascended the throne. This circumstance, which she took care
to mention, rendered a fum, which in that age was far from be-
ing inconsiderable, a very 'acceptable present to the King, whose
revenues, during a long minority, had been almost totally diffi-
pated t.

But the chief obje& of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Ar- Undermines

ran. While a minion, so odious to the nation, continued to go- Arran's
vern the King, his assistance could be of little advantage to Eli-
zabeth. And though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunt-
dane, had appeared extremely zealous for her interest, she could
place no great confidence in a man, whose condud was so capri-
cious and irregular, and who, notwithflanding his proteflations to
the contrary, still continued a secret correspondence both with
Mary, and with the Duke of Guise. The baniflhed Lords were at-
tached to England from affefion, as well as principle, and were
the only persons among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exi-
gency, the could thoroughly trust. Befcie Bellcnden left Lon-
4lon, they had been summoned thither, undcr colour of vindicat-

* Melv. 3i71 f Spotfw. 33. i Wd. 3. 7

BOOK vI." ting themselves from his accusations, but, in reality, to concert

with him the most proper measures for refloring them to their
country. Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen
it for execution; and it was greatly facilitated by an event, neis
ther uncommon nor considerable. Sir John Forfier, and Ker of
Ferniherft, the English and Scottith wardens of the middle
marches, having met, according to the cuffom of the borders,
about Midsummer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffel, the Earl of
Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This fcuffle was
purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design
formed by Ker, at the infligation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them thould be de-
livered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he
was obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aber-

Afllftsthe deen. During his absence from court, Wotton and his affoci-
baniflld ates carried on their intrigues without interruption. By their
robles advice, the banished nobles endeavoured to accommodate their

differences with Lord John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of' Cha-
telherault's two sons, whom Morton's violence had driven out of
the kingdom. Their common fufferings, and common interest,
induced both parties to bury in oblivion the ancient discord,
which had subsisted between the houses of Hamilton and Douglas.

Oab 2r f6. By Elizabeth's permission, they returned in a body to the borders

of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered favour, insisted
on putting the kingdom in a posture of defence. But Gray, Bel-
lenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued ; others they
rendered ineffcclual, by the manner of execution; and all of them
were obeyed slowly, and with reluctance *.

WVotton's fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the design
was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the punishment his
treachery merited, he departed without taking leaves.

They r- Meanwhile, the banished Lords hastened the execution of their

,m i,,to enterprise; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join
and are re- them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were
'theKin to welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the most ser-

vent prayers were put up to heaven, for the success of their arms.
They advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at
the head of ten thoufaud men. The King, though he had as-

* Spotfv. 540. t M'Ielv. 335

fembled an army superior in number, could not venture to meet BooK VII.
them in the field, with troops, whose loyalty was extremely du-
bious, and who, at best, were far from being hearty in the cause;
nor was either the town or castle provided for a siege. The
gates, however, of both were shut, and the nobles encamped at
St. Ninians. That fame night they surprised the town, or more Nov. 2.
probably it was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself by a preci-
pitate flight. Next morning they invested the castle, in which
there were not provisions for twenty-four hours ; and James was
necessitated immediately to hearken to terms of accommodation,
They were not so elated with success, as to urge extravagant de-
mands, nor was the King unwilling to make every reasonable
concession. They obtained a pardon, in the mofi ample form, of
all the offences, they had committed ; the principal forts in the
kingdom were, by way of security put into their hands ; Craw-
ford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were removed from the
King's presence ; and a parliament was called, to eflablifh tran-
quillity in the nation *.

Though a great majority in this parliament consisted of the A parlia.

confederate nobles and their adherents, they were far from dif- ment.

Decent, ir.

covering a vindicfive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an as, re-
floring them to their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying
the pardon granted by the King, they seemed willing to forget
all patll errors in the adminifIration, and spared James the mor-
tification of feeing his ministers branded with any public note of
infamy. Arran, alone, deprived of all his honours, firipped of
his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his country by
public proclamation, funk back into obscurity, and must hence-
foith, be mentioned by his primitive title of Captain Jt.mes
Stewart. As he had been, during his unmerited prosperity, the
obje& of the hatred and indignation of his countrymen, they be-
held his fall without pity, nor did all his fuffTcrings mitigate their
resentment in the least degree.

The Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no re- Church a&

dress of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate f
nobles had, all along, affeaed to be considered as guardians of
the privileges and dilcipline of the Church. In all their manui-
sestos they had declared their resolution to restore these, and by
that popular pretence, had gained many friends. It was now na-
tural to exped some fruit of these promises, and some returas of

* Call. 3. 795

i'l/ame II. C

EooK VII. gratitude towards many of the most eminent preachers, who had

fuffered in their cause, and who demanded the repeal of the laws

1585. passed the preceding year. The King, however, was resolute to

maintain these laws in full authority; and as the nobles were ex-
tremely solicitous not to difgufl him, by infifling on any disagree-
able request, the claims of the Church in this, as well as in ma-
ny former inflances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
The vlinifters gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and
their impatience under the disappointment broke out in some ex-
preffions, extremely difrefpedful even towards the King himself*.

1586. The Archbilhop of St. Andrew's too, felt the effecs of their

'anger. The Provincial Synod of Fife summoned him to appear,
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Affemb.
lies, in presuming to excercife the funcion of a Bishop. And
though he refused to acknowledge the jurifdiaion of the court,
and appealed from it to the King, afentence of excommunication,

April 13. equally indecent and irregular, was pronounced against him.

Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal
excommunication againil Melvil, and some other of his oppo-

nents.

Soon 'after, a General Assembly was held, in which the King,

with some difficulty, obtained an adt, permitting the name and
ofilce of a Bishop flill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched. The exercise of
diiIipline, and the infpe&ion of the life and docrine of the Cler-
gy, were committed to Prefbyteries, in which Bishops flhould be
allowed no other pre-eminence, buit that of presiding as perpetual
moderators. They themselves were declared to be fubjef, in the
fame manner as other pastors, to the jurifdiion of the General As-
fembly. And as the discussion of the Archbiflhop's appeal might have
kindled unusual heats in the Assembly, that affair was terminated
by a compromise. He renounced any claim of supremacy over the
Church, and promised to demean himself suitably to the charaaer
of a Bishop, as described by St. Paul. The Assembly, without
examining the foundations of the sentence of excommunication,
declared that it should be held of no effed, and restored him to
-all the privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
*-Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness shewn for the hon-
'our of the fyond, and the delicacy and refpe&, with which its
jurifdidion was treated, several members were so zealous as to
protest against this decifiont

* Spotfw, 343.

- Cald. 3. 894. Spotfw. 346.

The court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so warmly BooK VII.

attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two king- "
doms, proposed last year, met with no interruption, but from A league
D'Efneval the French Envoy. James himself first proposed to with Eng-

land con-

renew the negociation. Elizabeth' did not fuffer such a favour- cluded.
able opportunity to flip, and inflantly dispatched Randolph to
conclude a treaty, which she so much desired. The danger to July 5.
-which the Proteflant religion was exposed, by the late combina-
tion of the Popish powers for its deftrudion, and the necefllity of a
'lril confederacy among those who had embraced the Recforma-
tion, in order to obftru& their pernicious designs, were mentioned
as the foundation of the league. The chief aiticles in it were,
that both parties should bind themselves to defend the Evangelic
Religion; that the league should be ofl'enfive and defensive a-
gainft all, who flhall endeavour to diflurb the exercise of religion
in either kingdom; that if one of the two parties be invaded, the
other, notwithstanding any former alliance, flould not directly or
indirectly assist the invader; that if England be invaded in any
part remote from Scotland, James should assist the Queen with two
thousand horse, and five thousand foot that if the enemy landedor
approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the King fliould take
the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as he would
do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return, under-
took to ad in defence of Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the
fame time, she assured the King that no step (hould be taken,
which might derogate in any degree sorn his pretensions to the
English Crown *. Elizabeth exprefftd great fatisfa&ion with a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an nfeful ally, inflead of a dan-
gerous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that
fide, which all her anceflors had aimed at, but none of them had
been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the blessings
of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable
period, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that
the King's condut was universally acceptable to his own people-t.

The acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, exposed James

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged in
the conspiracy against the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton, and Binny one of his own servants, who fuffered for that
crime, had accused him of being present at the murder S. He had
escaped punishment by flying into England, and James had often
required Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her pro-

SSpotfw. 3.51. -f Camd. 513.  See Append. No. XII.

C ij

BOOK VII. te&ion. He now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to

86 return into Scotland; and after undergoing a mock trial, calcu.

lated to conceal rather than to dctea his guilt,,he was not only
taken into favour by the King, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable chara&er of his ambassador. James
Was now of such an age, that his youth and inexperience cannot
be pleaded in excuse for this indecent tranfafion. It must be
imputed to the excessive facility of his temper, which often led
him to gratify his courtiers, at the expence of his own dignity
and reputation *.

Rife ofEa Not long after, the inconsiderate affecion of the English Ca.
confpiracv tholics towards Mary, and their implacable resentment against
againflt Eli- Elizabeth, gave rife to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the

one Queen, left an indelible slain on the reputation of the other,
and presented a fpeaacle to Europe, of which there had hitherto
been no example in the history of mankind.

Do&or Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priests educat-

ed in the seminary at Rhiems, had adopted an extravagant and
enthusiastic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth
wvas dicated immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion
they inflilled into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted
for his furious zeal, and daring courage; and persuaded him that
no service could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the

ApEIl 5. life of an excommunicated heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the

crown of martyrdom, bound himself, by a solemn vow, to kill
Elizabeth. Ballard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza the Spanish ambassador
there, to procure an invafiont of England, while the affairs of the
league were so prosperous, and the kingdom left naked by fend-
ing so many of the Queen's best troops into the Netherlands.
Paget and the Engliih exiles demonfhtated the fruitlessness of such
an attempt, unless Elizabeth were first cut off, or the invaders
secured of a powerful concurrence on their landing, If it could
be hoped that either of these events would happen, effeaual aid
was promised; and in the mean time Ballard was sent back to

4May r rtenew his intrigues.

He communicated his defigas to Anthony Babington, a young

gentleman in Derbyshire, of a plentiful fortune, and many ami-
able qualities) who having contra&ed, during his residence in
France, a familiarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had been
recommended by him to the Queen of Scots. He concurre4

4p0ots 348. Cald.3.9i7.

with Paget in considering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary rooK VII.
preliminary to any invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an
end would soon be put to her days, and imparted to him Savage's 1586,
vow, who was now in London waiting' for an opportunity to strike
the blow. But Babington thought the attempt of too much im-
portance, to rely on a single hand for the execution of it, and
proposed that five resolute gentlemen should be joined with Sa-
vage in an enterprise, the success of which, was the foundation of
tall their hopes. lie offered to find out persons willing to under-
take the service, whose honour, secrecy, and courage, they might
safely trust. He accordingly opened the matter to Edward
WVindfor, Thomas Sal:fbury, Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne,
Robert Gage, John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dua, John Jones, and Polly, all of them, except Polly,
whose bustling forward zeal introduced him into their society,
gentlemen of good families, united together in the bonds of pri-
vate friendthip, flrengthened by the more powerful tie of reli-
gious zeal. Many consultations were held; their plan of opera- June.
tions was at lalt fettled ; and their different parts assigned. Ba- Thefchemr
hington himself was appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Sa- she con.
lifbury, with fame others, undertook to excite several counties
to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the most dangerous and
important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with
four associates. And so totally had their bigotted prejudices ex-
tinguifhed the principles of honour, and the sentiments of huma-
nity, suitable to their rank, that without scruple or compunaion,
they undertook an adion, which is viewed with horror, even
when committed by the meanest and most profligate of mankind.
This attempt, on the contrary, appearcd to them no less honour-
able than it was desperate, and in order to perpetuate the memo-
ry of it, they had a pidure drawn containing the portraits of the
fix afaffins, with that of Babington in the middle, and a motto
intimating that they were jointly embarked in some hazardous
diefign.

The conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in- Dircovere4

fiance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce possible, by Wal-
and neither distrusted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubt-
ed the success of their undertaking. But while they believed
that their machinations were carried on with the most profound
and impenetrable secrecy, every flep they took was fully known
to Walsingham. Polly was one of his fpics, and had entered into
the conspiracy with no other design than to betray his associates,

BOOK VII. Gilbert Gifford, too, having been sent over to England to quick-

S' en the motions of the conspirators, had been gained by Walfing.

1386. ham, and gave him sure intelligence of all their projecs. That

vigilant minifler immediately imparted the discoveries which he
had made to Elizabeth i and without communicating the matter
to any other of the counsellors, they agreed, in order to under-
fland the plot more perfealy, to wait till it was ripened into
some form, and brought near the point of execution.

They are At lafi, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to ex-
seized and
punil ed poSe her own life, and to tempt providence any farther. Bal-
August 4. lard, the prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrefled.

His associates, disconcerted and struck with aflonifhment, endea-
voured to save themselves by flight. But within a few days, all
of them, except Windsor, were seized in different places of the
kingdom, and comrmitted to the Tower. Though they had under
taken the part, they wanted the firm and determined spirit of as.
faffins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, discovered all they
knew. The indignation of the people, and their impatience to
revenge such an execrable combination against the life of their
Sovereign, hastened their trial, and all of them fuffered the death

Sept. 20 of traitors *.
Mary is ac. Thus far Elizabeth's condua may be pronounced both prudent
cufed ofbe-
ing an ac- and laudable, nor can she be accused of violating any law of hu-
complice in manity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were neceffia-
the confpi-
racy. ry for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard

to which, posterity will pass a very different judgment.

The frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts fufficiently

for all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But
this was not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Miniflers
chose to place the conspiracy. They represented Babington and
his associates to be instruments employed by the Queen of Scots,
the real though secret author of so many attempts against the life
of Elizabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They produced
letters, which they ascribed to her, in support of this charge.
These, as they gave out, had come into their hands, by a very
singular and mysterious method of conveyance. Gifford, on his
return into England, had been intrufled with letters to Mary;
but in order to make a trial of his fidelity or address, they were
only blank papers made up in that form. These being safely de-
livered, he was afterwards employed without farther scruple. By
Walfingham's permiflion, and the connivance of Paulet, he bribed

* Camd. 515. State Trials, Vol. i. Iso.

a tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whither Mary toox VII.
had been conveyed, who deposited the letters in a hole in the
wall of the castle, covered with a loose stone. Thence they i586.
were taken by the Queen, and in the fame manner, her answers
returned. All these were carried to Walsingham, opened by
him, decyphered, sealed again so dexterously, that the fraud
could not be perceived, and then transmitted to the persons to
whom they were dire&ed. Two letters to Babington, with several
to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the Englilh fugitives, were
procured by this artifice. It was given out that in these letters
Mary approved of the conspiracy, and even of the affaffination ;
that the direded them to proceed with the utmost circumfpec-
tion, and not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to
join them that she recommended the Earl of Arundel, his bro-
thers, and the young Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons
to condu& and to add reputation to their enterprise ; that she
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame time some commo-
tion in Ireland ; and above all, besought them to concert with
care the means of her escape, fuggefling to them several expedi-
ents for that purpose.

All these circumirances were opened at the trial of the confpi, The indig-

nation of

rators. And while the nation was under the influence of those the Englith
terrors which the association had raised, and the late danger had againt her

on that ac-

augmented, they were believed without hesitation or inquiry, and count.
spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her religion was well
known ; and in that age, examples of the violent and fanguina-
ry spirit which it inspired, were numerous. All the cabals a-
gainft the peace of the kingdom for many years had been carri-
ed on in her name; and it now appears evidently, said the Eng-
lifh, that the safety of the one Queen is incompatible with that
of the other. Why then, added they, flould the tranquillity of
England be sacrificed for the fake of a stranger ? Why was a
life so dear to the nation exposed to the repeated assaults of an
exasperated rival ? The cafe supposed in the association, has now
happened, the sacred peifon of our Sovereign has been threaten-
ed, and why flhould not an injured people execute that just re-
venge which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to Eliza- Elizalth

resolves to

beth and her Ministers. They themselves had at first propagated proceed to
them among the people, and they now served both as an apology, the utmost

Sextrenvutes

and a motive, for their proceeding to such extremities against againfit her.
the Scottish Queen, as they had long meditated. The more in-

Boo;: VII. juries Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the more she feared and hated

that unhappy Queen, and came at last to be persuaded that there

1586. could be no other security for her own life, but the death of her

rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted so zealously all
her measures with regard to Scottish affairs; and had a&ed, with
so little reserve, in opposition to Mary ; that they had reason to
dread the most violent effeas of her resentment, if ever fte would
mount the throne of England; and therefore they endeavoured
to hinder an event so fatal to themselves, by confirming their
Miftrefs's fear and hatred of the Scottifli Queen.

Her domes- Meanwhile, Mary was guarded with tnufual vigilance, and
&c. are great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the
seized. conspiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last tent from court, to

acquaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which she
was loaded as acoeffory to that crime ; and he surprised her with
the account, just as the had got on horseback to ride out along
with her keepers. She was struck with aftoniflnment, and would
have returned to her apartment. But she was not permitted;
and in her absence, her private closet was broke open, her cabi-
net and papers were seized, sealed, and sent up to court. Her
principal domeftics, too, were arrested, and committed to differ.

Sept. ro. ent keepers. Naue and Curle, her two secretaries, the one a

native of France, the other of Scotland, were carried prisoners
to London. All the money in her custody, amounting to little
more than two thousand pounds, was secured. And after lead.
ing her about, for some days, from one gentleman's house to an-
other, fie was conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong caflle in North.
amptonfnire *.

Deliberates No farther evidence could now be expeaed against Mary, and
the nethod nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate. With
of proceed- regard to this, Elizabeth and those Ministers in whom the chief.

ly confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was
still great variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors.
Some thought it fufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and
to keep her under such close restraint, as would cut off all poffi-
bility of corresponding with the enemies of the kingdom ; and as
her constitution, broken by long confinement, and her spirit de-
je&ed with so many cares ; could not long support such an addi-
tional load, the Queen and nation would soon be delivered from
all their fears. But though it might be easy to secure Mary's
own person, it was impofible to diminish the reverence which

* Camnd. S17.

the Roman Catholics had for her name, or to ext;nguifh the corn- BOOK VII.
passion with which they viewed her fufferings;' while th-fe con- ---.
tinued, infurreations and invasions would never be warting for 15S6.
her relief, and the only effedt of any new rigour would be to ren-
der them more frequent and dangerous. For this reason the ex-
pedient was rejected.

A public and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was D'termines

judged the most unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it to try ie
had at the fame time, a semblance of justice, accompanied with
an air of dignity. It v, as in vain to search the ancient records,
for any statute or precedent, to juflify such an oncommon flep, as
the trial of a foreign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom
in arms, but had fled thither for refige. The proceedings a-
gainft her were founded on the at of lait Parliament, and by
applying it in this manner, the intention of those who h.d framed
that severe flatute became more apparent *.

Elizabeth resolved that no circumnfiance of pomp or solemnity

should be wanting, which could render this tranfadion such as
became the dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed, by
a commission under the great feal, forty persons, the mcft illus-
trious in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with
five of the judges, to hear aud decide this great cause. Many
difficulties were flarted by the lawyers, about the name and title
by which Mlary fhculd be arraigned; and while the essentials of
justice were so grofly violated, the empty forms of it were the
objecs of their care. They at length agreed that the should be
ftiled, " Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King of Scots,
commonly called Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France -.

After the many indignities which flie had lately fuffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her deftrudlion was determined.
She expe(aed every moment, to end her days by poison, or by
some of those secret means, usually employed againit captive
Princes. And leift the malice of her enemies, at the fame
time that it deprived her of life, flould endeavour likewise to
blafl her reputation, the wrote to the Duke of Guile, and vindi-
cated herself, in the strongest terms, from the imputation of en-
couraging or being accessory to the confplracy for affflinatinl
Elizabeth t. In the solitude of her prilfo, the tiranige resolution
of bringing her to a public trial had not reached her ears, nor
did the idea of any thing so unprecedented, and so repugnant to
regal Majesty, once enter into her thoughts.

Camd 19. Jomhnt. HiLt 113. - Strype, 3. 3-. Jebb', 2. 283.

,Volume II. D

BOOK VII. On the eleventh of Oaober, the commissioners appointed by

Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they deliver.

1 86.

The triaiat ed a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest re-
Fotherinm proaches and accusations, she informed her, that regard to her own
gay. safety had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a public in-

quiry into her condud, and therefore required her, as she had
lived so long under the protedion of the laws of England, to
submit now to the trial, which they ordained to be taken of her

Mary refit- crimes. Mary, though surprised at the message, was neither ap-
fes atfiift to
plead. palled at the danger, nor unmindful of her own dignity. She pro-

tested, in the most solemn manner, that she was innocent of the
crime laid to her charge, and had never countenanced any at-
tempt against the life of the Queen of England; but at the fame
time, refused to acknowledge the jurifdidion of her commission-
ers. " I came into the kingdom," said she, " an independent
" Sovereign, to implore the Queen's assistance, not to fubjeft
" myself to her authority. Nor is my spirit so broken by its
" past misfortunes, or so intimidated by present dangers, as to
' stoop to any thing unbecoming the Majesty of a crowned head,
" or that will disgrace the ancetlors from whom I am descended,
" and the son to whom I shall leave my throne. If I must be
" tried, Princes alone can be my Peers. The Queen of Eng-
" land's fubjeLs, however noble their birth may be, are of a rank
" inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this kingdom, I
" have been confined as a prisoner. It's laws never afforded me
" any protecion. Let them not now be perverted, in order to
" take away my life."

The commissioners employed arguments and entreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed ac-
cording to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on
account of her contumacy in refusing to plead; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline their jurifdi&ion. An argument
urged by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain, at last prevailed. He
told her, that by avoiding a trial, the injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be more agreeable
to them, or more acceptable to the Queen their Mistress, than to
be convinced, by undoubted evidence, that flie had been unjustly
loaded with these foul aspersions.

.tdhnents No wonder pretexts so plausible should impose on the unwary
however to
d so. Queen, or that she, unassisted, at that time, by any friend or coun-

fellor, flould not be able to detect and elude all the aTtifices of

"Elizabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally melancholy, BOOK VII.
and under circumstances neaily similar, her Grandson, Charles I. %
refused, with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurped I586.
jurifdi&ion of the High Court of Justice; and poffterity has ap-
proved his condu&, as suitable to the dignity of a King. If
Mary was less conflant in her resolution, it must be imputed solely
to her anxious desire of vindicating her own honour.

At her appearance before the Judges, who were seated in the Ofloberr4.

great hall of the castle, where they received her with much cere-
mony, she took care to protest, that by condescending to hear
and to give an answer to the accusations, which (hould be offered
against her, (he neither acknowledged the jurifdi&ion of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and justice of those aas, by which
they pretended to try her.

The Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to

vindicate the authority of the court.

Then the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor opened the charge The accufa-

against her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy. tionagaini
Copies of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and her.
Paget were produced. Babington's confeflion, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together with the declara-
tions of Naue and Curle her secretaries, were read, and the
whole ranged in the most specious order, which the art of the
lawyers could devise, and heightened by every colour, their
eloquence could add.

Mary listened to their harangues attentively, and without emo-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who
was then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory
to the conspiracy, (he broke out into this tender and generous
exclamation. " Alas! how much has the noble house of How.
" ard fuffered for my fake!"

When the Queen's council had finished, Mary flood up, and Her

with great magnanimity, and equal presence of mind, began her defenct.
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own situation,
that, after a captivity of nineteen years, during which the had
fuffered treatment no less cruel than unmerited, (he was at last
loaded with an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of
her right of succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to
transmit her name with infamy to future ages : That, without
regarding the sacred rights of sovereignty, the was now fubje&ed
to the laws framed against private persons; though an anointed
Qdeen, qommanded to appear before the tribunal of fubje&s

Dij

and like a common criminal, her honour exposed to the petulent
tongues of lawyers, capable of wrefling her words, and of mif.
representing her a&ions: That, even in this dishonourable situ-
ation, fihe was denied the privileges usually granted to criminals,
and obliged to undertake her own defence, without the presence-
of any friend with whom to advise, without the aid of council,
and without the use of her own papers.

She then proceeded to the particular articles in. the accusation.

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington. The
name of Ballard was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced: Though nothing
less then her hand-writing or subscription was fufficient to con-
vit her of such an odious crime: No proof could be brought that
the letters were delivered into her hands, or that any answer was
returned by her direlion :. The confeffions of wretches, con-
demned and executed for such a detestable action, were of little
weight; fear or hope might extort from them many things incon-
f.Ient with truth, nor ought the honour of a Queen to be flained
by fach vile teflimony. The declaration of her secretaries was
not more conclusive ; promffes and threats might easily overcome
the resolution of two firangers; in order to screen themselves, they
might throw the blame on her; but they could discover nothing
to her prejudice, without violating, in the first place, their oath
of fide!ty; and their perjury, in one initance, rendered them
unworthy of credit in another: The letters to the Spanifli ambaf-
fdor were either nothing more than copies, or contained only
what was perfetly innocent : " I have often," continued fihe,
" made such efforts for the recovery of my liberty, as are natu-
" ral to a human- creature. And convinced, by the fad experi
" ence of so many years, that it was vain to exped it from
" the juflice or generosity of the Queen of England, I have fre-
" quently solicited foreign- Princes, and called on all my friends
" to employ their whole interest for my relief. I have, likewise,
" endeavoured to procure for the English Catholics some mitiga-
" tion of the rigour with which they are now treated ; and if I
" could hope, by my death, to deliver them from oppreifon, I
" am willing to die for their fake. I wish, however, to imitate
" the example of Esther, not of Judith, and would rather make
" interceflion for my people, than fIhed the blood of the meanest
" creature, in order to save them. I have often checked the in-
" temperate zeal of my adherents, when either the severity
" of their own perfecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of

" injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate them tooK VII.
" into violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dan- "
" gers to which these harsh proceedings exposed herself. And x586.
" worn out, as I now am, with cares and fufferings, the profpecl
" of a Crown is not so inviting, that I fliould ruin my foul in
" order to obtain it. I am no firanger to the feelings of huma-
" nity, nor unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
" the detestable crime of affaffination, as equally repugnant to
" both. And, if ever I have given consent by my words, or
" even by my thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the
" Queen of England, far from declining the judgment of men,
" I thall not even pray for the mercy of God.*"

Two diffeient days did Mary appear before the judges, and

in every part of her behaviour maintainLed the magnanimity
of a Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a wo-

man.

The commissioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourn- Sentence a-

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in gan hober
Wefminfler. VWhen assembled in that place, Naue and Curle
were brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath. And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the
commissioners unanimously declared Mary " To be accessory to
" Babington's conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters,
" tending to the hurt, death, aud deftru&ion of Elizabeth, con-
" trary to the express words of the flatute, made for the security
" of the Queen's life.-f"

It is no easy matter to determine whether the injuflice in ap- Trr~'gulari-

ties in the

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conduaing it, were utial.
greatest and most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim
authority over an independnet Queen ? Was Mary bound to
comply with the laws of a foreign kingdom? How could the
fubjets of another Prince become her judges ? Or if such an in-
salt on royalty were allowed, ought not the common forms of
jullice to have been observed? If the testimony of Babington and
his aliociates was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them
for a few weeks, and by confronting them with Mary, over-
whelm her with the full convition of her crimes ?' Naue and

Cutle were both alive, wherefore did not they appear at Fother-
ingay, and for what reason were they produced in the Star-
Chamber, where Mary was not present to hear what they de-
posed , Was this suspicious evidence enough to condemn a Queen

* Camd. 520, &c. -I Ibid. 525.

BOOK VII. Ought the meanest criminal to have been found guilty, upon such

' feeble and inconclusive proofs?

I 586. It was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial,

that the sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a
pretence to juflify, but was not the cause of the violent fleps
taken by Elizabeth and her Ministers towards her deftruaion;
and was employed to give some appearance of justice, to what
was the offspring of jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded
with resentment against Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of
its own Sovereign from every danger, observed no irregularities
in the proceedings, and attended to no defecs in the proof, but
grasped at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had been irre-
fragable demonstrations,

The parlia- The parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounced
ment con-
firm the againit Mary. In that illustrious assembly, more temper and dif-
sentence, cernment, than are to be found among the people, might have

been expe&ed. Both Lords and Commons, however, were e-
qually under the dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and
the fame excesses of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the na-
tion, are apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with
impatience upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers
which threatened the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdom.
All the papers, which had been produced at Fotheringay, were
laid before them. And after many violent invecfives against the
Queen of Scots, both houses unanimously, ratified the proceed-
ings of the commissioners by whom she had been tried, and de-
clared the sentence against her to be just and well founded. Not
satisfied with this, they presented a joint address to the Queen,

anddemand beseeching her, as the regarded her own safety, the preservation
the execu- of the Protestant religion, the welfare and wishes of her people,
ion of it.

to publish the sentence; and without further delay to infli& on a
rival, no less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punishment
which she had merited by so many crimes. This request,
diLated by fears unworthy of that great Assembly, was en-
forced by reasons flill more unworthy.. They were drawn not
from juflice, but from conveniency. The most rigorous confine-
ment, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing spirit;
her address was found, by long experience, to be an overmatch
for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The severest
penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who, while they
believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes

wtre ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper BooK VII.
opportunity for invading the kingdom, and asserting the Scottish1
Queen's title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons, was in-
comptiable with Elizabeth's safety; and if the were spared out of
a false clemency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties
of the kingdom, could not be one moment secure. Necessity re-
quired that (he should be sacrificed in order to preserve these;
and to prove this sacrifice to be no less just than necessary, several
examples in hiflory were produced, and many texts of scripture
quoted, but both the one and the other were misapplied, and
distorted from their true meaning.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth Elizabeth's

than an address in this firain. It extricated her out of a situation, dilfflnula-

tion.

extremely embarrassing; and without depriving her of the power
of sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less appearance
of blame. . If flhe chose the former, the whole honour would re-
dound to her own clemency. If the determined on the latter,
whatever was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the so-
licitations of her people, rather than to flow from her own incli-
niation. Her answer, however, was in a 1file, which she often
used, ambiguous and evasive under the appearance of openness
and candor; full of such profeffions of regard for her people, as
served to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's
ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their indignation; and
of such insinuations that her own life was in danger, as could
not fail to keep alive their fears. In the end, (he besought them
to save her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a Queen,
her nearest kinswoman, to punithment; and to confider whether
it might not hill be possible to provide for the public security,
without forcing her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

The true meaning of this reply was easily underflood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former request, with addi-
tional importunity, which was far from being either unexpe&ed,
or offenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtained such a public fan&ion of her proceedings,
there was no longer any reason for protracting this scene of diffi-
mulation; there was even some danger that her feigned difficulties
might at last be treated as real ones; the therefore adjourned the
parliament, and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal of
her rival's fate *,

* Camd. 526. D'Ewes, 375.

BOOK VII. All the Princes in Europe observed the proceedings against

V Mary, with astonishment and horror; and even Henry III. not.

Fraice in- withstanding his known aversion to the house of Guise, was 0-
terpolesfee- bliged to interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the
blyinbehalf
of Mary. common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambassador,

and Bellievere who was sent with an extraordinary commission to

Novem. 21. the fame purpose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of

warmth. They employed all the arguments which the cause na-
turally fuggeflted; they pleaded from juffice, generosity, and hu-
manity ; they intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all
these Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable, and having re-
ceived some intimation of Henry's real unconcern about the fate
of the Scottith Queen, and knowing his antipathy to all the race
of Guise, the trusted, that these loud remonfirances would be fol.
lowed by no violent resentment *.

James en- She paid no greater regard to the folicitations of the Scottish
deavours to King, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, merited
ther'slife. more attention. Though her commissioners had been extremely

careful to sooth James, by publishing a declaration that their fen-
tence against Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour,
or invalidate any title which he formerly poffeffed; he beheld
the indignities to which his Mother had been exposed with filial
concern, and with the sentiments which became a King. The pride
of the Scottith nation was roused, by the insult offered to the blood
of their Monarchs, and called upon him to emplcy the most vigo-
rous efforts in order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

At first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would venture

upon an action so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to render
the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times, she
was so remarkably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary steps
which she took discovered her intention, he dispatched Sir .Wil-
liam Keith to London ; who, together with Douglas the ordinary
ambassador, remonfirated, in the strongest terms, against the in-
jury done to an independent Queen, in fubjeting her to be tried
like a private peifon, and by laws to which the owed no obedi-
ence ; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by fuffer-
ing a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonourable to the
King of Scots, to be put in execution f.

Elizabeth returning no answer to these remonfirances of his

ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand, complaining

Camd, 31. f- See Append. No XIII.

hm the bitterest terms of her condut, not without threats that BooK VII.
both his duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her
friendship, and to at as became a son when called to revenge his i586.
mother's wrongs *. At the fame time he assembled the nobles,
who promised to stand b'y him in so good a cause. He appointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore
the aid of these courts; and took other fleps towards executing
his threats with vigour. The high firain of his letter enraged
Elizabeth to such a degree, that the was ready to dismiss his
ambassadors without any reply. But his preparations alarmed
and embarrassed her Ministers, and at their entreaty she returned
a soft and evasive answer, promising to listen to any overture from
the King, that tended to his mother's safety 5 and to suspend the
execution of the sentence, till the arrival of new ambassadors
from Scotland -f.

Meanwhile, she commanded the sentence against Mary to be Decem. &.

published, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- The fen-

tence a-

torted from her by the repeated entreaties of both houses of par, gainof Mary
liament. At the fame time, she dispatched Lord Buckhurft and published.
Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunate-
ly the nation demanded the execution of it, and though she had
not hitherto yielded to these folicitations, she advised her to pre-
pare for an event, which might become necessary for securing the
Protestant religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people.
Mary received the message not only without symptoms of fear,
but with expreflions of triumph. " No wonder, said the, the
" Englifli should now thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince,
" they have often offered violence to their own Monarchs. But
" after so many fufferings, death comes to me as a welcome
" deliverer. I am proud to think that my life is esteemed of
" importance to the Catholic religion, and as a martyr for it I
" am now willing to die 1."

After the publication of the sentence, Mary was firipped of Sheistr-eat.

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of slate in her a- ed with the

utmoftri-

partment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap- gour,
proached her person without ceremony and even appeared co-
vered in her presence. Shocked with these indignities, and of.
fended at this gross familiarity, to which fte had never been ac-
cuftomed, Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at the
fame time, as her last request, entreated that she would permit

* Birch. Mem. . p. t Spotfw. 25t. Cald. 4. 5.
t Camd. 528. Jebb, 2pi.
Volurne II. E

BOOK VIs. her servants to carry her dead body into France, to be laid amo= g

her ancestors, in hallowed ground ; that some of her domeflics

't86. might be present at her death, to bear witness of her innocence,

and firm adherence to the Catholic faith; that all her servants
might be fuffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those
small legacies, which she should bestow on them, as testimonies
of her affe&ion; and that in the mean time, her Almoner, or
some other Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her, and
to assist her in preparing for an eternal world. She besought her
in the name of Jesus, by the foul and memory of Henry VII.
their common progenitor, by their near consanguinity, and the
royal dignity with which they were both inveffted, to gratify her
in these particulars, and to indulge her so far as to signify her
compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whether Mary's.
letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer
was returned, and no regard paid to her requefls. She was offered
a Protestant Bilhop or Deah to attend her. Them she rejeaed; and
without any Clergyman to dire& her devotions, (he prepared, in
great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which the now be.
lived to be at no great diftarrce *.

3587. James, without loinmg a moment, sent new ambassadors to Lon-

ames re- don. These were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil.
lolicita- In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Ma-
tionsinher ser would become bound that fro conspiracy should be undertakenr
January i. against her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's

consent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver
some of the most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hostages.
If this were not thought fufficient, they proposed that Mary thould
resign all her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom no-
thing injurious to the Proteflant religion, or inconsistent with
Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. The former proposal, Eli-
zabeth rejeaed as insecure; the latter, as dangerous. The am-
baffadors were then infiruted to talk in a higher tone; and Mel-
vil executed the eommlldion with fidelity and with zeal. But
Gray, with his usual perfidy, deceived his Master who trusted
him with a negociation of so much importance, and betrayed the
Queen whom he was employed to save. He encouraged and ur-
ged Elizabeth, to execute the sentence against her rival. He
often repeated the old proverbial sentence, " The dead cannot
<' bite." And whatever should happen, he undertook to pacify
the King's rage, or at least to prevent any violent effects of his
resentment f.

* Camd. 5p8. Jebb, 2. 295. f Spotfw. 35. See Append.'No XIV.

Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the most Boos VII.

violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She (hunned society,
she was often found in a melancholy and musing posture, and re- Elizabeth's
peating, with much emphasis, these sentences which she borrowed anxietyand
from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut ser aut feri; ne lo .
feriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness roust
be imputed to dissimulation; it was impossible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an
aaion, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life and
kingdom to danger, without reflecting deeply, and hesitating long.
The people waited her determination in fulpence and anxiety;
and left their fear or their zeal flould subside, rumours of dan-
ger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost indus-
try; Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was accused of having
suborned an affaffin to murder the QOeen. The Spanish fleet was
said by some to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others
affirmed that the Duke of Guise had landed, with a ftlong army, in
Sussex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were
up in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with
all their forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for
seizing the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every
day more violent, and the people, astonished and enraged, cal-
led for the execution of the sentence against Mary, as the only
thing which could reflore tranquillity to the kingdom *.

While these sentiments prevailed among her fubjedts, Eliza- Warrant

beth thought she might safely venture to firike the blow, which for Mary's

execltion

She had so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the signed.
secretaries of slate, to bring to her the fatal warrant 5 and her be- February ,
haviour, on that occasion, plainly fhewed that it is not to hu-
manity, that we must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the
very moment (he was subscribing the writ which gave up a wo-
man, a Queen, and her own nearest relation, into the hands of
the executioner, fie was capable of jefling. f" Go, says ihe, to
" Davison, and tell Walsingham what I have now done, though
' I am afraid he will die for grief when he hears it." Her
chief anxiety was how to secure the advantages which would arise
from Mary's death, without appearing to have given her consent
to a deed so infamous. She often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as
well as to some other courtiers, that now was the time to discover
the sincerity of their concern for her safety, and that the expe&-
ed their zeal would extricate her out of her present perplexity. But

* Camd. 533, 534-

BOOK VII. they were wife enough to seem not to underfland her meaning.

SEven after the warrant was signed, she commanded a letter to be

x587. written to Paulet, in less ambiguous terms; complaining of his

remissness in sparing so long the life of her capital enemy, and
begging him to remember at last what was incumbent on him as
an affecionate fubjed, and to deliver his Sovereign from continual
fear and danger, by (hortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet,
though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal in the discharge of
what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper, was nevertheless a
man of honour and integrity. He rejeced the proposal with dif.
dain; and lamenting that he thould ever have been deemed capa-
ble of acting the part of an affaffin, he declared that the Queen
might .dispose of his life at her pleasure, but he would never slain
his own honour, nor leave an everlatting mark of infamy on his
posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a crime. On
the receipt of this answer,. Elizabeth became extremely peevish;
and calling him a dain.y and prejife fellow, who would promise
much, but perform nothing, the proposed to employ one Wing-
field, who had both courage and inclination to firike the blow*,
But Davison remonfirating against this method, as no less danger.
ous than dishonourable, she again declared her intention that the
sentence pronounced by the commiffloners should be executed ac-
cording to law; and as Ihe had already signed the warrant, she
begged that no farther application might be made to her on that
head. By this the privy counsellors thought themselves fuffici-
ently authorised to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended,
by zeal for the Queen's safety, or instigated, as is more probable,
by the apprehenflon of the danger to which they would themselves
be exposed, if the life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they
assembled in the Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their
hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, together
with the High Sheriff of the County, to fee the sentence put iq
execution --.

,ary's be- On Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So-

haviour at theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her pre,
her death, fence the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to

-die next morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion,
and crossing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, " That foul, said she, is not worthy of
the joys of Heaven, which repines because the body must endure
the stroke of the executioner; and though I did not expea that

* Eiogr. Britan. Article Davison. f- Camd. 34. Strype, 3. 361, 364.

the Queen of England would set the first example of violating" the BooK VIL
sacred person of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that
which Providence has decreed to be my lot." And laying her
hand on a Bible, which happened to be near her, she solemnly
protested that she was innocent of that conspiracy which Babing-
ton had carried on against Elizabeth's life*. She then mention-
ed the requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but obtained
no fatisfafory answer. She entreated, with particular earnestness.
that now in her last moments, her Almoner might be fuffered to
attend her, and that the might enjoy the consolation of those pious
institutions preferibed by her religion. Even this favour, which
is usually granted to the vilest criminals, was absolutely denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the presence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and
Shrewsbury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and burst
out into the most passionate expressions of tenderness and sorrow.
Mary, however, not only retained perfe&t composure of mind, but
endeavoured to moderate their excessive grief. And falling on her
knees, with all her domeftics around her, she thanked Heaven that
her fufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that she might
be enabled to endure what still remained with decency, and with
fortitude. The greater part of the evening she employed in set-
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Teftlament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her clothes, she distributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote
a short letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments, and recommend-
ed her foul to their prayers, and her afflicted servants to their pro-
telion. At supper, she ate temperately, as usual, and conversed
not only with ease, but with cheerfulness the drank to every one
of her servants, and alked their forgiveness, if ever she had failed in
any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time she went
to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning the
retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in devo-
tion. At eight o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers entered
her chamber, and found her still kneeling at the altar. She im-
inediately started up, and with a majeflic mein, and a counte-
nance undismayed, and even cheerful, advanced towards the place
ps execution, lecaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was
4reffTed in a mourning habit, but with an elegance and splendor

* Jebb. 3 i.

which the had long laid aside, except on a few festival days. Anr
A.gns Dei hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at
her girdle ; and in her hand (he carried a crucifix of ivory. At
the foot of the flair, the two Earls, attended by several gentle.
men from the neighbouring Counties, received her ; and there
Sir Andrew Melvil, the maifer of her household, who had been
secluded, for some weeks, from her presence, was permitted to
take his last farewell. At the fight of a Miflrefs whom he tender,
ly loved, in such a situation, he melted into tears; and as he was
bewailing her condition, and complaining of his own hard fate
in being appointed to carry the account of such a mournful event
into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not, good Melvil, there is
at present greater cause for rejoicing. Thou (halt, this day, fee
Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares, and such an end put
to her tedious fufferings as the has long expe&ed. Bear witnefrs
that I die constant in my religion; firm in my fidelity towards
Scotland; and unchanged in my affection to France. Commend
mae to my fort. Tell him I have done nothing injurious to his
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights and God forgive all
those who have thirfled, without cause, for my blood."

With much difficulty, and after many entreaties, the prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the fcaffold. It
was ere&ed in the fame hall where (he had been tried, raised a
little above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cuflion,
and block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the fleps with ala.
crity, beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered coun.
tenance, and signing herself with the cross, (he fat down in the
chair. Beale read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to
which the liflened with a careless air, and like one occupied in
other thoughts. Then the Dean of Peterborough began a de.
rout discourse, suitable to her present condition, and offered up
prayers to Heaven in her behalf; but the declared that the could
not in conscience hearken to the one, nor join with the other;
and falling on her knees repeated a Latin prayer. When the
Dean had finished his devotions, (he with an audible voice, and
in the English tongue, recommended unto God the affliied slate
of the Church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a
long life, and peaceable reign to Elizabeth. She declared that
she hoped for mercy only through the death of Christ, at the foot
of whose image, (he now willingly flied her blood; and lifting up,
and kissing the Crucifix, (he thus addressed it, " As thy arms, 0

Jesus, were extended on the Cross; so with the outfireached 1ooa VII
arms of thy mercy, receive me, and forgive my fins."

She then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil, and 1587*

upper garments ; and one of the executioners rudely endeavour.
ing to assist, she gently checked him, and said, with a smile, that
Ihe had not been accuffomed to undress before so many fpefta-
tors, nor to be served by such valets. With calm but undaunted
fortitude, she laid her neck on the block ; and while one exe-
cutioner held her hands, the other at the second firoke, cut off
her head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her hair al-
ready grown quite grey, with cares and sorrows. The execu-
tioner held it up flill flreaming with blood, and the Dean crying
out, " So perish all Queeri Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of
Kent alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpe&tators continu-
ed silent, and drowned in tears ; being incapable, at that momenrt,
of any other sentiments, but those of pity or admiration *.

Such was the tragical death of Mary Queen of Scots, after a Sentimentg

life of forty-four years and two months, almost nineteen years of of hiftori-

ans con-

which she paTfed in captivity. The political parties which were cerning
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsisted, under her.
various denominations, ever since that time. The rancour, with
which they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding
ages, and their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been per-
petuated, and even augmented. Among Hiflorians, who were
tiunder the dominion of all these passions, and who have either a-
fcribed to her every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imput-
ed to her all the vices, of which the human heart is susceptible,
we search in vain for Mary's real character. She neither merit-
ed the exaggerated praises of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing
censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of exter- tier charac.

nal form, she added those accompliihments, which render their ter.
impreflion irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments ; because
her heart was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contiadic-
tion ; because she had been accustomed from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No stranger, on some occasions, to diflimu-
lation ; which, in that perfidious court where flie received her
education, was reckoned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with

* Camd. 534. Spots 355. Jebb, 2. 300, Strype, 3. 383.

BOOK VII. which almqot every woman beholds the influence of her owlt

beauty. Formed with the qualities which we love, not with the

1 " talents that we admire; flie was an agreeable woman, rather than

an illustrious Queen. The vivacity of her spirit, not fufficiently
tempered with found judgment, and the warmth of her heart,
which was not, at all times, under the restraint of diferetion, be-
trayed her both into errors, and into crimes. To fay that she
was always unfortunate, will not account for that long and al-
most uninterrupted fucceflion of calamities which befel her; we
muff likewise add that she was often imprudent. Her passion for
Darnly was rash, youthful, and excessive. And though the fud-
den transition to the opposite extreme was the natural effect of
her ill-requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and bru-
tality ; yet neither these, nor Bothwell's artful address, and im-
portant services, can justify her attachment to that nobleman.
Even the manners of the age, licentious as they were, are no
apology for this unhappy passion; nor can they induce us to look
on that tragical and infamous scene which followed upon it, with
less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over this part of
her charader which it cannot approve, and may, perhaps, prompt
some to impute her acions to her situation, more than to her dif-
positions ; and to lament the unhappiness of the former, rather
than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's fufferings ex-
ceed, both in degree, and in duration, those tragical difireffes,
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her' frail-
ties, we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve of
our tears, as if they were flied for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue.

With regard to the Queen's person, a circumstance not to be

omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all cotemporary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmolt beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of fliape, of which the human form is capa-
ble. Her hair was black, though, according to the fashion of that
age, fie frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different co-
lours. Her eyes were a dark gray ; her complexion was exqui-
fitely fine ; and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as
to flihape and colour. Her flature was of an height that rose to
the majeflic. She danced, flie walked,'and rode with equal
grace. Her tafle for music was juff, and she both sung and play-
ed upon the lute, with uncommon skill. Towards the end of
her life, lhe began to grow fat; and her long confinement and the

coldRefs of the houses in which she was imprisoned, brought on POOK VII.
4 rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No
man, says Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration 1581
and love, or will read her history without sorrow.

None of her women were fuffcred to come near her dead body,

which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,
where it lay, for some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn
from a billiard table. The block, the fcaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing flained with her blood, were redu-
ced to ashes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to
be buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the page-
antry of a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those in-
juries, which laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his
acceflion to the English throne, ordered her body to be removed
to Weflminfter-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs
of England.

Elizabeth affelted to receive the accounts of Mary's death, Elizabeth

with the most violent emotions of surprise, and of concern. Sighs, affietsto ]a.
tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display the ry's deth.
reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of diflimu-
lation and artifice may be traced through every period of Eliza-
beth's proceedings, against the life of the Scottish Queen. The
commission for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly ex-
torted from her, by the entreaties of her Privy Counsellors. She
delayed publiffiing the sentence againfi her, till flhe was twice so-
licited by both houses of Parliament. Nor did flie sign the war-
rant for execution, without the utmost apparent relucance. One
scene more of the boldest and most solemn deceit remained to be
exhibited. She undertook to make the world believe that Mary
had been put to death without her knowledge, and against her
will. And Davison, who neither fufpe&ed her intention, nor his
own danger, was her infirument in carrying on this artifice, and
fell a vitim to it.

It was his duty as secretary of state to lay before her the war-

rant for execution, in order to be signed i and by her command,
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
she had charged him not to communicate what fthe had done to
any person, nor to fuffer the warrant to go out of his hands, with.
out her express permission that in contempt of this order, he
had not only revealed the matter to several of her Miniflers, but
had, in concert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by

Velume II. F

BooK VII. whom, without her consent or knowledge, the warrant was iflueli

and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent empowered to put it in

1587- execution. Though Davison denied all this, and with circum-

itances which bear the firongeft marks of truth and credibility;
though it can scarce be conceived that her privy council, com.
posed of the persons in whom she most confided, of her Ministers
and favourites, would assemble within the walls of her palace,
and venture to tranfad a matter of so much importance, without
her privity, and contrary to her inclination ; yet so far did flie
carry her diflimulation, that, with all the signs of displeasure and
of rage, she banifled most of her Counsellors out of her pre.
fence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so hardily, and with
such marks of disgust that he gave up himself for loft, and in the
deepest affii&ion wrote to the Queen begging leave to resign all
his places, that he might retire to his own estate. Davison she
inflantly deprived of his office, and committed him a close prison.

March. er to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a solemn trial in

the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a fine of ten thousand
pounds ; and to be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part
of her condua, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the repu-
tation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in
her kingdom*.

Elizabeth This solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furnished
endeavours Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As
to foth
James. the profpeft of his Mother's danger had excited the King's filial

care and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His fubjeds felt the dishonour done to him,
and to the natiou. In order to sooth both, Elizabeth inflantly
dispatched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a
letter expressing her extreme affii&ion on account of that miser-
able accident, which, as fie pretended, had happened far con-
trary to her appointment, or intention. James would not permit
her messenger to enter Scotland; and with some difficulty, re.
ceived a memorial he sent from Berwick. It contained the tale
concerning Davison, dressed up with all the circumstances, which
tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on
his rashness or treachery. Such a defence gave little fatisfa&ion,

Camd. 36. Strype, 3- 370.

and was considered as mockery added to insult; and many of
the nobles, as well as the King, breathed nothing but revenge. 1587-
Elizabeth was extremely solicitous to pacify them, and neither
wanted instruments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester
wrote to the King, and Walsingham to secretary Maitland. They
represented the certain deftru&ion, to which James would expose
himself, if with the forces of Scotland alone, he thould venture
to attack a kingdom, so far superior in power ; that the hiflory of
pafil ages, as well as his Mother's fad experience, might convince
him that nothing could be more dangerous or deceitful than de-
pendence on foriegn aid; that the King of France would never
with to fee the British kingdoms united under one Monarch, nor
contribute to invefl a Prince so nearly allied to the house of Guise,
with such formidable power i that Philip might be a more a&ive
ally, but would certainly prove a more dangerous one, and under
pretence of assisting lim, would assert his own right to the Eng-
lifh Crown, which he already began openly to claim ; that the
fame statute, on which the sentence of death against his Mother
had been founded, would juffify the excluding him from the fuc-
cession to the Crown; that the Englift, naturally averse from the
dominion of strangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hofti-
lities, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth was disposed to
repair the wrongs which the Mother had fufered, by her tender-
ness and affe&ion towards the son ; and that by engaging in a
fruitless war, he would deprive himself of a noble inheritance,
which, by cultivating her friendship, he muff infallibly obtain.
These representations, added to his consciousness of his own
weakness, to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous spirit
of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that fa&ion, which was entirely at Elizabeth's devo-
tion, convinced James that a war with England, however just,
would in the present junaure be altogether impolitical. All these
considerations induced him to flifle his resentment; to appear fa-
tisfied with the pupnifihment, inflided on Davison; and to preserve
all the femblances of friendship with the English court *. In
this manner, did the cloud which threatened such a florm pass a-
way. Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained
unavenged by any Prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth might
incur, the was exposed to no new danger, on that account

Spotfw. 358. Strype, 3. 377-

BOOK VII. Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the Master of Gray

and loft him that favour which he had for some time poffeffed.

1587. He was become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire

Disgrace of
the Master power without merit, and exercise it without dilcretion, usually
of Gray, are. The treacherous part, which he had aced during -his late

embassy, was well known, and filled the King, who at length
came to the knowledge of it, with surprise. The courtiers obferv.
ed the symptoms of disgust arising in the King's mind, his ene-
mies seized the opportunity, and Sir William Stewart, in revenge
of the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his Brother Captain

May io. James, publicly accused him before a Convention of nobles, not

only of having contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to take
away the life of the Queen, but of holding correspondence with
Popish princes, in order to subvert the religion established in the
kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the King, deserted by all, and
conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble defence. He was
condemned to perpetual banishment, a punishment very unequal
to his crimes. But the King was unwilling to abandon one,
whom he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of justice;
and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and the other nobles who
had lately returned from exile, in gratitude for the zeal with which
he had served them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

Having thus accomplished the deftruion of one of his enemies)

Captain James thought the juncture favourable for prosecuting
his revenge on them all. He singled out fccretary Maitland, the
mroft eminent both for abilities, and enmity to him; and offered
to prove that he was no less accessary than Gray to the Queen's
death, and had even formed a dcfign of delivering up the King
bimfelf into the hands of the English. But time and absence had,
in a great measure, extinguished the King's affeftion for a minion,
who so little deserved it. All the courtiers combined against him
as a common enemy. And instead of gaining his point, he had
the mortification to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon
Maitland, who, together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power
and influence of a prime Minister,

In the Assembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Bishops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their incroachments, appeared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a parliament was summoned on that occasion, the Cler-
gy'remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to re-
present their grievances to that court, from which great thing
were expeded.

Previous to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a BooK VH1

work worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which subsisted be- 1587.
tween many of the great families, and which were transmitted The King
from one generation to another, weakened the firergth of the attempts to
kingdom contributed, more than any other circumilance, to pre- nite th
serve a fierce and barbarous spirit among .he nobles ; and proved
the occasion of many disasters to themselves, and to their country.
After many preparatory negociations, he invited the contending
parties to a royal entertainment in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe;
and partly by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
their promise to bury there dissensions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he conducted them, in solemn proceflion, through
the fireets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand,
with his enemy. A collation of wine and fweet-meats was pre-
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with
all the signs of reciprocal forgiveness, and of future friendship.
The people, who were present at a tranfaaion so unusual, conceiv-
ed the most sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity
established in every part of the kingdom, and teitified their fatis-
fa&ion by repeated acclamations. Unhappily the effe&s of this
reconciliation were not correspondent either to the pious endea-
vours of the King, or the fond wiihes of the people.

The first care of the parliament was the security of the Protef-

tant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified ; and a new and severe one was enacted a-
gainft seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose refllefs industry in
making profelytes brought many of them into Scotland about this
time. Two a&s of this parliament deserve more particular notice,
on account of the consequences with which they were followed.

The one refpe&ed the lands of the Church. As the public General an-

revenues were not fufficient for defraying the King's ordinary nexiion o"f
charges 5 as the administration of government became more corn- lands.
plicated and more expensive ; as James was naturally profuse, and
a firanger to ceconomy ; it was necessary, on all these accounts,
to provide some fund proportioned to his exigencies. But no
considerable fum could be levied on the Commons, who did not
enjoy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The nobles were
unaccustomed to bear the burden of heavy taxes. And the reve-
nues of the Church were the only source whence a proper supply
could be drawn. Notwithstanding all the depredations of the
laity since the Reformation, and the various devices which they

-d employed to seize the Church-lands, fame considerable por-

BOOK VII. tion of them remained fRill unalienated, and were held either by

the Bishops who poffeffed the benefices, or were granted to lay,

;587! men during pleasure. All these lands were, in this parliament,

annexed, by one general law *, to the Crown, and the King was
impowered to apply the rents of them to his own use. The
tithes alone were refervod for the maintenance of the persons who
served the cure, and the principal manfion-houfe, with a few acres of
land, by way of glebe, allotted for his residence. By this great
accession of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King, must
have acquired a vast increase of power, and the influence of the
nobles have fuffered a proportional diminution. The very re-
verse of this seems, however, to have been the cafe. Almost
all grants of Church-lands, prior to this a&, were thereby con-
firmed ; and titles, which were formerly reckoned precarious, de-
rived from thence the fan&ion of parliamentary authority. JameR
was likewise authorised, during a limited time, to make new alie-
nations ; and such was the facility of his temper, ever ready to
yicld to the folicitations of his servants, and to gratify their most
extravagant demands, that, not only during that time, but through-
out his whole reign, he was continually employed in beftowing,
and his parliament in ratifying grants of that kind to his nobles;
hence little advantage acrued to the Crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its revenues. The
Bishops, however, were great fufferers by the law. But at this
juncture, neither the King nor his Ministers were solicitous a-
bout the interests of an order of men, odious to the people, and
persecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with
the utmost zeal. The profpe& of sharing in their spoils induced
all parties to consent to it ; and after a step so fatal to the wealth
and power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult matter to
introduce that change in the government of the Church, which
soon after took place j.

LelrerBa- The change, which the other statute produced in the civil con,
ronsadmnit- flitution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal system, e-
liament by very Freeholder, or vassal of the Crown, had a right to be pre-
their repre- sent in parliament. These Freeholders were, originally, few in
t-ntatves. number, but poffeffed of great and extensive property. By de-

grees, these vast poffefflons were divided by the proprietors them-
selves, or parcelled out by the Prince, or split by other accidents.
The number of Freeholders became greater, and their condition
more inequal; besides the ancient Barons, who preserved thel;

* Parl. 1x. Jac. VI. c. 29. f- Sotfw. 365.

Atates and their power unimpaired, there arose another ordei; Bootc VIL
whose rights were the fame, though their wealth and influence
were far inferior. But, in those rude ages, when the art of go. I57
vernment was extremely imperfed, when parliaments were seldom
assembled, and deliberated on matters little interefling to a mar-
tial people, few of the Letfer Barons took their feats, and the
whole parliamentary jurifdidcion was exercised by the Greater
Barons, together with the Ecclesiastical order. James I. fond
of imitating the forms of the English conflitution, to which he
had been long accustomed, and dcfirous of providing a coun-
terpoife to the power of the great nobles, procured an a&, in the
year 1427, dispensing with the personal attendance of the lesser
Barons, and impowering those in each county, to chufe two com-
miffioners to represent them in parliament. This lawy like many
other regulations of that wife Prince, produced little effec. All
the King's vafflals continued, as formerly, poffeffed of a right to be
present in parliament, and, unless in some extraordinary conjunc-
tures, none but the greater Barons attended. But by means of
the Reformation, the constitution had undergone a great chanige.
The ariftocratical power of the nobles had been much increased,
and the influence of the Ecclesiastical order, which the Crown
usually employed to check their ufurpatious, and to balance their
authority, had diminished in proportion. Many of the Abbies
and Priors had been ereced into temporal peerages; and the
Proteflant Bishops, an indigent race of men, and odious to the
nation, were far from poffeffing the weight and credit, which their
predecessors derived from their exorbitant wealth, and the super-
flitious reverence of the people. In this situation, the King had
recourse to the expedient employed by James I. and obtained a
law reviving the statute of 1427 ; and from that time the Com-
mons of Scotland have sent their representatives to parliament.
An a&, which tended so visibly to abridge their authority, did
not pass without opposition from many of the nobles. But as
the King had a right to summon the lesser Barons to attend in
person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a
multitude of his dependents, and consented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the refiridion of appearing only
by their representatives.

The year x588 began with an universal expecation throughout i588.

all Europe, that it was to be diftinguiffied by wonderful events The ap-

proach hof

and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of the Spanish
cotemporary historians, had predided this: and the situation of as- arm4do.
fai;s in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a

Bcoc VII. sagacious observer, without any supernatural intelligence, n igit

have hazarded the predication, and have foreseen the approach of
f ome grand crills. In France, it was evident from the aflonifhing
progress of the league, conduced by a leader, whose ambition was
restrained by no scruples, and whose genius surmounted all diffi-
culties; as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic coun-
tils of Henry III. that either that monarch muff fabmit to aban-
don the throne, of which he was unworthy ; or by some sudden
and daring blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in
the beginning of the year, the Duke of Guise drove his Mafier out
of his capital city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which left
him only the shadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he
himself fell a viaim to Henry's fears, and to his own security-
In Spain, the operations were fach, as promised 'femething ftili
more uncommon. During three years, Philip had employed all
the power of his European dominions, and exhaufled the treasures
of the Indies, in vast preparations for war.' A fleet, the greatelf
that had ever appeared in the ocean, vWas teady to fail from Lif-
bon, and a numerous land army was assembled to embark on board
of it. Its destination was still unknown, though many circum-
flances made it probable that the blow was aimed, in the first place,
against England. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the re-
volted provinces in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded
them her proteEtion. A numerous body of her troops was in their
service; the Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; flie had
great sway in the civil government of the -republic; and some of
its "o.ft considerable towns were in her poffeflion. Her fleets had
insulted the coasts of Spain, intercepted the galleons from the
Weft Indies, and threatened the colonies there. Roused by so
many injuries, allured by views of ambition, and animated by a
superstitious zeal for propagating the Romifli religion, Philip re-
solved not only to invade, but to conquer England, to which his
descent from the house of Lancaster, and the donation of Pope
Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opinion, a double title.

Condaaof Elizabeth saw the danger approach, and prepared to encounter
Jlaeson -
thatocca. it, with the utmost intrepidity. The measures for the defence of
fin.- her kingdom were concerted, and carried on, with the wisdom

and vigour, which diftinguilh her reign. Her chief care was to
secure the friendship of the King of Scots. She had treated the
Queen his Mother with a rigour unknown among Princes; the
had often used himself harshly, and with contempt; and though
bl had hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of these niju-

ries, the did not believe it to be altogether extinguished, and was BooK VII.
afraid that, in her present situation, it might burst out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with Scotland 88
would facilitate his enterprise, courted James with the utmost
assiduity. He excited him to revenge his Mother's wrongs; he
flattered him with the hopes of fiharing his conquests; and offered
him in marriage his daughter the Infanta Isabella. At the fame
time, Scotland swarmed with priests his emissaries, who seduced
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Huntly, Ecrol, Crawford, were the heads of a fa6tion,
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, ar-
riving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In or-
der to counter-balance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest
profeffions of friendship to the King, and Aihby, her ambassador,
entertained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He as.
sured him that his right of fucceflion to the Crown should be pub-
licly acknowledged in England; that he thould be created a
Duke in that kingdom; that he should be admitted to some share
in the government; and receive a considerable pension annually.
James, it is probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's
arts, to rely entirely on these promises. But he underflood his
own interest in the present jun&ure, and pursued it with much
fleadinefs. He reje&ed an alliance with Spain, as dangerous,
He refused to admit into his presence an ambaffader from the Pope.
'rIe seized Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. He
drove many of the trafficking Priests out of the kingdom. He
marched suddenly to Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers,
and took him p-ifoner. In a Convention of the nobles, he declar-
ed his resolution to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng.
land; and, with outlilfening to the suggestions of revenge, deter-
mined to a&t in concert with Elizabeth, against the common ene-
my of the Proteflant faith. He put the kingdom in a posture of
defence, and le-ied troops to obftrua the landing of the Spaniards.
He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's assistance, and told her
ambassador that he expected no other favour from the King of
Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that
when he had devoured all his companions, he would make him
his last morsel*.

The zeal of the people, on this occaflon, was not inferior to covenant in

that of the King; and the extraordinary danger with which they defence of

lReligioe

* Camd. 544. Joh111 139, Spotfw. 369.

VolumeC I. G

BooK VII. were threatened, suggested to them an extraordinary expedient for

their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true

S58" Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,

in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This contain-
ed a confeffion of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises, in the name,
and through the. frength, of God, of adhering to each other, in
supporting the former, and in contending against the latter, to
the utmost of their power*. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy,
and the people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or un-
common as such a combination may now appear, many circum-
fLances contributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render
the idea familiar to the Scots. When roused by any extraordi-
nary event, or alarmed by any public danger, the people of lfrael
were accustomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to
adhere to that Religion, which the Almighty had efrablifihed
among them, this the Scots considered as [a sacred precedent,
which it became them to imitate. In that age, no considerable
enterprise was undertaken in Scotland, without a bond of mutual
defence, which all concerned reckoned.neceffary for their fecuri.
ty. The form of this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed
from those political, ones, of which so many instances have occur.
red; the articles, stipulations, and peculiar modes of expression,
are exacly the fame in. both. Almost all the considerable Popish
Princes were then joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
ed religion, and nothing could be more natural, or seemed more
etfEcacious, than to enter into a counter association, in order to
oppose the progress of that formidable confpisacy. To these causes,
did the Covenant, which has become so famous in hiflory, owe
its origin. It was renewed at different times during the reign
of Jamesf. It was revived with great solemnity in the year
1638. It was adopted by the English, in the year 1643, and
enfouced by the civil and ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms.
The political purposes to which it was then made subservient, and
the violent and unconfLitutional measures which it was then em,
ployed to promote, it is not our province to explain. But at the
juna&ure, in which it was first introduced, we may pronounce it
to have been a pruderi and laudable device for the defence of the
religion and liberties of the nation j nor were the terms in which
it was conceived, other than might have been expecaed from men
alirmed with the impending danger of Popery, and threatened

Dunlop's Celle&. of ConfT Vol. 2. Ir8, f Cald. 4. I39.

'with an invasion by the most bigotted, and most powerful Prince BOOK VII.
in Europe.

Philip's eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him ei- 1588

ther with the vigour or dispatch, necessary to ensure the success
of so mighty an enterprise. His fleet, which ought to have fail-
ed in April, did not enter trhe Englith channel till the middle of
July. It hovered many days on the coast, in expedation of be-
ing joined by the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the
ports of Slanders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters pur- The Arma.
sued the Spaniards during that time ; successive storms and bat- dodefeated.
ties, which are well known, conspired with their own ill condut,
to disappoint their enterprise. And by the blessing of Providence,
which watched with remarkable care over the Protestant Religion,
and the liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered and de-
firoyed the Armado on 'which they had arrogantly beflowed the
name of Invincible. After being driven out of the English seas,
they were forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round Scot-
land and Ireland. Many of them ftffered .flipwreck on these
dangerous and unknown coasts. Though James kept his fubje6fs
under arms to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent
their landing in an hostile manner, he received seven hundred
who were cast afliore by a tempest, and after supplying them with
necessaries, permitted them to return into their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambassador

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity, he had discovered during a conjunture so
dangerous. But none of Afhby's promises were any longer re-
membered; that Minister was even acculed of having exceeded
Lis powers, by thefe'too liberal offers; and conscious of his own
falsehood, or ashamed of being.difowned by his court, he with-
drew secretly out of Scotland*.

Philip, convinced by fatal experience of his own rashness in at- Philip's in-

tempting the conquest of England, by a naval armament, equip- Sco'tland
ied at so great a difiance, and fubjeted in all its operations, to
the delays, and dangers,. and uncertainties, arising from seas and
winds, resolved to make his attack in another form, and to adopt 1599.
the plan which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of in-
vading England through Scotland. A body of his troops, he
imagined, might be easily wasted over from the Low Countries
to that kingdom, and if they could once obtain footing, or pro-
ture assistance there, the frontier of England was open and de-

* Johnft. 134. Cami. 54?.

G ij

t1OK VII. fenceless, and the northren counties full of Roman Catholics

who would receive them with open arms. Meanwhile, a descent

I589. might be threatened on the foutheren coast, which would divide

the English army, diftra& their councils, and throw the whole
kingdom into terrible convulsions. In order to prepare the way
for the execution of this design, he remitted a considerable fum
of money to Bruce, a seminary Priest in Scotland, and employed
him, together with Hay, Creighton and Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits,
to gain over as many persons of diftinfion as possible to his in.

Poplihno, terest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful insinuations of these
bles con-
spire a- emissaries, induced several of the nobles to favour a measure,
gainft the which tended so mahifeftly to the deftruftion of their country,
King. Huntly, though the King had lately married him to the daugh-

ter of his favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly at-
tached to the Romifli Church. Crawford and Errol were ani-
mated with the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of fix thousand men, to render him master of Scot-
land, and to bring so many of their vassals into the field, that he
should be able to enter England, with a numerous army. Francis
Stewart, grandson of James V. whom the King had created Earl
of Bothwell, though influenced by no motive of religion, for he
flill adhered to the Protestant faith, was prompted, merely by
caprice, and the reftleffnefs of his nature, to join in this treason.
able correspondence,

Feb. 17, All these letters were interceptedin England. Elizabeth, alarm-

ed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom, sent them
immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popish party, called upon him to check this

The King's formidable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James, though
naaxims P
withregardfirmly attached to the Proteflant religion, though profoundly
to ropery. versed in the theological controversies between the Reformers and

the Church of Rome, though he had employed himself, at that
early period of life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelation,
in which he proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless
adopted, already, those maxims concerning the treatment of the
Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through the reft of his life.
The Roman Catholics, were at that time a powerful and afcive
party in England; they were far from being an inconsiderable sac,
tion in his own kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready
to take part in all their machinations, and to second every effort

tf their bigotry. The opposition of such a body to his succession BooK VII.
to the Crown of England, added to the averseness of the English
from the government of firangers, might create him many diffi- x589
culties. In order to avoid these, he thought it necessary to sooth
rather than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile
them to his succession, by the hopes of gentler treatment, and
some mitigation of the rigour of those laws, which were now in
force against them. This attempt to gain one party by promises
of indulgence and ads of clemency, while he adhered, with all
the obstinacy of a disputant, to the dodrines and tenets of the
other, has given an air of mystery, and even of contradidion, to
this part of he King's chara&er. The Papifts, with the credu
lity of a fe& struggling to obtain power, believed his heart to be
wholly theirs; and the Protefiants, with the jealousy infeperable
from those who are already in poffeflion, viewed every at of lenity
as a mark of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy. And in or-
der to please both, James often aimed at an excessive refinement,
mingled with diflimulation, in which he imagined the perfedion
of government, and of King-craft, to consist.

His beheaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general His excer-

maxims. Notwithiftanding the folicitations of the Queen of Eng- five lenity

to the

land, enforced by the jealous remonftrances of his own Clergy, a confpira-
short imprisonment was the only punishment he inflicted on Hunt- tors.
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent of an ad
of clemency, so inconfiflent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to as-
femble their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor April 1.
Maitland, an able Minister, but warmly devoted to the English
interest, from the King's councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by
Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their own ill condu&, they
were forced to retire to the North, where they openly ereded
the flandard of Rebellion. But as the King's government was
not generally unpopular, or his Ministers odious, their own vas-
fals joined them slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause.
And the King, in person, advancing against them with such forces
as he could suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on the fide-
lity of their troops, which though superior in number, followed
them with reludance, as to hazard a battle; but fuffering them April 20.
to disperse, they surrendered to the King, and threw themselves
on his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell were all
brought to a public trial. Repeated afts of treason were eatily

Boer"1 proved agaiai them. The King, however, did not permit anr

sentence to be pronounced; and after keeping them a few months

5039- "in confinement, he took occasion, amidst the public festivity and

rejoicings, .at the approach of his marriage, :to set them at
litberty *t

The K:ing's As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of
marrge Scotland, in the diref line; as all hopes of uniting the Crowns
w kh Anne
of Den- of the two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl
mark. of Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the

:King's marriage was on all these accounts, an event which the
nation desired with the utmost ardour. He himself was no less
desirous of accompliflhing it; and had made overtures, for that
purpose, to the eldest Daughter of Frederick II. King of Den.
mark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every thing, that'would render
the accession of-the house of Stewart more acceptable to the Eng.
Iiih, endeavoured to perplex James, in the fame manner she had
done Mary, and employed as many artifices to defeat or retard
tis marriage. His Ministers, gained by bribes and promises, second.
ed her intentions; and though several different ambafiadors were
sent from Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so limited,
or insisted on conditions so extravagant, that Frederick could not
believe the King to be in earnest; and fufpe&ing that there was
some design to deceive, or amuse him, gave his daughter in mar-
riage to the Duke of Brunswick. Not.difcouraged by this difap-
rointment, vwhich he imputed entirely to the conduc of his own
M Pinifters, James made his addresses to the Princess Anne, Fre-
derick's second daughter. And though Elizabeth endeavoured to
divert him from this, by recommending Catharine the king of Na.
varre's sifter, as a more advantageous :match; -though she pre-
vailed on the Privy Concil of Scotland to declare against the al.
liance with Denmark; he perfified in his choice. And despair-
ing of overcoming the obflinacy of his own Ministers, in any
other manner, he secretly encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh
to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor,
whom they accused as the person, whose artifices had hitherto dif-
sppointed the wishes of the King, and the expecations of his peo-
ple. In consequence of this, the Earl Marithal was sent into
Denmark, at the head of a folendid embassy. He received ample
powers and infirudlions, drawn with the King's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen
set fsail towards Scotland. James made great preparations for her

* -SpotC -73. Cald. 4. T73.

reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a BOOK Vii.
lover; when the unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tern-
pest had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a con- 1589-
dition so shattered, that there was little hope of its putting again
to sea, before the spring. This unexpe&ed disappointment, he
felt with the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted out some ships,
and without communicating his intention to any of his council,
failed, in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, oa. 22.
and a train of three hundered persons, in quest of his bride. He
arrived safely in a small harbour, not far distant from Upflo, where
the Queen then resided. There the marriage was solemnized. Nov. 24.
And as it would have been rash to trust those boiflerous seas, in
the winter season, James accepted the invitation of the court of
Denmark, and repairing to Copenhagen, passed several months
there, amidst continual feasting, and amusements, in which both
the Queen and himself had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation

from his general chara&er, than this sudden sally. His fonrt
Charles I. was capable of that excessive admiration of the other
sex, which arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by
elegance of taste; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain
suited fach a dilfpoition. But James was not susceptible of any
refined gallantry, and always expressed that contempt for the fe-
male charader, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with
politeness, is apt to inspire. He was fretted, however, at the
many obilacles which had been laid in his way. He was anxious
to secure the political advantages, which he expeced from mar-
riagei and fearing that a delay might afford Elizabeth, and
his own Ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by new in-
trigues, he suddenly took the resolution of preventing them, by
a voyage from which he expeted to returri in a few weeks. The
nation seemed to applaud his conduct, and to be pleased with this
appearance of amorous ardour, in a young Prince. Notwithbland-
ing his absence so long beyond the time he expected, the nobles,
the clergy, and the people, vied with one another in loyalty and
obedience; and no period in the King's reign was more remark-
able for tranquillity, or more free from any eruption of those
fa&ions, which so often diflurbed the kingdom.

* Melv. 352. Spotfw. 377,

# BOOK EIGHTH.

THE

HISTORY

OF

S C 0 TLAN D.

BOOK EIGHTH.

CONTENTS.

THE King and Queen arrive in Scotland. Disorders in the kingdom. An at-

tempt of Bothwell's against the King. Presbyterian Church government
eflablified. Conspiracy of the Popish Lords. The people's zeal, and the
King's proceedings Bothwell surprises the King. He- recovers his liber-
ty. Sufpe&ed of favouring the Popi(h Lords. His lenity. A new attempt
of Bothwell's. Fresh dangers from the Popish Lords. Eattle of Glenlivat.
Popish Lords driven out of the kingdom ' Bothwell flies to Spain. Change
in Adminiafration. Violence of the nation against the Popish Lords. Rath
proceedings of the Clergy. Of Black's seditious dotrine. Espoused by the
Clergy. Tumult in Edinburgh. The King's danger. His proceedings
against the Citizens. Power of the Church humbled. Citizens privileges
abridged. Regulations in the Church. Popish Lords pardoned. Ecclefiaftics
restored to Parliament. James gains a party in England. Accused of corref-
ponding with the Pope. Endeavours to gain the Roman Catholics. Go-wry's
conspiracy. Sprot's discovery. Conjecures concerning the confptirators. The
King's account disbelieved. Proceedings of the Parliament. Eflex's confpi-'
racy against Elizabeth. His correspondence with James. Cautious conduf&
of James. Wild attempt of Essex. His death. James continues his in-
trigues. Attempts to civilize the Highlanders. Elizabeth's illness and
death. Her characqer. James proclaimed King of England. .Takes pof-
session of the throne. View of the Revolution in Scotland, since the accef.
of Jamesr VI.

ON the first of May -the King and Queen arrived at Leith, and BOOK VIII.
were received by their fubjeas with every poflible expression of
joy. The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was condu&ed Th'90.
with great magnificence; and so low had the order of bishops fal- and Queen
len, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were present arrive in

Ssotland.

on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Minister
of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, administered the
sacred un6tion, and performed the other customary ceremonies.

Volume II. F

BooK VIII. The zeal and success, with which many of the Clergy had con-

tributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom, dur.

1590. ing his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their per-

sons, and even to the Presbyterian form of government. In pre-

August 4. fence of an Assembly, which met this year, he made high enco-

miums on the discipline, as well as the doctrine of the Church,
promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the affem.
bly to frame such a&s, as gradually abolif'ned all the remains of
episcopal jurifdifion, and paved the way for a full and legal efta.
blifhment of the Prefbyteriarr model *.

I59t. An event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy noI

small triumph. Archbishop Adamson, their ancient enemy, hav.
ing fallen under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of
the revenues of his fee in consequence of the a& of annexation,
and being oppressed with age, with poverty, and diseases, made
the meanest fubmiflion to'the Clergy, and delivered to the Affem-
bly a formal recantation of all his opinions concerning Church
government, which had been matter of offence. Such a confef.
sion, from the moil learned person of the order, was considered a?
a, teflimony, which the force of truth had extorted from an ad-
verfaryf. -.

liforders Meanwhile the King's exceflive clemency towards offenders
in the king.-
4lom. multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such aas of violence,

as brought his government under contempt, and proved fatal to
many of his fubje&s. The history of several years, about this
ilme, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between the
great families, and of' murders and affaflinations perpetrated in
the most audacious manner, and with circumstances of the utmost
barbarity. All the defe6ts in the feudal aristocracy were now
felt more sensibly, than at any other period in the hiflory of Scot-
land, and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree,
scarce consistent with the preservation of society. While the
King, too gentle to punish, or too feeble to aft with vigour, sus-
fered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

An attempt But though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which

Swell's. is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and those

gainft the fufpeaed of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. Many
King. persons, neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were

usually held to be certain indications of this crime, but masters of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
life, were seized and tortured i and though their confeffions con-

* Cald. 4. 204. t Spotfw. 385. Cald. 4 214,

"amined the most absurd and incredible circumitances, the King's Boox VIII.
prejudices, those of the Clergy, and of the people, conspired in
believing their extravagancies without hefitatioe, and in punishing 1591.
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy fufferers ac-
.cufed Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and of having employed their art, to
raise the forms, which had pndangered the Queen's life, and had
detained Jamnes so long in benmark. Upon this evidence, that
nobleman was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty
spirit could neither submit to the restraint, nor brook such an in-
Aignity. Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and im-
puting the accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancel-
lor, assembled his followers, under pretence of driving him from
the King's councils. Being favoured by some of the King's at-
tendants, he was admitted, by a secret passage, under cloud of
-night, into the court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He ad-
wanced direaly towards the royal apartment, but happily, before
he entered, the alarm was taken and the doors fliut. While he Decem. 17.
attempted to burfl open some of them, and to set fire to others,
the citizens of Edinburgh had time to run to their arms, and he
cfcaped with the utmost difficulty; owing his safety to the dark-
Defs of the night, and the precipitancy with which he fled*. 1592.

He retired towards the North, and the King having unadvised.

ly given a commi.fion, to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him,
and his followers, with fire and fwBrd ; he, under colour of execut-
ing that commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded
the house of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to thle ground, and flew Feb. 8.
Murray himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such pro-
mifing virtues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the darling
of the people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of
Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were
restrained, by the care of the magistrates, from any a& of violence,
they threw aside all refpe& for the King and his Ministers, and
openly insulted and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit
continued, James thought it prudent to withdraw from the city,
and fixed his residence for some time at Glasgow. There Hunt-
ly surrendered himlelf to justice; and, notwithstanding the atro-
cioufnefs of his crime, and the clamours of the people, the power
of the Chancellor, with whom he was now closely confederated,
ahd the King's regard for the memory of the Duke of Lennox,
whose daughter he had married, not only proteaed him from thi

SMelv,. 388. SpotC 386.

PooxVIII. sentence which such an odious acion merited, but exempted him

even from the formality of a public trial *.

r yteri- A step of much importance was taken, soon after, with regard
an Church to the government of the Church. The Clergy had long com.

fablifnt plained of the encroachments made upon their privilege and ju.

by law. rifdidlion, by the a&s of the parliament a 1584, and though these

laws had now loft much of their force, they resolved to petition
the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in form.

The jundure for pushing such a measure was well chosen. The

King had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity towards the
Popifth faction, and frill more by his remissness in pursuing the mur-
derers of the Earl of Murray. The Chancellor had not only a powe
erful party of the courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, -who imputed to him every false fiep in the
King's condu&. Bothwell flill lurked in the kingdom, and be-
-ing secretly supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-
firation, was ready, every moment, to renew his audacious enter-
prifes. James, for all these reasons, was extremely willing to in-
dulge the Clergy in their request, and not only consented to a law,
whereby the a&s 1584 were rescinded or explained; but he car-
ried his complaisance flill further, and permitted the parliament
to eflablifh the Presbyterian government, its General Assemblies,
Provincial Synods, Preibyteries and Kirk sessions, with all the dif-
ferent branches of their discipline and jurifdilion, in the most
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the adminiffration of Regents, from whom they might have
expe&ed the most partial favour, could not obtain the fan&tion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclefiaflical government.
No Prince was over less disposed than James to approve a system,
whose republican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so repug.
nant to his ex.alte4 notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
averflon be more inveterate than his, to the aullere and uncom-
plying characer of the Presbyterian Clergy in that age; who,
more eminent for zeal, than for policy, often contradided hi4
opinions, and censured his condut, with a freedom, equally offen-
five to his dogmatism as a Theologian, and to his pride as a King.
His situation however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to
dissemble his sentiments; and as he often difguffed his fubjeals,
by indulging the Popiflh fa&ion niore than they approved, he en-
deavoured to atone for this, by conceflions to the Presbyterian
Clergy, greater than he himself would otherwise have chofent.

* Spots 387. j Cald 4. 248, 252. Spots. 388.

In this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attaint- EooK VIII.

ed. But he soon made a new attempt to seize the King at Falk-
land; and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly 1592*
defended by others, who wifled well to Bothwell, as the Chan-
cellor's avowed enemy1 owed his safety to the fidelity and vigi-
lance of Sir Robert Melvil, ald to the irresolution of Bothwell's
associates *.

This danger was fearce well over, when the nation was alarm- A new conn

ed with the. discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy. the Ppi o
George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being seized as he Lords.
was ready to set fail f6r Spain, many suspicious papers were found
in his custody, and among these, several blanks signed by the
Earls of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary pre-
caution they hoped to efeape any danger of discovery. But Ker's
resolution shrinking when torture was threatened, he confeffed
that he was employed by these noblemen, to carry on a negoci-
ation with the. King of Spain ; that the blanks subscribed with
their names were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that
they were inftru&ed to offer the faithful service of the three
Earls to that Monarch; and to solicit him to land a body of
his troops, either in Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with
which they undertook, in the first place, to establish the Roman
Catholic Religion in Scotland, and then to invade England, with
the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David Graham .of Fintry,
and Barclay of Ladyland, whom he accused of being privy to the
conspiracy, were taken into cuflody, and confirmed all the cir-
cumiftances of his confeffion +-

The nation having been kept for some time in continual terror 59-.

and agitation by so many successive conspiracies, the discovery of Zeal of 4te
this new danger completed the panic. All ranks of met,. as if peo1pe,
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought tbernfelves
called upon to fland forth in defence of their country. 'fhe'Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commiflion, assembled
a considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide
an inflant remedy against the impending danger. They seized
the Earl of Angus, and committed him to the castle ; they ex-
amined Ker; and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the and pro-
King, concerning the slate of the nation, and the neceflity of che il,
prosecuting the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, againa

* el. 4, them.r

* Melv. 40z, f Rymer, 16 190.

1ooKVIIt. though jealous of every encroachment on his prerogative, anA of.

'- ' fended with fubjefs, who instead of petitioning, seemed to pre.
1593" scribe to him, found it necessary, during the violence of the ser-

ment, not only to adopt their plan, but even to declare that no
consideration ihould ever induce him to pardon those, who had

Jan. 8. been guilty of so odious a treason. He summoned the Earls of

Huntly and Errol to surrender themselves to justice. Graham of
Fintry, whom his Peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he
commanded to be publicly beheaded; and marching into the
North at the head of an army, the two Earls, together with An.
gus, who had escaped out of prison, retired to the mountains,
He placed garrisons in the castles which belonged to them; com-
pellod their vassals, and the Barons, in the adjacent counties, to
subscribe a bond containing profeffions of their loyalty towards
him, and of their firm adherence to the Proteilant faith ; and,
the better to secure the tranquillity of that part of the kingdom,
constituted the Earl* of Athol, and Marshall, his Lieutenant
there *.

March x8. Having finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,
Elizabeth
folicitshim where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador fronq
to treat the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a
them with
rigoar. conspiracy, which she considered as no less formidable to her own

kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
remissness, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, to pu;
niih this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not appre,
hend the persons, at least to confiscate the estates of fach audaci-
ous rebels. She weakened, however, the force of these requefts
by interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom,
according to her usual policy in nourishing a faclious spirit among
the Scottish nobles, the had taken under her protection. James
abfolutly refused to listen to any intercession in favour of one,
who had so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both
his government and his person. With regard to the Popish con-
fpirators, he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vi-
gour; but that he might be the better able to do so, he demand-
ed a small fum of money from Elizabeth, which she, difrufitful,
perhaps, of the manner in which he might apply it, fhewed no
inclination to grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his,
own fubje&s obliged him to call a parliament, in order to pass an
at of attainder against the three Earls. But before it met, KeD

* Spots. 391. Cald. 4. 29r.

made his escape out of prison, and on pretence, that legal evi- Boot VIII.
dence of their guilt could not be produced, nothing was con.
cluded against them. The King himself was universally fafpec-. 1593
ed of having contrived this artifice, on-purpofe to elude the re-
quests of the Queen of England, and to disappoint the wilhes of
his own people. And therefore, in order to sooth the Clergy,
who exclaimed loudly against his condut&, he gave way to the
passing of an a,&, which ordained those who obflinately contemn-
ed the censures of the Church, to be declared outlaws *.

While the terror excited by the Popilh conspiracy poffeffed the Bothwell

nation, the court had been divided by two rival facions, which the King
contended for the chief direftion of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the
Queen's displeasure. The Duke of Lermnnox, the Earl of Athol,
Lord Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart espoused her quar-
rel, and widened the breach. And James, fond no less of do-.
meflic tranquillity, than of puplic peace, advised his favourite to
retire, for some time, in hopes that the Queen's resentment would
subside. But as he flood in need, in the present junture, of the
affiflance of so able a Minister, he had recalled him to court. In
order to prevent him from recovering his former power, the Stew-
arts had recourse to an expedient no less illegal, than desperate.
Having combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame surname,
they brought him back secretly into Scotland and seizing the July 4.
gates of the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment -with
a numerous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by
all his courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered more in-
dignation than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, cal-
led on the Earl to finish his treafons, by piercing his Sovereign
to the heart. But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refuse his demands.
And a few days after he signed a capitulation with this fuccef-
ful traitor, to whom he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound
himself to grant him a remission for all past offences, and to procure
the ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean time, to dif-
miss the Chancellor, the Master of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir
George Home, from his councils and presence. Bothwell, on
his part, consented to remove from court, though he left there as
many of his associates, as he thought fufficient to prevent the re-
turn of the adverse faction.

* Cald. 4- 343. Sptf. 393. Parl.x3. Jac. V. c. 164.

BoOK VIII. But it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the

fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often fubjef during

1593. his minority. He discovered so much impatience to shake off his

He recovers
his liberty, fetters, that those who imposed, durst not continue, the restraint.
Septem. 7. They permitted him to call a convention of the nobles at Stirling,

and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to
be so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the King's person and authority to be high treason, and declar.
ed him absolved from any obligation to observe conditions, ex-
torted by force, and which violated so essentially his royal prero-
gative. James, however, flill proffered him a pardon, provided
he would sue for it as an aft of mercy, and promise to retire out
of the kingdom. These conditions Bothwell rejected with dif-
dain, and betaking himself once more to arms, attempted to fur-
prise the King, but finding him on his guard, fled to the bor-
ders *.

Supneedo ' The King's ardour against Bothwell, compared with his flow
favouring and evasive proceedings against the Popifih Lords, occasioned a
the Popith
Lords. general disgust among his fubjedcs; and was imputed either to an

excessive attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or to a
secret partiality towards their opinions ; both which gave rife to
no unreasonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians
of the Proteflant Religion, thought themselves bound, in such a
junEture, to take extraordinary fleps for its preservation. And

Sept. 2-. the provincial synod of Fife happening to meet at that time, a

motion was made to excommunicate all concerned in the late
coiffpiracy, as obtlinate and irreclaimable Papifts. And though
none of the conspirators resided within the bounds of the synod,
or were fubjea to.its jurifditiion, such was the zeal of the mem-
bers, that, overlooking this irregularity, they pronounced the fen-
tence of excommunication, to which the ad of last parliament ad-
ded new terrors. And left this fliould be imputed to a few men,
and accounted the at of a finall part of the Church, deputies were
appointed to attend the adjacent synods, and to desire their appro-
bation and concurrence.

His lerilty An event happened, a few weeks after, which increased the
towards people's suspicions of the King. As he was marching on an ex-

o

. 17- pedition against the borderers, the three Earls, coming suddenly

into his presence, offered to fabmit themselves to a legal trial, and
James, without committing them to cuflody, appointed a day for

* Cald 4. 3.6. Spots. 35.

that purpose. The conspirators prepared to appear with a formid- BooK VIII,
able train of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean time, .
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, assembling at I593-
Edinburgh, remonstrated against the King's extreme indulgence
with great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular course of juflice, to commit to sure custody persons charged
with the highest a&s of treason, who could not be brought to a
legal trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the
Church; and to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate con-
cerning the method of proceeding against them. At the fame
time, they offered to accompany him in arms to the place of trial,
left such audacious and powerful criminals should overawe justice,
and dicate to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit.
James, though extremely offended both with the irregularity of
their procedings, and the presumption of their demands, found
it expedient to put off the day of trial, and to call a Convention
of estates, in order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people.
By being humoured in this point, their suspicions began gradually
to abate, and the Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully,
that he himself, together with a few other members, was empowered
to pronounce a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much
deliberation, they ordained that the three Earls, and their affoci- Nov. 26.
ates, should be exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution,
on account of their correspondence with Spain; that, before the
first day of February, they fliould either submit to the Church,
and publicly renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of
the kingdom that, before the first of January, they fliould declare
which of these alternatives they would embrace ; that they fltould
find surety for their peaceable demeanour, for the future; and
that if they failed to signify their choice in due time, they should
lose the benefit of this a& of abolition, and remain exposed to all
the pains of law*.

By this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish fu-
perftition, fubmiflive to all the dictates of their priests, and buoy.- 594-
ed up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls re-
fused to accept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable
correspondence with the court of Spain. A convention of estates
pronounced them to have forefeited the benefit of the articles,
which were offered; and the King required them, byproclamation,
to surrender themselves to juflice. The presence of the English

* Cald 4. 330. Spots. 397,

Volume II.

BOOK VIII. ambassador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of these proceed.

- ings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and imput-

ES94* ing his relu&ance to punish the Popiflh Lords to a secret appro.

bation of their designs, had sent L/ord Zouche to represent, once
inore, the danger to which he exposed himself, by this false mo-
deration ; and to require him to exercise that rigour, which their
crimes, as well as the posture of affaiis rendered necessary. And
though the steps now taken by the King silenced all complaints
on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful of his characer as an ambaffa.
dor, entered into private negociations with such of the Scottish
nobles, as disapproved of the King's measures, and held almost an
open correspondence with Bothwell, who, according to the usual
artifice of malecontents, pretended much solicitude for reforming
the disorders of the commonwealth; and covered his own ambi-
tion with the specious veil of zeal againift those Counsellors, who
restrained the King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the
Proteflant faith. Zouche encouraged him in the name of his
Mistress, to take arms against his Sovereign.

Anew at- Meanwhile, the King and the Clergy were filled with mutual
Bothwell's. distrust of each other. They were jealous, perhaps to excess, that

his affecions leaned too much towards the Popilh fa&ion; he sus-
pe&ed them, without good reason, of prompting Bothwell to re-
bellion, and even of supplying him with money for that purpose.
Little instigation, indeed, was wanting to rouse such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwell's to any daring enterprise. He appeared suddenly
within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of four hundred horse;
The pretences, by which he endeavoured to justify this infurrec-
tion were extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Pope-
ry, concern for the King's honour, and for the liberties of the na-
tion. James was totally unprovided for his own defence; he had
no infantry, and was accompanied only with a few horsemen of
Lord Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the aid of
the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to a&
with zeal, he promised to proceed against the Popiflh Lords with
the utmost rigour of law. Animated by their Ministers, they
ran cheerfully to their arms, and advanced with the King at their
head against Bothwell; but he, notwithstanding his success in
putting to flight Lord Home, who had raftily charged him with
afar inferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith without dar-
ing to attack the King. His followers abandoned him soon after,
and discouraged by so many successive disappointments, could ne-
ver afterwards be brought to venture into the field. He betook

hinifelf to his usual lurking places, in the North of England ; but BooK VII.
Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's remonfirances, obliged
him to quit that retreat*. 1 94"

No sooner was the King delivered from one danger, than he Fresh dan.

was called to attend to another. The Popish Lords, in confe- thePopfrh
quence of their negociations with Spain, received, in the spring, Lords.
a supply of money from Philip. What bold designs this might April 3.
inspire, it was no easy matter to conjecture. From men under
the dominion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
the most desperate aclions were to be dreaded. The assembly of
the Church immediately took the alarm; remonfirated against
them with more bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified
the sentence of excommunication, pronounced by the synod of
Fife. James himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only be generally
displeasing to his own fubjeats, but give rife to unfavourable sus.
picions among the Engliflh, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a parliament; laid before it all the circumstances and June 8.
aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and several of these conneaed with the confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailled on them, by his in-
fluence and importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous sentence
the law can infli&. They were declared to be guilty of high
treason, and their etIates and honours forfeited. At the fame
time, statutes, more severe than ever, were enacted against the
profeffors of the Popish Religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater Battle of

difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the Glenlivat.
country almost inaccefflible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottish Monarch. No entreaty could prevail on
Elizabeth to advance the money, necessary for defraying the ex-
pences of an expedition against them. To attack them in person,
with his own forces alone, might expose him both to disgrace
and to danger. He had recourse to the only expedient which
remained, in such a situation, for aiding the impotence of So-
vereign authority ; he delegated his authority to the Earl of
Argyle, and Lord Forbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity
with the conspirators; and gave them a commission to invade
their lands, and to seize the castles which belonged to them.
Bothwell, notwithtianding all his high pretensions of zeal for the

* Spots 403. Cald. 4. 359.

pooK VIII. Protellant Religion, having now entered into a close confederacy

V' with them, the danger became every day more urging. Argyle,

4594- solicited by the King, and roused by the Clergy, took the field

at the head of seven thousand men. Huntly and Errol met him
at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in number, but compos.
ed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted on horse.

&ober 3. back, and who brought along with them a train of field pieces.

They encountered each other with all the fury, which heredi-
tary enmity and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined courage.
But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first discharge of the
cannon, to which they were little accustomed, and unable to re.
sift the impression of cavalry, were soon put to flight. And Ar.
gyle, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his friends
out of the field, weeFing with indignation at their disgrace, and
calling on them to stand, and to vindicate the honour of their
name *.

On the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to

pawn his jewels in order to raise money--, assembled a small body
of troops, and marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbefes, and other clans at en-
mity with Huntly and Errol, who having loft several of their
principal] followers at Glenlivat, and others refusing to bear arms
against the King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James wasted their lands; put garrisons in some of their
caffles ; burnt others 5 and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieu-
tenant in that part of the kingdom, with a body of men fuffici-
ent to restrain them from gathering to any head there, or from
infesting the low country. Reduced at last to extreme distress,

Popish by the rigour of the season, and the desertion of their followers,
Lords dri-
ven out of they obtained the King's permission to go beyond feas', and gave
the king- security that they flhould neither return without his licence, nor

engage in any new intrigues against the Proteflant Religion, or
the peace of the kingdom T.

3595* By their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the North of

The Roman
Catholics Scotland; and the firmness and vigour, which James had display-
incensed a ed in his last proceedings against them, regained him, in a great
James. degree, the confidence of his Protestant fubjedis. But he funk,

in the fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem of
the Roman Catholics. They had asserted his mother's right to
the Crown of England with so much warmth, that they could not,
with any decency, reject his. And the indulgence, with which

SCald. 4. 408.

. Birch, Mem. i. 186. f Spotfw 404. Cald. 373, &c,

he affected to treat the profeffors of that religion, inspired them ROOKVIII.
with such hopes, that they viewed his accession to the throne as
no undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King pur- . 595*
sued the conspirators, and the severe statutes against Popery to
which he had given his consent, convinced them that these
hopes were visionary ; and they began to look about in quest of
some new successor, whose rights they might oppose to his. The
English Papifts turned their eyes towards the Earl of Essex,
whose generous mind, though firmly established in the Proteflant
faith, abhorred the severities inflifted in that age, on account of
religious opinions. Those of the fame feet, who were in exile, form-
ed a bolder scheme, and one more suitable to their situation. They
advanced the claim of the Infanta of Spain ; and Parsons the Je-
suit published a book, in which, by false quotations from history,
by fabulous genealogies, and absurd arguments, intermingled
with bitter invedtives against the King of Scots, he endeavoured
to prove the Infanta's title to the English Crown to be preferable
to his. And Philip, though involved already in a war both with
France and England, and scarce able to defend the remains of
the Burgundian Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, ea-
gerly grasped at this airy proje6&. The dread of a Spanish Pre-
,tender to the Crown, and the opposition which the Papifts began
to form against the King's succession, contributed not a little to
remove the prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare the way
for that event.

Bothwell, whose name has been so often mentioned as the dif- Bothwell

forced tZ

turber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the kingdom, fly into
was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of Spain.
England, on account of his confederacy with the Popish Lords;
excommunicated by the Church, for the fame reason; and desert-
ed, in his distress, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for
safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after re-
nouncing the Protestant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and
indigent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauch-
ery. The King, though extremely ready to sacrifice the firongeft
refentments to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be soft-
ened by his fubmiflions, nor be induced to listen to any intercef-
sion in his behalf*.

This year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an able Minis-

ter, on whom he had long devolved the whole weight of public
affairs. As James loved him while alive, he wrote, in honour of

* Winw. Mem. x. Spots. 410.

BooK VIII. his memory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the

compositions of that age, are far from being inelegant *.

1595. Soon after his death, a considerable change was made in the
1596. administration. At that time, the annual charges of government

A change far exceeded the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of ex.
ninite a- pensive amusements. James himself was a stranger to oeconomny,
tion. It became necessary, for all these reasons, to levy the public reve.

S nues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trust was committed to eight gentle-
men of the laws, who from their number were called Odavians.
The powers vested in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their consent:
and knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alie.
nation of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the trea-
fury, should be held valid, unless it was ratified by the fubfcrip.
tion of five of the commissioners; all their aas and decisions were
declared to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in ci-
vil courts ; and in consequence of them, and without any other war.
rant, anyperfon might be arrefled, or their goods seized. Such exten-
five jurifdi&ion, together with the absolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the government into
their hands. United among themselves, they gradually under-
mined the reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucra-
tive or honourable office. The 'ancient servants of the Crown
repined, at being obliged to quit their stations to new men. The
favourites, and young courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's
liberality flinted by their prescriptions. And the Clergy ex-
claimed against some of them as known apoflates to Popery, and
suspected others of secretly favouring it. They retained their
power, however, notwithstanding this general combination against
them; and they owed it entirely to the order and oeconomy which
they introduced into the administration of the finances, by which
the necessary expences of government were more easily defrayed,
than in any other period of the King's reign :.

Violence of The rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said to be
the nation
againfthe carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with
opifh "* pots 41.

Lo . Alexander Seaton Pefident of the Sefflon, Walter Stewart Commendator,

of Blantyre, Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy, John Lindsay, James Elphing-
son, Thomas Hamilton, JohnSkene Clerk Register, and Feter Young Elermo
fynar.

i Spots. 413, 435"

the dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the BooK VIIL
defence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive; 1596.
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their eflates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the a& of forfeiture ineffecual, by supporting
the avowed enemies of the Protestant faith. The Assembly of March24.
the Church took under consideration the slate of the kingdom,
and having appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly re-
newed the Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere
to the Proteflant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors. A
committee, consisting of the most eminent Clergymen, and of ma-
ny Barons, and Gentlemen of diftindion, waited on the King, and
laid before him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the
preservation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the
estates of the banished Lords, as a fund for the maintenance of
soldiers; to take the firifeft precautions for preventing the re-
turn of such turbulent fubjecs into the country ; and to pursue
all who were fulpeded of being their adherents, with the utmost
rigour.

Nothing could be more repugnant to the King's schemes, or The King's

more disagreeable to his inclination, than these propositions. A- remissness

withreg'rd

verse, through his whole life, to any course, where he expe&ed totham.
opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the
characer of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed
with concern the prejudices against him, which were growing
among the Roman Catholics and resolved to make some atone-
ment for that part of his condut, which had drawn on him their
indignation. Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her
life had lately been in danger; if any Popish competitor should
arise to dispute his right of succession, a fadion, so powerful as
that of the banished Lords, might be extremely formidable ; and
any division among his own fubjefs might prove fatal, at a junc-
ture, which would require their united and most vigorous efforts.
Instead, therefore, of the additional severities which .the assembly
proposed, James had thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which
they already fuffered. And as they were surrounded, during their
residence in foreign parts, by Philip's emissaries ; as resentment
might dispose them to listen more favourably, than ever, to their
suggestions ; as despair might drive them to still more atrocious
ations ; he resolved to recall them under certain conditions, into
their native country. Encouraged by these sentiments of the

1~ooK VIII. King in their favour, of which they did not want intelligenic4

and wearied already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,

x596. they ventured to return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they

presented a petition to the King, begging his permifflon to reside
at their own houses, and offering to give security for their peace-
able and dutiful behaviour. James called a Convention of estates
to deliberate on a matter of such importance, and by their advice
he granted the petition.

therafh So soon as they were informed of this, the members of a com.
proceedings mittee, appointed by the last assembly, met at Edinburgh, and
6f the Cler.
gy and peo. with all the precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions

'le" as they thought necessary for the safety of the kingdom. They

wrote circular letters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they
warned them of the approaching danger; they exhorted them to
flir up their people to the defence of their just rights; they com-
manded them to publish, in all their pulpits, the a& excommuni.
cating the Popish Lords; and enjoined them to lay all those who
were fufpe&ed of favouring Popery under the fame censure, by a
summary sentence, and without observing the usual formalities of
trial. And as the danger seemed too pressing to wait for the
stated meetings of the judicatories of the Church, they made choice
of the molt eminent Clergymen in different corners of the kingdom,
appointed them to reside constantly at Edinburgh, and to meet
every day with the Mirnifters of that city, under the name of the
Standing Council of the Church, and vefiled in this body the supreme
authority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the Church Ihould receive no detriment.

These proceedings, no less unconstitutional than unprecedented,

were manifefi encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold
fieps towards open rebellion, The King's condua, however, jus-
tified in some degree such excesses. His lenity towards the Pa-
pifts, so regugnant to the principles of that age; his pardoning the
conspirators, notwithifanding repeated promises to the contrary;
the refpe& he paid to Lady Huntly, who was attached to'the Ro-
mifh religion, no less than her husband; his committing the care
of his daughter, the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingflon, who
was infeded with the fame superstition the contempt with which
he talked, on all occasions, both of the chara&er of Ministers,
and of their fun&ion; were circumflances which might have fil-
led minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with some suspicions;
and might have precipitated into rash councils, those, who were
far removed from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the

tmfotives might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laud- BooK VIII.
able the end they had in view, they condu6ced their measures,
with no address, and even with little prudence. James discovered I596.
a strong inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and, jea.
lous as he was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many
concessions for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the
Privy Counsellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the Clergy, and inquired whether Huntly and his affoci-
ates might not, 'upon making proper acknowledgments, be again
received into the bosom of the Church, and be exempted from
any further punishment, on account of their pafl apoftacy and trea-
sons. They replied, that though the gate of mercy flood always
open for those who repented and returned, yet as these noblemen
had been guilty of idolatry, a crime deserving death both by the
law of God,_ and of man, the civil magistrate could not legally
grant them a pardon; and even though the Church thould absolve
them, it was his duty to inflidt punishment upon them. This in-
flexibility in those, who were reckoned the most compliant of the
order, filled the King with indignation, which the imprudence and
obilinacy of a private Clergyman heightened into rage.

Mr. David Black, Minister at St. Andrew's, discoursing in one Seditious

of his sermons, according to custom, concerning the state of the dorine

tauglt by

nation, affirmed that the King had permitted the Popish Lords to Black.
return into Scotland, and by that a&ion, had discovered the treach-
ery of his own heart; that all Kings were the Devil's chil-
dren ; that Satan had now the guidance of the court; that the
Queen of England was an atheist; that the judges were mifcre-
ants and bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy
Counsellors cormorants and men of no religion ; and in his prayer
for the Queen, he used these words, We must pray for her for
fafhion's fake, but we have no cause, flie will never do us good.
James commanded him to be summoned before the Privy Coun- Nov. To.
cil, to answer for-fuch seditious exprelfioris ; and the Clergy, in- efioufe his
flead of abandoning him to the punishment, which such a petu- defence.
lant and criminal attack on his fiperiors deserved, were so impru-
dent as to espouse his cause, as if it had been the common one
of the whole order. The controversy concerning the immunities
of the pulpit, and the rights of the Clergy to teflify against vices
of every kind, which had been agitated in 1584, was now reviv.
ed. It was pretended, that with regard to their sacred fun&ion,
Ministers were fubjef to the Church alone ; that it belonged on-
ly to their Ecclesiastical fuperiours to judge of the truth, or false.

Volume II. K

BooK VII. hood of doarines, delivered in the pulpit; that if upon any pro.

tence whatever, the King usurped this jurifdicion, the Church

;596. would, from that moment, fink under servitude to the civil Ma.

giftrate; that inflead of reproving vice, with that honest bold.
ness, which had often been of advantage to individuals, and falu.
tary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to flatter the passions
of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of others; that the
King's eagerness to punish the indefcretion of a Protestant Minis.
ter, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of Popish con-
fpirators, called on them to stand on their guard; and that now
was the time to contend for their privileges, and to prevent any
encroachment on those rights, of which the Church had been in
poffeffion ever since the Reformation. Influenced by these con.
fiderations, the council of the Church enjoined Black to decline
the jurifdi&ion of the Privy council. And he, proud of such an
opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose,
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the
queflions which were put to him. In order to add greater
weight to these proceedings, the council of the Church transmitted
the declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom,
and commanded every Miniffer to fufcribe it, in testimony of his
approbation.

James defended his rights with no less vigour than they were

attacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority
must fall, if the clergy should be permitted, publicly, and with
impunity, to caluminate his Ministers, and even to cenfare
himself ; and knowing, by former examples, what unequal repa-
ration for such offences he might expedc from the judicatories of
the Church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and
issued a proclamation, commanding the members of the council
of the Church to leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own
pariflies. Black, inflead of submitting, renewed his declinature;
and the council, in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that
as they met by the authority of the Church, obedience to it was
a duty still more sacred, than that which they owed to the King
himself. The Privy council, notwithflanding Black's refusing to
plead, proceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pro-
nounced him guilty of the crimes of which he had been accused;
But referred it to the King, to appoint what puniflhment he
should fuffer.

Meanwhile, many endeavours were used to bring matters to

accommodation. Almost every day produced some new fclerme

*ft reconcilement; but through the King's fickleness, the obfti- BOOK VIII.
nacy of the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all
proved ineffectual. Both parties appealed to the people, and by i596*
reciprocal and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render
each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes,
with which James charged the Clergy ; while they made the pul-
pits resound with comp!aints of his exccffive lenity towards Pa-
pifts, and of the no less excessive rigour, with which he oppressed
the established Church. Exasperated by their bold inve&ives, he,
at last, sentenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to
reside there during his pleasure ; and once more commanding the
-members of-the fitnding council to depart from Edinburgh, he re-
-quired all the Ministers in the kingdom to fabfcribe a bond, oblig-
ing themselves to submit, in the fame manner as other fubjeds,
to the jurifdiftion of the civil courts, in matters of a civil nature.

This decisive measure excited all the N.iolent paflions, which A tumult in

.possess disappointed factions; and deeds no less violent immedi. Edinburgh.
ately followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices
of some courtiers, who expeted to reap advantage from the ca-
lamities of their country, or who hoped to lessen the authority of
the Odavians, by engaging them in hoatilities with the Church.
On one hand, they informed the King that the citizens of Edin-
burgh were under arms every night, and had planted a firong
guard round the houses of their Ministers. James, in order to
put a flop to this imaginary insult on his government, iiTued a procla-
mation, commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave
the town, within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to
the Miniflers, advising them to look to their own safety, as
Huntly had been secretly admitted, to an interview with the
King, and had been the author of the severe proclamation against
the citizens of Edinburgh *. They doubted no more the cf truth
of this intelligence, than the King had done of that which he re-
ceived, and fell as blindly into the snare. The letter came to
their hands, just as one of their number was going to mount the
pulpit. They resolved that he thould acquaint the people of their Dec. 17
danger ; and he painted it, with all the firong colours, which

* Though matters were indullrioufly aggravated by perfois, who wif'-ed

both parties to pursue violent measures; neither of these report- v- -re altoge.
ther destitute of foundation. As their Ministers weie supposed to be in danger,
some of the more zealous citizens had determined to defend then, by force of
arms. Birch, Mem. 2. 250. Hluntly had been privately in Edinburgh, where
he had an interview, if not with the Kir-g, at least with forme cf h: Mini'ers,
Blrch, I6id. 230,

BooK VII. men naturally employ, in describing any dreadful and instant ca.

lamity. When the sermon was over, he desired the nobles and

1S96. gentlemen to assemble in the Lit/le Church. The whole multi.

tude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded thither; they
promised and vowed to fland by the Church; they drew up a pe.
tition to the King, craving the redress of those grievances, of which
the Clergy complained, and beseeching him to deliver them fromn
all future apprehensions of danger, by removing such of hi
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the Proteflant Re.
ligion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgesses, and two

The King Ministers, were apppointed to present it. The King happened
in danger. to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef.

sion was fitting. The manner in which the petition was deliver.
ed, as well as its contents, offended him. He gave an haughty
reply ; the petitioners insisted with warmth ; and a promiscuous
multitude prefling into the room, James retired abruptly into an-
other apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut behind
him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were flill as.
fembled, and to whom a Minifler had been reading, in their ab-
fence, the flory of Haman. When they reported that the King
had refafed to listen to their petitions, the Church was filled in a
moment with noise, threatenings, execrations, and all the out.
rage and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their
arms; some to bring out the wicked Haman ; others cried, the
sword of the Lord and of Gideon; and rushing out with the mofft
furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatening the
King himself, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they
named, that they might tear them in pieces. The Magistrates of
the city, partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to
quell the tumult; the King attempted to sooth the malecon-
tents, by promising to receive their petitions, when presented in
a regular manner; the Ministers, sensible of their own rashness in
kindling such a flame, seconded both ; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and
the King returned to the palace; happy in having escaped from
an infurre&ion, which, though the instantaneous and unconcert-
ed effe&t of popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent dan.
ger, and was considered by him as an unpardonable affront to his
authority *.
' As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents affemb-
led, in order to prepare their petition. The punishment of the
Popish Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were sus-

* Spotfw. 417x, c. Cald 5. S4, 4&. Birch, Memn. 2. 235

peaed of favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all BooK VII.
the late aas of council, subversive of the authority of the Church -
together with an a& approving the proceedings of the standing 1596.
council; were the chief of their demands. But the King's indig-
nation was still so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpose,
durst not venture, that night, to present requests which could not
fail of kindling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with He leaves
all his attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the fefilon, and other Edinburgh,

and Fro-

courts of justice, were required to leave a city, where it was ceeds with
no longer consistent either with their safety, or their dignity to feerity a.

gainft the

remain; and the noblemen and barons were commanded to re- citizens.
turn to their own houses, and not to reassemble witho,.t the King's
permission. The vigour, with which the King aced, struck a
damp upon the spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible
how much they would fuffer by his absence, and the removal of
the courts of juflice, repented already of their conduct. The Mi.
nifters alone resolved to maintain the contest. They endeavour-
ed to prevent the nobles from dispersing; they inflamed the peo.
ple by violent invecives against the King; they laboured to pro-
cure subscriptions to an aflociation for their mutual defence ; and
conscious what lustre and power the jun&ion of some of the great-
er nobles would add to their cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh
wrote to Lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the word of God,
and provoked by the injuries offered to the Church, had taken
arms; that many of the nobles had determined to protect the
Protestant Religion, which owed its establishment to the piety
and valour of their ancestors; that they wanted only a leader to
unite them, and to inspire them with vigour; that his zeal for
the good cause, no less than his noble birth, entitled him to that
honour: They conjured him therefore not to disappoint their
hopes and withes, nor to refuse the fuffering Church that aid,
which fle so much needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of comply-
ing with their desire, carried the letter dire&ly to the King,
whom this new insult irritated to such a degree, that he command-
ed the Magifirates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their Minis-
ters, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The
magistrates, in order to regain the King's favour, were preparing
to obey; and the Minifders, who saw no other hope of safety, fled
towards England *.

This unfuccefsful infurrefion, inflead of overturning, eflablifh- The King

ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confound- humblesthe powerofthe
ed and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjeas, in order to avoid Churcoh

.* Spotfw. 45., Cald. 5. 126.

BOOK VIII. fufpiciim, or to gain his favour, contended who should bemofl foa.

ward to execute his vengeance. A Convention of estates being

9,7-" called, pronounced the late infurredion to be high treason ; or

dained every Minister to fubicribe a declaration of his fubmilfio0
to the King's ju ifdidion, in all, matters civil and criminal; em.
powered magistrates to commit, inflantly, to prison any Minister,
who in his sermons, should utter indecent refiedions on the King's
condu;ct prohibited any Ecclefiallical judicatory to meet, with.
out the King's licence ; commanded that no person should be ele&.
ed a magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the King's
approbation and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
should either difoover, and inflia condign punif{ment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself thould be fubjeded to
all the penalties of that treasonable a-ion *.

Abridges Armed with the authority of these decrees, James resolved to
leges of the cruh entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjedts. As the Clergy
cmitzs of had, hitherto, dlerived their chief credit and strength from the

r. favour and zealof the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was to

humble them. Though the magifirates submitted to him in the
most abjea terms; though they vindicated themfeives, and their
fellow citizens, from the most diflant intention of violating hig
royal person or authority ; though, after the ftri&eft scrutiny, no
circumitances that could fix on them the suspicion of premeditated
rebellion had been difoovered; though many of the nobles, and
such of the Clergy as flill retained any degree of favour, interced-
ed in their behalf; neither acknowledgements, nor interceffions,
were of the least avail-t. The King continued inexorable, the

Februaryze. city was declared to have forfeited its privileges as a Corporation,

and to be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital of
the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted by its ministers,
abandoned by the courts of justice, and proscribed by the King,
remained in desolation and despair. The couxtieis even threaten-
ed to raze the city to the foundation, and to ered a pillar where
it flood, as an everlafling monument of the King's vengeance, and
of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in compliance with Eli-
zabeth, who interpcfed in their favour, and moved by the con-

tMarch. 21. tinual folicitations of his nobles, James absolved the citizens from

the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he flripped them of
their moit important privileges; they were neither allowed to eled
their own magistrates, nor their own ministers; many new bur-
dens were imposed on them; and a great fum of money was eax
ad ted by way of peace- offering .

* Cald. 5. 147. t Cald . i5 49 j Spotfw- 434. 444.

James was, meanwhile, equally afliduous, and no less fuccefsful, DE K VIII.

in circumscribing the jurifdifion of the Church. Experience "-"'
had discovered that to attempt this, by ads of parliament, and 1597.

New repu-

sentences of privy council, was both ineffetual, and odious. He t:oi.sjith
had recourse, now to an expedient more artful, and better calcu- regai d to
lated for obtaining his end. The Ecclesiastical judicatories cu
were composed of many members; the majority of the Clergy
were extremely indigent, and unprovided of legal flipends; the
Ministers in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithRianding
the parity established by the Presbyterian government, had alTum-
ed a leading in the Church, which filled their brethren with
envy; every numerous body of men is susceptible of sudden and
firong impressions, and liable to be influenced, corrupted, or over.
awed. Induced by these considerations, James thought it polfble
to gain the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to subdue.
Proper agents were set to work all over the kingdom; promises,
flattery, and threats were employed; the ufarpations of the bre,
thren near the capital were aggravated; the jealousy of theirpower,
which was growing in the diflant provinces, was augmented; and
two different General Afiemblies were held, in both, which, not-
withstanding the zeal and boldness, wherewith a few leading Cler-
gymen defended the privileges of the Church, a majority declared
in favour of those measures, which were agreeable to the King.
Many practices, which had continued since the Reformation,
were condemned; many points of discipline, which had hitherto
been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the.
licence, with which Miniflers discoursed of political matters, was
restrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed against par-
ticular persons, censured; sentences of fummnary excommunication
declared unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly, without
the King's permission, prohibited; and the right of nominating
Ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown. Thus,
the Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which it would have
been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted to a yoke,
pnore intolerable than any James would have ventured to impose
by force; while those who continued to oppose his measures, in-
flead of their former popular topic of the King's violent encroach-
ments on a jurifdidion which did not belong him, were obliged
to turn their outcries against the corruptions of their own order *.

By the authority of these assemblies, the Popith Earls were al. Popi'i

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors were abfolv-

pardoned.

* Spotfw. 433. Cald, 5. x8., 233-

Boox VIii. ed from the sentence of excommunication; and received into the

bosom of the Church. -But, not many years after, they relapsed

1597. into their former errors, were again reconciled to the Church of

Rome, and by their apoftacy juflified, in some degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

The Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the intercefilon of these

aTemblies, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridg.
ed their power. The city was divided into diflina parishes; the
number of Ministers doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King
could rely were fixed in the new parishes ; and these circumftan.
ces, added to the authority of the late decrees of the Church,
contributed to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclesiastical
affairs, which James poffeffed during the remainder of his reign,

The King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfaftions of this period scarce deserve to be remem.
bered. The Odavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split.
ing into factions among themselves, resigned their commission;
and the adminifiration of the revenue returning into its former
channel, both the King and the nation were deprived of the be.
nefit of their regular and frugal ceconomy.

Dec. 19. Towards the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

to restore Huntly, and his associates, to their estates and honours,
by repealing the a& of forfeiture passed against them. The au-
thority of this supreme court was likewise employed to introduce
a farther innovation into the Church ; but conformable to the
system which the King had now adopted, the motion for this

Ecclefiaftics purpose took its rife from the Clergy themselves. As the ad of
reftoredto a
eat in par- general annexation, and that establishing the Presbyterian go-
liament. vernment had reduced the few Bishops, who still furvived,Jo

poverty and contempt; as those who poffeffed the Abbeys, and
Priories, were mere laymen, and many of them temporal Peers,
few or none of the Ecclefiaffical order remained to vote in par.
liament, and by means of that, the influence of the Crown was
considerably diminiflied there, and a proper balance to the power
and number of the nobles was wanting. But the prejudices, the
nation had conceived against the name and characer of Bifliops,
were so violent that James was obliged, with the utmost care, to
avoid the appearance of a design to revive that order. He pre-
vailed therefore on the commission appointed by last assembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was the only body
in the kingdom deflitute of its representatives in that supreme

court, where it so nearly concerned every order to have some, BooK V11I.
who were bound to defend its rights ; and to crave that a corn-
petent number of the Clergy should be admitted, according to 1597.
anc;ent cultom, to a feat there. In compliance with their re-
quest, an acd was passed, by which those Miniflers, on whom the
King flould confer the vacant Biihopricks and Abbeys, were en-
titled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy might con-
ceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their privileges, it was
remitted to he General Assembly, to determine what spiritual
jurifdi&ion or authority in the government of the Church these
persons should possess *. g.

The King, however, found it no easy matter to obtain the con,

currence of the EcclefiafPical judicatories, in which the a& of
parliament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy
perceived how much Juftre this new privilege would refle& upon
their order; though they were not insensible of the great accef-
son of personal power and dignity, which many of them woul4
have acquired, by being admitted into the supreme council of the
nation, their abhorrence of Episcopacy was extreme; and to that,
they sacrificed every consideration of interest or ambition. All
the King's profeffions of regard for the present conflitution of the
Church did not convince them of his sincerity ; all the devices
that could be invented for restraining and circumscribing the ju-
rifdiaion of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did
ilot diminish their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had
taught them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advan-
ces, and though admitted at first with moderate authority, and
inder specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.
" Varnith over this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen,
7ith what colours you please; deck the intruder with the utmost
art; under all this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The
f,ime sentiments prevailed among many of his brethren, and in-
duced them to reje& power and honours, with as much zeal, as
ever those of their order courted them. Many, however, were
allured by the hopes of preferment ; the King himself and his
Ministers employed the fame arts, which they had tried so fuc-
cefsfully last year ; and after long debates, and much opposition,
the General Assembly declared that it was lawful for Ministers to -March 7.
accept of a feat in parliament; that it would be highly beneficial
to the Church, to have its representatives in that supreme court;
.nd that fifty-one persons, a number nearly equal to that of the

* Spotfw. 450. Parl. i5th, Ja.c. VI. c. 235.
!olume II. L

BooK VIII. Ecclefiaftics, who were anciently called to parliament, (flould be

chosen from among the Clergy for that purpose. The manner of

1598" their elec&ion, together with the powers to be veftied in them,

were left undecided for the present, and furnished matter of fu.
ture deliberation *.

I599. As the prospect of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

James en- nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it cer.
deavours
withfi:cefs tain. And as he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany
to gain a by his marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to their feve.
party h i
England. ral courts, in order to explain the justness of his title to the'Eng.

lifh throne, and to desire their affilance, if any competitor should
arise to dispute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily ac.
knowledged the equity of his claim ; but the aid they could as.
ford him was diilant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce
abbot of Kinlofs, his ambassador at the English Court, solicited
Elizabeth, with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by
some public deed, and to deliver her own fubjefes from the cala-.
mities, which are occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fuccef-
flon. But age had flrengthened all the passions, which had, hi-.
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this great queflion obscure, and
undecided ; and a general and evasive answer was all that James
could obtain. As no imprefiron could be made on the Queen,
the ambassador was commanded to found the disposition of her
iubje&s, and to try what progress he could make in gaining
them. Bruce polffeled all the talents of secrecy, judgment, and
address, requisite for cordu&ing a negociation, no less delicate,
than important. A Minister of this charaaer was entitled to the
confidence of the English. Many of the highest rank unbosom-
ed themselves to him without reserve, and gave him repeated aL
fhrances of their refolnticn to afTert his mafter's right, in oppofi-
tior to every pretender f-. And as several pamphlets were dif-
perfed, at this time, iKi England, containing obje&ions to his
title, James employed some learned men in his kingdom to an.
fwcr these cavillers, and to explain the advantages which would
refilt to both kingdoms, by the union of the Crowns. These
books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to reconcile
the Englilh to that event. A book published this year, by the
King himself, produced an effect flill more favourable. It was
intitled Bafq/icon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the
art of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwith-
itanding the great alterations and refinements in national taftle

* Spot.45o. Cald.5.2787. Johaft, 242.

Since that time, we must allow this to be no contemptible per- BOOK VIII.
formance, and not to be inferior to the works of most cotempo-
rary writers, either in purity of flyle, or justness of conipofition. 1599-
Even that vain parade of erudition with which it abounds, and
which now disgusts us, raised the admiration of that age ; and as
it was filled with those general rules, which speculative authors
deliver for rendering a people happy, and of which James could
discourse with great plausibility, though often incapable of put-
ting them in practice ; the English conceived an high opinion of
his abilities, and expeded an increase of national honour and
prosperity, under a Prince so profoundly skilled in politics, and
who gave such a specimen both of his wisdom, and of his love to
his people *.

The Queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were

very different from therfe of her fubjeds. His excessive indul-
gence towards the Popith Lords; the facility with which he par-
doned their repeated treafons; his refloring Beaton, the Popish
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time
of the Reformation, to the poffefion of the temporalities of that
benefice; the appointing him his Ambassador at the court of
France; the applause he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on
those who adhered to the Queen his mother, Elizabeth considered
as so many indications of a mind alienated from the Protefiant re-
ligion; and fufpeced that he would soon revolt from the profef-
sion of it. These suspicions seemed to be fully confirmed, .by a Accuses
discovery which came from the Master of Gray, who resided at himofcor-

responding

that time in Italy, and who, rather than fiffer his intriguing spirit with the
to be idle, demeaned himfelffo far as to adt as a spy for the Eng- Pepe.
lifli court. He conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a letter, writ-
ten by James to Pope Clement VIII. in which the King, after
many expreflions of regard for that Pontiff, and of gratitude for his
favours, declared his firm resolution to treat the Roman Catholics
with indulgence ; and, in order to render the intercourse between
the court of Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he
solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bifllop of Vaizon, a
Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardinals. Elizabeth, who had
received, by another channel $, some imperfed intelligence of
this correspondence, was filled with just surprise, and immediately
dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the
truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an action so unbe-
coming a Proteflant Prince. He was no less afioniflied at the

* Camd. Spots. 457. Cald. 333, 1 Winw. Mem. vol. i. 37, 32.

L- ij

POOK VIII. accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing but the cbtlf.

oufnefs of innocence could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a
mere calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies,
on purpose to bring his sincerity in religion to be fufpefhed. El.
phingfton the Secretary of State denied the matter with equal s.o
lerrinity. It came to be known by a very singular accident,
which happened some years after, that the information which Eli.
zabeth had received vtas well founded, though at the fame time
the King's declarations of his own innocence were perfedtly con.
fiftent with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply which he
publfihed to a controversial treatise, of which the King was the
author, accused him of having abandoned the favourable senti.
ments which he had once entertained of the Roman Catholic re.
ligion, and as a proof'bf this quoted his letter to Clement VIII.
It was impossible, any longer, to believe this to be a ficfion'; and
it was a matter too delicate to be passed over without ftrift in.
quiry. James immediately examined, Elphingfton, ahd his con-
session unravelled the whole inyftery. He acknowledged that he
had fhuffled in this letter, among other papers, which he laid be.
fore the King to be signed, who, fufpe&ling no such deceit, sub-
fcribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
'contained ; that he had no bther motive, however, to this adion,
but zeal for his Majefty's service ; and, by flattering the Roman
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government,
he imagined that he was paving the way for his more cafy accef-
sion to the English throne. The Privy Council of England en-
tertained very different sentiments of the Secretary's condu&.
In their opinion, not oenly the King's reputation had been exposed
to reproach, but his life to danger, by this rafl imposture; they
even imputed the gunpowder treason to the rage and disappoint-
inent of the Papifts, upon finding that the hopes which this letter
inspired were frustrated. The Secretary was font a prisoner into
Scotland, to be tried for high treason. His peers found him guil-
ty ; but by the Queen's intercession, he obtained a pardon *.

According to the account of other historians, James himself

.was no stranger to this correspondence with the Pope; and, if
we believe them, Elphingfton being intimidated by the threats of
the English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of
Dunbar, concealed some circumfiances in his narrative of this tranf-
a&ion, and falfified others and, at the expence of his own fame,
'and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil over
this-part of his Mafter's conduc f.

SSpotf. 456, 507. Johnft. 448. f Cald. vol. v. 3:Z. vi. 147.

But whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre- PooK VIII.

tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,
'"bout thfis time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friend- '599-

James at

Ihip of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precaution to- great pains
wards facilitating his accession to the Enmlifl throne. Lord to gain the

Romran

Home, who was himself a Papifi, was intruded with a secret corn- Caiholics
mission to the Pope* ; the Archbilhop of Glasgow was an alire
instrument with those of his own religion+. The Pope expref-
fed fach favourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right
to the Crown of England, that James thought himself bound,
some years after, to acknowledge the obligation in a public man-
nert. Sir James Lindsay made great progress in gaining the
English Papifts to acknovvwledge his Majely's title. Of all these
intrigues Elizabeth received obscure hints, from different quar-
ters. The more imperfecly flhe knew, the more violently she
fufpeaed the King's designs, and the natural jealousy of her tem-
per increasing with age, ihe observed his conduct with greater
solicitude than ever.
- The questions with regard to the ele&ion and power of the
representatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by 16oo.
the General Assembly, which met at Montrose. That place was March 28.
chosen, as most convenient for the Ministers in the north, among His sregu1a

' *tions with

whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And although great num- regard to
hers resorted from the northern provinces, and the King employ- the church.
ed his whole interest, and the authority of his own presence, to
gain a majority, the following regulations were with difficulty
agreed on. That the General Assembly flhall recommend fix per-
sons to every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in Par-
liament, out of whom the King 'hall nominate one; that the per-
son so eleted, after obtaining his feat in Parliament, shall neither
propose, nor consent to any thing there, that may affe& the inte-
reft of the church, without special inflru&ions to that purpose;
that he flall be answerable for his condut to every General As-
fembly; and submit to its censure, without appeal, upon pain of in-
famy and excommunication; that he fiall discharge the duties of
a Pastor, in a particular congregation; that he shall not usurp any
ecclesiastical jurifdicion, superior to that of his other brethren;
that if the church inflia on him the censure of deprivation, he
(hall thereby, forfeit his feat in ;Parliament; that he shall annual-
ly resign his commiftion to the General Airembly, which may be
reflored to him, or not, as the Assembly, with the King's appro-

* Winw. Mem. vol ii. 57. - Cald. vol. vi. 147. 4 Ibl. vol. v. 604.

Boo, VIII. bation, shall judge most expedient for the good of the church*.

' Nothing could be more repugnant to the idea of Episcopal govern-

ment, than thrcfc regulations. It was not in consequence of rights
derived from their office, but of powers conferred by a commis-
sion, that eccleafitical persons were to be admitted to a feat in
Parliament; they were the representatives, not the superiors of the
clergy. Deflitute of all spiritual authority, even their civil jurif-
difion was temporary. James, however, flattered himself that
they would soon be able to fhiake off these fetters, and gradually
acquire all the privileges which belonged to the Episcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he contended for, and
they opposed the nomination of these commissioners, not so much
on account of the powers then vefied in them, as of those, to
which it was believed they would soon attaint.

Gowry's During this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil.
conpiracy. lity. The clergy, after many struggles, were brought under great

fubje&ion; the Popiih earls were restored to their eflates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the consent of the
church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this
security, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a
conspiracy altogether unexpeaed, and almost inexplicable. The
authors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowry, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the
year 1584. Nature had adorned both these young men, especial-
ly the elder brother, with many accompliflhments, to which edu-
cation had added its most elegant improvements. More learned,
than is usual among persons of their rank; more religious, than
is common at their age of life ; generous, brave, popular; their
countrymen, far from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime,
conceived the most sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Not-
withilanding all these noble qualities, some unknown motive en-
gaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we adhere to the account
commonly received, mufft be transmitted to posterity, as one of
the most wicked, as well as one of the worst concerted, of which
history makes any mention.

On the fifth of Augufi, as the King, who resided during the

hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruth-
ven, who, with an air of great importance, told the King, that
the evening before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious

Spots. 453, 457- Cald. vol. v. 368. SSpotf. 45+4.

afpca, walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at BOOK VIII.
Perth; and on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot
filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold ; that he had immedi-
ately seized both him and his treasure, and without communicat-
ing the matter to any person, had kept him confined and bound
in a solitary house; and that he thought it his duty to impart
such a singular event, first of all to his Majefly. James imme-
diately fufpeced this unknown person to be a trafficking priest,
supplied with foreign coin, in order to excite new commotions
in the kingdom; and resolved to empower the Magistrates of
Perth to call the person before them, and inquire into all the cir-
cumftances of the flory. Ruthven violently opposed this refolu-
tion, and with many arguments urged the King to ride direflly
to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean-
while the chafe began ; and James, notwithtianding his paffiort
for that amusement, could not help ruminating on the strangeness
of the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At last he called
him, and promised, when the sport was over, to set out for Perth.
The chafe, however, continued long ; and Ruthven, who all the
while kept close by the King, was flill calling on him to make
halte. At the death of the buck, he would not allow James to
flay till a fresh horse was brought him and observing the Duke
of Lennox and the Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the
King, he entreated him to countermand them. This James re-
fused; and though Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as
the apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour, raised some sus-
picions in his mind ; yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's soli-
citations, prevailed on him to set out for Perth. When within
a mile of the town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his brother
of the King's arrival, though he had already dispatched two mef-
fengers for that purpose. At a little distance from the town, the
Earl, attended by several of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations were made for
the King's entertainment; the Earl appeared pensive and embar-
raffed, and was at no pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality,
for the bad fare with which he treated his guests. When the
King's repast was over, his attendants were led to dine in another
room, and he being left almost alone, Ruthven whispered him,
that now was the time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring Sir Thomas
Erfldkine along with them ; but, instead of that, Ruthven order-
ed him not to follow : and conduaing the King up a flair-cafe,

and then through several apartments, the doors of which bh
locked behind him, led him at last into a small fludy, in which
there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagger
by his fide. The King, who expeated to have found one dif-
armed and bound, flarted at the fight, and inquired if this was
the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle
of the man in armour, and holding it to the King's breast,
" Remember," said he, " how unjustly my father fuffered by
" your command ; you are now my prisoner; submit to my dif-
" pofal without refifiance, or outcry ; or this dagger fihall in.
'' ftantly avenge his blood." James expoflulated with Ruthven,
entreated, and flattered him. The man, whom he found in the
fludy, flood, all the while, trembling and dismayed, without
courage either to aid the King, or to second his aggressor. Ruth-
ven protefled that if the King raised no outcry, his life should be
safe ; and, moved by some unknown reason, retired in order to
call his brother, leaving to the man in armour the care of the
King, whom hie bound by oath, not to make any noise during
his absence,

While the King was in this dangerous situation, his attend.

ants growing impatient to know whither he had retired, one of'
Gowry's attendants entered the room hastily, and told them that
the King had just rode away towards Falkland. All of them
rushed out into the fireet; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry,
called for their horses. But, by this time, his brother had re-
turned to the King, and swearing that now there was no remedy;
he behoved to die ; offered to bind his hands. Unarmed as
James was, le scorned to submit to that indignity ; and closing
with the affaffin, a fierce struggle ensued. The man in armour
flood as formerly, amazed and motionless ; and the King drag-
ging Ruthven towards a window, which during his absence he
had persuaded the person with whom he was left to open, cried,
with a wild and affrighted voice, " Treason ! Treason ! Help!
" I am murdered !" His attendants heard, and knew the voice;
and saw, at the window, a hand which grasped the King's neck
with violence. They flew with precipitation to his afliflance.
Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the principal
flair-cafe, wdhere they found all the doors shut, which they bat-
tered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burfi them open.
But Sir John Ramsay, entering by a back-flair, which led to the
apartment where the King was, found the door open; and rush-
ing upon Ruthven, who was still struggling with the King, fitr'sc

Ehin twice with his dagger, and thruil him towards the flair-cafe, Bbo VIII.
where Sir Thomas Erikine and Sir Hugh Herries met, and kill-

16oo.

ed him;-he crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to
" blame for this adion." During this fcufile, the man, who had
been concealed in the fludy, escaped unobserved. Together with
Ramsay, Erikine, and Herries, one Wilson, a footman entered
the room where the King was, and before they had time to shut
the.door, Gowry ruffled in with a drawn sword in each hand, fol-
lowed by seven of his attendants well artned, and with a loud
voice threatened them all with inflant death. They immediate-
ly thrust the King into the little fludy, and shutting the door up-
on him, encountered the Earl. Notwithflanding the inequality
of numbers, Sir John Ramsay pierced Gowry through the heart,
and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his followers
having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflif. A
dreadful noise continued flill at the opposite door, where many
persons laboured in vain to force a passage 5 and the king being
assured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it
was opened on the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpe&edly found safe, with transports of congratulation; and
he, falling on his knees, with all his attendants around him, of-
fered solemn thanks to God for such a wonderful deliverance.
The danger, however, was not yet over, The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provolt Gowry was, and by whom he was ex-
tremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two brothers, ran to
their arms, and surrounding the house, threatened revenge, with
many insolent and opprobrious speeches against the King. James
endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by speaking to them
from the window; he admitted their Magistrates into the house;
related to them the whole circumflances of the fad; and their
fury subsiding by degrees, they difpexfed. On searching the Earl's
pockets for papers, that might discover his designs and accompli-
ces, nothing was found but a small parchment bag, full of ma.
gical characters, and words of enchantment; and if we may be-
lieve the account of the conspiracy published by the King,
" while these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled
" not; but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed
" out in great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of
this busy day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland,
having committed the dead bodies of the two brothers to the cuf-
tody of the Magiflrates of Perth.

Volume 1.

BOOK VIII. Notwithflanding the minute detail which the King gave of ad

the circumstances of this conspiracy against his life, the motives

i6oo.

The mo-. which induced the two brothers to attempt an alion so deteftl
tives of the able, the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose
confpira-
tors not ea- aid they depended, were altogether unknown. The words of
filyexplain' Ruthven to the King gave some grounds to think, that the desire

of revenging their father's death had infligated them to this at-
tempt. But, whatever injuries their father had fuffered, it is
scarce probable that they could impute them to the King, whose
youth and fubje&ion, at that time, to the violence of a fadion,
exempted him from being the obje& of resentment, on account
of aaions which were not done by his command. James had
even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the father had fuH.
fered, by benefits to his children; and Gowry himself, sensible
of his favour, acknowledged it with the warmest expressions of
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being conviaed of
assisting him in this assault on the King's servants, were executed
at Perth'; but they could give no light into the motives, which
had prompted their master to an a&ion so repugnant to these ac.
knowledgments. Diligent search was made for the person con-
cealed in the fludy, and from him great discoveries were ex-
peaed. But Andrew Henderson the Earl's fleward, who, upon
a promise of pardon, confeffed himself to be the man, was as
much a firanger to his mafter's designs, as the reft ; and though
placed in the ftludy by Gowry's command, he did not even know
for what end that fRation had been assigned him. The whok
tranfa&ion remained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two
brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their fcheme'without
either confident or accomplice, with unexampled secrecy, as well
as wickedness.

Sprot's dif- An accident, no less strange than the other circumiftances 6f
oncernin the flory, and which happened nine years after, discovered that
it. this opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the

two brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among some persons thait
he knew several secrets relating to Gowry's conspiracy, the privy
council thought the matter worthy of their attention, and order.
ed him to be seized. His confeffion was partly voluntary, and
partly forced from him by torture. According to his account,
Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but d
dissolute morals, was privy to all Gowry's intentions, and an ac-
complice in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent isr

t.erviews with him, in order to concert the plan of their opera- BooK VIII.
tions; the Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose;
and one Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret,
and carried the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters
written both by Gowry and Logan, on that occasion; and in.
,confirmation of his testimony, several of Logan's letters, which a
curiosity fatal to himself had prompted Sprot to steal from among
Bour's papers, were produced *. These were compared, by the
privy council, with papers of Logan's hand writing, and the re-
semblance was visible. Persons of undoubted credit, and well
qualified to judge of the matter, examined them, and swore to
their authenticity. Death itself did not exempt Logan from pro-
fecution, his bones were dug up, and tried for High Treason, and
by a sentence, equally odious and illegalf, his lands were for-

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another to Gowry,
and three of them without ariy dire&ion; nor did Sprot declare the name
of the person to whom they were written. Logan gives him the appella-
tion of Right Honourable. It appears from this, however, and from other
words in the letter, Crom. 95. that there were several persons privy to the
conspiracy, The date of the first letter is July i8th. Mr. Ruthventhad com-
municated the matter to Logan only five days before. Ibid. It appears fromn
the original fammons ofForfaulture against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though
he had letters addressed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally dan-
gerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read. " Jacobus
" Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, diti Georgii opera in legendis omnibus
' fcriptis ad eum missis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altogether
grange; and nothing but the capricious charader of Logan can account for
his chufing such a confident.

t By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High Treason might
be tried even after death. This praftice was adopted by the Scots, without
any limitation, Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power
was soon conceived to be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper
refiri&ions, by an a&, A. D. 1542, which has never been printed. The
words of it are, " And because the said Lords (i. e. the Lords of Articles)
think the said a&s (viz. in 1540) too general, and prejudicial to the Barons
in the realm, therefore statutes and ordains that the said a& thall have no
place in time coming, but against the heirs of them that notoriously com-
mits or shall commit lefe majesty against the King's person, against the re-
alm for everting the fame, and againf them that shall happen to betray
the King's army allenarly, and being notourly known in their time; and
the heirs of these persons to be called and judged within five years after
the decease of the said persons c6mmitters of the said crimes; and the said
time being bypast, the said heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The
sentence against Logan violated this statute in two particulars. He was not
notourly known during his life to be an accomplice in the crime for which
as was tried; and his heirs were called in question more than five years as

Mij

BOOK VIII. felted, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot was condemn.

, ed to 'be hanged for misprision of treason. He adhered to his

confeffion to the last, and having promised, on the fcaffold, to
give the spectators a sign in confirmation of the truth of what he
had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was thrown off
the ladder by the executioner *.

ter his death. It is remarkable that this flatute seems not to have been
attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular
circumstance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of juffice that no person
can be tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their
forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving them, they con.
trivedJhat in any process againil a dead person, his corpse or bones fball
be presented at the bar. Examples of this occur frequently in the Scottish
hiflory. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Hunt.
ly was presented in parliament, before sentence of forfaznture was pronoun-
ced againfi him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowry and his bro-
ther were preserved, in order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz.
Crim. Law, Book. I. Tit. 6. Se&. 22.

* It appears that Archbiffop Spotfwood was present at the execution of

Sprot, Crom. 113; and yet he seems to have given no credit to his difcove.
ries. The manner in which he speaks of him is remarkable, " Whether
"1 or not I thould mention the arraignment and execution of George Sprot,

l who fuffered at Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confeffion, though vo-

" luntary and constant, carrying small probability. \This man deposed, (ec.
' It seemed to be a very fidion, and a mere invention of the man's own
" brain, for neither did he thew the letter, nor could any wife man think
"' that Gowry, who went about the trealbn to secretly, would have corn-
' municated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. SA.
Spottvood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had
been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He
himself was probably present in parliament at the trial. The Earl of Dun-
bar, of whom he always speaks with the higheit refpe&, was- the person
who dire&ed the process againrft Logan Such a peremptory declaration a-
gainfi the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithflanding all these circumitan-
ces, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's advocate at that time,
and afterwards Earl of IIadington, represents the proof produced at Lo.
gan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an original letter of his to the
King, 2ift of June 16o0. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the man,
aner in which the trial had been conduted, he thus goes on. " When the
probation of the frmmnioas was referred to the Lords of Article's votes, they
found uniformly, all in one voice, the fhid summons to be so clearly proved,
that they seemed to contend who should be able mos zealou ly to express
the satisfaction of his heart, not oQly by the most pithy words, but by tears
of joy; diverse of the best rank confefling, that that whereof they 'doubled
at their entry into the house was now so manifest, that they behoved to cdeem
them traitors, who fliould any longer rcfufe to diclare their aiffred refol4-
,ton of the truth of that t.e.fon."

But though it be thus unexpe&edly discovered that Gowry BooK VIII.

did not at without associates, little additional light is thrown 
by this discovery, on the motives and intention of his conduct.
It appears almost incredible that two young men of such diftin-
guilhed virtue, should revolt, all at once, from their duty, and
attempt a crime so atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign.
It appears flill more improbable, that they flould have concerted
their undertaking with so little foresight and prudence. If they
intended that the deed should have remained concealed, they
could not have chosen a more improper scene for executing it than
their own house, If they intended that Henderson thould have
firuck the blow, they could not have pitched on a man more def-
titute of the courage, that mufll diret the hand of an aflaffin ; nor
could they expec that he, unsolicited, and unacquainted with
their purpose, would venture on such a desperate afcion. If Ruth-
yen meant to stab the King with his own hand, why did he with-
dra'yt-fe dagger after it was pointed at his breast ? How could
he leave the King, after fich a plain declaration of his intention ?
Was it not preposterous to commit him to the keeping of such a
timid and false associate, as Henderson ? For what purpose did he
waste time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man, whom he
might easily have dispatched with his sword ? Had providence
permitted them to embrue their hands in the blood of their So-
vereign, what advantage could have accrued to them by his
death ? and what claims or pretensions could they have oppofed'
to the rights of his children * ? Inevitable and inflant vengeance,
together with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences they
could expet to follow such a crime.

On the other hand, it is impofflible to believe that the King had

formed any design against the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-

* It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl

of Gowry might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the son of
Dorothea Stewart daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who
after her divorce from the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third
hufoand. Burnet tlir. of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded.
Itappears, from undoubted evidence that Lord Methven had only one child by
Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy, and Dorothea Lady Ruthven
was not the daughter of Queen Margaret, but of Janet Stewart Lord Meth-
ven's second w-ife, a daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329.
And thon.h GGowry had really been defccnded froma the blood royal of
England, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and besides
them, Ls'vy Arab!' a Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a
-preel~ba le t-e th te Crown of England.

Boox VIII. gree, the objecs of his jealousy or hatred* , nor was he of a spirit

. so sanguinary, or so noted for rafl and desperate valour, as to have

attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were
surrounded with many domeflics, he only with a slender and un-
armed train; where they could call to their assistance the inhabi.
tants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a
difiance from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for
his associates, in such an cnterprife, the Earl of Mar, and the
Duke of Lennox, the former conneced in close friendship with
the house of Gowry, and the latter married to one of the Earl's
fillers.

A conjee- Whichsoever of these opposite fyflems we embrace; whether
ture con-
cerningthe we impute the intention of murder to Gowry, or to the Kingi
inten ton of insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf
rators. tery, and contradidions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-

fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from
more remote cause, we may discover it to be less criminal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual dependence, was one

great objec of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, flte some,
times soothed him; and sometimes bribed his Miniffers and fa.
vourites; and when the failed of attaining her end by these means,
fthe encouraged the Clergy to render any administration she dif-
trusted unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up fomre faCion of

* Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph 'Winwood, imputes the

death of the two brothers to a cause not mentioned by any of our Hilfori.
ans. " Out of Scotland we hear that there is no good agreement, but ra-
ther an open diffidence betwixt the King and his wife, and many are of
opinion that the discovery of some affeftion between her and the Earl of
Gowry's brother (who was killed with him) was the truest cause and mo-
tive of that tragedy." Winw. Mem. Vol. I. 274 Vv'hether the following
passages in Nicholfon's letters be any confirmation of that suspicion, is sub-
mitted to the reader. In his letter, Sept. 22. 16o02, he mentions the return
of Gowry's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, " The coming in
of these two, and the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and sending away
and furnishing Mrs. Beatrix [their fifer] with fach information as Sir
Thomas Erikine has given, hath bred great fuflpicion in the King of Scots,
that they come not in but upon some dangerous plot." In another letter,
January 1. 1603. " The day of writing my last Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was
brought by the Lady Failley, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewo.
men into the court in the evening, and flowed in a chambr prepared for
her by the Queen's direftion, where the Queen had much time and confer-
erce with her. Of this the King got notce, ard sLewed his dislike there.
of to the Queen, gently reproving her for it, and examining quietly of the
Queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters thercunto belonging
with such discretion and secrecy as requires fuich a matter.

the nobles to oppose, and to overtuin it. They, unacquainted BOOK VIlf.
with the arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigues, had re-
course to the ruder prac&ice of rendering themselves mailers of the
King's peifon, that they might thereby obtain the direcions of
his councils. Those nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of
Ruthven, were inltigated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in
all his wild attempts, enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat
in her dominions. The connections, which James had been form-
ing of late with the Roman Catholic Princes, his secret negoci-
ations in England with her fubjefs, and the maxims by which
he governed his own kingdom, all contributed to excite her jea-
lousy. She dreaded some great Revolution in Scotland to be ap-
proaching, and it was her interest to prevent it. The Earl of
Gowry was one of the most powerful of the Scottifli nobles, and
descended from ancestors warmly attached to the English interest.
He had adopted the fame fyflem, and believed the welfare of his
country to be infeperably conneted with the subsistence of the
alliance between the two kingdoms. During his residence at
Paris, he had contracted an intimate friend.hip with Sir Henry
Neville, the Queen's ambassador there, and was recommended by
him to his Court, as a person of whom great use might be made *.
Elizabeth received him, as he passed through England, with dif-
tinguithed marks of refpe& and favour. From all these circum-
flances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the conspiracy a-
gainft the King was formed at that time, in concert with her.
Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the letters of
Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
destitute of foundation. An English ship was observed hovering
for some time, in the mouth of the firth of Forth. The Earl's
two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill success of
the conspiracy, and were proteded by Elizabeth. And James
himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great umbrage at
her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scot-
land tended to hurt the King's person, but only to circumscribe
his authority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was the surest
safeguard of her own, and reltrained the Popith pretenders to her
Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts, to which
their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged them
on. To have encouraged Gowry to muider his Sovereign, would,
on her part, have been an a6t of the utmost imprudence. Nor
does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers.

* Winw. i. xS6.

BooK VIIl. Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Pertli,

- without any attendants. When these proved more numerous than
x6oo. was expeaed, the 'Earl employed a stratagem in order to feperate

them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away to-
-wards Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses, that they
might follow him. By shutting James up, meanwhile, in a dif-
tant corner of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands,
their design seems to have been rather to seize, than to affaffinate
him. And though Gowry had not colleded his followers, so as
to have been able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of
the kingdom, by open force, he might soon have been conveyed
aboard the Engliflh (hip, which waited perhaps to receive him,
and he might have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house of Logan's,
in which, according to many obscure hints in his letters, some
rendezvous of the conspirators was to be held. Amidst the fur-
prise and terror, into which the King must have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natural for him to
conclude that his life was fought. It was the interest of all his
followers to confirm him in this belief, and to magnify his danger,
in order to add to the importance, and merit of their own services.
And thus, his fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity, and
wonder, which the contemplation of any great and tragical event,
when not fully underflood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole
tranfadion. On the other hand, the extravagance and improba.
bility of the circumilances, which were added, detra6ted from the
credit of those, which really happened; and even furnifihed pre.
tences for calling in quellion the truth of the whole conspiracy.

v-any ds- The account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh,
believethe next morning. The privy council commanded the Ministers of
biacted byu that city instantly to assemble their people, and, after relating to
the King. them the circumfiances of the conspiracy formed against the King's

life, to return public thanks to God, for the protecion, which
he had so visibly afforded him. But as the first accounts tranf-
mitted to Edinburgh, written in hurry, and while the circumfian.
ces of the conspiracy were but imperfecly known, and the pas-
fions which it excited firongly felt, were indiflint, exaggerated,
and contradictory, the Ministers laid hold of this, and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's safety, they re.
fuaed to enter into any detail of particulars, or to ulter from the
chair of truth, what appeared to be still dubious and uncertain.

A few days after, the King returned to Edinburgh; and though

Calloway, the Minister of his own Chapel, made an harrangue to

the people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circum- BOOK VIII.
fiances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing,
confirmed his account; though le commanded a narrative of the 16oo.
whole tranfafion to be published; the Miniflers of that city, as
well as many of their brethren, flill continued incredulous, and
unconvinced. Their high efreem of Gowry, their jealousy of
every part of the King's conduce, added to some false and many
improbable circumstances in the narrative, not only led them to
fufpef the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility.
But at length, the King, partly by arguments, partly by threats,
prevailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that
they were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He could be
brought no further than to declare, that he reverenced the King's
account of the tranfa&ion, but could not fay that he himself was
persuaded of the truth of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a single
man would have been little regarded, but as the fame spirit of in-
credulity began to spread among the people, the example of one,
in so high reputation for integrity and abilities, was extremely
dangerous. The King was at the utmost pains to convince and to
gain Bruce, but finding it impossible to remove his doubts, he de-
prived him of his benefice, and after repeated delays, and many
attempts towards a reconcilement, banished him the kingdom .

The proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any scruples Proceed-

of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced ings a par-
there, according to law; an indictment for High Treason was gainli the
preferred against them; witnesses were examined; and, by an una- conpira
nimous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the
punithment due to Traitors was infliaed on their dead bodies; and,
as if the punithment hitherto in use did not express fufficient de-
teflation of their crimes, the parliament ena&ed that the surname
of Ruthven flould be abolilhed; and in order to preserve the
memory of the King's miraculous escape, and to declare the sense
which the nation had of the divine Goodness, to all future ages,
appointed the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of
yublic thanksgiving f.

* Spo*f 461, &c. Cald. 5. 389, cr.
" A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King published

a dicourfe of their vile and unnatural conspiracy again/I his life. In the
year 1713, George Earl of Cromerty publilfed an " Historical account of
" the conspiracy by the Earl of Gowry and Robert Logan of Reftalrig a-
" gainft King James VI." He seems not to have seen the account which
the King himself had given of that matter, and borrows the whole hiftori-

Vo!um II, N

BooK VIII. Though Gowry's.confpiracy occafloned a sudden and a great

Salarm, it was followed by no consequences of importance; and
having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any
associates, or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain so,
the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after,

Es's con- a conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
fpiracy a-
gainftEli- the first danger was inflantly dispelled, produced tragical effets,
zabeth. that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy.

As James was deeply interested in that event, it merits our par-
ticular notice.

cal part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but he has extra&ed from the
public records the depositions of the witnesses produced by the King's Coun.
cil, in order to make good their charge against the two brothers and Lo-
gan their associate. From these two trcatifes, our knowledge of all the
material circumfitances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which
they contain, one would expe& to be au'hentic and decisive. An account
of a fa&, Rill recent, publified by royal authority, and the original depo-
fitions of persons examined in pretence of the highest court in the nation,
ought to convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in historical relations,
and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But as every thing
w ith regard to this tranfation is dark and problematical, the King's ac-
count and the depositions of the witnesses not only vary, but contradiA each
o'her in so many circumitances, that much room is flill left for hesitation,
a;nd historical scepticism. The teflimony of Henderson, is the fullest and
raofi important, but in several particulars the King's account and his are
contradiFtory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was
holding the dagger at his breafi, " the fellow in the study flood quaking
and trembling." Disc. 17. But Henderson says that he himself wrested the
dagger out of Mir. Ruthven's hand. Difre. . Croin. 50. Henderson like-
viife boasted to his wife that he had that day twice saved the King from
being stabbed. Dif. 54. Crom. 53. II. The King asserts that Henderson o-
paned the window during Mr. Ruthven's absence. Dif. 23. Henderson de-
pos-s that he was only attempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned,
and that during the firuggle between the King and him, he opened it.
Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we may believe the King, the fellow in
the fludy flood, during the firuggle, behind the King's back inadive and
trembling all the time. Dife. 27. But llenderfon affirms that lie snatched.
away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the King; that
he pulled back Ruthven's hand while he was endeavouring to stop the King's
nm)u.i, and that he opened the window. Ditf. 54. Crom. 52. IV. By the
King's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the fludy, and went away in or-
der to meet with his brother, aid that thl Eairl came up the flairs for the fame
purpose. Die. Di. 23. enderfon deposes that when Mr. Ruthven left the King,
" he believes that lie did not pass from the door." Crom 35. It is apparent
both from the situation of the hout'z, and from o her circumfiances, that
there could not possibly have been any interview between the brothers, at
this time. Dire. 23.

The court of England was, at this time, divided between two BOOK VIII.

powerful faUtions, which contended for the supreme diredtion of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'evreux, Earl of
Essex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the most accom-
plifihed, and the most popular of all the Englifli nobles; brave,

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the privy crun-
cil in August, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliament in November.
Not to mention some lesser variations between these depositions, we fliall
point out two which are remarkable. In his first deposition Mr. Henderson
relates the most material circumitance of the whole in these words. " Mr.
* Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger and held thd fame to his Ma-
" jefty's breast, saying, remember you of my father's murder; you Jhall now
" diefor it, and minting to his Highneffe's heart with the dagger, the de-
" ponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hands, and swore that as
" God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in
" his hand, the space a man may go fix fleps, he would have firicken the
" King to the hilts with it." Disc. S2. But at his second examination he
varied from this in two material circumstances. First the words which he
at that time put in Mr. Ruthven's mouth while he held the dagger at the
King's breast are, " Sir you muff be my prisoner; remember on my father's
" death." Secondly when he threatened him with death, it was only to de-
ter him from making any noise. " Hold your tongue or by Chri j you jall
" die." 2. In his firfl deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven when he re-
turned to the chamber where he had left the King, are " There is no reme.
" dy, by God you muji die." But in his second deposition, " By God there is
" no remedy, and offered to bind his Majefly's hands." Crom. 5s. The ma-
terial words you mufi die are omitted. The first deposition seems plainly to
intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder the King. The second
would lead us to conclude that he had no other design than to detain him

as a prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradifions in the testimonies cf

the other witnesses. i. In the discourse published by authority it is infinu-
ated that the tumult of the inhabitants was railed against the King, and
that it required some art to pacify them. Disc. 32. The Duke of Lennox
confirms this in his deposition. Crom. 44. An aft of privy council summon-
ing the Magistrates of Perth to answer for that riot is till extant. And
yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town, deposes that he himself
railed the people, and that they took arms in order to affit the King. Crom.
66. 2. Henderson deposes that he gave an evasive answer to 1N\r. John
Moncrief, who inquired where he had been that morning, because the Earl
had commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at Falkland.
Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George
Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay,
depose that the Earl in their presence, asked Henderson, " Whom he found
" with the King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which queflion seems to
prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a secret.

N ij

BOOK VIII. kenerous, affable; though impetuous, yet willing to listen o .tle
i councils of those whom he loved an avowed, but not an implac-

16oi. able enemy; a friend no less conflant, than warm.; incapable of

disguising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for the camp, than for the court; and of a genius
that qualified him for the first place in the administration, witha
spirit which scorned the second, as below his merit. He wasfoon
distinguished by thd Queen, who, with a profusion uncommonto
her, conferred on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho.
nours, and most important offices. Nor did this diminish the e.
fteem and affection of his countrymen ; but, by a. rare felicity, he
was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the
people. Cecil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and
trained under a father, deeply Ikilled .in all its arts, was crafty,
insinuating, industrious; and though poffeffed of talents, which
fitted him for the highest offices, he did 'not rely upon his merit
alone for attaining them, but availed himself of every advantage,
which his own address, or the mistakes of others, afforded him,
Two such men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Effexde.
fpifed the arts of Cecil,, as low and bale. To Cecil, the Earl's
magnanimity appeared to be presumption and folly. All themi.
litary men, except Raleigh, favoured Essex. Most of the cour-
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly resembled
their own.

His corref- As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle between these
pondence fa&ions became more violent. Essex, in order to strengthen him-
with the
Scotnih self, had early courted the friendship of the King of Scots, for
King. 'whofe right of fucceflion he was a zealous advocate, and held a

close correspondence both with him, and with his principal Mini-
fiers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen alone, rose daily to new ho.
nours, by the assiduity of his services, and the patience, with which
he expeaed the reward of them. ' While e Earl's high spirit
and impetuosity fometimes'expofed him to checks from a Miflrefs,
'who, though partial in her affetion towards him, could not eaf-
ly bear contradiction, and conferred favours often unwillingly,
and always slowly. His own folicitations, however, seconded
maliciously by his enemies, who wiflied to remove him at a dif.
tance from court,'advanced him to the command of the army em-
ployed in Ireland, againit Tyronne, and to the office of Lord
Lieutenant of that kingdom, 'with 'a commission almost unlimited.
His success, in that expedition, did not equal either his own prc-
mises, or the expefations of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevifhfrom

her dfappointment, and exasperated against Essex by the artifices EocK Viti
of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accufatlons and
reproaches. These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in
the first transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a
part of his army into England, and bv driving his enemies from
the QOeen's presence, to reinflate himself in favour, and in
power. Bat, upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rash
design, and setting fail with a few officers, devoted to his person,
landed in England, and posted directly to ceurt. Elizabeth re-
ceived him, without any f)mpt im either of affection or of difplea-
fore. By proper compliances and acknowledgments, he might
have regained his former ascendant over the Q2.een. But he
thought himself too deeply injured to submit to three. Elizabeth,
on the other hand, determined to subdue his haughty temper;
and though her severity drew from him the most humble letters,
she confined him to the Lord keeper's house, and appointed cornm-
mitfioners to try him, both for his conduat during his government
of Ireland, and for leaving that kingdom without her permission.
By their sentence, he was fafpended from all his offices, except
that of Mailer of the horse, and continued a prisoner during the
Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having mortified his pride thus
far, Elizabeth did not fuffer the sentence to be recorded, and soon
aifter allowed him to retire to his own house. During these tranf-
acfions, which occupied several months, Essex fluctuated between
the allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire of re-
venge; and sometimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the
other. In one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he sent James'scau-
a messenger into Scotland to encourage the King to assert his own od& n
right to the fuccefflion by force of arms, and to promise that, be-
sides the afliitance of the Earl and all his friends ia England,
Lord Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, o ould join
him with five thousand men, from that kingdom. But James did
not chufe to hazard the losing a kingdom, which was just ready
to fall into his hands, by a premature attempt to seize it. MIount-
joy, too, declined the enterprise, and Essex adopted more dutiful
schemes ; all thoughts of ambition appearing to be totally effaced
out of his mind.

This moderation, which was merely the effea of difgufi and T, wila

atze npts of

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Qieen, Eet- o
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, which she
had formerly beffowed, but to admit him into her presence, that
tw injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much

BOOK VIII. fretted, to absolute despair. His friends, inflead of soothing his

rage, or restraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their im.

I:6o0. prudent and interefled zeal. After many anxious consultations,

he determined to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. And
conscious how unpopular such an enterprise would be, if it ap.
peared to proceed from motives of private revenge alone, he en-
deavoured to give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the King of Scotland's interest with his own. He wrote to James,
that the facfion, which now predominated in the English court,
had resolved to support the pretensions of the Infanta of Spain to
the crown, that the places of the greatest importance in the king.
dom were put into the hands of his avowed enemies; and that
unless he sent ambassadors, without delay, to insist on the imme-
diate declaration of his right of succession, their measures were
so well concerted, that all his hopes would be desperate. James,
who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would be to the
.Queen of England, was not willing rashly to expose himself to
her displeasure. But Essex, blinded by resentment, and impati.
ent for revenge, abandoned himself to these pafions, and adled
like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompletely armed, he attempted to assault a
throne, the best established in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
but of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if
they either valued his life, or wifLed to preserve the kingdom
from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow
his standard. He advanced towards the palace, with an inten-
tion to drive Cecil and his faaion out of the Queen's presence,
and to obtain a declaration of .the Scottish King's right of fuccef.
sion*, But, though almolt adored by the citizens, not a man
would join him in this wild enterprise. Dispirited by their in-
difference, deserted by some of his own attendants, and almost
surrounded by the troops, which marched under different leaders
into the city, he retreated to his own house; and without any
bold effort, suitable to his present condition, or worthy of his for-
mer reputation for courage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as Jam.es heard of Effex's ill success, he appointed the

Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his ambaffa-
dors to the court of England. The former of these was the per-
son, by whose means Essex had carried on his correspondence with
the King. He was a passionate admirer of the Earl's character,
and disposed to attempt every thing that could contribute to his

* irch. Mem. 2.477-

safety. Bruce, united in a close friendflip with Mar, was ready BOOK VIII.
to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the em-
bafy less friendly to Essex, than the choice of the ambassadors; they 6oi.
were commanded to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the
Earl's life, and if they found that the King, by avowing his
friends, could either promote their designs, or contribute to their
safety, they were empowered to lay aside all disguise, and to pro-
mise that he would put himself at their head, and claim what was
due to him, by force of arms *. But before the ambassadors His death,
could reach London, Essex had fuffered the punishment he merit-
ed by his treason. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in order
to obtain his pardon, hastened his death. Elizabeth continued,
for some time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could not bring
herself to consign into the hands of the executioner, a man, who
had once poffeffed her favour so entirely, without a painful
struggle between her resentment against his late mifcondua, and
her ancient afferion towards him. The distress to which hewas
now reduced tended naturally to soften the former, while it re-
vived the latter with new tenderness; and the intercession of one
faithful friend might perhaps have saved his life, and have pro-
cured him a remission, which, of herself, the Queen was ashamed
to grant. But this generous nobleman had at that time no such
friend. And Elizabeth, solicited incessantly by her Ministers,
and offended with the baughtinefs of Essex, who, as (he imagined,
scorned to sue for pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be
put in execution. No sooner was the blow firuck, than she re-
pented of her own raffinefs, and bewailed his death with the
deepest sorrow. James always considered him as one, who had
fallen a martyr to his service, and after his acceflion to the Eng-
lifh throne, restored his son to his honours, as well as all his as-
fociates in the conspiracy, and diftinguiffied them with his favour -.

The Scottish ambassadors, finding that they had arrived too late James con-

to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not on- tinues his

intrigues in

ly concealed that part of their iiftrudions, with the utmost care ; Eugland.
but congratulated the Queen, in 'their Mafter's name, on her
happy escape from such an audacious confpiiacy. Elizabeth,
though no firanger to the King's correspondence with Essex, or
to that nobleman's intention of asserting James's right to the
Crown, was not willing that these should be known to the peo-
yje, and, for that reason, received the congratulations of the
Scottish ambassadors with all pofllfible marks of credit, and good

* Johnft, 289. Birch Mem, 2. 51.

" CWnd. Spo.ts 464-

BooKVl1, wi!l; and in order to sooth James, and to preserve the appear.

ances of union between the two courts, increased the subsidy
which fti paid him annually. The ambassadors resided for some
time in England, and were employed, with great success, in re.
newing and extending the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly
entered into with the Englifn nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the Englilh turned their eyes more and more towards
Scotland, and were eager to prevent each other in courting the
favour of their future Monarch. Assurances of attachment, pro-
felfions of regard, and promises of support, were offered to James
from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil himself, perceiving
what hopes Essex had founded on the friendship of the Scottilh
King, and what advantages he might have derived from it,
thought it prudent to fRand no longer at a distance from a Prince,
who might so soon become his Master. But being sensible, at
the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mifirefs naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew
fironger with old age ; though he entered into a correspondence
with him, he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution ne-
ceffary in his situation, and peculiar to his charadter. And James,
having gained the man whose opposition and influence he had
hitherto chiefly dreaded, waited, in perse& security, till that e-
vent should happen, which would open his way to the throne of
England. It was, with some difficulty, that he refirained, with-
in proper bounds, his adherents in that kingdom, who labouring
to distinguish themselves by that officious zeal, with which a
Prince, who has a near prolped of mounting the throne, is always
served, urged him to allow a motion to be made in parliament
for declaring his right of fucceflion to the Crown. James pru-
dently discouraged that design- but it was with no small fatisfac.
tion that he observed the ascendant he was acquiring in a court,
,whose diEtates he had been, so long, obliged to obey ; and which
had either prescribed or thwarted every itep he had taken during
the whole course of his reign *.

16o02. Notwithilanding the violent firuggles of the political factions

Attempts to which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which had
civilize the
Highland- happened there, since the King first took the reins of government
ers. into his own hands, Scotland Lad enjoyed unusual tranquillity, be-

ing undillurbed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intef-
tine commotion of long contiauance During this period, James
cndcavoured to civilize the highlands and the Isles, a part of his

* Spots. 467, 471. Birdi. Mlem. 2. 514.

dominions almost totally negleked by former Monarchs, though BOOK VIII.
the reformation of it was an obje& highly worthy of their care. 1602.
The long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of fab-
duing the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of reflraining their
depredations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen, than to
their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gra-
dually, to forget the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their natural fierce-
ness, averse from labour, and inured to rapine, infested their more
industrious neighbours, by their continual incursions. James be-
ing solicitous not only to repress their inroads, but to render them
useful fubjeds*, had at different times enated many wife laws
extremely conducive to these ends. All landlords, or Chiefs of
Clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their estates,
who could not find fufrcient surety for their good behaviour;
they were required to make a lift of all suspicious persons under
their jurifdiclion, to bind themselves to deliver them up to juffice,
and to indemnify thoCe who should fuffer by their robberies and
in order to ascertain the faithful performance of there articles, the
chiefs themselves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to
put pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and commerce,
were appointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one
in Cantyre, another in Lochaber, and a third in the Isle of Lewis;
and in order to draw inhabitants thither all the privileges of Royal
Boroughs were to be conferred upon them. Finding it, however,
to be no easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those countries
with the love of indaftry, a resolution was taken to plant among
them, colonies oT people from the more industrious counties. The
first experiment was made in the Isle of Lewis; and as it was ad-
vantageoufly situated for the fitfling trade, a source from which
Scotland ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony tranf-
ported thither was drawn out of Fife, ihe inhabitants of which
were well skilled in that branch of commerce. But before they
had remained there lot,,g enough to manifest the good effe&s of I
this institution, the iflar.ders enragea at feeing their country oc-
cupied by those intruders,-. took arms, and surprising them in the
night time, murdered some of them, and compelled tihe reft to a-
bandon the settlement. The King's attention being soon after
turned to other objects, we hear no more of this salutary projet.
Tiugh James did not puifue the design, with that fleady appli<

* Bafl. Dor. 159.

Volume II. 0

BOOK VIII. cation and perseverance, without which it is impossible to change

Sthe manners of a whole people, he had the glory, however, not

1602. only of having first conceived the thought, but of having firfE

pointed out the proper method of introducing the civil arts of life
into that part of the Island *.

Elizabeth's After having long enjoyed a good slate of health, the effe&t of
last ilinefs
and death, a found conflitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and

temperance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having

1603. removed, on a very flormy day from Westminster to Richmond,

whither she was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She
had no formed fever; her pulse was good; but she ate little, and

January 31. could not sleep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep

melancholy, which appeared both in her countenance and beha-
viour. She delighted in solitude; the fat constantly in the dark,
and was often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons

of all ranks, and of all different fe&s and parties, redoubled their
applications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in
profeffions of attachment to his person, and, in promises of fubmif-
sion to his government. Even some of her own servants, weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid
of the burden of gratitude for past benefits, and expecting to thare
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert her. And crowds
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the fa-
vour of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

Meanwhile, the Queen's disease increased, and her melancholy

appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjectures were
formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which (he seem-
ed to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for many years
created her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from
observing the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her
people, who beheld her health declining with most indecent in-
difference, and looked forward to the acceflion of the Scottith
King, with an impatience, which they could not conceal. The
most common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the moftl proba.
ble, was, that it flowed from grief for the Earl of Essex. She re-
Stained an extraordinary regard for the memory of that unfortun'at

* Parl. 1587, 194, 1597* Spots 468.

Sobleman; and though the often complained of his obilinacy, fel- Boox VIII.
dom mentioned his name without tears*. An accident happened 6
Loon after her retiring to Richmond, which revived her affection 16 .
with new tenderness, and imbittered her sorrows. The Countess
of Nottingham, being on her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen,
in order to reveal something to her, without discovering which,
she could not die in peace. When the Queen came into her
chamber, she told her, that while Essex lay under sentence of
death, he was desirous of imploring pardon in the manner which
the Queen herself had prescribed, by returning a ring, which du-
ring the height of his favour she had given him, with a promise
that, if in any future distress, he sent that back to her as a token,
it (hould entitle him to her prote&tion ; that Lady Scroop was the
person he intended to employ in order to present it; that by a
mistake, it was put into her hands instead of Lady Scroop's ; and
that flie having communicated the matter to her husband, one of
Effex's most implacable enemies, he had forbid her either to car-
ry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The Coun-
tess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the Queen's forgive-
ness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice of the Earl's
enemies, and how unjustly (he had suspected him of inflexible ob-
flinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never can;" and
left the room in great emotion f. From that moment, her fpi-
rit funk entirely; (he would scarce taste food; she refused all the
;medicines prescribed her by her phyficians declaring that she

* Birch, Mem. 2. oS0.
- This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first published by Osborne, Mem.

of Eliz. p. 23. is confirmed by the testimony of de Maurier, Mem. 26o. and
by the traditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, published by Dr.
Birch, Negoc. 206. Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Effex's death as
one of the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain which
prove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birch, Mem. 2. 5o6.
But Essex had been beheaded two years before her death, and there seems to
have been no other reason, but that which we have assigned, why her for-
row fnould revive with so much violence at so great a distance of time. As
the death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before
the Queen's death, the coincidence of these events, together with the other
evidence mentioned, adds so much probability to the story related by Osborne,
as will entitle it to a place in history. The only objec&ion to the account we
have given of Elizabeth's attachment to Essex, arises from her great age.
At the age of fixty-eight, the amorous passions are commonly abundantly cool,
and the violence of all the paflions, except one, is much abated. But the
fprce of this objef&ion is entirely removed by an author who has illuffrated
many passages in the English History, and adorned more. Catalogue of Roy.
and Nob. Authors, Article Essex,

BooKVIIT. wilfed to die, and would live no longer. No entreaty coiuld pre.

1603. vail on her to go to bed ; the fat on cushions, during ten days and

nights, pensive, and filent,.holding her finger almost continualy
in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The
only thing to which ihe seemed to give any attention, were the
a&s of devotion, performed in her apartment, by the Archbiflhop
of Canterbury; and in these she joined with great appearance of
fervour. Wasted, at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long
abstinence, she expired without a firuggle, on Thursday the 24th
day of March in the seventieth year of her age, and the forty-fifth
of her reign*.

Hercharac- Foreigners often accuse the English of indifference and difre,
ter. fipea towards their Princes. But without reason ; no people are

more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati.
tude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the Englifl of this age, with the fame warmth, as they were
by those, who Ihared in the blelTings and splendor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is frill adored in England. And the
liflorians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her peo-
ple ; her sagacity in difceining their true interest ; her fleadinefs
in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her Ministers; the
glory she acquired by arms; the tranquillity the secured to her
fubjedsi and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all these; justly rank her among the
most illustrious Princes. Even the defecs in her chara&er, they
observe, were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excel.
five frugality was not accompanied with the love of hoarding;
and though it prevented some great undertakings, and rendered
the success of others incomplete, it introduced oeconomy into
her adminifiration, and exempted the nation from many bu.dens,
which a Monarch, more profuse, or more enterprising, must have
imposed. Her slowness in rewarding her servants sometimes dif-
couraged useful merit ; but it prevented the undeferving from ac-
quiring power and wealth, to which they had no title. Her ex-
treme jealousy of those princes, who pretended to dispute her right
to the Crown, led her to take such precautions, as tended no less
to the public safety, than to her own ; and to court the affeclions
of her people, as the firmest fuppcrt of her throne. Such is the
piaure the English draw of this great Queen.

Whoever undertakes to write the History of Scotland finds

himself obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different, and

* Camd. Birch, Mem. 2. So6. Birch. Negoc. 20o6. Strype, 4. 373,

in a less amiable light. Her authority, in that kingdom, during BooK VIII.
the greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which she
poffelfed in her own. But this authority, acquired at first by a '03'
service of great importance to the nation, fie exercised in a mdn-
ner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By her indufiry in so-
menting the rage of the two contending factions; by supplying
the one with partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes ;
by balancing their power so artfully, that each of them was able
to distress, and neither of them to subdue the other ; flie rendered
Scotland long the feat of discord, confuflon, and bloodflhed: and
her craft and intrigues, effecting what the valour of her ancestors
could not accomplifin, reduced that kingdom to a slate of depend-
ence on England. The maxims of policy, often little consonant
to those of morality, may, perhaps, justify this condu&. But
no apology can be offered for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a
scene of diflimulation without necessity and of severity beyond
example. In almost all her a&ions, Elizabeth is the objea of
our highest admiration ; in this, we must allow that she not only
laid aside the magnanimity, which became a Queen, but the feel-
ings, natural to a woman.

Though Elizabeth would never permit the queftlon concern- James pro

ing the right of fucceflion to the Crown to be determined in par- eing of
liament; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point, England.
which she withed to remain an impenetrable mystery ; she had,
however, formed no design of excluding the Scottifi King from
an inheritance, to which his title was undoubted. A short time
before her death, fihe broke the-filence, which she had so long
preserved on that fubjet, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral,
" That her throne, was the throne of Kings ; that she would
have no mean person to ascend it, and that her Cousin the King
of Scots should be her fucceffor." This she confirmed on her
death-bed. And as soon as she breathed her last, the Lords of
the Privy Council proclaimed James King of England. All the
intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of the Infanta, all
the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to support the titles of
Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, difappeaied in a mo-
ment ; and nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hoflilities
with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of firangers,
testified their fatisfaftion with louder acclamations, than were
usual at the acceflion of their native Princes. Amidit this tu-
piult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
prescribe faome conditions to the successor, and to exad from him

BooK VIH. the redress of some grievances, before they called him to th

throne, was scarce heard ; and Cecil, by fliffling it, added to his

6c3." flock of merit with his new Master. Sir Charles Percy, brother

of the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl o!
\Worcefier's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to
the King, signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors then in
London ; informing him of the Queen's death, of his acceflio
to the Throne, of theircare torecognize his title, and of theuniver.
fal applause, with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost hafle to deliver this welcome
message ; but were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey,
Lord Hunfdane's youngest son, who setting put a few hours after
Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, juflat
the King had gone to bed. He was immediately admitted into
the royal apartment, and kneeling by the King's bed, acquaint-
ed him with the death of Elizabeth, saluted him King of Eng.
land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of the truth
of the intelligence which he brought, presented him a ring,
which his sifter Lady Scroop had taken from the Queen's finger
after her death. James heard him with a decent composure,
But as Carey was only a private messenger, the information he
brought was not made public, and the King kept his apartment
till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles were so.
lemnly proclaimed ; and his own fubjecs expressed no less joy,
than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre.
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people
were extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepar-
ed to set out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed
his Queen to follow him within a few weeks. He committed
the government of Scotland to his Privy Council. He intruflei
the care of his children to different noblemen. On the Sunday
before his departure, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and
after hearing a sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the
greatness of the divine goodness in raising him to the throneof
such a powerful Kingdom without opposition or bloodshed, and
exhorted him to express his gratitude, by promoting to the ut.
most, the happiness and prosperity of his fubjefas; the King rose
up, and addressing himself to the people, made many profeflions
of unalterable affedion towards them; promised frequently to vi.
fit Scotland; assured them that his Scottish fubjets, notwith-
flanding his absence, should feel that he was their native Prince,
no less than when he resided among them ; and might fiill truss

Lhat his ears thould be always open to their petitions, which he BooK VIII.
would answer with the alacrity and love of a parent. His words
were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience; 1603
who, though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted
into sorrow by these tender declarations *.

On the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid, Takes pof.

but not a numerous train ; and next day he entered Berwick. thetnohro.
Wherever he came, immense multitudes were assembled to wel-
come him and the principal persons, in the different Counties
through which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnifi-
cence in entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Eli-
zabeth had reigned so long in England, that most of her fubjels
remembered no other court but her's; and their notions of the
manners and decorum suitable to a prince were formed upon what
they had observed there. It was natural to apply this flandard
to the behaviour and adions of their new Monarch, and to com-
pare him, at first fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he was
to be placed. James, whose manners were extremely different
from hers, fuffered by the comparison. He had not that flowing
affability, by which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her peo-
ple; and though easy among a few whom he loved, his indo-
lence could not bear the fatigue of rendering himself agreeable
to a mixed multitude. He was no less a stranger to that dignity,
with which Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And instead of
that well.judged frugality, with which fthe conferred titles of ho-
nour, he bestowed them with an undiftinguifhing profusion, that
rendered them no longer marks of diftindion, or rewards of me-
rit. But these were the refleaions of the few alone ; the multi-
tude continued their acclamations ; and amidst these, James en-
tered London on the 7th of May and took peaceable poffeffionr
of the throne of England.

Thus were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac- Concluhfion.

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one
great monarchy. And by this jun&ion of its whole native force,
Great Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe
which England and Scotland never could have attained.

The Scots had so long considered their Monarchs as next heirs A view of

to the English throne, that they had full leisure to refled on all the Revolu-

tions in the

the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But consitution
dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful of Scotland

-o since the ac

enemy, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in cefflon of

* Spots, 476., Jmes VI.

BoOK VIII. full expectation of sharing liberally in the wealth and honours ni

would now be able to beflow, they attended little to the moil
obvious confequ-nces of that great event, and rejoiced at his ac.
cession to the throne of England, as if it had been no less bene.
ficial to the kingdom, than honourable to the King. They foca
had reason, however, to adopt very different sentiments; and
from that period, we may date a total alteration in the politicl
conflitution of Scotland.

The feudal Aristocracy, which had been subverted in most na.

tions of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had been un.
dermined by the progress of commerce, still subsisted with fuR
force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually to
augment the power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Reform.
ation, which in every other country where it prevailed, 'added
to the authority of the Monarch, had increased their wealth and
influence. A King, poffeffed of a small revenue, with a premr
gative extremely limited, and unsupported by a flanding army,
could not exercise much authority over such potent fubiecs. He
was obliged to govern by expedients; and the laws derived their
force not from his power to execute them, but from the volun.
tary fubmifflion of the nobles. But though this produced a fpe.
cics of government feeble and irregular beyond example; though
Scotland, under the name, and with all the outward ensigns ofh
Monarchy, was really fubje& to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy and even in this wild form of a confli.
tution, there were principles, which tended to their security and
advantage. The King, checked and overawed by the nobles,
durst venture upon no as of arbitrary power. The nobles, jea.
lous of the King, vwhofe claims and pretensions were many,
though his power was small, were afraid of irritating their de-
pendents by unreasonable exadions, and tempered the rigoursi
ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness and equality to whichi:
is naturally a stranger. And while the military genius of thc
feudal government, remained in vigour, the vassals both of the
Crown and of the Barons were not only free from oppression, buh
courted by their superiors, whose power and importance wer:
founded on their attachment and love.

But, by his accession to the throne of England, James acquired

such an immenfc accefflion of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, affonifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to
firuggle for privileges Nwhich they were now unable to defend
Nor was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke:

James, partial to his countrymen, and willing that they should BOOK VIII.
partake in his good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours;
and the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of his power,
in tamiog their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the
Prince became the supreme law in Scotland, and the nobles firovej
with emulation, who fl1ould moist implicitly obey commands, which
they had formerly .ben accustomed to contemn. Satisfied with
having fubjeaed the nobles 'to the Crown, the King left them in
full poffeffion of their ancient jurifdi&ion over their own vassals.
The extensive rights; vested in a feudal Chief, became in their
hands, dreadful initruments of oppression, and the military ideas
on which these rights were founded being gradually loft or difre-
garded, nothing remained to corre& or to mitigate the rigour with
which they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their for.
tunes by the expence of frequent attendance upon the English
court, and by attempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their
more wealthy neighbours, multiplied exa&tions upon the people,
who durst fearce utter complaints which they knew would never
reach the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any
redress. And from the union of the Crowns, to the revolution in
f688, Scotland was placed in a political situation of all others
the most singular and the most unhappy ; fubjefled at once to the
absolute will of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurifdiciori of
an Ariflocracy, it fuffered all the miseries peculiar to both these,
forms of government. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were
slaves and tyrants; and the people groaned under the figorous
domination of both.

During this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

thake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency.
After the death of James, the Scottith nation was no longer view-
ed by our Monarchs with any partial affe&ion. Charles I. edu-
cated among the Englith, difeovered no peculiar attachment to
the kingdom of which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiv-
ing the sceptre to be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a
Prince with whom they had little connection-, and over whose
councils they had little influence, no longer submitted with the
fame implicit obedience. Provoked by some encroachments of
the King on their order, and apprehensive of others, the remains
of their ancient spirit began to appear. They complained and
remonstrated, And the people being, at the fame time, violently
disgusted; at the innovations in Religion, the nobles secretly
heightened this disgust; and their artifices, together with the ill,

Volume II P

BooK VIII. condua of the court, raised such a spirit, that the whole latiolt

took arms against their Sovereign, with an union and animosity
of which there had formerly been no example. Charles brought
against them the forces of England, and notwithstanding their
own union, and the zeal of the people, the nobles must have funk
in the struggle. But, the difaffecaion which was growing among
his English fubjets, prevented the King from acting with vi-
gour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms. And after ma-
ny battles and revolutions which are well known, the Scottish
nobles, who first began the war, were involved in the Tame ruin
with the throne. At the Refforation, Charles II. regained full
poffeffion of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the nobles,
whose estates were wasted, or their spirit broken by the calamities
to which they had been exposed, were less able and less willing
than ever to resist the power of the Crown. During this reign,
and that of James VII. the diaates of the Monarch were receiv.
ed in Scotland with most abje6t submission. The poverty to which
many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner slaves,
and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always ne-
gleated, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

The Revolution introduced other maxims into the government

of Scotland. To increase the authority of the Prince, or to fe-
cure the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almost the
sole object of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention be-
gan, henceforward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By
the claim of rghbt, their liberties were secured. And the num-
ber of their representatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in Parliament. As they
came to enjoy more security, and greater power, their minds be-
gan to open, and to form more extensive plans of commerce, of in-
duftry, and of police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which still
predominated, together with many other accidents, retarded the
improvement and happiness of the nation.

Another great event completed what the Revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the
union of the two Crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Instead of making apart, as formerly, of the
supreme aflembly of the nation, instead of bearing the most con-
fiterable sway there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the

British Parliament by their representatives only, and form but an Boox VIII.
inconsiderable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative
authority is vefied. They themselves are excluded absolutely
from the House of Commons, and even their eldelt sons are not
permitted to represent their countrymen in that auguff assembly.
Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to compensate for this
extindion of their political authority. As commerce advanced
in its progress, and government attained nearer to perfection,
these were insensibly circumscribed, and at lalt, by laws no less
salutary to the public, than fatal to the nobles, they have been
almost totally abolished. As the nobles were deprived of power,
the people acquired liberty. Exempted from burdens to which
they were formerly fubjeft, screened from opprefflon, to which
they had been long exposed, and adopted into a conflitution,
whose genius and laws were more liberal than their own, they
have extended their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts and
sciences.

This survey of the political state of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three eras, from each of which we may
date some great alteration, in one or other of the three different
members of which the supreme legislative assembly in our confli-
tution is composed. At the Acceefon, the Kings of Scotland,
once the most limited, became in an infiant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their
Parliaments were unable to controul, or their nobles to resist.
At the Union, the feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so ma.
ny ages, and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the
Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences,
peculiar to their order, and reduced themselves to a condition,
which is no longer the terror and envy of other fubjedts. Since
the Union, the Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings,
and despised by the nobles, have emerged into dignity; and be-
ing admitted to a participation of all the privileges, which the
English had purchased at the expence of so much blood, must
now be esteemed a body not less considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

The church felt the effets of the absolute power which the
King acquired by his acceflion; and its revolutions, too, are
worthy of notice. James, during the latter years of his admini-
Itration in Scotland, revived the name and office of Bilhops.

Pij

BooK VIII. But they poffeffed no ecclesiastical jurisdiction or pre-eminence;

their revenues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce diftin-
guifhed by any thing, but by their feat in Parliament, and by
being the objea of the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred.
The King, delighted with the splendor and authority which the
English Bishops enjoyed, and eager to asse&t an union in ecclefi-
aftical policy, which he had, in vain, attempted in the civil go-
vernment, resolved to bring both Churches to an exa& conformi-
ty with each other. Three Scotsmen were consecrated Bilhops
at London. From them, their brethren were commanded to
receive orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were imposed.
And though the clergy, less obsequious than the nobles, boldly
opposed these innovations, James, long praCifed and well flkilled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length their compli.
ance. But Charles i. a superstitious Prince, unacquainted with the
genius of the Scots, imprudent and precipitant in all the measures
he pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly the reception of
the Englilh liturgy, and indiscreetly attempting a resumption of
church lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the people
being left at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the Episcopal
church was overturned, and the Preibyterian government and
discipline were re-eflablifhed with new vigour. Together with
Monarchy, Episcopacy was refiored in Scotland. - A form of go-
vernment, so odious to the people, reqiired force to utphold it;
and though the whole rigout of authority, 'and all the barbarity
of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion of the
nation was insurmountable, and it subsisted with difficulty. At
the Revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legislature, the Presbyterian government
was again efiablifhed, and being ratified by the Union, is fill
maintained in the kingdom.

Nor did the influence of the Accefflion extend to the civil and

ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its
taste and spirit, things of a nature flill more delicate, were fenfi-
bly affeaed by that event. When learning revived in the sis-
teenth and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in
a slate equally barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even
of perspicuity. No author thought of writing in languages so ill
adapted to express and embellish his fentinments, or of erecing a
work for immortality, with such rude and perifliing materials.
And as the spirit, which prevailed at that time, did not owe its
rife to any original effort of the Ihuman mind, but was excited by

tdmiration of the ancients, their compositions were esteemed not Boor VIII.
only the flandards of taste, and of sentiment, but of flyle; and
even the languages in which they wrote,were thought to be pe-
culiar and alnoft consecrated to learning and the Muses. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but their language
copied ; and, extravagant as the attempt may appear to write in
a dead tongue, in which men rwere not accustomed to think, and
vhich they could not speak, nor even pronounce, the success of
it was astonishing. As they formed their fltyle upon the purest
modles, as they were uninfe6ted with thofc barbarifms, which
the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the affetration of courts,
intercourse with strangers, and a thousand other causes introduce
into living languages, many moderns have attained to a degree
of elegance in their Latin compositions, which the Romans them-
selves scarce poffeffed beyond the limits of the Augufian age.
While this was almost the only species of composition, and all
authors, by using one common language, could be brought to a
nearer comparison, the Scottish writers were not inferior to
those of any other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan, e-
qually formed to excel in prose and in verse, more various, more
original, and more elegent, than that of almost any other modern
who writes in Latin, refle6ls, with regard to this particular, the
greatest luire on his country.

But the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was irk-
some; the unequal return for their industry which authors met
with, who could be read and admired only within the narrow
circle of the learned, was mortifying and men, inflead of waft-
ing half their lives in learning the language of the Romans, be-
gan to refine and to polish their own. The modern tongues were
found to be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not e-
qual to those of the ancient ones, were at least more attainable.
And the Italians having first set the example, Latin was no long-
er used in the works of taste ; it was confined to books of science;
and the politer nations have banished it even from these. The
Scots, we may presume, would have had no cause to regret this
change in the public taste, and would flill have been able to
maintain some equality with other nations, in their pursuit of li-
ierary honour. The Englifhl and Scottish languages, derived
from the fame sources, were, at the end of the sixteenth century,
in a state nearly firnlar, differing from one another somewhat in
orthography, though not only the words, but the idioms were
much the fame. The letters of several Scottith flatefmen of that

BOOK VIII. age are not inferior in elegance, or in purity, to those of tht

' English Ministers with whom they corresponded. James himself

was master of a flyle far from contemptible ; and by his example
and encouragement, the Scottift language might have kept pace,
with the English in refinement. Scotland might have had a
series of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin language, to
boast of; and the improvements in taftl, in the arts, and in the
sciences, which spread over the other polifhled nations of Europe,
would not have been unknown there.

But, at the very time when other nations were beginning to

drop the use of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the
firength and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy which the Accession at
firit occasioned, were soon over ; and the Scots, being at once
deprived of all the objeas that refine or animate a people, of the
presence of their Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the fplen.
dor and elegance of a court, an- universal deje&ion of spirit seems
to have seized the nation. The Court being withdrawn, no do.
medlic flandard of propriety and corrednefs of speech remained;
the few compositions that Scotland produced were tried by the
English flandard, and every word or phrase that varied in the
least from that, was condemnedas barbarous ; whereas, if the
two nations had continued diftind, each might have retained
idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these, render-
ed faffionable by the example of a court, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been considered in
the fame light with the varieties occasioned by the different dia.
lects in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties,
and, in many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of both
nations. But by the Acceflion, the Englifli naturally became
the sole judges and lawgivers in language, and rejeaed as sole-
cifms, every form of speech to which their ear was not accufiom-
pd. Nor did the Scots, while the'intercourfe between the two
nations was inconsiderable *, and ancient prejudices were fill so

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the English and

Scots, before the union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers,
one published by Haynes, the other by Strype. In the year i567, Elizabeth
commanded the Bifhcp of London to take a survey of all the strangers with-
in the cities of London and Westminster. By his report, which is very
minute, it appears that the whole number of Scots at that time was fifty-
eight. Haynes 4,5. A survey of the fame kind was made by Sir Thomas Row,
Lord Mayor, A . D. i56. The number of Scots had then increased to

violent as to prevent imitation, possess the means of refining their BooK VIII.
Own tongue according to the purity of the English flandard. On
the contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from every different
source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age, were more emi-
nent for piety than for learning ; and though there did not arise
many authors among them, yet being in poffelfion of the privi-
lege of discoursing publicly to the people, and their sermons be-
ing too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty producions
could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorred modes of
expression may be traced back to that original. The pleadings
of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that profefflion
having furniflied more authors, and the matters of which they
treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many of
those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotticfms,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did ei-
ther the language or public taste receive any improvement in
parliament, where a more liberal and more correct eloquence
might have been expeted. All business was tranfaded there by
the Lords of Articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the
court, that few debates arose, and none were condu&ed with the
spirit and vigour natural to a popular assembly.

Thus, during the whole seventeenth century, the English were
gradually refining their language, and their tafe ; in Scotland
the former was much debased, and the latter almost entirely loft.
In the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out
of barbarity; but the distance between them, which was then in-
ccnfiderable, became ,before the end of it, immense. Even after
science had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be fink-
ing back into ignorance and obscurity; and active and intelli-
gent as they naturally are, they continued, while other nations
were eager in the purfult of fame and knowledge, in a slate of
languor and ftupefadion. This, however, must be imputed to
the unhappiness of their political situation, not to any defet of
genius; for no sooner was the one removed in any degree, than
the other began to display itself. The a& abolishing the power
of the Lords of Articles, and other salutary laws passed at the
Revolution, having introduced freedom of debate into the Scot-
tilh Parliament, eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or

eighty.eight. Strype, 4. Supplement No I. On the Accefflon of James a con-
fiderable number of Scots, especially of the higher rank, resorted to Eng-
land; but it was not till the Union that the intercourse between the two
kingdoms became great.

Boox VIII. perse& it, became immediate obje&s of attention; and the i.
* ample of Fletcher of Salton alone is fufficient to shew that th,

Scots were still capable of generous sentiments, and, notwith.
flanding some peculiar idioms, were able to express themfelvs
with energy, and with elegance.

At length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendored them one people, the diflinctions which had fubfifed
for many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities difappeari th,
f.ame manners prevail in both parts of the island ; the fame an.
thors are read and admired; the faime entertainhments are fie.
quented by the elegant and polite ; and the fame flandard of
taste, and of purity in. language, is eftablilhed. And the Scots,
after being placed, during a whole century, in a situation no les
fatal to the liberty than to the taste and genius of the nation,
were at once put in poffeffion of privileges more valuable than
those which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and every ob.
1truffion that had retarded their pursuit, or prevented their ac
quLfition of literary fame, was totally removed.

# APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 96.)

A MEMORIAL of cLrtain points meet for the refior-

ing the realm of SCOTLAND to the ancient weale.

IMprIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that Sth August
Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual peace with ton. Lib.
the kingdom of England, or to be made one monarchy with Eng- Cal. B. To.
land, as they both make but one island, divided from the reft of From a
the world. copy in Sea

If the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with Eng- cetay

nd.

land, then must it necessarily be provided, that Scotland be not
so fubje& to the appointments of France, as is presently, which,
being an aritient enemy to England, feeketh always to make
Scotland an infirument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon
England, and to make a foot-flool thereof to look over England
as they may.

Therefore, when Scotland shall come into the hands of a mere
Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope of such accordi
but as long as it is at the commandment of the French, there is
no hope to have accord long betwixt these two realms.

Therefore, feeing it is at the French king's commandment by

reason of his wife, it is to be considered for the weal of Scotlandj
that until she have children, and during her absence out of the
realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the house of the Ha-
miltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the
crown be imposed nor wasted ; and on the other fide, the nobili-
ty and commonalty ought to force that the laws and the old cuf-
toms of the realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
impoverished by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the man-
ner of France 5 for provision wherein, both by the law of God
and man, the French king and his wife may be moved to reform
their mifgovernance of the land.

And for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and com-
mons joined with the next heir of the crown, to seek due reformation
of such great abuses as tend to the ruin of their country, which
must be done before the French grow too strong and insolent,

Volume IL. Q.

Fir/A, That it may be provided, by consent of the three efate"

of the land, that the land may be free from all idolatry like as
England is, for juilification whereof, if any free general council
may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the feat of judg.
ment, they may offer to shew their cause to be most agreeable to
ChrifPs religion.
, Next, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules
iand offices, by the antient blood of the realm, without either
captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other princes govern their
countries, and especially that the forts might be in the hands of

mere Scottish men.

Thirdly, That they might never be occasioned to enter into

wars against England, except England should give the first cause
to Scotland.

Fourthly, That no nobleman of Scotland /hould receive pension

of France, except it were whilst he did serve in France, for
otherwise thereby the French would shortly corrupt many, and
betray their own country.

Fifthly, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given

to any but mere Scottish men, by the assent of the three estates
of the realm.

Sixth, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the

queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in those cafer
not to be dire&ed by the French.

Seventhly, That it be by the said three estates appointed how

the queen's revenue of the realm shall be expended, how much
the queen shall have for her portion and estate during her ab-
fence, how much shall be limited to the governance and defence
of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

In these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be

found unwilling, and will withstand these provisions for the weale
of the land, then hath the three estates of the realm authority,
forthwith, to intimate to the said king and queen their humble
requests ; and if the fame be not effeaually granted, then hum-
bly they may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of
the crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and antient
rights of the realm.

Finally, If the queen shall be unwilling to this, as it is likely

she will, in refpe& of the greedy and tyranous affetion of France,
then it is apparent that Almighty God is pleased to transfer from
her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of it, and this time must
be used with great circumfpeaion, to avoid the deceipts and-
tromperics of the French.

And then may the realm of Scotland conlfder, being once
maade free, what means may be devised by God's goodness, to
accord the two realms, to endure for time to come at the plea-
fire of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all priucep be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 133.

A Letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus direEled,

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

SUNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that dif- 2cthJan.
coursing with zour countrymen upon the mater of Scotland, and

Cott. Lib.

comoditeys may enfew to that realm, hereafter giff ze presently Cal. B. ix.

From the

affifl ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre of the contrary advise, original in
douting that we fall not at length be found trusty frends, nor his own

hand.

nean to contynew in constant ametye, albeit we promise, but on-
ly for avoyding the present danger make zow to serve our turne,
and after being delivered, becum enemies as of before. For prose
quhareof, they allege things have past betwixt ws heretofore, and
a few prefumptiones tending to the farm end, all grounded upon
piftruft; quhilks, at the first ficht, have some fiewe of apparence,
gif men wey not the circumstances of the mater 5 but gif they
will confer the tyme past with the present, confider the nature
of this caus, and estate of our contrey, I doubt not but jugement
fal be able to banish mistrust. And first, I wad with ze should
examyne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of
England and Scotland, and quhat moved our anceflours to enter
into ligue with the Frenche ; quhilks by our storeys and regiftres
off antiquiteys appear to be these. The princes of England, some
tyme, alledging a certaine kynde off foveraintye over this realmi
some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our
bordourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterprifed
the conqueR of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force off armes,
that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by loss of our princes,
our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrey, fa that experience
taught ws that our owne strength was fcarfe fufficient to withstand
the force of England. The Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confi-
dering well how nature had fa placed ws in, a island with zow that na
nation was able fa to annoye England as we being eneymes, foucht to
jpine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne zour

QJ*

trmyes from the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the de,
fence off zour country at hame, offering for that effea to beltowq
some charges upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choy.
fed a tyme to propone the mater, quhen the frefche memory of
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely prented o0
pur hartes, that all our myndes were ocupyed how to be reveng,
ed, and arme ourfelfps with the powar off a forayne prince against
zour enterprises thereafter.

This wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At

quhilk tyme, our cronicles maks mention, that some of the wyfeft
forfaw the perril, and small frute should redound to ws thereof at
lenth: zit had affealion fa blinded jugement, that the advise of
the maift part owercame the best. The maift part of all querells
betwixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came
on our fyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr procuremant rather
than any one caus off our felfes: and quhenfaever we brack the
peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to eschew the
conquest intended by that realm. But now hes God's provi.
dence fa altered the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary,
that now hes the Frenfche taken zour place, and we, off very
jugement, becum difyrous to have zow in theyr rowme. Ou;
eyes are opened, we espy how uncareful they have been of our
weile at all tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne,
drew us in maift dangerous weys for theyr commodite, and never.
thelefs wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour of the ligue,
to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their sup-
port, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affeaion they bare to
ws, for pytie they had off our estate, for recompense off the lyke
friendship fchawin to theym in tyme off theyr affli&ions, but for
ambition, and infaciable cupidite, to reygne, and to mak Scot.
land ane accessory to the crown of France. This was na friendly
office, but mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the propor.
tion of theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defence of a part,
We fee theym manifestly attempt the thing we fufpeaed off zow;
we feared ze ment the conquest off Scotland, and they are
planely fallen to that work; we hated zo.w for doubt we had ze
ment evill towards ws, and fall we love theym, quhilks bearing
the name off frends, go about to bring ws in maift vile servitude?
Gif by zour frendly support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not
only sixte ze not the ruyne off our country, but will preserve the
libertie thereof from conquest by ftrangeares, fall not the occa4
sion of all inimity with zow, and ligue with theyn, be taken ak

way? The causes being removed, how fall the effe&es remane ?
The fear of conquest, made ws to hate zow and love theym, the
cais changed, quhen we fee theym planely attempt conquest, and
zow fchaw ws frendfhip, fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ?
Gif we have fchawne fa great constance, continuing fa mony
zears in amity with theym, off quhome we had fa small commo-
ditie, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes
my do ws greatest plefour ?

But ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and then frends

as off before. I think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off
this ze may be assured, we will never fa far trust that reconcili-
ation, that we will be content to forgo the ametye of England,
nor do any thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we
nqt befydes the loffe off eflimation and discrediting of ourfelfes, per-
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifest danger, and
becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid could we implore, be-
ing destitute of zour friendflhip, gif they off new wald attempt
theyr formar enterprise ? Quhat nation myght help .ws giff they
wald, or wald giff they myght ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will
not flick hereafter to tak theyr tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and
grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feing ambition has fa
impyrit ower their reason, that before we had ever done any thing
myght offend theym, but by the contrary pleased theym by right
and wrang, they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our
hale Rtate. I wald ze should not efleme ws fa barayne of jugement
that we cannot forefe our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we
will not fludy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk confiftes all in the relaying of zour frendfhips.
I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the days of zour prin-
ces off maift noble memory king Henry the VIII. and king Ed-
ward the VI. meanes wer opened off amitye betwixt baith realms
was not at all tymes the difference of religion the onely flay they
wer not embraced ?' Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort ? But now
has Godoff his mercy removed that blockfurth off the way: now is
not theyr prad&ife lyke to tak place any mare, when we ar comme
to a conformity off docrine, and profes the fame religion with
zow, quhilk I take to be the ftrayteft knot off amitye can be de-
vised. Giff it may be alleged, that some off our countrymen, at
ony tyme, violated theyr promisi giff ze liss to way the circum-
(lances, ze fall fynd the promis is rather brought on by neceffite,

after a great overthraw off our men, then comme off fre will, and
tending ever to our great incommodite and decay off our haill state
at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libertie be infeperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and
the violation off our fayth cast ws in maift miserable servitude,
Sa that giff neyther the feare of God, reverence of man, religion,
othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes fufficient to bynd ws,
yet fall the zeale off our native countrey, the maintenance off
our owne state, the safety of our wyffes and childrene from slavery,
compell ws to kepe promiffe. I am assured, it is trewly and fin.
perely ment on oar part to continew in perpetual ametye with zow;
it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be as defyrous of it
as we ar, assurances may be devyfed, quharby all partyes will be
out of doubte. There be gode meanes to do it, fit infiruments
for the purpos, tyme serves weill, the inhabitants off baith realmes
ivifh it, God hes wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties
a certaine still agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at ones to.knyt it up, the diipofition of
few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I
hope he quha hes begun this work, and mainteyned it quhile now,
by the expe&ation qs man, sale perfyte it.

I pray zow, let- not zour men dryve tyme in consultation,

quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seynig the mater fpeaketh
for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence off our caus,
giff ze have any refpea for zowr awne weill. Their preparative
in France, and levying of men in Germany, (quheytoff I am late-
ly advertised) ar not altogydder ordeyned for us, %e ar the mark
they shote at they feke our realme, but for ane entrey to pours.
Giff they thould dire&ly fchaw hoffilite to zow, they knaw zo
-wald 4mak re.y for theyme; therefor they do, by indirecd meanes,
to blind zQw, the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte.
They feme to invade us to th' end that having assembled theyr
hale forces fa rere zour bordours, they may unlok it to attack
zow: It is ane off theyr ald fetches, making a fchew to one place,
to lyght on ane other. Remember how covertly zqur places a-
bout Boulougne were affaizeit, and carryed away, ze being in
peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was feynely differa-
,bled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third,
prevent theyr policy by prudence. Giff ze fe not the lyke dif
position presently in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a greffe igno-
rance to mifknaw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak hede
ze fay not hereafter, " Had I wiftl " ane uncomely sentence to

Irocede offawyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced ons to
tow, quhilk zow commonly wiffed, that this countrey myght be
divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to pass as was maift
expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken
the mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeded we would have been
ontrufty frends, and na langer continued fledfafle, then perril had,
appeared. But now, quhen off our self, we have conceyved the
hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing
with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they
fall fynd ws ennemyes in ernell, that fa ungently hes demeyned
our countrey, and at quhais hands we can look for nathing but
all extremitye, giff ever they may get the upper hand. Let not
this occasion, fa happely offered, escape zow ? giff ze do, negle&-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode luk
comme fleaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe
to great, and fa firang, that afterwards quhen ze wald, ze fall not
be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart, after the
tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by expe-
tience, quhath arme cometh off oversight, and trusting to zour
enemyes promeffe. We offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour
former losses may be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, sus-
fering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the
Prenfche, that they fall not invade zow in zour'own boundes, sick is
their lust to reygne, that they can neyther be content with theyr
fortune present, nor reft and be satisfied when they have gode luck,
but will still follow on, having in theyr awne brayne conceaved
the image of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end ?
Is ther any of fa finall jugement, that he doth not foresee already,
that theyr hail force fall then be bent against zow ?

It fal not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be
presently. Theyr estate is not always fa calme at hame as every
man thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr great redines for
weyr made theym to tak this mater on hand, at this tyme, but
rather a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have found
ia resistance, theyr opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes
them now amafed. The estates off the empire (as I heare) ha's
futed restitution off th' Imperial towns, Metz, Toull, and Verdun,
quhilk may grow to some befynes; and all thing is not a calme
within theyr awne countrey, the less fit they be presently for weyr,
the mare oportune effeme ye the tyme for zow. Giff the like oc-
cafion wer offered to the Frenfche against zow, wey, how gladly
would they embrace it, Are ze not efchamed of zovr sleuth, to

1pare theym that hes already compassed your deftru&ion, giffthey
wer able ? Confider with your self quhilk is to be choyfed? To
wveyr against theym out with zour realme or within ? Giff quhill
ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute
zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke
tow. But forne *ill fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly
to think they wald not giff they war able, quhen before hand they
flick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe the style of zour crown,
Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr awne bounds
or without, it is mnanifeft. Giff twa armyes should camp in your
country, but a nmoneth; albiet ye receaved na other harme, zit
flhould zowr loffe be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
beflow on our support will draw to, befydes the dishonour;

Let not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticulat

refpeds weill affe&ed to the caus, move zow to fubtra& zour help.
ing hand, by alleging things not apparent, for that they be possible.
It is not, I grant, unpoffible that we may receave conditiones of
peace; but I fee lyttle likelyhode that our ennemyes will offerws
fik as will remove all mistrust, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow
not be moved for that they terine ws rebelles, and diffames ouf
just querell with the name of conspiracy against our foverayne. It
is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme
we fIudy to preserve, with the hazard off our lyves. We are not
(God knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as men im-
pacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the zoke of government,
but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of firan-
geares feaking to defraude ws off lawful government. Giffwe
should fuffer firangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably inall the
firenthesof our realme, fortify the Sey-portes, andmaift important
places, as aneentre to a plain conquest, now in the minorite of ourfo.
verane, beyngfurth of the realme, should we not be thought oncareful
off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill
fubjeas to hir majefte ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off
ws ? Might she not justly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negli-
gent minifleres? Giff Strangeares should be thus fuffered to broke
the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and pervert our lawes
and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people esteem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na wyfe to
fubtrak our obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off
hir dew reverence, rents and revenues off hir crown. We feka
nathing but that Scotland may remaine, as of before, a fne realme,

rewlit by hir hyenes and hir minifteres borne men of the fain; and
that the succession of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I wald not ze fould not fa lyttil efteme the friendship of Scot-

land, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na
fiall commodite for zow to be delivered off the anoyance of so neir
a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more trouble zow, then off ony
other nation albeit twyfs as puissant, not lyeng dry marche with
zow. Befydes that ze fall n6t nede to feare the invasion off any
prince lackyng the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand.
Confider quhat superfluous charges ze beftowe on the fortification
*and keping of Barwick; quhilk ze may reduce to a mean fowme,
having ws to frendes. The realme of Ireland being of natour a
gode and fertill countrey, by reason off the continewalld unquiet-
nes and lak of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow
then great advantage; and giff it were peaceable may be very
commodious. For pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to
zow quhat service we ar abill to do. Refuse not theyr commodi-
teys, besides maony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I
fRudy not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other countrey able to
offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be embraced, for that
zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maift ernefily futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes al-
maift caryed me beyond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will
leave to trouble zow, after I have geven you this note. I wald
wifs that ze, and they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former
orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthyace, and confidre quhat.
counfall that wyfe Oratour gave to the Athenians his countrymen,
in a lyke cafe; quhilk hes so great affinite with this cause of ours,
that every word theroff myght be applyed to our purpos. There
may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed, when zour
nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill.
From Sant Andrews, the 2oth of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 39-)

Part of a Letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil,

from the camp before Leith, 29th of April, 156o.

I WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the An Origi.
earl of Hantly, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as Office.
one, who with all his heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost
of his power. Half the words that come out of his mouth were

Volume II. R

able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his be-
half, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to
judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself
always measure my thoughts, as he shall deserve to be spoken of,
With much difficulty, and great persuasion, he hath subscribed with
the reft of the lords to join with them in this a6tion - whatfomever
he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to
do, with solemn proteflation, and many .words , he triufteth to ad.
join many to this cause; and faith surely that no man fnall lie
where he taketh part. He hath this day subscribed a bond be.
tween England and this nation; he faith, that there was never
thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 146.)

Randolph to Cecil, oth Augufi 156o. From Edinburgb.

An Oi i;l SINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last to your honour,
Paper Of- I have heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this present it
fie. may please you to know, that the most part of the nobles are here

arrived, as your honour lha1l receive their names in writing. The
earl of Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington chosen speaker
of the parliament, or harangue-maker as these men term it. The
first, day of their fitting in parliament will be on Thursday next.
Hitherto, as many as have been present of the lords have com-
muned and devised of certain heads then to be propounded, as,
who (hall be sent into France, who into England. It is muck
easier to find them than the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved
upon, that for England the Master of Maxwell, and laird of Liding-
ton. For France, Pitarrow and the Juilice Clerk. Also they have
consulted whom they think meeteft to name for the XXIV. of
the which the XII counsellors must be chosen. They intend,
very [hortly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with
the names of thofe,.they.fhall chufe , and also to require the king
and queen's consent unto this parliament. They have devised ho0-
to have the contraa with England confirmed by authority of par-
liament, how also to have the articles of the agreement betweent
them and their king and queen ratified. These things yet have
only been/had in communication. For the confirmation of the
contrac with England I have no doubt; for that. I hear many me-
very well like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Suther-

land, the L. Glamis, who dined yeflerday with the lord James.
The L. James requested me this present day to bring the contrad
unto him. I intend also, this day, to speak unto the L. Gray,
in our L. Gray's name, for that he promised in my hearing to fLb-
Jcribe, and then presently would have done it, if the contradl could
have been had. For the more assurance against all inconveni-
ents, I would, besides that, that I trust it shall be ratify'd in par-
liament, that every nobleman in Scotland had put ht hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument,
tho' the aft of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might,
therefore, fland with your advice, that the lords might be wiit-
ten unto, now that they are here present to that effct, or that I
might receive from your Honr. some earnest charge to travel here-
in, I doubt not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might
be also known with what substantial and effc6tious words or chaige
you desire to have it confirmed, I think no great difficulty would
be made. The Earl Marshal has oft been moved to subscribe, he
ufeth mo delays than men judged he would. His son told me yes-
terday, that he would speak with me at leisure, so did also Drum-
lanrick; I know not to what purpose: I have caused lord James
to be the earnefter with the L. marshal, for his audtority's fake,
when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between these two realms might be per-
petual; and among diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew
.of no-other, but by making them both one, and that in hop
of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever been
granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto
that, that he had promised for it, that it should pass his power and
,ll the crafty knaves of his counsel, (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own words) to break so godly a purpose. This talk liked
well the affifters, howsomever it pleased him to whom it was fpo-
ken unto. The barons, who in time past have been of the parlia-
ment, had yeflerday a convention among themselves in the church,
in very honest and quiet fort; they thought it good to require to
be restored unto their ancient liberty, to have voice in parliament.
They presented that day a bill unto the lords to that effect, a copy
whereof thall be sent as soon as it can be had. It was answered
unto gently, and taken in good part. It was referred unto the
lords of the articles, when they are chosen, to resolve thereupon.-
Here follows a long paragraph concerning the fortications of Dun-
bar, &c.-This present morning, vi'z. the 9th, I underitood, that
the lords intended to be at the parliament, which caused me

somewhat to stay my letter, to fee what I could hear or leara
worth the reporting unto your Honr. The lords, at ten of the
clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where the duke lieth;
from thence they departed towards the tolbooth, as they were in
dignity. Each one being set in his feat, in such order as your H.
shall receive them in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword,
were laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the L.
of Lidington began his oration. He excused his infufficiency to
occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of things past, and
of what necessity men were forced unto for the defence of their
country, what remedy and support it pleased God to fend themin
the time of their necessity, how much they were bound heartily
to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the perfua.
sion that was in many men's minds that lay back, that mifdeemed
other things to be meant than was attempted. He advised all e-
slates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend themselves wholly
to the true service of God and of their country. He willed them
to remember in what state it had been of long time for lack of
government, and exercise of justice. In the end, he exhorted
them to mutual amity and hearty friendship, and to live with one
another as members all of one body.-He prayed God long to
maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially betwixt
the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so
ended. The clerk of register immediately flood up, and alked
them to what matter they would proceed: It was thought necef.
fary, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed with the
common consent, for that it was thought necessary to fend them
away with speed into France, and to receive the ratification of
them as soon as might be. The articles being read, were im-
mediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to have certain of
the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put to their seals, to be
sent away by a herald, who shall also bring the ratification again
with him. The barons, of whom I have above written, required
an answer to their request, somewhat was said unto the contrary,
The barons alledged for them custom and authority. It was in
the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the
lords of the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, Ihould
find it right and necessary for the commonwealth, it should be ra-
tify'd at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed-
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the ar-
ticles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chufe the temporal,
and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There

were chosen as in this other paper I have written. This being
done, the lords departed and accompanied the duke, all as far as
the Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high street) and
many down into the palace where he lieth. The town all in ar-
mour, the trumpets founding, and other mufick such as they have.
Thus much I report unto your honour of that that I did both
hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used saving in times
long past the lords have had parliament robes, which are now with
them wholly out of use.

The names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal as

are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Lords.
Erskine.
Ruthven.
Lindsey.
Sommervill.

, Cathcart.

Hume.
Livingston.
Innermeth.
Boyd.
Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltrie,
Gordon.

The Lords of the

Temporal.

The Duke.
Argyll.
Marshall.
Athole.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Ruthven.
Erikine.
Boyd.
Lindsay.

So that with the Subprior of St. Lords Spiritual,

St. Andrews.
Dunkell.
Athens.
The bishop of the fles.
Abbots and Priors I

know not how ma,

-y.

e Articles,

Barons elected to be of

the Articles.

Maxwell.
Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pitarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provofts of the

chief towns, which
also are of the Ar-
ticles.

Andrews, the -whole is 36.

Earls.

Arran.
Argyll.
Athole.
Crawford.
Caffils.
Marshall.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Sutherland.
Cathnefs.
Rothes.
Monteith.

Spiritual.

Athens.
Isles.
Lord James.
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoxis.
Cowpar.
Kinross.
Kilwinning.

It were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition,

and chiefly the aiffeions of these men, that are at this time chof.
en Lords of the Articles. May it satisfy your Honr. for this time,
to know that, by the common opinion of men, there was not
a more fubftancialler or more fufficient number of all forts of mea
chosen in Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had great.
er hope of good to infue. This present morning, viz. the ioth
the L. of Lidington, made me privy unto your letter; he in.
tendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France.
He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that mov.
eth him most, which is the example of the last, that went on a
more grateful message than lie ihall carry, and flood on other
terms with their prince than lie doth, and yet your honour know.
eth what the world judgeth.

Petition of the Le/er Barons to the Parliament, held

Azug. 1560.

Inclored in MVly lords, unto your lordfhips, humbly means and shows, we the
Randoloh's
letter to Ce- barons and freeholders of this realm, your bretheren in Christ,
cil. i3th That whpreas the causes of true religion, and common well of
Aug.a6o0. this realm, are, in this present parliament, to be treated, order.

ed, and established, to the glory of God, and maintainance of
the commonwealth and we being the greatest number in portion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are ready
to bear the greatest part of the charges thereuntill, as well in
peace, as in war, both with our bodeis, and with our goods; and
feeing there is no place where we may do better service now than
in general councils and parliaments, in giving our best advice,
,and reason, vote and counfell for the furtherance thereof, for the
maintainance of virtue, and punishment of vice, as use and cuf-
tom had been of old by ancient adFs of parliament observed in
this realm ; whereby we understand that we ought to be heard
to reason, and vote in all caufcs concerning the comi..inwealh,
as well in. counfells as in parliaments; otherwise we. think that
whatfomever ordinances and flatutes be made concerning us and
our estate, we not being required and fuffered to reason and vote
.at the making thereof, that the fame should not oblige us to fiand
thereto. Therefore it will please your lordihips to take confi-
deration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born by us,
since we are willing to serve truly to the common well of this

realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this present parliament,
and all counfells, where the common well of the realm is to be
treated, take our advice, counfell and vote, so that, without the
fame, your lordfhips would fuffer nothing to be passed and con-
cluded in parliament or councils aforesaid; and that all a&s of
parliament made, in times past, concerning us for our place and
estate, and in our favour, be at this present parliament, confirm-
ed, approved, and ratified, and ad of parliament made thereupon.
And your lordfhips answer humbly beseeches.

Of the success of this petition, the following account is given by

Randolph; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. x56o. The matters conclud-
ed and past by common consent on Saturday last, in such solemn
fort as the first day that they assembled, are these. First, that the
barons, according to an old ad& of parliament, made in the time
of James I. in the year of God 1427, shall have free voice in
parliament, this aa passed without any contradidion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 152.)

A Letter of Thomas Randolpb, the Englijh resident, to

the right worjhipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal
secretary to the queen's majefly.

I RAVE received your honour's letters of the first of this month, 9 Aug.

1461. Cott

written at Ofyes in Essex, and also a letter unto the lord James, I ib. B. ic
from his kinsman St. Come, out of France, in this they agree fa. 3y-
both that the queen of Scctland is nothing changed, of her pur-
pose in home coming. I assure your honour that will be a flout
adventure for a sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well
what may happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily
tle may be received when she cometh so land of a great number,
who are utterly persuaded that she intendeth their utter ruin, .
come when (he will; the preparance is very small whensoever
that fie arrive, fcarfely any man can be persuaded that tle hath
any such thought in her head. I have (hewn your honour's let-
ter unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Ledington, they
whfl as your honour doth, that she might be flayed yet for a space,
and if it were not for their obedience fake, some of them care
not tho' they never saw her face. They travel what they can to
prevent the wicked devises of these mischievous purposes of her
ministers, but I fear that that will always be found that filij hu-
jus feculi, they do what they can to stand with the religion, and.

to maintain amity with their neighbours ; they have also need to
look unto themselves, for their hazard is great, and that they fee
there is no remedy nor safety for themselves, but to repose them.
selves upon the queen's majesty, our fovereign's favours and sup.
port. Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may trust at home. There are in mind shortly to try what they
may be assured at of the queen's majefly, and what they may as.
furedly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties.
This the queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this
file feeketh by all means to prevent; and hath caused St. Come,
in her name, earnestly to write to charge him that no such things
be attempted before her home coming ; for that it is said, that
they too already arrived here 'out of England for the purpose,
what femblant fomever the noblemen do make, that they are
grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far from their
hearts. They intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I have
my answer ready enough for them. If she thrust all Englifhimen
out of this country, I doubt not but there will be some of her
own that will bare us some kindness. Of me she shall be quit,
so soon as it pleafeth the queen's majefly my mistress no longer to
use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that they
are of mind that immediately of the next convention, I lhall re.
pair towards you with their determinations, and resolutions, in all
purposes, wherein your honour's advice is ernefily required, and
thortly looked for. Whatfomever I desire myself, I know ay
will ought to be fubje& unto the queen my fovereign's pleasure,
but to content myself, would God I were so happy as to serve her
aiajefly in as mean a slate as ever poor gentlemen did to be quit
of this place 5 not that I do in my heart wax weary of her majef.
ty's service, but because my time and years require some place of
more repose and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also
my infufticience when other troubles in this country arise, or ought
shall be required of me to the advancement of her majefty's ferv.
ice, that either my will is not able to compass, or my credit fuffici-
ent to work to that effe&, as perchance shall be looked for at my
hands. As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in
this room, so I trust that I shall find that continual favour at your
hands, that so soon as it shall stand with the quene's majefty's
pleasure, I may give this place unto some far worthier than I am
myself, and in the mean season, have my course dixreted by you

good advice how I may by my contrivance do some such service,
as may be agreeable to her majefly's will and pleasure.

These few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of my-

self. tor the reft, where that is wiflied that the lords will stout-
ly continue yet for one month. I assure your honour that there
is yet nothing omitted of their old and accufltosed manner of
doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and
thould now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I find not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I

doubt more her money, than I do her fair words; and yet can.
I not conceive what great things can be wrought with forty thou-
sand crowns, and treasure of her own here I know there is no sure
or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth no-
thing at this time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to fatif-
fye your desire, in.knpwledge of the present slate of things here.
Whatfomever cometh. of that, he findeth it ever best, that she
come not; but if ilhe do come, to let her know, at the first, what
lhe shall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if she
embrace Christ, and desire to live in peace with her neighbours.
By such letters as ybou hav'e last received, your honour somewhat
underfiandeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, what is
determined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never to
leave him until God have taken his life, and thus together with
what comfort fomever it will please you to give him by your let-
ters, that the queen's majefly doth not utterly condemn him, or
atthe least in that point, that he is so fore charged with by his
own queen, that her majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt
not but it will be a great comfort unto him, and will content ma-
ny others; his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with
England, and that God will never fuffer men to be so ungrate, as
by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deftrution of them,
that have saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty.
I leave farther, at this time, to trouble your honour, desiring God
to fend such an amity between therfe two realms, that God may
be glorified to them of this world.-At Edenbourgh the 9th of
August, 1561.

S Volume II.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 158..

A Letter of zieen Elizabeth to Zuyeen Mary.

To the right exce!cent, right high and mighty princf/e, our ngt

dear and well belovedj 'ler and cousin the Zucen of Scotland.

i6th of RIGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princesse, our right dear
Paer Of- and right well beloved filler and cousin, we greet you well. The
fice from a lord of St. Cofme brought to us your letters, dated the 8th of
Copy. this present at Abbeville, whereby ye signify, that although by

the answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have
had occasion to have entred into some doubt of our amity, yet as.
ter certain purposes passed betwixt you and our ambassador, you
would assure us of your good meaning to live with us in amity,
and for your purpose therein ye require us to give credit to the
said St. Cofme. WVe Lave thereunto thought good to answer as
followeth. The fame St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto
us on your part, for your excuse in not ratify ingthe treaty as vourfelf
made to our ambassador, and we have briefly answered to every
the fame points, as he can flhew you; and-if he shall not so do, yet
least in the meane season you might be induced to think that your
realons has fatisefid us, fomerally we assure you, that to our re-
quefls your answer cannot be reputed for a fatisfacion. For we
require no benefit of you, but that you will perform ycur promie
-whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the re-
fufal whercof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither co-
vet we any thing, but that which is in your own power as qucca
of Scotland, that which yourflif in vords and fpcech doth ccn-
fess, that which your late hufband's our good brother's ambailadors
and you concluded; that which your own nobility and people weie
made privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quietness be-
twixt us, yea that, without which, no perfle armity can continuebe-
tw,-ixt us, as if it be iudifi'crently weighed, we doubt not but ye
will perceive, allow and accomplillh. Nevertheless, perceiving'
by the report of the brilger, iLat you mean furthwith upon yotu
c.mil g hc':c, to follow herein the advise of  our council in Scot-
.ind, we awr conteit to fufuend our conceipt of all unkindness,
and do Assure you that we be fully resolved upon this being per-
formed, to uniLe a lure band of amity, and to live in neighbour-
Lood with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the knot
of friendlhip, a:s ve be ia the knot of nature and blood. Aid

herein we be so earnestly determined, that the world flould fee
if the contrary should fellow, (which God forbid) the very cccafion
to be in you and not in us; as the flory witneffeth the like of the
king your father, our uncle, with whom our father fought to have
knitt a perpetual bond, by inviting to come in this realm to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us, and we
think with you, sundry witnesses of our father's earneil good mean-
ing, and of the error whereunto divers e il councellors induced
your father; or finally where it feemeth that report hath been
made unto you, that we had sent our admiral to the fees with cur
navy to empeache your paffige, both your servants do well under-
fland how fdife that is, knowing for a truth that we have not any
more than two or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost crmpeelied, Ly
the earnest complaint of the ambassador of our goed bett.cr the
king of Spain, made of certain Scottiihmen haunting our fe.s s
pirates, under pretence of letters of marque of which mattcr all"
we earnestly require you, at your coming to your realme, to ha, e
some goad consideration, and the rather for refpe& that ought to
be be:xwi;t your realme and the countries of us, (,f Irance, of
Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right excellent,
right high and mighty princess, we recommend us to you with
modl earnest requell, not to neglect these our friendly and fiuleily
offers of friendflhip, which, before God, we mean and intend to ac-
complifh. Given under our signet at He.yngham the 16th of
Augull, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. I78,)

A Letter of Randolph to the right bonourable Sir t-il! iam

Cecil, knighbt, principal frcretar? to the qu:e:s ma-

OF late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing T<th of

M ay, 1563.

worth the writing unto your honour.-Before his coming, we had Paper Of.
so little to Lint upon, that we did nothing but pass our time in fice from

the Origi-

fcias, bacquetting, masking, and running at the ring, and such nal.
like. He brought with him such a number of letters, and such
abundance of nevs, that for the space of three days, we gave our-
selves to nothing else but to reading of writings, and hearing of
tales many so truely reported, that they might be compared to any

S ij

that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as
an undoubted truth, which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his
being with the emperor, moved a marriage between his youngefl
son, the duke of Auftruche, and this queen; wherein he hathfo
far travailed, that it has already come unto this point, that if tle
find it good, the said duke will out of hand fend hither his embaf.
fador, and farther proceed to the consummation hereof, with as
convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her mind may be
the better known, la Croch is sent unto her with this meflage from
the cardinal, who hath promised unto the emperor, to have word
again before the end of May; and for this cause la Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both day and night. This
queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many means,
hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein,
but would never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn
what her meaning is, or how (he is bent. She ufeth no man's
council, but only this man's that last arrived, and assuredly until
the L. of Lidington's return, flie will do what she can to keep that
secret, and because resolution in his absence cannot be taken, lhe
will, for this time, return la Croch with request, to have longer
time to devise; and after, with the most speed (he can, flie fully
purpofeth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardinal, of her
mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I
know not whether by some intelligence that he had before his de.
parture, or since his arrival in France, divers letters have passed
between her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as much
as was written in sypher, is kept into themselves. Whither also
the L. of Lidington hath had any conferrence with the Spanil
ambassador in England of this matter, or any like, I leave it unto
your houour's good means, to get true knowledge thereof. Guel-
fes or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to write for
verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the em-
peror hath offered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county
of Tyroll, which is said to be worth thirty thousand franks by
year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a letter unto this
queen, out of France, not long since. This is all that presently
I can write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther
knowledge, your honour thall be informed.

I have received your honour's writings by the Scottish man,

that last came into these parts, he brought also letters unto thi6

queen from the L. of Lidington, their date was old, and contain-
ed only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that New-
haven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature,
but that I know they will fay as much as'they dare do, I will
not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' From
hence I do assure them, what means fomever they make, or how
pitiful fomever there mone be, they are like to receive but small
comfort, for all their long allie. We stand daily in doubt what
friendship we shall need ourfeif, except we put better order unto
our misruled papifts, than yet we do, or know how to bring to
pass, that we may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the s5th of this instant, the queen departeth of

this town, towards Edenbourgh. If my hap be good, you shall
thoroughly hear some merry tidings of the Bp. of St. Andrews;
upon Wednesday next he shall be arreigned, and five other priests,
for their massing at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take my
leave; at St. Andrews the Isth of May, 1563.

No. VIII, (Vol. I. p. 184.)

Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the queen's ma-
jefly.

MAY it please your honour, the 7th of this inflant, Rowlet, this loth of
queen's secretary, arrived here; he reporteth very honeffly of his piaer Of-:'
good usage, he brought with him many letters unto the queen fice from

the Origin.

that came out of France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She ta in his
received from the queen mother two letters, the one contained own Hand,
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the slate of
France as then it was, in what fort things were accorded, and
what farther was intended for the appealing of the discords there,
not mistrusting but that if reason could not be had at the queen
of England's hands, but that the realm of France should find her
ready and willing to support and defend the right thereof, as by
friendihip and old alliance between the two realms she is bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, your honour

can well confider, and by her writings in this fort unto this queen,
(which I assure your honour is true) you may assuredly know,
that nothing shall be left undone of her part, that may move 4e!
bate gr controverfie between this queen and our sovereign.

It was much mused at by the queen herself, how this new

kindness came about, that at this time fle received two long let.
ters written all with her own hand, saying, all the time since her
return she never received half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can myself teflify by the queen's own saying,
and other good affirance, where hitherto I have not been deceiv-
ed. I can also farther assure your honour, that this queen hath
fayd that fle knoweth now, that the friendship of the queen's
majesty my sovereign may fland her more in flead, than that of
her good mother in France, and as the is desirous of them both,
so will she not lose the one for the other. I may also farther as
sure your honour, that whatfomever the occaflon is, this queen
hath some what in her heart that will burst out in time, which
will manifest that some unkindness hath passed between them,
that will not be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself,
the faith that the queen mother might have used the matter other-
wife than she hath done, and doth much doubt what shall be the
success of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have
her will. Seeing then that presently they fland in such terms
one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her in that mind,
(this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause
her to conceive better of the other. And yet I am assured flie
shall receive as friendly letters, and as many good words from
this queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the queen
mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lydington of that
purpose, fle did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if she
do, I think it hard if your honour can get no favour thereof,
at his return, or perchance by some means here. It may, per-
chance be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or underfland what mind flie beareth unto the
queen's majefly our sovereign. The queen knoweth now that
the earl Bothwell is sent for to London. She caused a gentle-
man of hers to enquire the cause; I answered, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and
that it should be judged there. I know that (he thinketh much
that he is not sent into Scotland. It is yet great.e doubted that
if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil infirument. If
the lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour
herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but
mofl of all to himfclf. There comes a vulture in this realm, if
ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 189.)

The Oration made by IWilliam .Maitland of Lethington,

younger fecretaryfbr the time, in the parliament bold-
en by our sovereign the king's mother, queen of this
realm for the time, the time of the reflitution of Um-
'ubile Matthew Earl of Lennox.

MY lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has
pleased her majefly most graciously to utter unto you, by her
own mouth, ye may have fufficiently conceived the cause of this
your present assembly; yet having her majefly's commrandment
to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee
deceased, I am willed to express the fame fomeewlat more at
large.

Notour it is, how, in her Highnefs's minority, a proccfs of

forfaultour was decreed againif my Lord of Lennox, for certain
offences alledged committed by him, specified in the dome and
cenfement of Parliament given thereupon ; by reason whereof
ie has this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his na-
tive country, how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has
well appeared by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her
Mlajefiy's knowledge, not only containinrg most humble and due
submission, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to
her Majefly his natural princcfs, and earnest affelcion he had to
her Highness most humble service, if it should please her Majef-
ty of her clemency to make him able to enjoy the benefit of a
fibje t; many rcfpc6ts might have moved her Highness favour-
ably to incline to his request, as the antiency of his house, and
the firname he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her ma-
jefty by affinity, by reason of my Lady TMargarct her highnefs's
aunt, and divers other his good considerations, as also the effec-
tuous requefl of her good filler the Queen's Majesty of England,
whose earnest commendation was not of least moment, besides
that of her own natural, her majefly has a certain inclination to
pity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard, by her own re-
Spit, has a great deal more pleasure to be the infirument of the
iphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient blood,
than to have matter miniftred of the decay or overthrow of any

edJ **-ace. Upon this occasion, her majefly the more tenderli

looked upon his request, and her good fiffer the Queen of Eng.
land's favourabli letter, written for recommendation of his cause,
in consideration whereof not only has fihe granted unto him her
letter of restitution, by way of grace, but also lifcenfed him to
pursue, by way of reducion, the remedies provided by the law
for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment, unorderly
led, and to have the process reversed ; for examination whereof,
it has pleased her majesty presently to assemble you the three
eflates of this her realme, by whose advice, deliberation, and de.
ciflon at her majefty's mind, to proceed forward upon his com-
plaints, as the merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and prac.
tice observed in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus as it
were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have in
hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far dif.
ferent from the fame fubjec, wherein I would extend the cir-
cumftances more largely. If I feared not to offend her highness,
whose presence and modest nature abhors long speaking and adu.
lation, and so will compel me to speak such things, as may seem
to tend to any good and perse& point ; and lear it fliould be
compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I fliould omit to put
you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this, and the
like demonstrations of her gentill nature ; whose gracious beha.
viour towards all her fubjefas, in general, may serve for a good
proof of that felicity, we may look for under her happy govern.
ment, so long as it shall please God to grant her unto us for a
good harmony to be had in the common yeill, the offices be-
tween the prince and tec fubje&s must be reciprocque; as by her
majefty's prudence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign
nations, and quietness among yourselves, in such fort, that I think
justly it may be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that present.
ly lives, was in greater tranquillity ; so is it the duty of all us
her loving fubjecs to acknowledge the fame as a most high be-
nefit, proceeding from the good government of her majesty, de-
claring ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma-.
jefty such due obedience, as a just prince may look for at the
hands of faithful and obedient fubjefts. I mean no forced nor
unwilling obedience, which I know her nature does detest, but
fach as proceeds from the contemplation of her modefl kind of
regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof.
A good proof have we all in general had of her majefty's benig-
nity these three years, that the has lived in the government.ovr

you, and many of you have largely tasted of her large liberality
and frank dealing; on the other part her highness has had large
appearance of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to con-
tinue, as we have begun, in consideration of the many notable
examples of her clemency above others her good qualities, and
to abhor and detest all false bruites and rumours, which are the
most peffilent evils that can be in any common weil, and the
fowers and inventors thereof. Then may we be well assured to
have of her an most gracious princesse, and she most faithful and
loving fubjeas ; and so both the head and the members, being
encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the politick
bodies, whereof I made mention before, as the glory thereof
shall partly appertain to her majefly, so shall no small praise and
unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all univer-
sally her fubje&s.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 195.)

The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in

time to come follow, to the SQeen's majefly of Eng-
land, and slate of this realm, upon the marriage of
the Qjteen of Scots to the Lord Darley.

FIRST, the minds of such as be affeaed to the Queen of Scotts,
either for herself, or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown,
or for the desire to have charge of the form of religion in this re-
alm, or for the difcontentation they have of the Queen's ma-
jefty, or her succession, or of the succession of any other be.
fide the Queen of Scotts, shall be, by this marriage, erected,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring their
desires to pass; and to make some estimate what persons those are,
to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed ; the
fame may be compassed in those forts either within the realmu or
without.

The firfi are such as are specially devoted to the Queen of
Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as
first all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her part, and the Earl
of Lennox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their blood,
and have received difpleafures by the Duke of Chaltlreault and
the Hamiltons. The second are all nmanner of persons, both in
this realm and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received and in there

Volume II. T

two forts are the substance of them comprehended, that shall take
comfort in this marriage.

Next therefore to be considered what perils and troubles theft

kind of men shall intend to this realm.

First, the general scope and mark of all their desires ist and

always shall be, to bring the queen of Scotts to have the royal
crown of this realm; and therefore, though the devifees may vary
amongst themselves for the compassing hereof, according to the
accidents of the times, and according to the impediments which
they shall find by means of the queen's majefty's adions and
governments, yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and prac.
tices, shall wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts
queen of this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof:
and in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confi.
dered, whereof the one is far worse than the. other: the one
is intended by them, that either from malicious blindness in re-
ligion, or for natural affeftion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord
Darley, do persuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts
hath presently more right to the crown than our sovereign lady
the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on both sides, and
all such as are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland
Ireland, or elsewhere; the other is meant by them, which, with
less malice, are persuaded that the queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty and her
issue, of which fort few are without the realm, but here within,
and yet of them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from these
two forts shall the peril devises and praaices proceed. From the
first, which imagine the queen of Scotts to have perpetually right,
are to be looked for these perils. First, is it to be doubted the
devil will infe& some of them to imagine the hurt of the life of
our dear sovereign lady, by such means as the devil (hall fugged
to them, although it is to be assuredly hoped, that almighty God
will, as he hath hitherto, graciously protea and preserve her
from such dangers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by per-
foafions, by bruites, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the
minds of good fubje&s from the queen's majefly, and to counci-
liate them to the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the fron-
tiers and the north will be much solicited and laboured. Third.
ly, there will be attempted causes of some tumults and rebellions,
specially in the north towards Scotland, so as thereupon may fol-
low some open enterprize set by violence. Foutrthly, there will
be, by the said queen's council and friends, a new league madq

*ith France or Spain, that shall be offenfive to this realm, and
a furtherance to their title. And it is also very likely, that they
will set a foot as many pra6tices as they can, both upon the fron-
tiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty to encreafe
and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty
or potent, and for the attempting of all these things, many
tievifes will be imagined, from time to time, and no negligence
will therein appear.

From the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen

of Scotts, but that (he should succeed in tittle to the queen's majef-
ty, is not much to be feared, but that they will content them-
selves to fee not only the queen's majesty not to marry, and so to
impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts (hall have issue,
which they will think to be more pleafible to all men, because
thereby the crowns of England and Scotland shall be united in one,
and thereby the occasion of war shall cease ; with which persuasion
many people may be seduced, and abused to incline themselves to
the part of the queen of Scotts.

The remedies against these perils.

A Duplicat.

Afummary of the consultation and advice given by the 4Jhjune,

lords and others of the privy council. Collected out of Lib. C1.
the sundry and several f eeches of the said counsellors. o. so.

Lord Keeper. Mr. Comptroler.
Lord Treasurer. Mr. Vice Chamberlain.
f Derby. Mr. Secretary.

Earls of Bedford. Cave.

[Leicester. Peter.
Lord Admiral. Mason.
Lord Chamberlain.

Questions propounded were these two,

FraST, what perils might ensue to the queen's majesty, or this re-
alm, of the marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts, and the Lord
Darnly.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some

counsellors into only one.

% T ij

1. Firfi, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (Leieg not

married) a great number in this realm, not of the worlf fubjeis,
might be alienated in their minds from their natural duties to her
majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage of Scotland,
as a mean to establish the succession of both the crowns in theiffue
of the fame marriage, and so favour all devises and pradices, that
should tend to the advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that considering the chief foundation of them,

which furthered the marriage of the lord Datnly, was laid upon
the trust of such as were papifts, as the only means left to reffore
the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both in this
realm, and Scotland, the papifts would most favour, maintain, and
fortify this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for further.
ance of facion in religion, devise all means and pradices that could
be within this realm, to diflurb the eflate of the queen's majefly,
and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchive their pur.
poses by force, rather than fail. By some other, these perils hay.
ing indeed many branches, were reduced, though somewhat other-
wife, into two forts, and these were in nature such as they could
not be easily fevered the one from the other, but were knit and
lincked together, naturelly for maintaining the one with the other.
The first of these fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the
lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further the pretend.
ed title of the queen of Seotts, not only to succeed the queen's
majesty, as in her best amity (he had profeffed, but that to ocou-
py the queen's estate, as when (he was in power, she did mani-
feftly declare.

The second was, that hereby the Romish religion should be e-

-re&ed, and increased daily in this realm, and these two were thus
knit together, that the furtherance and maintenance of the title
flood in furthering of the religion of Rome within this realm; and
in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion stood by the
title, for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to ad,

vance the title to disturb the queen's majefly, must needs ensue,
was considered that always the intention and will of any perfou
is most manifest, when their power is greatest, and contrary when
power is small, then the intention and will of every person is co-
vered and less seen. So as when the queen of Scotts power was
greatest, by her marriage with the dolphin of France, being as.
terwards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind she,
and all her friends were using then manifestly all the means that

tould be devised to impeach and difpoffefs the queen's majesty,
first by writing and publishing herfelt in all countries queen of Eng-
land; by granting charters, patents, and commiflions with that
flile, and with the arms of England, both the French and Scotts,
which charters remain flill undefaced; and to prosecute it with
fet[et, it is known what preparations of war were made, and sent
into Scotland; and what other forces were affcmbled in foreign
countries; yea, in what manner a shameful peace was made by
the French with King Philip, to employ all the forces of France,
to pursue all the matters by force, which by God's providence,
and the queen's majesty contrary power, were repelled; and as-
terwards, by her hufband's death, her fortune and power being
changed, the intention began to hide itself, and altho' by the
Scottiih queen's commiffarys an accord was made at Edenbrough,
to reform all those titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this
day, by delays and cavillations, the ratification of that treaty
hath been deferred, And so now, as soon as the (hall feel her
power, she will set the fame again abroad, and by considering of
fach errors as were committed in the first, her friends and allies
will amend the fame, and proceed fubfiantially to her purpose.
By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater of this
marriage with the lord Darnley, being a fubje& of this realm,
than with the mightiest prince abroad

) for by this, he being of

this realm, and having for the cause of religion, and other refpe&s,
made a party here, thould encreafe by force, with dimunition qs
the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make
by the fadtion of the papist, and other discontented persons here,
should be as it were deduded out of the power of this realm ; and
by the marriage of a fdranger, (he could not be assured of any
part here; so as by this marriage she should have a portion of her
own power to serve her turn, and a fimall portion of adversaries at
home in our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble
the like abroad; whereof the examples are in our own fiories
many, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm, but with
the help of some at home. It was also remembered, that feeing
now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifefily
seen, that in every corner of the realm, the fa&ion that most favour-
eth the Scottish title, is grown flout and bold, yea seen mani-
Mftly in this court, both in hall and chamber, it could not be
(but except good heed were speedily given to it) by this mar-
riage, and by the pra&ice of the fautors thereof, the fame faclion
would shortly encreafe, and grow so great and dangerous, as the

jedrefi thereof would be almost desperate. And to this purpose
it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the substance of
the jufiices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly
a third was'found fully assured to be trusted in the matter of re-
ligion, upon which only firing the queen of Scotts title doth hang,
and some doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of'Lennax,
and his, had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and there.
by made avant now in Scotland, that their party was so great in
England as the queen's majesty durst not attempt to contrary his
marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of the perils declared,
being notwithftandirig more largely and plainly set out, and made
so apparent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council
could deny them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Queflion.

T9E question of this consultation was what were meet to be

done to avoid these perills, or else to divert the force thereof
from hurting the realm wherein there were a great number of
particular devises propounded, and yet the more part of them was
reduced by some into three heads.

T, The first thought necessary by all persons, as the only thing

of the most moment and efEcacy, to remedy all these perrils, and
many others, and such as without it, no other remedy could be
found fufficient, and that was to obtain that the queen's majesty
would marry, and make therein no long delay.

2. The second was to advance, establish, and fortify indeed

the profeffion of religion, both in Scotland, and in England, and
to deminifh, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

3. The third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to difal.

point and break this intended marriage, or, at the leafi, thereby
to procure the fame not to be so hurtful to this realm, as other-
wife it will be,

The first of these three hath no particular rights in it, but an

earnest and unfeigned defire'and suite, with all humbleness, by
prayer to Almighty God, and advice and council to the queen's
majesty, that she would differ no more time from marriage, where-
by the good fubjefts of the realm might flay their hearts, to de-
pend upon her majesty, and the issue of her body, without which
no surety can be devised to ascertain any person of continuance
of their families or poftenics, to enjoy that which otherwise fhoul~
come to them.

Sercnd,,concerning the matters of religion, wherein both truth

and policy were joined together, had these particulars.

Tiril, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realnr

have taken occasion to comfort and increase their faclion, both in
England, Scotland, and abroad, with a rumour and expecation
that the religion shall be shortly changed in this realm, by means
that the bishops, by the queen's majefty's commandment, have
of late dealt ftreightly with some persons of good religion, be-
cause they had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like
things, being more of form and accidents, than of any substance,
for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning to com-
fort the adversaries, but only to maintain an uniformity as well
in things external, as irr the fubflance; nor yet hath any inten-
tion to make any change of the religion, as it is established by
laws. It was thought by all men very necessary for the suppress.
ing of the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries, indirecly here-
by to notify, by her special letters to the two areh-bifhops, that
her former commandement was only to retain an uniformity, and
not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her majef-
ty, in the change of any part of religion, but that the did deter-
mine firmly to maintain the form of her religion, as it was efla-
blifhed, and to punish such as did therein violate her laws. And
in these points, some also wilted that it might please her arch-
bilhops, that if they should fee that the adversaries continued in
taking occasion to fortify their fa&ion, that in that cafe they
should use a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order might be de-
vised, and established, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity
and gravity might be retained amongst the clergy.

The second means was, that the quondam bishops, and others,
which had refused to acknowledge the queen's majefty's power o-
ver them, according to the law, and were of late difperfed.in the
plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is known they cease
pot to advance their fadion, might be returned to the tower or
some other prison, where they might not have such liberty to fe-
duce and invegle the queen's majefty's subjects, as they daily do.

The third means was, that where the bishops do complain that

they dare not execute the ecclesiastical laws, to the furtherence of
religion, for fear of the premunire, wherewith the judges and
lawyers of the realm, bzing not best affeaed in religion, do
threaten them, and in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface
them, that upon such cafes opened, some convenientauithority

miglht be given them, from the queen's majeffly, to continq|
during her pleasure.

The fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and

unlawful books in English brought from beyond seas, and are bold,
ly received, read, and kept, and especially in the North, fedu.
cing of great numbers of good fubjefts, the like boldness whereof
was never fuffered in any otler princefs's time, that some tireight
order might be given to avoid the fame, and that it might be con.
fidered by the judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to main
tain such books, made diretly against her majefty's authority, and
maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

The fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and

such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in Eng.
land, especially in the North, as curates of churches, and all such
of them as are not found honest and conformable may be banilh.
ed out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in
the realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

The sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings are on the

other fide the sea, and from thence maintain sedition in the realmi
that livings may be better bellowed, tQ the commodity of the re.
alm, upon good fubje&s.

The seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no finall

authority in this realm in governance of all property of the realm,
might be sworn to the queen's majefly, according to the laws of
the realm, and so thereby they ftould for conscience fake maiq.
tain the queen's majefty's authority,

The particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this

marriage, or to divert the perils.

First to break this marriage, considering nothing can likely do

it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by some that these
means following might occasion the breach of the marriage.

1. That the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. That the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. That the garrison be there increased.
4. That all the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed

to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. That some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl

of Salop, or such other, be sent unto Yorkshire, to be lieuteriant
general in the North.

6. That preparations be made of a power, to be in readinefsto

serve, either at Berwick or to inyade Scotland.

8. That presently the lady Lenox be committed to some place,
where the may be kept from giving, or receiving of intelligence.

9. That the earl of Lenox and his son may be sent for, and
required to be sent home by the queen of Scotts, according to the
treaty; and if they shall not come, then to denounce to the queen
of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
hoflility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame
be done in deeds and not in fliews) that the marniage will be avoid-
ed, or at the least that it may be qualified from many perils; and
whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with speed,
whilst she has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the marriage,
and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France or
Spain.

Somb other allows well of all these proceedings, saving of pro.

ceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and also to these
particularities following.

o10. That the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his fon's refusing,

should be seized and bestowed in gift or cuflody, as shall please
her majesty, upon good fubjefts.

Ii. That all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or

elsewhere, be inquired for, and that they be, by sundry means
well looked to.

12. That enquiry be made in the North, who have the flew-

ardfhip of the queen's majefty's lands there, and that no person,
deserving miflruft, be fuffered to have governance or rule of any
of her fubjefts or lands in the North, but only to retain their fees,
and more trusty person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. That all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scot-

land, be restrained to all Scottish men, saving such as have safe
conduft, or be especially recommended from Mr. Randolph, as
favourers of the realm.

14. That some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as
favour not the marriage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. That the queen's majefty's houfhold, chamber, and pension-
ers be better seen unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used
by sundry against the slate of the realm.

16. That the younger son of the earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles,
be removed to some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. That considering the fa&ion and title of the queen of Scotts

hath now, of long time, received great favour, and continued, by
the queen's majefty's favour herein to the queen of Scotts and her
ministers, and the lady Catharine, whom the said queen of Scotts

Volume II. U

accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it mq
please the queen's majefly, by some exterior a&, to shew some re,
milfion of her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hertford,
that the queen of Scotts thereby may find some change, and het
friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein.

S18. That whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralpi

Sadler may accompany him.

19. That with speed the realm of Ireland may be committedts

a new governor.

20o. Finally, that these advises being considered by her majefly;

it may please her to choose which of them flie liketh, and to pat
them in execution in deeds, and not to pass them over in consul.
tations and speeches.
* For it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all meau
to put their intention in execution. Some by praftice, some by
force, when time shall serve, and no time can serve so well tl
queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before
the queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

(No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 2oz.)

Randolph to the earle of Leicefler, from Edinburgh ti

3 ft of July, 1565-

Cott. lb. MAY it please your lordflip, I have received your lordfriip's let
Cal. B. 9.
fol. 28.An ter by my servant, fufficient testimony of your lordfhip's favour
Original. towards me, whereof I think my self always so assured, that what

other mishap soever befall me, I have enough to comfort my self
with; though I have not at this time received neither according
to the need I hfand, nor the necessity of the fervife that I am im.
ployed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with patience, tha
trouble your lordship to be further futer for me, when there is so
little hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt not but
your lordfiip hath heard by such information, as I have given
from hence, what the -present state of this country is, how this
queen is now become a married wife, and her husband, the fel
fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires, hither.
to, they have found so much to their contentment, that if the
reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think themselves
much happier, than there is appearance that they shall be, so
many discontented minds, so much mifliking of the fabjes t&

Jave these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be brought to.
Kds; I never heard, of any marriage, so little hope, so little
comfort as men do talk, was never seen, at any time, when men
should most have fhewed themselves to rejoice, if that confidera-
tion of her own honour and well of her contry had been bad as
appertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the o-
verthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the queen's ma-
jelly, and the deftru&ion of as many of the nobility as ihe hath
mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a quarrle unto. To fee
all these inconveniencys approaching, there are a good number
that may sooner lament with themselves, and, complain to their
neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them, some at-
tempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any
good, what is required otherwise, or what means there is made
your lordship knoweth ; what will be anfweared, or what will be
done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your intent be
never so good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that
our ruin shall prevent your support when council is once taken.,
Nothing so needfull, as speedy execution. Upon the queen's ma-
jelly, we wholly depend, in her majefty's hands it flandeth to
save our lives, or to fuffer us to perilh ; greater honor her ma-
jelly cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majefly's power,
to do for us; the sums are not great, the numbers of men are not
many that we desire; many will dayly be found, though this will
be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this time, I think:
her majesty thall loose but few; her friends here being once taken
away, where will her majesty find the like; I speak least of that.
which I think is most earnefily intended by this queen, and her.
husband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared more for
the papifts in England, than he did for the protestants in Scotland;
if therefore, his hops be so great in the papifts of England, what
may your lordship believe that he thinketh of the proteflants there;
for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honor he hath to be of kine
to the queen my mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's
majesties worst fubjes&s to those that are her best, he declareth what
mind he beareth to the queen's majesties self, any man may fay it
is slenderly rewarded and his duty evil forgotten ; he would now
seem to be indifferent to both the religions, fie to use her mass, and
he to come sometimes to the preaching; they were married with all
the folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mass -
his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain.feen
to the world that he were of f0me religion his words to all men,

U ij

against whom he conceiveth any displeasure how unjust soever it
be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the
world, than he that, not long since, we have seen and known the
lord Darnley ; he rooketh now for reverence of many, thathave
little will to give it him and some there are that do give it, that
think him little worth of it ; All honor that may be atributed
unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully ; all praises
that may be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself all dig.
nities that she can indue him with, which are already given and
granted ; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him) and what
may I fay more, she hath given over to him her whole willtobe
ruled and guided as himself best liketh; the can as much preval
with him, in any thing that is against his will, as your lordlhip
may with me to perfwade that I should hang my self; this laI
dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, (he would have
it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or he had been
hlimfelf of 21 one years of age, that things done in his name
might have the better authority. He would, in no cafe, haveit
deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is rifin amongeft our men of law whether the being clade with
husband, and her husband not twenty one years, any thing with.
out parliament can be of strength, that is done between them,
upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in debateing.
And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king.
This was the night. before the marriage; this day, Monday at
twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were in the toun, were
present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man said so
much as amen, saving his father that cried out aloud God fare
his queen. The manner of the marriage was in this fort, upon
Sunday in the morning between five and fix, (he was conveyed
by divers of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning
hood, not unlike unto that, which (he wore the dolfull day
of the buriall of her husband; she was led into the chapell, by
the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was (he left untill her
husband came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the mi.
rifter priests, two, do there receive them, the bands are alked the
third time, and an infirument taken by a Notour that no man said
against them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three.
the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her finger; They nete

together, and many prayers said over them, she tarrieth out the
mals, and he taketh a kiss, and leaveth her there, and went to
her chamber, whither within a space the followeth; and being re-
quired, according to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave
sfide those forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for maner fake than
grief of heart, she fuffereth them that flood by, every man that
could approach to take out a pin, and so being commited to her
ladies, changed her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to
the world, that it was not lust that moved them to marry, but
only the necessity of her country, not, if God will long to leave
it destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of
all things to make the worit, would that it should be believed, that
they knew each other before that they came there, I would not
your lordship should so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to
the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an adt done, I
would not believe it. After the marriage followeth commonly
great cheer and dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed by
the whole nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried ; mony
thrown about the house in great aboundance, to such as were hap-
py to get any part; they dine both at one table, she upon the up-
ppr han.d, there serve her these earls Athole Sewer Morton, Car-
ver Craufoord cupbearer; these serve him in like offices, earls
Eglington, Caffels, and Glencairn; after dinner they danced a-
while, and then retired themselves till the hour of supper; and as
they dined so do they fupe, some dancing there was and so they
go to bed; of all this I have written to your lordthip I am not
Oculatus testis, to this, but of the verity your lordship shall not
need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was sent for to have
been at the supper, but like a currish or uncourtly carle I refuted
to be there; and yet that which your lordflhip may think might
move me much, to have had the fight of my miflrefs, of whom
these eighteen days byjuft account I got not a fight, I am my lord
taken by all that fort as a very evill person, which in my heart
I do well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can I not
find either honest or good that liketh their doings; I leave at this
time further to trouble your lordflaip, craving pardon for my long
silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I walk novy
more abroad by night than by day, and the day too little to dif-
charge myself of that which I conceive, or receive in the night.
As your lordship, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write

Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he thall be to this, to sav~

me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I tat,'
my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of July, 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)

Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir WJI,

liam Cecil, knt. her majefty's principal secretary, and
one of her highnefs's privy cotmcil.

2I of Sept. A IE my hearty commendations, this day at noon, Captain
:156 . Paper
Office from Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the queen's ma.
the Origin- jefly's letters containing her full resolution, and pleasure for all

things he had in charge to give information of, saving that for
the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing deter-
mined, or at the least expressed in the fame letters, and for tha.
purpose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the duke,
the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to be holpen with
3oo harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better defence.
And- albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and
the queen's majefly our fovereigr's good will, and care towards
them; and do also underitand that it were very requisite to have
them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner de.
cided, and that it now flandeth upon their utter overthrow and
undoing, finfe the queen's part is at the least 5ooo, and they
not much above 1000 ; besides, that the queen hath harquebuliers,
and they have none, and do yet want the power that the earl of
Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs;
I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means, tolearn
her majefty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I shall an-
fwer them, or otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their ex,
treme necessity. For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their ut-
ter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable subversion of religion
there; and, on the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradven-
ture, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the mean time to
leave the place unfurniffed, (having in the whole but 8oo00) with-
out any grant of new supply for the fame; and by that means al.
so, to leave the marches here the more fubje& to invasion, while
in the mean season new helps are preparing ; to this know not I
what to fay, or how to do. And so much more I marvel there-

if, as that having so many times written touching this matter, nao
resolute determination cometh. And so between the writing,
and looking for answer the occasion connot pass, but must needs
proceed and have success. God turn it to his glory ; but surely
all mens reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a push it is
now come unto, as this little supply would do much good to ad-
vance God's honour, to continue her majefly's great and careful
inemory of them, and to preserve a great many noblemen and
gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affe&ion that way, I do nothing mistrust, and here-
in (hall take such good advice, as by any means I can. I receiv-
ed from these lords two papers inclosed, the effe& whereof shall
appear unto you. For those matters that Captain Brickwell
-brought, I shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you
two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day, By him
you {hall hear that the protefiants are retired from Edenborough
further off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid (hall come
in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so pre-
fently need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you to
God. From Berwick, this 2d of Sept. 1565*

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

UPON the advertizements lately received from you, with such 12 sepr.
other things as came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Ran- 1Pae.
dolph, and upon the whole matter well considered, we have thus Oflice
determined. We will, with all the speed that we can, fend to
you 30001. to be thus nfed. If you thall certainly underfland
that the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprest-
ing to him of moool. might fland him in flead for the help to de-
fend himself, you shall presently let him secretly to underftand,'
that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so we
will that you let him have, in the most secret fort that you can,
when the said fum (hall come to you, or if you can, by any good
means, advance him some part there before hand.

The other 20001. you shall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if

it be not that you shall fee neceffiary cause to imprest some part
thereof to the now numbers of the 600 footmen, and 0oo horse-
men5 or to the casting out of wages of such workmen, as by sick-
nfs, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And whese we per-

6eive, by your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said ot
of Murray and his associates, that they might have, at the leafi,
300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also write, that
tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we
would but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for
attempting such things, as you with the help of others should
bring about, you doubt not but things would do well; you (hall
nurlerfiand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many re-
fpeds to maintain any other princes fubjeas, to take arms against
their sovereign ? neither would we willingly do any thing to give
occasion to make warrs betwixt us and that prince, which hath
caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power to let them
be aided with arty men4 But now, considering we take it, that
they are pursued, notwithstanding their humble fubimiffion, and
offer to be ordered and tried by law and juflice, which being re.
fused to them, they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our
weft marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and add-
ing thereunto the good intention that presently the French king
pretendeth, by sending one of his to join with some one of ours,
and jointly to treat with that queen, and to induce her to for-
bear this manner of violent and rigorous proceeding against her
fubje&s, for which purpose, the French ambassador here with us
Lath lately written to that queen, whereof answer is daily look-
ed for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords flould not
be opprefied and ruined, for lack of 'fome help to defend them,
vwe are content and do authorize, if you mhall fee it necessary for
their defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and with.
out notifying that you have any dire&ion therein from us) to
have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken either in whole
bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee
cause. And to cover the matter the better, you shall fend these
numbers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time, that such powers are on the other
part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you shall
fee cause to dire& of, the fame numbers or any of them may most
covertly repair to the Paid lords, when you shall exprefly adver-
tize, that you fend them that aid only for their defence, and not
therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any thing
that may offend her person, wherein you shall so precisely deal with
them, that they may perceive your care to be such as if it should
otherwise appear, your danger should be so great, as all the friends
you have could not be able to save you towards us. Andfo we assure

you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to proceed with
them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not
yield to give them aid of money, or men: And yet we would
not that either of these were known to be our a61, but rather to
be covered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 212.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565-6.

My humble duty considered ; what to write of the present slate An Origin'.
of the country I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily altera-
tions of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower than other-
wife I would. Within these few days, there was some good hope
that this queen would have showed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin thould have returned unto them with
comfort, upon some conditions. Since that time, there are come
out of France Clernau by land, ahd Thorneton by sea; the one
from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glasgow. Since
whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appear-
ance of any good intended them, except that they be able to per-
fwade the queen's majesty our sovereign to make her heir appa-
rent to the croun of England. I write of this nothing less than I
know that (he hath spoken. And by all means that the thinketh
the best doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately
devised, in which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain,
the duke of Savoy, with divers princes of Italy, and the queen-
mother fufpe&ted to be of the fame confederacy to maintain pa-
piftry throughout.Chriftiandom ; this band was sent out of France
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof
remaining with her, and the principal to be returned very short-
lie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon, a fit minister for such a
devilish devise, if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that shall be
sent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet came to this
touh upon Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and her
husband, but not long; the next day he had long conferences
with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any
whereof they intreated, I cannot speak with any that hath any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by him,
though it is said that he hath very good will to do so to the
uttermost of.his power. He is lodged near to the court, and liv-
eth up on the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given,

X

whereat means made to many to be present that day at the mals,
Upon Candlemafs day there carried their candles, with the queen
her husband, the earle of Lenox, and earle Athole; divers o.
ther lords have been called together and required to be at the
mass that day, some have promised, as Caffels, Mongomerie, Se.
ton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Livingflon,
Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and of them all Bothell is the
flouteft, but worst thought of; it was nioved in council that mals
should have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was ra.
ther to tempt men's minds, than intended indeed: She was ds
late minded again to fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such
as fihe trufteth in amongit the queen's majefty's fubjeas, ofwhofe
good willis this way I trufi that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not in time
to be ware, and provide for the worif ; some in that country are
thought to be privie unto the bands and confedercie of which I
have written, whereof I am sure there is some things, though
perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers
quarles, contentions, and debates 5 nothing so much fought as to
maintain mischief and difoider, David yet retaineth fill his place
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign guid-
ed chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do
any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that shall be the
first voyage that she will make after fle is delivered of her being
with child; the bruit is common that she is, but hardly believed
of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there have of late
appeared some tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. '. p. 217.)

Part of a Letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho,

Randolph to the lords of the council of England from
Barwick, 27th of March, 1566. An Original in
the Cotton Library, Caligula B. 1o.fol. 372,

May it please your honours,

17 March, HERING of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie
x5S6. in the reportes, we have myche ado to decerne the veritie : which

maketh us the flower and loother to put any thing in wrytinge,
to the entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
queen's majeftie, our foverigne, (hould not be advertised but of

the verie trothe as we can possible. To this end we thought good
to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edenbourge at the tyme
of the last atemptate, who spoke there with diverse, and after that
with the queen's self and her husband conforme to that, which we
have learned by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the
fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and as-
fyflers unto these that were executors of the a6e.

This we fynde for certain, that the queen's howfband being
tntred into a vehment suspicion of David, that by hym some thynge
was commytted, which was most agynite to the queen's honour,
and not to be borne of his perte, fyrfte communicated his mynde
to George Duglafs, who fynding his bforrowes so great fought all
the means he coulde to put some remedie to his griefs; and com-
municating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's command-
ment, no other waye coulde be found then that David fholde be
taken oute of the waye. Wherein he was so earnest and daylye
pressed the fame, that no refle coulde be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton,
and Lord Lindfaye should be made previe to th' intente that
theie might have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to assemble so mayny, as thaie thought fufficient a-
gainft the tyme, that this determination of theirs should be put in
executione; which was determined the ixth of this inftante 3 daies
afore the parliament should begyne, at which time the fayde
lordes were assured, that the erles Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and
their complices fholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not
be persuaded through this means to be their friends who for the
delyre he hade that this intent should take effect th' one waye,
was content to yielde without all difficultie to t'other, with this
condition, that thaie fholde give their consents, that he might
have the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee these
things he saw, and were daylye brought to his eares, that he day-
lypreffed the said lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer de-
laye; and to the intent yt myght be manifefte unto the world,
that he approved the a-te, was content to be at the doing of that
himself.

Upon Saturdaye at neight neire unto VIII of the clock the
king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and
two others, throwe his owne chamber by the privie stayers up to
the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
xii foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table
it the which theyr were fitting at the supper the queene, the la-

x ij

dy Argile, and David with his capp upon his head. Into t'ht
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who willW-
David to come forth, saying, that was no place for him. T'he
queen said, that it was her will. Her howfband anfwerede, that
yt was against her honour. The lord Rothen faide, that he ihcit
lerne better his deutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm,
David took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put him.
self behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him: lut
the king having loosed his hand, and holding her in his annes,
David was thrust out of the cabinet thorow the bed chamberia.
to the chamber of prefens, whar were the lord Motton, lord Lindsey,
who intending that night to have reserved hym, and the next da~
to hang him, so mane being about hym, that bore hym evill ill
one thurft him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hymr
great many others, so that he had in his bodie above wondi
It is told for certayne, that the kinges own dagger was left slid.
ing in him. Wheather he fluck him or not we cannot here si,
certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as was aE:
but going down the flayres out of the chamber of prefens.

There remayned along tyme with the queen her howfbandau

the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great interceffisn, tk
lie fhold have no harm. She blamed greatlee her howfband t,:
was thee actor of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did ankfs
that David had more companie of her boddie then he for the spa;:
of two months and therefore for her honour and his own contens
ment he gave his consent that he flould be taken away. "Itl
not" (faythe she) " the woman's part to seek the hufband,"a:.
therefore in that the fault was his own. He said that when
came, fme either wold not, or made herself sick. " Well," fayti
the, " you have taken your last of me and your farewell." Tc
were pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majefty's haulk
and must yield dutie to each other. "' Why may I not," fa)..
she, " leave him as well as your wife did her hufband?" Oti-
have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that she was lawfd
divorced from her husband, and for no,f4ch cause as the king fo.
himself greve. Befydes this man was mean, baffe, enemieto iL
nobilitie, shame to her, and deftrucfon to herself and count
" Well, faith she, that shall be dear blude to some of you, y-
" be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the m:-
your grace fhowe yourself offended, the world will judge the Won

Her husband this tyme fpeaketh little, herself continually We.

eth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and weak calleth fc,

drink, and faythe, " This I must do with your majeflies pardon,1t
and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that she would paci-
fie herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

In this mean time there rose a nombre in the court 3 to paci-

fie which there went down the lor4 Ruthen, who went firayt tQ
the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to quiet them, and to as-
sure them for the king that nothing was intend against them.
These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord
of Murray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them,
Huntly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfth and Glandores (who
was lately called Dyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Liding-
ton. Theie went that night to such places, where they thought
themselves in most fauftie.

Before the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the

lord Ruthen the was contents that he fhold lie with her that
night. We know not how he * * himself, but came not at
her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

There were in this companie two that came in with the king

the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth woul4
have firoken her with a dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, bro-
therto the justice clerk, who also her grace fayth, offered a dag. a-
gainfi her belly with the cock down. We have been earnestly
in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he affeur-
eth us of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the
lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two others. They at the
firfi offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen drawd his dag-
ger, and 4 mo weapons then that were not drawn nor seen in her
prefens, as we are by this lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to-Dun-

bar-Caftle, whether resorted unto the lords Huntly and Bothwell:
That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find themselves left by
the king for all his fair promises, bonds and subscriptions. That
he had protested before the council, that he was never consenting
to the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " That
" of the great fubilance David had there is much spoken, some
" fay in gold to the value of i imC. His apparel was very good,
" as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose. His chamber well furnish-
" ed, armour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebufes, 22 swords. Of
" all this nothing fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He

" had the custody of all the queen's letters, "which all were do.
" livered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that he had hang-
" ing about his neck of some price, that cannot be heard of. He
" had upon his back, when he was flayn a night gown of damaall
0 furred, with a fatten dublet, a hQfe of russet velvet."

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 223.)

Part of a Letterfrom Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16,1565-6,

---I cANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been betweeq
her grace and her husband, 'he preffeth earnestly for the matrimo-
niall crown, which she is loath haflily to grant; but willing tq
keep somewhat in store, until she know how well he is worth to
enjoy such a foverignity and therefore it is thought that the par-
liament, for a time lhall be deferred, but hereof I can write nq
pertainty,

From Mr. Randolph's Letter to Secretary Cecil.

4 April, THE juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause thaqi
Office frr any desert, and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worst,
the original for neither hath the quteen good opinion of him for attempting of

any thing that was against her will, nor the people that he hath
denied so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them
that did as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and
Murray that was yesterday arreigned, were both accused by him,
It is written to me, for certain, by one, that upon Monday last
spoke with the queen, that flie is determined that the house of
Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl con.
tinueth sick, fore troubled in mind; he flaith in the Abby, his son
has been once with him, and he once with the queen, since she
came to the castle. The queen hath now seen all the covenants
and bands that passed between the king and the lords, and now
findeth that his declaration, before her and council, of his inno-
cency of the death of David, was false; and grievioufly offended
that, by their means, he thould seek to come to the crown matrbi
monial.

Part of a Letter from Randolphb to Cecil from Berwick,

25 April, 1566.

- THERE is continually very much speech of the discord be-
tween the queen and her husband, so far that, that is commonly
said and believed of himself, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to
Rome to sue for a divorce between them. It is very certain that
Malevafier had not spoken with him within these three days. He
is neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman; attend-
ed upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or seven of the
guard; at liberty to do, and go where, and what he will, there
have no hope, yet among themselves of quietness.

--David's brother, named Joseph, who came this way with
Malevafieur, unknown to any man here, is become secretary in
his brother's place.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 225.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Augffl, 1566.

THE queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather
worse. She eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keep-
eth company with him, nor loveth any such as love him. He is
so far out of her books, as at her going out of the cafile of Edin-
burgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what
she said of him. One Hickman, an English merchant there, hav*
ing a water-fpaniel which was very good, gave him to Mr. James
Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure which he saw the king
had in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen there-
upon fell marvellously out with Melvill, and called him dissembler
and flatterer, and said she could not trust one, who would give
any thing to such one as ihe loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Auiguf l 8.

THE disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth,
o01 rather increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, with-
in twelve milesof Edinburg, could not tell where to find the Queen,
sith which time flie is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve

horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that I can lhea
of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company.
The king her husband is gone to Dumfermling, and paffeth his
time as well as he may; having at his farewell, such countenance
as would make a husband heavy at the heart.

Sir John Forfier to Cecil, 8 Sspt. from Berwick.

THE queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the Earl of
Lennox came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forfier to Cecil. i ith Dec.

THE Earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambassadors, and
all things for the christening are at his lordthip's appointment, and
the fame is scarcely well liked of the nobility, as is said. The
king and queen is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greaterfa.
ailliarity than he was all the while pallf.

Adverti -fvents out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

AuOft THAT the king and the queen agreed well together two days, as-
1

- 6. Paper

Ofice,from ter her coming from---, and after my lord of Murray's com-
the oki- ing to Edinburgh, some new discord has happened. The queen

hath declared to my lord of Murray that the king bears him evil
will, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him, ind-
ing fault that the doth bear him so much company; and in like
manner, hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king,
which he did a few nights since in the queen's presence, and in
the hearing of divers. The king confeffed, that reports were made
to him, that my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made
him speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that
the king had spoken such words unto her, and confeffed before tie
whole house, that fihe could not be content that either he or any
other should be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of Mur-
ray enquired the fame .tloutly, and used his fpcech very modeltv,
in the m- an time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear
that the queen fnould use familiarity either with man or worman,
and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Marre, who
keep noft company with her. My Lord of Murray and Both.
wellhave been at evil words for the L. of Ledington, beforethe

queen, for he and fir James Balfoure had new come from Leding-
ton, with his answer upon such heads or articles as Bothwell and
he thould agree upon, which being reported to the said earl in the
queen's prcfince, made answer, that e'er he parted with such lands
as was desired, he fliould part with his life. My lord of Murray
said floutly unto him, that twenty as honest men as he should lose
their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The queen spake nothing,
but heard both; in these terms they parted, and since, that I hear
of, have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Eden-
burgh, and carryeth the prince thence to Sterling with her. This
last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthven's, who
confeffed that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of the faa.
The queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that money
was sent from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for
what purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. .I. p. 235)

Partofa Letter from Elizabethto Mary, Feb. 20o, 1569.

A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains an answer to
a complaining letter of Mary's upon the imprisoning
of the bpfop of Rfs.

--AFTER this [i. e. Mlary's landing in Scotland] how patiently
did I bear with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty ac-
corded by your own commiiTioners, whereby I received no finall
unkindness, besides the manifold cause of suspicion that I might
not hereafter truit to any writings. Then followed a hard man-
ner of dealing with me, to entice my fubje& and near kinsman,
the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits for land, to come
into the realm, to proceed in treaty of marriage with him with-
out my knowledge, yea to conclude the fame without my assent or
liking. And how many unkind parts accompany'd that fad; by
receiving of my fubje s that were base runnagates and offenders at
home, and enhanfing them to places of credit against my will, with
many such like, I will leave, for that the remembrance of the fame
cannot but be noyfome to you. And yet all these did I as it
were fapprefs and overcome with my natural inclination of love
towards you; and did afterwards gladly, as you know, christen
your son, the child of my said kinsman, that had before so un-
loyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other undu-
tiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly also dealt I
by messages to reconcile him, being your husband, to you, when

Voluem II. Y

others nourished discord betwixt you, who as it seemed had more
power to work their purpofes,.being evil to you both, than I had
to do you good, in refpeft of the evil I had received. Well I
will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
ing my council. And then in your most extremity, when you
was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life From your noto-
rious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remembrance
of any former unkindness you had fhewed me. Nay, how void
was I of refpe& to the designs which the world had seen attempt.
ed by you to my crown, and the security that might have ensued
to my slate by your death, when I finding your calamity to be
great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatened
fbme as were irritated against you, that I only may fay it, even I
was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 246.)

Letter P. Elizabeth to t. of Scots. Thus marked on

the back with Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarum RegiT
Majeftatis ad Reginam Scotorum. VIIIo. Aprilis.

Sap. Office. MADAME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de Crocq, je n'euffe en

si peu de consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens
de charit6 vers les ruinez, et les prieres des miferables ne m'y
contraignaffent. Je entens que un edit a et divulgue de par vous,
inadame, pue ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons este les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent ale faire
le xrame de ce mois. La quelle chose, comme c'eft plus honor-
able et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, ne y eftant cache'
quelque miftere on fineffe, ainfi le pere et amis du mort gentel-
homme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de prolongue
le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combines
par force de faire ce que par droi& ils ne pourront pas faire;
partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui
il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter le leur conceder cette requefte, laquelle, si elle les feroit
nie, vous tourneroit grandement en foupcon, de plus que j'efpere
ne penfez, et qae ne voudriez volontiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de
Dieu, madame, ufez de telle fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui
vous touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous
livrer comme innocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne
fiftes, feriez dignement efbloyd hors de rancz de princesses, &

Ion fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
pvienne, je vous fonhaiterois une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie
;nacule6; vous voiez madame, queje vous traite comme ma fille,
et vous promets, que si j'en euffe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx,
que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me porte tefmoignage,
a qui je prie de bon coeur de vous inspir.er a faire ce qui vous sera
plus a honneur, et a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mnes tres
cordialles recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le
plus de bien, qui vous pourra er) ce monde avenir. De Weft.
ce 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 256.)

A Letter from England concerning tbe murder of king

Henry Darnley.

IAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to E. of Mor-
write a few words unto you. I have reed. some writs from youi Arcves
and some I have seen lately sent others from you, as namely to Bundle B.
the earl Bedford of the 16th. of May. I have participat the con- No. a.
tents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue,
for there was not one papist nor proteflant which did not consent
that justice should be done, be the queen my fovn. aid and sup.
port, against such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & boldness did not
rife from such as were called to council, but from such as thould
give life and execution thereunto. And further, I assure you,
I never knew no matter of eflate proponed which had so many
favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto
you, no man promoted the matter with greater affedion, than the
Spanish ambassador. And sure I am, that no man dare openly
be of any other mind, btit to affirm that whosoever is guilty of
this murder, handfafted with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I
shall not need to tell you, which be our letts and ftayes from all
good things here. You are acquainted with them as well as I.
Neds I muff confess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit,
honour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and name-
ly such as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow
of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and justice the punishment
of those abominable acts, though we lend you but a cold aid, and
l1beit you, and divers others, both honourable and honest, be

* A mistake in the date corre6ted with Cecil's hand VIII. Aprili,

X ij

well known to me, and sundry others here, to be juflifable in al!
their a&cions and doings; yet think not the contrary but your.
whole nation is blemilhed and infamit by these doings, which
lately paffled among you. What we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you assuredly, for we be fubjec unto many mu-
tations, and yet I think we shall either aid you, or continue you
in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so as it appear to us
that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own deffrution, if you be un-
advised. I know not one, no not one of any quality or estate in
this country, which does allow of the queen your sovereign, but
would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame were
done without farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary juflice,
This I fend the 23d May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 261.)

Part of a Letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil,

iith of Yuly, j 567, from Berwick.

An rign- ---SIR, Your letter of the 6th Jully, I received the Icth at
Office, Berwick. I am sorry to fee that the queen's majesty disposition

altereth not towards the lords, for when all is done, it is they
which must fland her more in flead, than the queen her cousin,
and will. be better inffruments to work some benefite and quiet.
ness to her majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotlan4
.which is void of good fame.

A Letter from Sir Nicolas 2hbrogmorton to Cecil from

FaTIcaqtle, 2thb of uly, 1567.

Paper Of- Sim, as yow might perceive by my letter of the xith July, I
4ice. lodged at Faftcaftle that night, accompanyed with the lord Hume,

the lord of Ledington, and James Melvin, where I was intreated
very well, according to the slate of the place, which is fitter tQ
lodge prisoners then folks at liberty, as it is very littel, so it is
very strong. By the conference I have had with the lord of
Ledington I find the lords his associates and he hath left nothing
unthought of, which may be either to their danger, or work
them fuerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likewise they confider the fame of
England ; but as farr as I can perceave, to be plain with yow,
they find more perril to grow unto them through the queen's jna,

jeily's dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary fation amongeft themselves, for they affare themselves
the queen will leave them in the bryers if they run her fortoun,
and though they do acknowledge great benefit as -well to them,
as to the realm of England by her majestys doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms have
received great fruit yet upon other accidents which have chan-
ced since, they have observed such things in her majestys doings,
as have ended to the danger of such as flie hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own defignments, and little to the fuerty
of any party; and upon these considerations and discourses at
length, me thinketh I find a disposition in them, that either they
mind to make their bargain with France, or else to deal neither
with France nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for
their state and fuerty, and to use there remedys as occation shall
move them i meaning neither to irritate France nor England, un-
till fach time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one
of yow; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both
for awhile pari paffu, for that was my lord of Ledington's terms.
I do perceave they take the matter very unkindly, that no better
answer is made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her ma-
jellty, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to their fatis-
fadion, I have answered as well as I can, and have alledged their
own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen, and their uncertain-
ty hath occationed this that is yet happned, and therefore her
majesty hath sent me to the end I may inform her througly of the
slate of the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds and
intents to such purposes as shall be by me proposed on their ma-
jeftys behalf unto them, they shall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At these things the lord of Ledington smiled and shook
his head, and said it were better for us yow would let us alone,
than neither to do us nor your selves good, as I fear me in the
end that will prove; Sr if their be any truth in Ledington, La
Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man
of like quality, and to deliver them of their queen for ever, who
fliall lead her life in France in a abby reclufed, the prince at
the French devotion, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
tion of the Scottifli nation, the forts committed to the custody of
such as shall be chosen amongeft themselves, as yet I find no great
likeliehood that I shall have access to the queen, it is objeted
they may not so displease the French king, unless they were sure
to fnd the queen of England a good friend; and when they once

by my access to the queen have offended the French, then t4ey
fay yow will make your profit thereof to their undoing; and a4
to the queens liberty, which was the first head that I proposed,
they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen wants
their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly
to talk of them the liberty going before ; but said they, if you
will do us no good, do us no harm, and we will provide for our-
selves. In the end they said, we (hould refuse our own commodi.
ty, before they concluded with any other, which I mhould hear of
at my coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the
band concluded by hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly and that fatfion,
not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr, as that which
was sent into France ; thus having no more leasure but compeli'd
to leap on horseback with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly
take my leave of from Faftcaftle the 12th July 1567.

To Sir Nicclas Throgjnorton being in Scotland. By the

queen the 14b 7uliy 1567.

Faper Of- TuSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we thinl;
we. that the causes will often change upon variety of accidents, yet

this we think, for sundry relfitrs, not amiss, that as yow fiall
deal with the lords having charge of the young prince for the
committing of him into our realm, so (hall yow also do well, in
treaty with the queen, to offer her that where her realm appear'
eth to be fubjeft to sundry troubles from time to time, and there-
by (as it is manifaft) her son cannot be free, if she s(hall be con-
tented that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this
our realm, being so near as the knows it is; we shall not faill tq
yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as can be devised
for any that might be our child born of our own body, and shall
be glad to show to her therein the trew effet of nature ; and here-
in the may be by yow remembred how much good may ensue to
her son to be nourithed and acquainted with our country; and
therefore, all things considered, this occation for her child, were
rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us) and to this end, we mean that yow (hall so deal with her, both
to flay her in deed from inclining to the French pradtife, which
is to us notorioufs to convey her and the prince into France, an4
also to avoid any just offence, that fthe might hereafter conceive,
if she thould hear that we should deal with the lords for the prince.

Sir Nicolks Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, 14tbh uly

1567, from Edinbargb.

IT may please your majesty to be advertised, I did fignifie unto An Origin-

al Paper

Mr. Secretary by my letters of the Iith and 12th of July, the ffice.
day of mine entry into Scotland, the caafes of my flay, my lodg,
ing at Faficaffle a place of the lord Humes, where I was met by
the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had passed ir
conference betwixt us, whilet I was at the said Faflcafile. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and with 40O
horses by their appointment for my better conduft, I came to
Edinr the 12th of this present. The I3th being Sunday appoint-
ed for a folemne communion in this town, and also a folemne fast
being publified, I could not have conference with the lords which
be assembled within this town as I desired, that is to fay the
earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
ton, Sir James Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James M1cGill
and the president of the session.

Nevertheless I made means by the lord of Lidington that they
would use no protrale of time in mine audience, so did I likewise
to the earle of Morton, whom I met by chance; I was answered
by them both, that albeit the day were destined to sacred exer-
cifes, fach as were there of the council would confalt upon any
mioyen touching my access unto them and my conference with
them, and said also that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I flould hear from them. About 4 of the clock in the
afternoon, the said i3th day, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and
others, that they required me to have patience though they had def-
fered my conference with them, which was grounded principal-
ly upon the absence of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the lords
Semple, Crighton and others of the council, saying also that
they did confider the matters which I was on your be-
half to treate with them of, were of great importance, as they
could .not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor give me
answer without the advice of the lords, and others their associates
the lord of Lidington also said unto me, that where he perceiv-
ed, by his private conference with me in my journy hither-
wards, that I pressed greatly to have speedy access to the queen
their sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were
here, that in that matter there was great difficulty for many re-
fpes, but specially because they had refused to the French am-

tal'fador the like access, which being granted unto me, inigih
greatly offend the French, a matter which they desired and intend.
ed to eschew for they did not find by your majeflys dealings
with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate the French
king, and to loose his favour and good intelligence with him; I
answered that as unto their refufall, made unto the French ambaf.
fador, monsieur de Ville Roye was dispatched forth of France he.
fore these accidents here happened, and his special errand was to
impeach the queens marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so in.
deed since my coming hither I learned his commifilon tended to
that end, and to make offer to the queen of another marriage)
and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could have no order forth, of
France concerning these matters since they happened; and there-
fore they might very well hold them fufpeced to have conference
with the queen, least they might treate of matters in this time
without inftruaions and so rather do harm then good ; but your
majesty being advertized of all things which had chanced had sent
me hither to treate with them, for the well of the realm, fcr the
conservation of their honors and credit, and for their fuerty; and
I might boldly fay unto him, that your majesty had better deferv.
ed than the French had. He said, for his owvn part, he was
much bound unto your majesty, and had always found great favour
and courtesy in England, but to be plain with you Sir fayed he
there is not many of this assembly that have found so great ob-
ligation at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the French kings,
for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only persons which
took benefit by the queens majefltys aid at Leith, the reft of the
noblemen were not in the action, and we think said he, the queens
majefly your sovereign, by the opinion of her own council, and
all the world, took as great benefit, by that charge as the realm
of Scotland, or any particular person and not to talk with yow
as an ambassador, but with Sir Nicolas Throgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie, found
but cold favour at the queens majeflys hands, when they were ba-
nilh'd forth of their own contry; but I would all our whole com-
pany were as well willing to accornplifh the queen your fovereiga
intents and desires as I am, for mine own part, I am but one, and
that of the meanest fort, and they be many noblemen and fach as
have great interest in the matter, mary yow shall be assured I
will imploy myself to imploy my credit, and all that I may do,
to fatisfic the queen your mifrefs, as much as lyeth in me,
and for your own part you have a great many friends in this a-

fembly, with many other good words. But for conclusion I must
take this for an answer to flay untill the other lord were come,
and thereupon I thought meet to advertize your majesty what
hath passed, and how far forth I have proceeded; your expec-
tation being great to hear from hence.

And now to advertize your majesty of the slate of all things,
as I have learned since my coming hither, it may please your ma-
jellty to understand as followeth.

The queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the cafile
of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the
owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is employed in another
commission, because he began to show great favour to the queen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys
4 or 5 gentlewomen, and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French
woman. The earle of Buchan, the earle of Murray's brother,
hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords afore-
said, which have her in guard, doe keep her very straitly, and as
far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order from
these men, because that the queen will not by any means be in-
duced to lend her authority to prosecute the murder, nor will not
consent by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her hus-
band, but avoweth constantly that she will live and die with him;
and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquish her crown
and kingdom or the lord Bothell, she would leave her kingdom
and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and that she will
never consent that he (hall fare worse, or have more harm than
herself.

And as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her deten-

tion is, for that these lords do fee the queen being of so fervent
affedion towards the earle Bothell as she is, and being put at as
they thould be compelled to be in continuall arms, and to have
occation of many battles, he being with manifest evidence noto-
rioufly dete&ed to be the principallmurderer, and the lords mean-
ing prosecution of justice against him according to his merits.

The lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as

a marriage not to be fuffered for many refpe6ts, which feperation
cannot take place if the queen be at liberty, and have power in
her hands.

They do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd with the

danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave, they intend not
either to touch the queen in fuerty or in honor, for they do speak
of her with refpedt and reverence, and do affirm, as I do learn,

Volume II, Z

that the conditions aforesaid accomplifhled, they will both put Les
to liberty, and restore her to her estate.

These lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqubufhert

which be in very good order, for the entertainment of which con.
panys, untill all matters be compounded, they did sue unto your
majesty, to aid them with such fum of mony, as hath been mention.
ed to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons writting, amount.
ing as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand crouns of the

They were latly advertized that the French King doth mind

to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell dez Ursine, a knight of the
French order, and always well affetionate to the house of Guyfe,
and howsoever la Forest, Villaroye, and du Crocq have used lan,
guage in the queens favour and to these lords disadvantage there,
to your majesty; la Crocq doth carry with him fuech matter as
shall be little to the queens advantage; so as it is thought the
French king, upon his coming to his presence, will rather fatisfie
the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have their party so
well made, as the French will rather make their profit by them,
than any other way.

Herewith I fend your majefly the last bond agreed on, and sign.

ed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and fhndry
others at Dumbarton.

Neverthelels, since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons

have sent unto me a gentleman of their surname named Robert
Hamilton with a letter from the bishop of St. Andrews and the
abbot of Arbroth, the coppy whereof I fend your majesty and mine
answer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of some
things, as these did by him unto me.

The earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me

wvith a letter and credit, I have used him as I did the others, the
coppy of both which letters I fend your majesty also. The lord
Harrys hath also sent unto me but not written, and I have return-
ed unto him in like fort.

Against the 20th day of this month there is agenerall assembly

of all the churches, ihires, and boroughs towns of this realm,
namely of such as be contented to repair to these lords to this
town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter will be
handeled, and I fear me much tothe queens disadvantage and dan-
ger; unless the lord of Ledington and some others which be best
affefed unto her do provide some remedy; for I perceave the
great number, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,
which have assisted in these doings, do greatly dishonour the

oucen, and mind seriously either her deprivation, or her deftruc-
tion; I used the best means I can (considering the furie of the
world here) to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth to me to
be the best remedy; I may not speak of dissolution of it, for that
may not be abiden, and I should thereby bring my self into great
hatred and perril. The chiefeft of the lords which be here pre-
sent at this time dare not show so much lenity to the queen as I
think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be most furious and impudent against the queen, and
yet the men be mad enough; so as a firanger over bufie may soon
be made a sacrifice amongeft them.

There was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with there adhe-
rents would put their force into the fields against the 24th of this
month, but I do pot find that intent so true, as the common
brit goeth.

The earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trou-

ble among his own contrymen.

The earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and.
I do believe your majesty may so use him, and dire& him, as he
shall be able to promote your purpose with these men.

The earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.-
I do find amongeft the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company
two firange and sundry humours.

Hamiltons do make (how of the liberty of the queen, and pro.

fecute that with great earneflnefs, because they would have thefre
lords destroy her, rather than tlie fuould be recovered from them
by violence; another time they seem to desire her liberty, and
Bothell's defiraion, because they would compass a marriage be-
twixt the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

The earle of Argyll doth affea her liberty, and Bothell's de-
truEtion, because he would marry the queen to his brother.

And yet neither of them, notwithflanding their open concur-

anee, (as appeareth by their bond) doth discover their minds to
each other, nor mind one end; Knox is not here, but in the weft
parts, he and the reft of the ministers will be here at the great
afTembly, whos austerity againil the queen I fear as much as any
man's.

By some conferrence which I had with some of this councill, me

thinketh that they have intelligence that there is a disposition in
the queen of Scotland, to leave this realm, and to retire herself
either into England, or into France, but most willingly into Eng-
land, for fuch--and miflikings as she knoweth hath been, and

z ij

is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to

t

number of persons deleagued, and authorized by her or to fonet

one or more.

And it please your majefly, I think it not amiss to put yow in

remembrance, that in cafe the said queen come into England by
your allowance, without the French king's consent, she flhal
lose her dowery in France, and have little or nothing from hence
to entertain her; and in cafe she do go into France with th<
King's contentment, fthe may be an instrument (if she can reca.
ver favour, as time will help to cancell her disgrace) either by
matching with some hudband of good quality, or by some other
devise, to work new unquietness to her own contry, and so con.
fequently to your majefly's.

Therefore it may please your majefly to confider of this mat.

ter, and to let me know youi pleasure with convenient speed,
how I fliall answer the fame, if it be propounded unto me, either
by the queen,, or by the councill, as a piece of the end and com.
position. For I am sure, of late, fie hath seemed very desirous
to have the matter brought to pass, that Phe might go into Eng.
land, retaining her eflate and jurifdi&ion in herself, though fhti
do not exercise it; and likewise I underfland that forne of this
council which be leafr affe&ed to her safety do think there is nl
other way to save her. Thus Almighty God preserve your ma,
jefty in health honor and all felicity i at Edinr the 14th July j567,

Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to uieen Ethfabetb the 18it

July 1567, from Edinburgh.

An Origin- IT may please your majefly, yow might perceave by my letters
as. aper of the

.6 h, how far I had proceeded with these lords, and what

was their answer; since which time I have spoken particularly
with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and Sir James
Balfour captain of this c{ftle, at whose hands I cannot perceavo
that as yet access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted me,
slaying themselves still by the absence of the lords and others
their associates, which (they fay) they look for within two days;
and for'that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have thought
good not to defer this dispatch untill I have a resolute answer in
that matter.

May it therefor please your majefly to undcrftand Robert Mel-

vin returned from the queen in Lochleven, to this town, the 6th

of July, and brought a letter from her written of her own hand
to these lords, which doth contain as I underfland matter as fol-
loweth-A request unto them to have consideration of her health,
and if they will not put her to liberty, to change the place of
restraint to the castle of Stirling, to the end (he might have the
comfort and company of her son, and if they will not change her
from Lochleven, she required to have some other gentlewomen
about her, naming none,

To have her apothecary, to have some modest minifter.--To
have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as flie would be oc-
cupiea about, and to have a varlet of the chamber-Touching
the government of the realm, she maketh two offers, which are
but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not fpe-
cified, but refered to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to com-
mit it only and wholly to the earle of Murray; the other is to
the lords whose names ensue, assisted with such others, as they
shall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the
earls of Morton, Murray, Mar, and Glencairn.

She hath written unto them that I might have access unto

her.--She requireth further that if they will not treat her and
regard her as their queen, yet to use her as the king their fove-
reigns daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their prince's
mother.--She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her
huiband, nor relinquish him; which matter will do her most harm
of all, and hardeneth these lords to great severity against her.

She yeildeth, in words, to the prosecution of the murder.
I have the means to let her know that your majeftly hath sent

me hither for her relief.

I have also perfwaded her to conform herself to renounce Both-

ell for her husband, and to be contented to fuffer a divorce to pass
betwixt them ; the hath sent me word that she will in no ways
consent unto that, but rather die; grounding herself upon this rea-
son, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child, by re-
nouncing Bothell, she should acknowledge herself to be with
child of a ballard. and to have forfeited her honor, which the will
not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her own life
and her child, to choose the least hard condition.

Mr. Knox arrived here in this town the 6 of this month, with

whom I have had some conference, and with Mr. Craig also, the
other minister of this town.

I have perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I

find them both very aultere, in this conference, what they (hall do

hereafter I know not, they are furnished with many arguments,
some forth of the scripture, some forth of hiflories, some ground.
ed (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon praftices
used in this realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made
by their prince at her coronation.

The bishop of Galloway unple to the earle of Huntly hath feat

hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle and some others
of that fide, may, at Linlithgow or at Stirling, have some com.
mnunication with some appointed on this fide, affaring them that
there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to con.
curre with these, assuring further that they will not dissent for
triffles or unnecessary things, and (as I am given to underfHand)
they can be pleased the queen's restraint be continu'd, untill the
murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the feperation of the
queen and Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the
security for all men, and a good order taken for the governance
of the realm in tranquility.

Captain Clerk, which hath so long ferred in Denmark and ferv.

ed at Newhaven, did the 16th of this month (accompanyed
with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier as the greater fame
goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and such a one as had great
estimation with these lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, honefly,
and willingness in this action ; whereupon Clerk hath retired
himself; their quarrel was about the ship which took Blacketer,
which ship was appointed by these lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the passage of the eaile Bothell, in cafe he
went either to the isles, or to any other place; by the death of
this man this enterprize was daflied.

The bifhlop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth de.

fire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

The abbot of Killwinning hath sent for Sir James Balfour cap.

tain of the cafile, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my last, the Hamiltons now

find no matter to difever these lords and them asunder, but would
concurr.in all things (yea in any extremity against the queen) so
as that they might be assured the prince of Scotland were crouned
king, and should die without issue, that the earle of Lenox's son
living thould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to
his nephew.

And although the lords a.d ecuncelors speak reverently, mildly,

and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their fpeeeh
any intention to cruelty or violence, yet I do find by intelligence,

that the queen is in very great peril of her life, by reason that thd
people assembled at this convention do mind vehemently the de.
Itruftion of her.

It is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongit all e-

Rfates, (saving of the counselors) that their queen hath no more
liberty nor priviledge to commit murder nor adultery, than any
other private person, neither by God's law, nor by the laws of the
realm.

The earl Bothwell and all his adherents and affociats, be put

to the horn by the ordinary justice of this town, named the lords
of the session, and commandment given to all fhirriiFs, and all
other officers, to apprehend him, and all other his followers and re-
ceiptors.--The earl of Bothel's porter, and one of his other
servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confeffed such
sundry circumtlances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said
tarl was one of the principal executors of the murder, in his own
person, accompany'd with sundry others, of which number I can-
not yet certainly learn the names But of three of them, that is to
fay, two of the Ormrilton's of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bdl-
ton; the lords would be glad that none of the murderers should
have any favour or receipt in England, and hereof their deSire is,
that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell doth
Rill remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming,
which have been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do re-
pair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth grow daily betwixt
these lords, and those which held of; and notwithflanding these
lords have sent an hundred and fifty harqubufhers to Stirling, to
keep the town and passage from furprize; and so have they done
in like manner to St. Johnston, which be the two passages from
the north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain of
Dunbar is much bufiled in fortifying that place, I do mervile the
carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.

Of late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the

said call!e, which hath been furprized ; and thereby matter is
discovered which maketh little to the queen's advantage.

Thus, having none other matter worthy your majefty's know-

ledge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty with long life, per-
sect health, and profoerous felicity. At Edinburgh the i8th of
July, I567,

Lettek of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right hontur.

able the earl of Leicefler, knt. of the order, and one
of the lords of her majefy's mfl bonourable prity
Councel.

24 of July, By my former dispatches sent to her majefly, and Mr. Secretary,
Paper Of- since the 2th of July, your lordfhips might have perceived the
fice, from slate of this country, and to what end these matters be like to
al. - come; so as not to trouble your lordfhlip with many words; this

queen is like very Ihortly to be deprived of her royal eflate, her
son to be crowned king, and flhe detained in prison within this
realm, and the fame to be governed, in the young king's name,
by a councel, consisting of certain of the nobility, and other wife
men of this realm; so as it is easy to be seen that the power and
ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty,
and the realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly,
rel in the hands of these lords, and others their affociats, affem.
bled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majefly will fill persist
in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (unto whom
the shall be able to do no' good) then I do plainly fee that these
lords and all their accomplices will become as good French, as
the French kirg can wihh, to all intents and purposes. And as
for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that sac.
tion, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth
little devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is
the slate of things so come to pass of this country, that France
has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them, to all pur-
poses, as ever it was; and what an indirument, . the young
prince will prove to unquiet England, I report me to your lord
ships -wisdoms, and therefore considering the weight of the matter,
and all the circumstances, I trust your lordfliips will well bethink
you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her majefly, to
leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be
in her poffeffion, or, at the least, to be at her devoiion. And a-
mongit other things, that I can imagine, for the first degree, no-
thing is more meet to bring this to effed, than to allure this com-
pany here assembled, to bear her majefly their favour. Some talk
hath passed between the lord of Liddington and me, in certaia
conferences, about this matter. By him I find, that when her
majefly 'hall have won these men to her devotion, the principal
poin; that will make thenm conformable to deliver their prince in-

to England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling
him to the fucceffidn of the crown of England, for fault of issue
of the queen's majefty's body, some other things will also be re-
quired, as the charge of the said prince and his train, to be at
the charge of England. I do well perceive that these men will
never be brought to deliver their prince into England, without
the former condition, for the succession of England; for (faith
Liddington) that taking place, the prince shall be as dear to the
people of England as to the people of Scotland; and the one will be
as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise, he faith,
ill things considered, it will be reported that the Scottifhmen
have put their prince to be kept in safety, as those which commit
the sheep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion, your
lordlhips may perceive here will be the scope of this matter. As
unto the delivering of him upon hostages, he fayeth, let no man
think, that the condition of the succession not being accomplished,
the nobility and the gentry will never consent to leave themselves
destitute of their sovereign. upon any hostages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It
were not good for yourselves (faith he) that the matter were so
handled; for then you should adventure all your goods in one
(hip, which might have a dangerous effe&, considering the un*
willingness of the queen your sovereign to consent to establishing
any fucceiffor to the crown. And then, how unmete were it, that
her majesty having in her poffefflion already all such persons as do
pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have our prince
also in her cuitody. For so their might follow, without good ca-
pitulations, a firange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen your
mistress do think that such imaginations could not proceed
tut from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf.
What is come to pass since my last dispatch, and how far forth
things are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed by my
letters sent unto her majesty, at this time. And so I pray al-
nighty God, preserve your lordship in much honour, and felicity.
At Edenburgh this 24th of July, 1567.
It may please yohr good lordthip to make my lord Stuard part.
ner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Thockmorton.

By the Queen.

TUsrTY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as much 6th of Aug.
a we do confider that you have now a long time remained in 1x67.

Volume. II A a

those parts, without expedition in the charge committed unto yo,
we think it not meet feeing there hath not followed the good ac.
ceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that slate, which
good reason would have required, that you should continue thea
any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, that you ihall, inmmediattlv
upon the receipt hereof, fend your servant Middlemnore unto th6
lords and estates of that realm, that are assembled together, willing
him to declare unto them, that it cannot but seem very strange un.
to us, that you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to
deal with them, in matters tending so much to their own quio,
and to the benefit of the whole estate of their country, they hes
so far forgotten themselves and so slightly regarded us and or
good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is flra.
gest of all, in not vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. Ad
altho' these dealings be such, indeed as were not to be looked fc
at their hands, yet do we find their usage and proceedings towadi
their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in so trang
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole woildk-
sides, cannot but think them to have therein gone so far beyou
the duty of fubjeas, as must needs remain to their perpettu
touche for ever. And therefore he shall fay, that we have tho':
good, without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke j'r
to our presence, requiring them to grant you llfcence and pafle
so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we will that y:
make your repair hither, unto us, with as convenient fpced asys
may. Given, 'c.

Indorfed 6th August, 1567.

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Ccd,

knight, one of ber majefly's privy council and pribb
pal secretary, give these.

Si., .

'Zth Au- 7 VWHAT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Muls:
gust. i367,
Paper Of- and Mons. de Linnerd, you (hall underfhand by my letter tot:'
fice, from
the Origi- majesty, at this time. The French do, in their negotiations,e
naL they do in their drink, put water to their wine. As I am C'

to fee into their doings-, they take it not greatly to the heart'
the queen sleep, whether (he live or die, whether (he be at lIe
ty or in prizon. The mark they tloot at, is to renew their
league, and can be as well contented to take it of this littkkl

(howsoever his title be) and the fame by the order of these lords'
as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yesterday, and me thinketh
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will seek
to displease these lords, when they changed the coming of La
Chappelle des Ourfins for this man, because they doubted that de
la Chappelle should not be grateful to them, being a papist. Sir,
to speak more plainly to you than I will do otherwise, me think.
gth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and
be partaker of their fortune. I hear no mart speak more bitter-
ly against the tragedy, and the players therein, than he, so little
like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Ledington,
is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any thing,
for our purpose. I can assure you the whole protefiants of France
will live and die in these mens quarrels and, where there is
bruit amongst you that aid, thould be sent to the adverse party,
and that Martigues should come hither with some force; Mons.
Baadelot hath assured me of his honour, that instead of Martigues
soming against them, he will come with as good a force to fuc-
cour them: And if that be sent under meaner condu&, Robert
Steuart (hall come with as many to fortify them. But the con-
gfable hath assured these lords, that the king meaneth no way to
ofend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and
speed you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it
be to kindle thefr lords more against us. Thus I do humbly take
py leave of you, from Edenburgh the i2th of August, 1567.

Yours to use and commana.

'The .ueen ta Nicholas Throckmorton.

TIuSTY and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within
these two days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 20th,
22d, and 23d, of this month, having not before those received
any seven days before; and do find, by these your letters, that
you have very diligently and largely advertised us of all the hasty
and peremptory proceedings there 5 which as we nothing like, so
we trust in time to fee tHiem wax colder, and to receive some re-
formation. For we cannot perceive, that they with whom you
bave dealt, can answer the doubts moved by the Hamiltons, who
howsoever they may be carried for their private refpeas, yet
those things which they move, will be allowed by all reasonable
persons. For if they may not, being noblemen of the realm, be
uffered to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind con.r

Aa ij

cerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep lih
in captivity, how should they believe the reports, or obey them,
which do report it ? and therefore our meaning is, you shall let
the Hamiltons plainly understand, that we do well allow of theit
proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the queen
their sovereign for her relief) and in such things as shall appear
reasonable for us therein to do, for the queen our sifter, we will
be ready to perform the fame. And where it is so required, that
upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should deal with the
lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we
are well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize the
lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him to ihewbim.
self favourable to them in their artions, that may appear plainly
to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho.
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that
upon your message done to the earl of M.irray, you might retura,
so our meaning is you shall. And if these our letters (hall meet
you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the lar
Scroope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567,

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 264.)

Sir Nicholas 'Throckmorton to the archblfhop of St. An.

drew's and the abbot of Arbrotbe.

rS Aug. AFTER my good commendations to your good lordihips, this U1.
1567. Pa. be to advertize you, that the queen's mnjetlly my sovereign hav-

m 'Office ing sent me hither her ambassador to the queen her filleryao

py which sovereign, to communicate unto her such matter as flie thought
fentto the meet, considering the good amity and intelligence betwixt thee,
queen. who being detained in captivity (as your lordfhips know) con.

trary to the duty of all good fubje&s, for the enlargement u
whole person, and the reflitution of her to her dignity, herm.
jefly gave me in charge to treat with these lords assembled at
Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means
might be, for the safeguard of the young prince, the puniflihmn
of the late horrible murder, the dissolution of the marriage b.-
twixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and lailly for their osl
futeties. In the negotiation of which matters I have (as yo
lordfhips well know) spent a long time to no puarpofe, not he)V
able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the queen my"j
vereign's fatisfaafion. Of which firange proceedings towvard.s

raijefly, and undutiful behaviour towards their sovereign, I have
advertised the queen's majesty; hfle (not being minded to bear
this indignity) hath given me in charge to declare her further
pleature unto them, in such fort as they may well perceive her
najefly doth disallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath
revoked me. And further hath given me in charge to commu-
nicate the fame unto your lordihips, requiring you to let me
know, before my departure hence, (which flall be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you) what you and your
confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen your sovereign at
liberty, and to restore her to her former dignity by force, or
otherwise; feeing these lords have refused all other mediation, to
the end the queen's majesty my sovereign may concur with your
lordfhips in this honourable enterprize.

And in cafe, through the dispersion of your associates, your

lordfhips can neither communicate this matter amongst you, nor
receive resolution of them all by that time, it may please you to
fend me the opinions of so many of you as may confer together,
within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in
this town by Monday or Tuesday next at the furthest, being the
19th of this August ; for I intend (God willing) to depart to-
wards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I most hum-
bly take my leave of your lordl ips at Edenburgh, the 13th of
Aug. 1567.

Indorfed i3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

Your good lordfhip's letter of the 13th of Auiguft I have receiv- 24 Ag.,
ed the 19th of the fame. For answer whereunto it may like '567 ,
your lordship to underfland, that I will fignife unto you plainly, from a co.
how far forth I am already thoroughly infiruded of the queen's Nc'wich
majefly my fovereign's pleasure, concerning the detention of the as fel', to

Sfcretary

queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief. CeciL

To the first her majesty hath given in charge, to use all kinds

of persuasion in her name, to move these lords assembled at Eden-
burgh to deifit from this violent and undutiful behaviour, which
they use toward their sovereign. And in this part, besides the
fliew of many reasons, and sundry perfuaflons of amicable treaty
with them, her majesty hath willed me to use some plain and fe-
vere speech unto them, tending so far forth, as if they would not
le better advised, and reform these their outrageous proceedinga

exercised against their sovereign, that then they might be affuted
her majefly neither would, nor could indure such an indignity
to be done to the queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

And notwithstanding these my proceedings with them, they

have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as yet neither
will they consent to the enlargement, neither fuffer me to speak
with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to treat any
more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have adver,
tifed the queen's majesty my sovereign, expecting daily her ma-
jefty's further order; and as I thall be advertised thereof, so will
not fail to signify the fame to your good lord(hip ; and in the
mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordflip
hath written unto me. Thus with my due commendations to
your good lordflhip, I commit the fame to almighty God, refling
plways to do you the pleasure and service that I can lawfully,
At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol, I. p. 271.)

,Account of lord Herreis's behbaviour in the parliament

held December 15, 1567.

Paper Of. Tni lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the
tee duke and himself, their friends and adherents, (the duke him-

self, the earl of Caffilles, and the abbot of Kilwinning being alfa
present) to persuade the union of the whole realm in one mind.
Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise.
that part of this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning
took means for punilhment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing
the queen's inordinate affection -to that wicked man, and that the
could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
fequefIring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of
noblemen. That their honourable doings, which had not spare4
to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their native country
from the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among other
nations, had well deserved that all their brethren should. join
with them in so good a cause. That he and they, in whose names
he did speak, would ,villingly, and without any compulsion, en-
ter themselves in the fame yoke, and put their lives and lands in
the like hazai d, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen
herself were in Scotland, accompanied with 2,0ooo men, they
will be of the fame mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped

tne remainder noblemen of their party, Huntly Arguile, and
others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would
come to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly
move them. And if they will remain obflinate, and refuse to
qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and their friends, join
with us to correc them, that otherwise will not reform them-
selves. So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our
party, none of ourselves could have made. He did not forget
to term my lord regent, by the name of regent, (there was no
mention at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at
every word, when his speeches were directed to him, accompa-
nying all his words with low courtcfies after his manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 285.)

Part of a Letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th

Aug. i 568, from Bolton.

- BUT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to An oriinfna
favour the form, but also the chief article of the religion of the a.ze.
gospel, namely, juflification by faith only: and the heareth the
faults of papeftry revealed, by preaching or otherwise, with con-
tented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and the doth not
seem to like the worse of religion throw me.

Part of a Letter from fir Francis Knol)ys to Cecil, 2 r

Septemper, 1568, from Bolton.

*---lT came to this queen's ears of late that hle vras bruited to
be lately turned to the religion of the gofpell, to the great diflik.-
ing of the papifts hereabouts, which thing the herself confeffed
unto me, and yesterday openly in the great chamber, when the
assembly was full, and some papifts present, (he took occasion to
speak of religion, and then openly the profeffed herself to be of
the papist religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame,
more earnestly than (he had done a great while afore, altho'
her defences and arguments were so weak, that the effet of her
speech was only to mhew her zeal; and afterwards to me alone,
when I mifliked to fee her become so confidently backward in
religion, why, said flie, would you have me to loose France and
Spain, and all my friends in other places, by seeming to change
my religion, and yet I am not assured the queen my good fifler
will be my assured friend, to the fatisfafion of my honour and
expeaation.

No. XXV. (VoL I. p. 404.)

ueen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Paper-Of- RIGHT truity and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well.
fice. From he wae d
a col. Where we hear fay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts
re&ed by of Scotland, that whatsoever should fall out now upon the hear-
secretary
Cecil. ing of the queeri of Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to

acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her late
husband our cousin, we have determined to reflore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereof, as we
cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and therefore we
have thought good to assure you, that the fame is untruly devised
by the authors to our dithenour. For as we have been always
certified from our said fifler, both by her letters and messages,
that the is by no means guilty or participant of that murder, which
we with to be true, so surely if the thould be found jufily to be
guilty thereof as hath been reported of her,. whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it should behoove us to confider
otherwise of her cause than to satisfy her desire in restitution of
her to the government of that kingdom. And so we would have
you and all'others think, that shall be disposed to conceive ho.
nourably of us and our a&ions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9tb of Oc2ober, 1568,

from Tork.

An origin- ----viv lord's grate of Norfolk sending for me to Bolton, ft
*d. Paper- attend upon him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither
Uffice.

accordingly, meaning to flay here until Munday next as touch-
ing the matters of the commilion, that his grace and the reft have
from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of all things
thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed, and altho'
the matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to prefume.to
utter any opinion of mine own- thereof, yet I fee that my lord
Herris for his parte laboureth a reconciliation, to be had without
the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of Ledington also
faith to me, that he could with these matters to be ended in dulce
tmaner, so that it might be done with safety ; of the reft you cata
conceive, by the advertifcments and writtings, sent up by out
commillioners.

A Letter from the bijhop of Ross to the queen of Scots,

from 2'rk, OElober 1568.

PLEIS your majeftly I conferred at length with A. ane great part Cott. Lib.
of a night, who affurit-me that he had reasoned with B. this Sa- a Copy.
turday C. on the field, who determinate to him that it was the D.
determinit purpose not to end your cause at this time, but to hold
the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, to make the
E. pursue extremity, to the effect F. and his adherents might ut-
ter all they could to your dishonour, to the effeEt to cause you
come in disdain with the hail fubjets of this realm, that ye may
be the mair unable to attempt any thing to her disadvantage. And
to this effea is all her intention, and when they have produced
all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter inflantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there, till (he
think time to shew you favour, which is not likely to be hastily,
because of your uncles in France, and the fear (he has of yourself
to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that ye write
an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your sub-
je&s which has offendit you.- This in effet that your majesty
hearing the eflate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majefly was informed of you, that you could
not gudely remit your fubjefs in such fort as they might credit
you hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay of this contro-
verfy to be ended. And therefore persuading her D. effeaually
not to trust any who had made such narration. But like as ye had
rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her
counfell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to all
others, as well uncles as others, and assure her to keep that thing
ye wald promise to your fubje&s by her advice. And if D. dif-
credit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be remov-
ing within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G.
pleased, until the time her G. were fully satisfied, and all occa-
flon of discredit removed froni her. So that in the mean time
your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubje&s re-
flored and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things
tending to this effe&. And affirms that they believe that this
may be occasion to canfe her credit you that ye offer so far; and
it may come that within two or three months she may become
better-minded to your grace, for now flie is not well minded, and
will not (hew you any pleasure for the caetfes foresaid.

Volume II. B b

If. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following

key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commissioners
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 296.)

Deliberation of secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland,

Dec. 21, 1568.

Paper Of. THE belf way for England, but not the easiest, that the queen of

ce. Scotts might remain deprived of her crown, and the slate conti.

nue as it is.

The second way for England profitable, and not so hard.-

That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some perfwafions,
to agree that her son might continue king, because he is crown'd
and herself to remain also queen; and that the government of the
realm might be committed to such persons as the queen of Eng.
land thould name, so as for the nomination of them it might be
ordered, that a convenient number of persons of Scotland thould
be first named to the queen of England, indifferently for the queen
of Scotts, and for her son, that is to fay, the one half by the queen
of Scotts, and the other by the earlb of Lennox, and lady Len.
nox, parents to the child; and out of those, the queen's majefly
of England to make choice for all the offices of the realm, that
are, by the laws of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of
the land.

That untill this may be done by the queen's majefly, the go-,

vernment remain in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is, pro.
viding he flall not dispose of any offices or perpetuals to continue
any longer but to these offered of the premises.

That a parliament be summoned in Scotland by several com-

mandments, both of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

--That hostages be delivered into England on the young

king's behalf, to the number of twelve persons of the earle of
Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts fliall name; and likewise on
the queen's behalf to the like number as the earl of Murray shall
name; the fame not to be any, that have by inheritance or office
cause to be in this parliament, to remain from the beginning of
the summons of that parliament, untill three months after the par-

riament; which hoflages shall be pledges, that the friends of ei.
ther part flhall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this parliament
it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England
shall devise for the government of the realm, (being not to the
hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to the laws of Scot-
land for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the parlia-
ment at Edinr. the Decemr, 567) shall be eftabliflied to be kept
and obeyed, under pain of high treason to the breakers thereof.

- That by the fame parliament also be flablifhed all execu-

tions and judgments given against any person for the death of the
late king.

- That by the fame parliament, a remission to be made uni-

verfally from the queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also
from every one fubjeft to another, saving, that reflitution be made
of lands and houses, and all other things heritable that have been
by either fide, taken from them which were the owners thereof,
at the committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

That by the fame parliament it be declared who shall be fuc-

ceffors to the crown next after the Q. of Scots and her issue; or
else, that such right as the D. of Chatelherault had, at the mar-
riage of the Q. of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be conserved
and not prejudized.

That the Qof Scots may have leave of the queen's majefly of
England, twelve months after the said parliament, and that she
shall not depart out of England, without special licence of the
queen's majesty.

That the young king shall be nourished and brought up in Eng-

land till he be years of age.

It is to be considered, that in this cause the composition between

the queen and her fubje&s may be made with certain articles,
outwardly to be seen to the world for her honour, as though all
the parts should come of her, and yet for the surety of contrarys,
that certain betwixt her and the queen's majesty are to be con,
eluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 298.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 1568-9.

WE greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, Paper.Of
to renew that which it hath pleased God to make grevious to us, fice.
and sorrowful to yow; but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this
point, having occasion to command yow in our service, and yow also
whileft yow are to serve us. We require yow to confider of this

Sb ij

that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hithertq
yow have accuftumate in qur fervife; at the time of our last let.
ters written to yow the fourteenth of this month for removing of
the queen of Scots, we had underfianding out of Scotland of cer-
tain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongst
the which one is found to contain great and manifest untruths
touching us and others also, as shall and may plainly appear unto
yow by the coppy of the fame, which likewise we fend yow, and
because at the fame time we were advertised, that it should be
shortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we
thought good first to remove the queen, before we would disclose
the fame, and then expeft the issue thereof ; and now, this day
by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained, that
since that time the fame matters contained in the writting, are
published in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought
it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, and to confound the
falsehood contained in that writting, not. only to have the fame
xeproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to
charge that queen therewith, so as the may be mnoved to declare
the authors thereof, and persuaders of her to write in such flan-
derous fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, we have
here flayed her commissioners, knowing no other whom we may
more probably presume to be parties hereunto, then they, untill
the queen shall name some other, and aquit them ; who being
generally charged without expressing to them any particularity,
do use all manner of speeches to discharge themselves; wherefore
our pleasure is, that ye shall, after ye have well perused the cop-
py of this writting sent to yow, speedily declare unto her, that
we have good underfianding given us of diverse letters and writ-
tings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand, a-
mongeft which one writting is sent with her commandment ex-
prefsly as now it is already publithed, as we are much troubled
in mind that a princess as the is having a cause in our hands so
implicated with difficulties and calamitys, fthould either conceave
in her own mind, or allow of them that should devise fach false,
untrue, and improbable matters against us, and our honor, and
specially to have the aventure to have the fame being known so
untrue to be published ; and you shall also fay, because we will
laot think so ill of her, as that it fthould proceed of her self, but
rather she hath been counselled thereunto, or by abuse made to
think fame part thereof to be true, we require her, even as lth

have been the authors and perfwaders thereof, and so she shall
make as great amends to us as the cafe may require ; after you
have thus far proceeded, and had some answer of her, whether
the s(hall deny the writing absolutely, or name any that have
been the advisers thereof, you flhall fay unto her that we have
flayed her commiflioners here, until we may have some answer
hereof, because we cannot but impute to them some part of this
evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may be known;
and as soon as you can have dirct answers from her, we pray
you to return us the fame ; for as the cafe flandeth, we cannot
but be much difquieted with it, having our honour so deeply
touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we
know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in
the fame writing void of thought for the matters, to them there-
in imputed ; you may impart to the queen of Scots either the
contents of the slanderous letter, or fliew her the copy to read it,
and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to join
with you there as you shall think meet.

Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from WetherWIy

the z8th January, 1568.

- I WILL fupprefsmy own grieffs, and pass them over with fillence, AnOrignal

in the Pa-

for the prefint learning of your majefty-and for this queen's per Office.
answer to the coppie of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I
muftt add this unto my brother's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary
yeflernight late; in process of time, she did not deny but that
the firit lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to a
letter that she had sent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of
Mlurray's promise to deliver her son into your majefty's hands,
and to avoid that the fame should not be done without her con-
sent, made her, fthe faith, to write, in that behalf ; she faith also
that fthe wrote that they {hould cause a proclamation to be made
to flir her people to defend my lord of Murray's intent and pur-
pose, for delivering of her said son, and impunge his rebellious
government, as the termed it, but she utterly denyeth to have
written any of the other slanderous parts of the said letter
touching your majesty; she said also, that she fufpeaed that a
Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the author of some
Scotch letters devised in her name, but the would not allow me
to write this for any part of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 303.)

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable tbh

lord of Liddington.

2oth of Ju- Youi. letter of the 3d of July, I have received the T5th of th
From the fame. For ans-wer whereunto you shall understand, that friends
Original. here to my lord regent and you do with such a concurrence in l

doings, as in matter and circumstances there arise no dissention,
or at the least, no more nor other than the difference of countries
doth necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consummation of the matter
in hand, which principally to advance, your allowance, profecu.
tion, and speedy promotion, in Scotland, is most requisite, for
you are so wife, and well acquainted with the state of the world,
and with all our humours, as you know that some do allow and
disallow for reason, some for refpeat of multitude, some for re-
fpea of persons, and so the cause is to go forward as men do like
to set it forward. You are not to seek that some will use cau-
tions, some neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly im.
pugne it. And yet all and every of these forts will alter their do-
ings, when they shall fee the regent and his favourers accord
with the best and greatest part there, and agree with the wifefl
and firongeft party here. Tho' the matter has taken its begin.
ning here, upon deep and weighty considerations, for the well of
both the princes and their realms, as well presently, as in time
to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent and
the realm of Scotland, by you, should propose the matter to the
queen our sovereign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
or be disposed to leave but a fear, and no wound of the hurts past.
I would be glad that this my letter should come to your hands
before the convention, whereat it seems your queen's refloration
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk shall be propounded, either
to wynne in them both allowance or reje&tion. To which pro.
ceedings, because you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason
thus, me thinketh you use a propofterous order, to demand the
consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good
end hath rather been felt or prepared, and therefore there mufl
needs follow either a universal refusal, or a factious division a.
mongft you, whereby a blouftering intelligence must needs come
to queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage from thence, which
ought to have been secretly and advisedly propounded unto hte

highness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
her majefly shall be made inexorable, an so bring the matter to
flch passe, as this which should have wrought surety, quietness,
and a flay to both the queens and their realms, shall augment
your calamity, and throw us your best friends into divorfe with
you, and into unhappy division amongst ourselves ; for you may
notconje&ure that the matter is now in deliberation, but expe&-
eth good occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so
slenderly of the managing of this matter, as to think we have not
cast the worst, or to enter therein so far without the assistance of
the nobility, the ablest, the wisest, and the mightiest of this re-
alm except queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed
until you, as the fittest minister, might propound it to her, on
the behalf of the regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How
far master Woddes deamations do carry them of queen Eliza-
beth's affeaions, and master fecretary's, to assist the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scotts, I know not, nor it is not materi-
al; but I do assuredly think, that her majesty will prefer her
surety, the tranquility of her reign, and the conservation of her
people, before any device, which may proceed from vain dif-
course, or imperfecfions of pafflons, and inconsiderate affe&ions.
And as for Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh.
not to go too fast afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far be-
hind, and special when the reliques be of no great value or
power. If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently,
you may repose as well of him in this matter, as of the duke of
Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford,
Shrewsbury, and the reft of the nobility ; all which do embrace
and proteile the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according
to your advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the
fame zeal and care of his well-doing that I owe to him,
whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto him
tle queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he
feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be as I trust, hasten
your coming hither, for it is very necessary that you were here
presently. Q. Elizabeth both doth write to my lord Regent in
such fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her ma-
jefty's affe&ion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent
than he conjeafureth of him, the effea of which her majefty's let-
ter you shall underfland, by my lord Leicefter's letter unto you,
at this dispatch. At the court, 20th July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 304.)

Part of a Letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. pro.

bably Lord Burleigh.

I56:L BECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small motions, and

Harl. Lib.
37. B. 9. so. that the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my fovereign's
43- mother, and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while past been very

frequent in both the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her majefly'i
ears. I will, for fatisfa'ion of her highness, and the discharge
of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interest,
and medling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing
whatsoever is prejudicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to
the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me. What confer.
rences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, -and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able to de-
clare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt
him and me, either at that time, or since. And to the end her
majefly may understand how I have been dealt with, in this mat.
ter, I am compelled to touch some circumstances, before there was
any mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the
commiffloners, I found very--and neutral dealing with the duke,
and others her highnefs's commifflioners, in the beginning of the
cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely, and fa
further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flick.
ing at our just defence in the matters that were objeaed againif
us, by the said queen's commissioners, lookitng certainly for no 0-
ther thing, but summary cognition in the cause of controversy,
-with a small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day,
the Lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to Howard;
what purpose they had I cannot fay, bui that night Lithirgton re-
turning, and entring in conferrence with me upon the slate of out
acion, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and require fa-
miliar conferrence, by the which I might have some feeling to
what iffne our matters would tend. Acccording to which advice,
having gotten time and place convenient in the gallery of the
house where the duke was lodged, after renewing of our firfl acquaint-
ance made at Berwick, the time before the afflize of Leith, and
some speeches passed betwixt us ) he began to fay so me, how he
in England had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and
friendship of many, it was to be tho't there could be none more
fit infiruments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the present

fate of both, and how I was entered in that afiori tending so fai
to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by him to confider how
inatters stood in this, what honour I had received of the queen,
and what incoriveniencies her defimation in the matters laid to her
charge might breedto herpofterity. Her refpeawas not little tothe
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my
unfriends had the next refpe&, and that I should efleem the issue
of her body would be the more affeaionate, to me and mine, than
any other that could attain to that crown. And so it should be
ineeteft, that the affirmed her dimiffion made in Lochlevin, and
we to abftrad the letters of her hand write, that (he should not
be defamed in England. My reply to that was, how the matter
had passed in parliament, and the letters seen to many, so that the
abara6ing of the fame could not then secure her to any purpose,
6nd yet thould we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us.
Affirming it would not be fair for us that way to proceed, feeing
the queen's majesty of England was not made privy to the matter
as she ought to be, to be in refpe& we wete purposely come iii
England for that end, and for the - of the grants of our cause.
The duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle matters
ivell enough at the court. After this, on the occafiion of certain
articles, that were required to be resolved on, before we entered
on the very declaration of the very ground of our a&ion, we came
up to the court; where some new conmmiffioners were adjoined to
the former, and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the
parliament house at Weftminfier, in prefenc of which commis-
fioners for the said queen, and- through the- rebuking of
the queen of England's own commissioners, we uttered the whole
of the action, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations,
as we had, which might move the queen's mnajefty to think well
of our cause. Whereupon expecing her highness declaration,
and feeing no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given;
but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, rfand-
ing in hazard and danger, we were put to the uttermost point off
4ur witt, to imagine whereunto the matters would tend, tho'
albeit we had left nothing undone for justification of our causes,
yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to some
accord with the queen, and reflore her to whole or half reign. I had
no other answer to give them, but that I thould neither do against
ionfcience nor honour in that matter. Notwithftandingfeeing this
my plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I was,

in formed that the duke began to mislike of me, and t6 speak of me, ar

Probably that I had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her---
Adulterr." and murderer, I was advised to pass to him, and give him good

words and to purge myself of the things objected to me, that I
should not open the sudden entry of his evil grace, nor have him
to our enemy- -considering his greatness. It being there.
withal whispered, and lhewed to me, that if I departed, he fland.
ing discontented and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such
trouble in my way, as my throat might be cut before I came to
Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough appear to her
marriage, I should not put him in utter difpair, that my good will
could not be had therein. So few days before my departing, I
came to the park in Hampton-court, where the duke and I met
together, and there I declared unto him that it was come to my
ears, how some misreport should be made of me to him, as that I
should speak i'rreverently and rathly of the said queen my fove.
reign's mother, such words as before expressed, that he might

Probably - -thereby my affetion to be so alienate from her, as that I
fufpeat. could not love her, nor be content of her preferment, howbeit he

might persuade himself of the contrary, for as (he once was the
person in the world that I loved best, having that honour to be
so near unto her, and having received such advancement and hon-
our by her, I was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wish her
body harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of me,
(howsoever the truth were in the self) and as to the preservation
of her son, now my sovereign, had moved me to enter into this
cause, and that her own pressing was the occasion of that was ut-

Wrobably tered to her-- whensoever God thould move her heart to ret
di7onour. pent of her by past behaviour and life, and after her known re-

pentance, that mhe thould be separate from that ungodly and un-
lawful marriage that the was entred in, and then after were join-
ed with such a godly and honourable a personage, as were affec-
tioned to the true religion, and whom we might trust, I could'
find in my heart to love her, and to shew her as great pleasure,
favour, and good-will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe, he
flould be that personage, there was none whom I could bettei
like of, the queen-- in- -of England being made privy
to the matter, and she allowing thereof, which being done, I
thold labour in all things that I could, to her honour and plea-
sure, that were not prejudicial to the king my fovereign's estate,
and prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my affc&ion war
rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God should-
direct her to know herself, than utterly alienated and abflrafted

from her; which he seemed to accept in very good part, saying,
Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing, whereunto I will
make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing I came to my lodging, and by
the way, and ail night, I was in continual thought and agitation
of mind, how to behave myself in that weighty matter, first, ima-
gining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempted without
ihe queen's Majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this
realm and I myself in particular having received such favour and
comfort at her highnefs's hands, and this whole isle such peace
and quietness, since God poffeffed her majesty with her crown.
And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
proteffing, none other were or thould be privy to our speech, I
tho't I could not find in my heart to utter any thing, that might
endanger him ; moved to the uttermost with these cogitations, and
all desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to fend me some
good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfaf&ion of my
troubled mind, which I found indeed ; for upon the morn, or
within a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my
lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the court, where he began
to find strange with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to
him, standing so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had
in my communication with the duke, come so far- and there
he made some discourse with me, about that which was talk be-
twixt us, I perceiving that the duke had----the matter to my Probably
lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the dzfclofed.
duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in
every point to my lord of Leicester, who desired me to thew the
fame to the queen's majesty, which I refused to do, willing him
if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that he as
one--by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her
highnefs's hands is obliged to wifth her well, should make declara-
tion of the fame to her majefly, as I understand by some speech
of her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the duke
was the only cause, that staid the violence, and trouble prepared
for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways understand. The fame
declaration I was obliged to renew since in writings of--fent
to my servant John Wood. The fum whereof, I trust, he thew-
ed the duke, and something also I wrote to himself, for it was
tho't this fthould redeem some time, that the duke should not fud-
denly declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft laid be-
fore me, and what friendship he had of the chief of the nobility

Cc ij

in England, so that it might appear to the queen's majesty of
England-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly that
might seem favourable for us, we had some cause to fufpet that
her highness should not be contrarious to the marriage when it
should be proposed to her. The sharp message sent by her majef.
ty with the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the
duke tending so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were
proposing one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think
that her highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that
she might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was de.
vised in England, that the lord of Lethington should come as
from me, and break the matter to her highness, as her majeftly in
a letter declared that t(he looked for his coming, yet that devise
proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention could

Probably no wife accord to his sending, nor allow of the matter motioned,
divorce.
a

...... but altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame, great incon-

veniencies, to the surety and quietness of this whole isle; for our
proceedings have declared our mifliking and disallowance of the
purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleased, he was ready
for the journey. And in likewise it was devised to give consent,
that the- between the said queen and Bothwell, Ihould be
fuffered to proceed in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord
Boyd, by reason we could not underfland what was the queen's
majefty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf- -And where-
as ye mean, that her highness was not made privy of any such in.
tention, the fault was not in me. The first motion being declar-
ed, as I have writtena, to my lord of Leicester, and by him im.
parted to her majesty, so far as I could perceive by some speech
of her highnefs's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plain-
ly declared how I have been dealt withal for this marriage, and
how just necessity moved me not to require directly, that which
the duke appeared so--- unto. And for my threatnings, to
assent to the fame, I have exprefied the manner; the persons, that
laid the matter before me were of my own company. But the
duke since hath Ipoken, that it was his writing which fared my
life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her majesty,
that she let no speeches nor any other thing palfed and obje6ted to
my prejudice, move her majefly to alter her favour- towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my assured constancy towards her
highness; for in any thing which may tend to her honour and
surety, I will, while I live, beflow myself, and all that will do
for me, notwithstanding my hazard or danger, as proof fiall d4.
lare, when hqr mwjefty finds time to employ me.

A P P E N D I X

TO THE VI. VII. and VIII, BOO 0 S.

No. I. (Book VI. p. 312.)

William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicejer,

March 20th, 1570, from Ledington.

THE great desolation threatried to this whole realm, be the divi- An Origi~.

a!.

fions thereof in dangerous fa&ions, doth press me to frame my
letters to your lordihip, in other fort, then were behovefull for
me, if I had no other refpe&, but only to maintain my private
Predit; therefor I am driven to furnifhi them with matter, which
I know not to be plausible, whereupon by misconstruing my mean-
ing, some there may take occasion of offence, thinking that I ra-
ther utter my own passions, than go about to inform your lordship
truly of the slate; but I trust my plain dealing shall bear record
to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible, I will
lay before your lordfhip's eyes, the plat of this country; -which
first is divided into two fa&ions, the one pretending the mainte-
nance of the king's reign, the other alledging the queen to have
been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her slate;
the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen,
and principal burroughs of the realme, who fiall have, as Mr.
Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's majesty your fovereign's
allowance and prote&ion ; the other hath in it some most princi-
pall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the infe-
rior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look assuredly
that all kings do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
Jy. What consequence this division will draw after it, I leave it
to your lordfliip's consideration, there is fallen out another divi-
sion, accedentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to
change the slate of the other two fadtions, to increase the one,
and diminuih the other, which is grounded upon the regiment of
the realm. Some number of noblemen aspire to the government,
pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's demission of the

,roun, and her commission granted at that time for the regiment
during the king's minority, another fa&ion doth altogether re.
pine against that division, thinking it neither fit nor tolerable,
that three or four of the meanest fort amongst the earls, ihall
presume to challenge to themselves a rule over the whole re.
alme, the next of the blood, the first in rank, the greatest al-
way both for the antientry of their houses, degree, and forces,
being negleckted ; this order they think preposterous, that the
meaner fort shall be placed in publick fundion to command, and
the greater thall continue as private men to obey ; besides that,
they think if the commission had in the beginning been valew.
able, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not be ex.
tended to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed
are ceased, and so the effe& of the whole 'void the letter part of
this division hath many pretences, for besides the queen's fa&ion,
which is wholly on that fide, a great number of these that have
heretofore profeffed the king's obedience, do favour the fame,
and will not yield to the government of the other, wvhofe prefer-
ment for refpeas they mislike, when the queen's fation flall be
increased; with a part of the king's, and these not of least sub.
fiance, and yow may judge what is like to infue ; an other inci-
dent is like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given
out here in Scotland, that the queen's majcfly is setting forth
some forces towards the border, which shall enter this realm, to
countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the
contrary faction, and bruts are spread, that the fame (hall be here
out of hand; these that think themselves of equal force with their
contrary faaion at home, or rather an over-match to them, yet
not able to encounter with the forces of another prince, rather
than yield to their inferiors, will I fear, take advise of necessity,
and evil councillors, and seek also the maintenance of some so-
reign prince, whereby her majesty (altho no further inconvenient
were to be feared) must be driven to exceflive charges, and it
would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at one
time to set us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of
your forces coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at
the fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon with a meffen-
ger sent exprefly from the king of France, to that part of the no-
bility, that favours the queen, to learn the state of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her
afairs, or for their own safety; assuredly this message will be
well receive4, and fuffered accQrdingly, this is the present fito

Of Scotland. Now if your lordlhip would also know myj opinion,
how to choice the belt, as the cafe flandeth; I will in that alfa
fatisfie your lorlhip, I am required from them to deal plainly, and
your lordflip shall Judge wither I do so or not; for I think it
plain dealing, when I simply utter my judgement, and go not a-
bout to disguise my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which she
hath gone about to purchase, with befllowing great charges,- and
the loss of some of her people; this desire is honourable for her'
highness, profitable for both the contrys, and of none to be dif-
allowed; specially if it be (as 1 take it) to have the amity of the
whole realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn,
nor will it prove commodious for her to fait the friendship of a sac-
tion of Scotland, for in so doing, in gaining the best, filhe may
lose the more, and the fame would bring all her actions with us
in suspicion, if she fliould go about to nourith faaions amongst us,
which meaning I am sure never entered into her majefty's heart;
then if it be the friendihip of the whole the doth demand, let her
not, for pleasure of one part, go about to overthrow the remnant,
which will not be so faifable, as some may give her to underfiand ;
but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
state, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good meant
to an uniformity, so fliall (he give us all occasion to think well of
her doings, that the tendeth our wealth, and provoks us univer-
sally to with unto her majesty a most prosperous continuance; by
the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, the will fend forces to
suppress these whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma'
ny; men be not so faint heartea, but they have courage to pro-
vide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace the means
partly offered, but will also procure further, at the hand of other
princes. This for mine own part, I do abhorr, and protest I de-
fire never to fee forces of firangers to set foot within this land,
yet I know not what point necessity may drive men into, as if men
in the middle of'the sea were in a ship, which suddenly should be
set on fire, the fear of burning would make them to leap into the
sea, and soon after the fear of the water would drive them to
cleive again to the fired ship, so for avoiding prcfent evill, mei
will many times be inforced to have recourse to another, no les1
dangerous. Trust me forces will not bring forth any good fruit
to her majefly's behove, it must be some way of treaty shall serve
the turn, wherein by my former letters your lordship doth know
already what is my judgement ; yow fee how plainly I do write,

without consideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet
my hope is that such as will favourably interpret them, (hall think'
that I mean as well to her majefly, and that realme, as these that
will utter other language. I wish the continuance of the amity
betwixt the two contrys, without other refped, and will not con-
ceal from her majeftiy any thing to my knowledge, tending to the
prejudice thereof; if I thall perceave her majesty taking frank
dealings in evill part, I shall from thenceforth forbear; in the
mean season I will not cease to trowble your lordship, as I shall
have occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your lordship.

No. II. (Book VI. p. 316.)

A Letter of queen Elfabetb to the earle of Sufeks, July

2d, 1570.

Calderw. RIGHT trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day
M. S. His-
tory; V. 2. we have received your letters of 28 the last month, with all 0-
. 189. ther letters, sent from Scotland, and mentioned in your letters,

whereunto answer is desired to be given before the tenth of this
month ; which is a very short time, the weightiness of the mat.
ters, and the diftlance of the places considered; nevertheless we
have, as the fihortnefs could fuffer it, resolved to give this answer
following, which we will, that yow, by warrand hereof, shall
cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox and the reft
of the noblemen conveend with them. Where it is by them, in
their letters, and writtings alledg'd, that for lack 6f our resolute
answer conoerning the eftablithing of the regiment of the realm
under their young king, great inconveniences have happned,
and therefore they have deferred now at their last convention to
determine of the famine, who shall have the place of governour,
until the 21ft this month, before which time they require to
have our advise, in what peffon ot persons the government of that
realm shall be eflablifhed, we accept very thankfull the good will
and reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly to require
and follow our advise in a matter, that toucheth the slate 6f their
king, their selves, and realm so near, wherein as we per&ive,'
that by our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to
their slate and fuerty, so on the other part, they of their wisdoms
ought to think, that it might be by the whole world evill inter-
preted in us to appoint them a form of government, or a gover-
nour by name, for that how'foever we thould mean well if we

ihould do so, yet it could not be without some jealousy in the
heads of the estate, nobility, and community of that realm, that
the government thereof should be by me specially named, and
ordain'd; so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet milliking
most that they should take any discomfort by our forbearing to
flow our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed,
considering with ourselves how now that realm had been a good
space of time ruled in the name of their king, and by reason of
his base age, governed heretofore by a very carefull and honour-
able person, the earle of Murray, untill that by a mischievous
person, (an evil example) he was murdered, whereby great dif-
order and confusion of neceflity had, and will more follow, if de-
termination be not made of some other fpeciall person, or per-
sons, to take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpeciall,
for administration of law and jultice, we cannot but very well al-
low the desire of these lords to have some special governour to be
chosen; and therefore being well assured, that their own under-
flanding of all others is best to confider the slate of that realm,
and to discern the abilities and qualities of every person meet and
capable for such a charge, we shall better fatisfie ourselves, whom
they by their common consent shall first choose and appoint to
that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly nam-
ed, and that because they (hall perceave that we have care of the
person of their king, who by nearness of blood, and in refpeci of
his so young years, ought to be very tender and dear to us, we
shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they Ihall all accord
to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be
governor alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in
the mean time by their common cqnfent appointed lieutenant ge-
neral) reason moveth us to think that none can be chosen in that
whole realm, that (hall more desire the preservation of the king,
and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being
next to him in blood of any nobleman of that realm, or else-
where, and yet, hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them
this choice, except they shall of themselves fully and freely allcw
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured, that
whatsoever reports of devises, are, or s(hall be spread or invented,
that we have already yielded our mind to alter the slate of the
king or government of that realm, the fame are without juit
cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised
them, that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour
we could not refuse, *'h't the queen of Scots or her part fliall

o!e.:: II . D d

fay and offer, not only for her own affarance, but for the wealth
of that realm, yet not knowing, what the fame will be, that shall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and juffice,
by advancing her cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we
shall deliberately and assuredly fee, upon the hearing of the whole,
some place necessary, and just cause to do ; and therefore finding
that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that
realm, and thereof invested by coronation and other folemnities
nfed and requisite, and generally so received by the whole eflates,
we mean not, by yielding to hear the complaints or informations
of the queen against her son, to do any aa whereby to make
conclusion of governments, but as we have found it, so to fuffer
the fame to continue, yea not to fuffer it to be altered by any
means that we may impefhe, as to our honor it doth belong, as
by your late ations hath manifestly appeared, untill by some jus-
tice, and clear cause, we Ihall be direfly induced otherwise to
declare our opinion ; and this we would have them to know to
be our determination and coulfe that we mean to hold, whereon
we trust they for their king may fee how plainly and honourably
we mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of
us, whatsoever to the contrary they have or fliall hear; and on
the other part, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how un.
honourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us, whenr
the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear her
cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for
matters betwixt ourselves and her, as betwixt herself and her foa
and his party of that realm, against which offers no reason could
Tmove us to refuse to give ear, that we should aforehand openly
*and directly, before the causes be heard and considered, as it
,-ere, give a judgement or sentence cither for ourselves or for
them, whom she maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye fiall
admocnifh them, that they do not, by misconceiving our good
meaning toward them, er by indireft assertions of their adversary
grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such
lort, that our good meaning towards them shall not take such effee
towards them, as they flall defie, or themselves have need of,
All this our answer ye shall cause be given them, and let them
know, that for the shortness of time, this being the end of the
second of this month, we neither could make any longer decla.
ration of our mind, nor yet write any several letters, as if time
might have served we would have done. , July, i 57.

No. III. (Book VI. p. 316.)

she bb op of Rfs tofecretaryLidingtonfrom Chattyivoartb.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chat- iS June,
tifworth, the ioth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had .
written to you at length, like as the queen did with my lord Le-
vingfton, by the which you will be resolved of many points con-
tained in your said letter. I writ to you that I received your
letter and credit from Thos. Cowy at London, and ftnt to Lei-
cefter to know the queen of England's mind whether if you should
come here or not. He sent me word, that Phe will no ways hav'e you
come as one of the commidioners, because the is yet cffended witl
yop; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither, but
remain where you ait, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may
best advance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weil and safe-
ty depends thereon, in refpedt of the great feid atid ennimity born
against you by your Scots people, and the great heirship taken
of your father's landis; both were fare demonflrations of their
malice. Yet I am encouraged by your flout and deliberate mind.
Aflure yourself no deligence fliall be omitted to procure fipports
forth off all parts where it may be had. We will not refuse the
aid neither of papilf, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and to
this end, during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And
feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into Slanders, the queen
thinks it very necessary that he so do, for the duke D'Alva has
gotten exprcfs command of the king of Spain to give support, and
I am fare that there he flall have aid both of Slanders and the
pope, for it abides only on the coming of some men of counte-
nance, to procure and receive the fame. He must needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty, Vwhich will
be a great furtherance to the fame here. The queen has already ,
written to the duke D'Alva for this effedc, advertizing of his
coming; there is certain furns of money coming for frpport of the
Englithmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope. Where-
upon I would he had a general comniffion to deal for them, and
leceive ifch faurs as (hall be given. The means stall be found to
ca,:fe you be aniucrit of the fuams you wit for, to be difponit upon
the furni'hing of the cafile of Edenbu.gh, so being t;me honest
and true man were sent to Fiandeis to receive it, as said is, which
I would you prepared and sent. Orders thall be taken so the
;aetals as you writ of. We have proponit your avyce in entrlnr

D d ij

to treat with the queen of England, for retiring of her forces
puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen are
tho't very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands,
in that cafe, eflote prudentes ficut ferpentes. You may takeex-
perience with the hard dealing with me, how ye would be used
if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of danger being in medio
nationes pravae; alway no fear, with God's grace, fliall make me
shrink from her majefty's service. Since the queen of England
has refused that you come here, it appears to me quod nondumeft
fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Ca.
thenes mnight by any means be procured to come, they were the
most fit for the purpose, Rothes were allbo meet if he and I were
not both of one firname; so the treaty would get the less credit
either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend the belt
may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come with them
whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure; in my last packet,
with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a let-
ter of the queen's own hand writing to him, which I trust ye re-
ceived. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to
have had by your presence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do.
The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying God to fend yo0
health. From Chattifworth the i5th of January.

No. IV. (Book VI. p. 328-)

The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grainge and

Lethington zoungare upon the 8th day of OR. 1571.

WHEREAS you desire to know the queen's majefly's pleafare, what
the will do for appealing of these controversies, and therewith hai
offered yourselves to be at her commandment, touching the com-
mon tranquility of the whole ifie, anrd the amity of both realmsi
her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye thould leave off the mainte-
mance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king,
whom flie will maintain to the utmost of her power.

And in this doing, fihe will deal with the regent and the king's

party, to receive you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for
iecurity of life and livings.

Also she lays that the queen of Scotts, for that she has pradlifed

with the pope and other'princes, and also with her own fitbje&
in England, great and dangerous treafons against the gate of ha

own country, and also to the deftrudion of her own person, that
fie shall never bear authority, nor have liberty while she lives.

If ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you, fthe will

presently aid the king's party, with men, ammunition, and all
leceffary things, to be had against you.

Whereupon her majefly requires your answer with speed, with-

out any delay.

No. V. (Book VI. p. 335.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general ajembly, AugufJ 5th,

1572.

FIRST, desiring a new a& to be made ratifying all things concern- Calderw.
ing the king and his obedience that were enacted of before with- M.s. HiPoT
out any change, and that the ministers who have contraveend the '
former a&s be correded as accordeth.

That fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintain.

ing the king's cause, that whatsoever proceedeth in this treaty of
peace they be mindful the kirk be not prejudg'd thereby, in any
fort, and they specially of the ministers, that have been robbed of
their poffeffions within the kirk during the time of the troubles,
or otherwise dung and injured, may be restored.

To fate at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other

benefice be given to any person, contrary to the tenor of the a&s
made in the time of the firfi regent o!f good memory, and they
that are given contrar the said ats, or to any unqualified person,
may be revoked and made null be an adt of secret council, and
that all bifhopricks so vacand may be presented, and qualified per-
sons nominat thereupto, within a year after the vaking thereof,
according to the order taken in Leith be the commissioners of
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January last, and in
special to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick of Ross to the
lprd Methven.

That no pentions of benefices, great or finall, be given be fim-

ple donation of any lord regent, without consent of the poffeffor
of the faids benefices having tittle thereto, and the admission of the
superintendent or commissioners of the province where this bene-
fice lyeth, or of the bishops lawfully eleaed according to the said
order taken at Leith 5 and desire an at of council to be made
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine may be
specially inafted, with inhibition to the lords of session to give any
L.tters or decrfets, upon such fimpie gifts of benefices or pentiopn

not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk pre,
fently assembled declare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their

power.

That the first form of prefcntation to benefices, which were in

the first and second regents time, be not chang'd, as now it is
commonly: but that this clause be contained in the presentation,
that if the persons presented make not residence, or be slanderous
or found unworthy either in life or dodtrine be the judgment of
the kirk, (to which alwife he shall be fubje&) or meet to be
transported to another room at the fight of the kirk, the said pre.
fentation and all that shall fall thereupon shall be null and of no
force nor effec ; and this to have place also in the nomination of
the bishops.

That an adt be made in this assembly that all things done in

prejudice of the kirk's assumptions of the thirds, either be papifts
or others, by giving of fews, life-rents, or tacks, or any otherwise
difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null with a solemn
protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

That an ad be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, ad.

mitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account of
their whole rents, and intromiflions therewith once in the year,
as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may easily
confider the fame to be most expedient and necefl'ar.

Anent the jurifdiftion of the kirk, that the fame be determin.

ed in this assembly, because this article hath been long pofpond
to make fute to the regent and council for remedy againfi meffen.
gers and excommunicate persons.

Last that orders be taken anent the procurers-of the kirk, who

procure against miniflers and minifiry, and for futting of juifice of
the kirk's a&ions in the fefion,

No. VI. (Book VI. p. 338.)

Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace

concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.

BE it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Killi-
rrewe, E'q; ambassador for the queen's majesty of England,
Forafinuchl as, at the earnest motion and solicitation being made to
alle, on her highnefs's behalf, there is accord and pacification of
tlhe public troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland
sgrced and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards
the right honourable Gcorge earl of Huntly, lord Gordon an4

taidzenoch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the duke's Grace of
Chaftellarault, fnd commendatour of the abby of Abirbrothock for
the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their
kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depend-
ing on them; in treating of the which said pacification, the mur-
derers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax
grandfather, late regent to the king's majefly of Scotland his re-
ahn and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
fruclis or moveable goods, which the said persons have taken fra
perfonis profeffing the king's obedience, or for the damages done
or committed by them, since the xsth day of Junij, 1567, and
before the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the com-
mon cause or any thing depending thereupon, being thought by
the king's commifaries materis of such wccht and importance, as
the king's present regent could not conveniently, of himself, re-
mit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpec of the necemlity of the
present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and common
quietness of this realm and leiges, it is accorded, that the mat-
ters of remifflion of the said murderers, and of the discharge of
the said fruais, moveable goods, and other damages, moved by
the persons desiring the said remiflions and discharge to the queen's
majesty my sovereign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and
habitation to the king of Scotts. And whatsoever her majelly
lhall advise and councel touching the said remission and discharge,
the said lord regent, for the well of the king and universal quiet-
ness of the realm of Scotland, shall perform, observe, and fulfill
the fame. And in likewise, the said earl Huntly, and commen-
datour of Abirbrothock, being urged to have delivered pledges
and hoflages for observation of the conditions of the said accord
and pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majef-
ty's name, by virtue of my commifflon, to promise for them that
they shall truly and faithfully observe and keep the said pacifica-
tion, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their parts, and
that it would please her majesty to interpose berfelf, as surety
and cautioner for them to that effed, to the king's majesty of
Scotland their sover-eign and his said regent, which I have done,
and promise to do, by virtue of his majefly's commiflion, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and lord, their
intention to peace well appears, the fame being most agreeable to
the mind of the queen's majefiy my sovereign, which so long by
her minflers hath travelled for the said pacification, and in the
end, at her motion and follicitation, the fame is accorded, know-

ing her majefty's godly desire, that the fame may contihue an.
violate, and that the noblemen and others now returning to the
king's obedience shall have fufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majefly's name, and by
virtue of my commiflion, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majefty's good
means, the said remission and discharge shall be purchased and ob-
tained to them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers,
now properly depending upon them, (the persons specified in the
first abftinance always excepted) as also that the said pacification
shall be truly observed to them, and that her majeftly thall inter-
pose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour herself to
cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points and ar.
ticles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to this
present subscribed with my hand, and sealed the fame with mine
own feal the 13th day of Febry, Anno Domini, 1572. And
this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof, and the
parliament which (hall be appointed for their restitution, or at the
furthest before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubilribitur.

The bifbop of Glafgo w's note concerning the queen of

Scotland's dowry.

5 L7b. THE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry,
Cal. B. IV. besides other poffeflions, the dukedom of Turrene, which was

solemnly contracted and given to her by the king and estates of
parliament which dakedom the poffeffed peaceably till 1576,
and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his
brother, to augment whose appennage this dutchy was given, to
which the queen of Scotland 'yielded upon account of princes,
who were her near relations, provided the equivalent which was
promised her should be faithfully performed. So that year, after
a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, (he had grant-
ed her the county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks
of Seuley and Vetry ; tho' 'tis known that county, and the other
lands were not of equal value with Turene, but was promised to
have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal va-
lue. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were con-
firmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court
of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others necessary; upon
which (he entered into poffeffion of that county, &c. After-
wards, by a valuation of the commitdioners of the chamber of ac-

Mmpts, it was found, that the revenue of that county, &c. did
not amount to those of Turene by 3000 livres. But initead of
making up this deficiency according to juflice, some of the privy
council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of Bellievre, Ni-
cocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithiland-
irg of her aforesaid lofles, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy ofL flaimpes, to madam deMonpenfier, from
whom the king received money; of which sale the councellors
aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath hind-
red the aforesaid queen tq have justice done her. So that madam
de MAonpenfier hath been put in polleffion of these lands of Sen-
lis, contrary to all the declaration, proteflation, and assurances of
the king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difpoi'fffed of her dowry, contrary to all
equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Book VI. p. 341.)

ALetter from the lord ofLochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

IT will please your grace, I received your grace's letter, and has 3d March,
considered the fame. The parson, of Camfey, was here at me be- 7.ortou E. of
fore the receit thereof, direced fra my lord of Mar, and the Archieves,

Bund. B.

nmafer anent my last written, which was the answer of the writ- No. 19.
ing that the mailer sent to me, which I fend to your grace, de-
firing me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given
my answer before the receipt of your grace's letter, that I be-
hulffit to be befyd Sand Androis, at ane friends tryst, which I
might not omit ; I underfiand by my said cousin, that the king's
majefly is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent
your lordihip's trial, and that he had written before his depart-
ing to my Lord Monthrois. I understand, likewise, he will
write to your grace to come there for the fame effec, which I
tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace, for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the belt, and
not to sleep in security, but to turn you with unfeigned heart to
God, and to confider with yourself, that when the king's majef-
ty was very young, God made him the infirument to divest his
mother from her authority, who was natural princess, for offend-
ing of his divine majefly, and that there ran no vice in her, but
that the fame is as largely in you, except that your grace conde-
feended not to the defiru6lion of your wife. For as to harlotry,
and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God, and

Volume I. /- Ee

far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left unplagued,
except speedy repentance, which I pray God grant to your grace,
for otherwise your grace cat never havethelove of God nor man. I
pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace believes
that ye have the good will of them that are the king's good-will.
ers, ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfetly that your own
particulars are not contented, lat by the reft, and that most prin.
cipally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace, beir with me
that I am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge,
but from the very affeaion of my heart towards your grace, which
has continued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, be.
cause the matter flands in your grace's handling with the king's
majef`y, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I
fee not how ye shall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to
God, and look on the best, and cast from your grace both your
vices, to wit, ambition and avaritioufners. I am riding this day
to Sana Androis, and trust to return on Wednesday at the farth-
eft. If your grace will command me in any offices that are ho.
nest, that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise
of your grace's mind, and shall do to my power and knowledge,
and this with my heartille, &c. &c.

To our trulty co/finz the lord Locbleven.

From the TRUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, we receiv.
Original,
E. of Mor- ed your letter of the 3d of March, and as we take your plainnfs
ton's therein in good part, as proceeding from a friend and kinsman,
Bund. B. in whose good affeaion towards us we never doubted, so ye may
No. 31. not think it firange that we purge ourself so far of your accufa-

tion, as in conscience we find not ourielf to have offended in. As
touching our offence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to
submit us to his mercy 5 for ambition surely we think none can
juffly accuse us; for in our private estate we could, and can live
as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without fur-
ther aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the government of
the realm, indeed, mon lead us, or any other that shall occupy
that place, not simply to respect ourself, but his majefty's rowme
which we supply, and therein not transcending the bounds of
measure, as, we truit, it (hall not be found we have done, it
ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us. For as soon as
ever his majeity flall think himself ready and able for his own
government, none shall more willingly agree and advance the
fame nor 1, fiace I think never to set my face against himn vwhof

honour, safety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor
will never believe to find otherwise at his hand than favour, al-
though all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him, to
persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our friend-
ly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully
acquit; as we trust yourself considers, but because the ambaffa-
dors of England, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, treasurer,
and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we pray
you heartily address yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as
ye shall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we have
tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Sterling rides
to Douglas. And so we commit you in the prote&ion of God.
At Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577*

For the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in
us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers,
nor never shall any sovereign and native born prince, let be any
officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them judges to
their own reward ; in many causes, I doubt not to find the assist-
ance of my friends, but where my a&ions flhall appear unhonett,
J will not crave their affliftance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Book VI. p. 369.)

bie coppy of the king of France his direElions sent to
Scotland with Seineur de la MAotte Fenelon. TanJIat-
ed out of the French.

FRasT, on their majeflys most christian part, he shall make the Calderw.
most honourable salutation and visiting to the most serene king of M. s. Hir.

tory, Vol. 3.

Scotland, their good brother and little son, that in him is pof- p. 208.
fable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such like
as they have written to him with their hands, and to show ex-
prefly the perfect friendship and singular affe&ion, that their ma-
jeflys bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

To take head to the things which touch near the most serene
king, to the effe& that his person may be in no danger, but that
it may be most surely preserved.

And that he be not hindred in the honest liberty that he ought
to have, and that no greater, or ftraiter guards be about him than
he had before.

Eei4

And such like, that he be not impeached in the authority, that

God hath given to him of king and prince sovereign above his
fubjeas, to the effecl he may as freely ordain and command in
his affairs, and in the affairs of his country, with his ordinary coun.
cil, as he was used to do of before.

That his nobility, barons and commonality of his contry may

have their free liberty to resort to his serene majesty, without sus.
picion of greater guards or more armed men about his person then
the use was, that they be not affraid and hindered to resort; and
further that the fegnieur de la Miotte Fenelon fall liberally and
freely speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re.
establishing of that that may or hath been changed or altered.

And that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and

other men of good behaviour of the towns and commonality of
the contry conveens, and are content with the form of goverment
presently with the said serene king, to the end that if their be
any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that
he return not without the certainty of the famine.

And if he may underfland that there be any who have not uied

them so reverently towards the said serene king their sovereign
lord, as the duty of their obedience required, that he may pray
on this behalf of his majesty most christian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill vwholly to forget the fame,
and exorting them to do their duty towards his majefiy, in time
coming, in all refpeas with the obedience and true fubjeafioa
they ought him,

And if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the said serene

king to be in any manner confirained of his person, authority, li-
berty, and disposition of his effairs, than he used to be, and not
convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty of a prince
does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to place
him in the famine, and that he employ as much as the credit of
his most christian majefly may do toward the nobility, and sub-
je&s of that' contry, and as much as may his name, with the nainm
of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he loves and
confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

And that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his eflates,

of his consent, and to all the nobility and principall personages of
the contry, that his most Christian majeftie will continue on hii
part in the most ancient alliance and confederacy, which he hath
had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobi-
lity and contry, with his principall fubjefs, to persevere in th-

famine, in all good understanding and friendship with him; the
which, on his part, he flall do, observing the famine molt in.
violable.

Further his most christian majefly underflanding that the serene

king his good brother was contented with the duke of Lennox,
and his fervife, the said fignieur De la Motte had charged to pray
his serene majesty that he might remain beside him to his con-
tentment, believing that he should more willing ihtertain the
points of love and confedrace, betwixt their majestys and their
contrys, because he was a good fubje& to them both; and if he
might not remain, without some alteration of the tranquility of
his eflate, that he might retire him to his own house in the said
eontry, in furenes, or if he pleased to return to France that he
might fuerly--and if if pleases his serene majesty, to cause cease
and flay the impeachments, that are made of new upon the fron,
tiers, to the effef that the natural Frenchmen may enter as free-
ly into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

And that there may be no purpose of diffamation,'or no speech

but honourable of the most Christian king, in that contry, but
such like as is spoken most honourably of the serene king of Scot-
land in France.

He had another head to propone, which he concealed till a lit-

tle before his departure, to wit, that the queen, the king's mo-
ther, was content to receive her son in association of the kingdom,

No. IX. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 4-)

Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the i4th of

AugufJ, 1584, from Berwick.

SIR,

ACCORDING to my former letters, touching my meeting with the Calderw.
earle of Arran upon Wedinfday lait, there came hither to me from M- s flito-
the earle, the justice clerk, and fir William Stuart, captain of

. 374-.

Dumbarton, both of the king's privie council, to treat with me
about the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to appoint
the hour, and the number we fliould meet withal; so as we con-
cluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and
the number with ourselves to.be 13 of a fide; and the reft of our
troops to fland each of them a mile from the toun i the one on the
one fide, the other on the other fide, so as our troops were two
miles asunder; I was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with
footmen, where I had 1oo fliot on horse, but they were very near

0oo horse well appointed: According to which appointment, vwe

met yesterday, and after some congratulations, the earle fell in
the like proteflations of his good-will and readiness to serve the
queen's majesty, before any prince in the world, next his fove.
reign, as he has done heretofore by his letters, and rather more
with such earnest vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her
majefly may dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him, and
so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge
the king or him with any unkind dealing toward her majefly, ac-
cording to my inftru&ions, which without any delay he answered
presently, as ye (hall perceive by the said answers, sent herewith;
but I replying unto him, he amplified them with many moe cir-
cumftances, but to this effedt. Then I dealt with him touching
the point of her majefty's fatisfa&ion, for the uttering such prac.
tices as has been lately set on foot for the difquicting of her ma.
jefty and her efiate, who thereof made sundry discourses, what
marriages have been offered to his majesty by fundrie princes, and
by what means the earle has fought to divert them, and for what
causes; the one, for that be marriage with Spain or France, he
must also alter his religion, which as he is sure the king will never
doe, so will he never fuffer him to hearken unto it, so long as he
has any credit with him; he denys not but the king has been
dealt withal be praaices to deal against her majesty, which he has
so far denied and refused to enter into, as they have left dealing
therein, but whatsoever the king or he knoweth therein there
thall be nothing hidden from her majefly, as her majesty shall
know very shortly; surely it seems by his speeches, that if the
king would have yielded thereunto there had been no small com-
pany of French in Scotland ere now to disquiet her majefly.-
This being ended, I dealt with him earneflly for the flay of this
parliament,, which now approacheth; or at the least that there
may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice of these noblemen
and others now in England, for the forfaulting of their livings and
goods, hereupon he made a long discourse to me, first of the earle
of Angus dealing about the earle of Morton, then of his going
out, notwithrianding of fundrie gracious offers the king had made
him, then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they
had the King's majefly in their hands, they imprisoned himself,
dealt with the king for putting of the duke out of the realm, the
king refused so to do, they told him plainly that if he would not
he should have the earle of Arran's head in a dish; the king ask-
ed what offence the earle had made ? and they answered it must
be so, and should be so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran';

life, the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet Arran
afterwards fundrie times in danger of his life; I alledged unto him
the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and his ads in council,
that they had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good
liking and contentment, who answered me he durst do no other-
wife, nor could not do any thing but that which pleased them, with
such a number of other their dealings with the king whileft he was
in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if they
were true I lfaid the king might have let the queen's majeflty's
ambassador have known his mind secretly, and her majesty would
have relieved him; he answered that the king was not ignorant
that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's
pracfice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him, and yet
the king was content, and did give remission to as many, as would
acknowledge their faults, and aik remission, and such as would
not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further loyalty, in which
time they conspired the king's second apprehension, and the kil-
ling of the earle, and others, and seduced the ministers to their
faction, and yet not satisfied with these conspiracies and treason-
able dealings, (as he terms them) are entered into a third, being
in England under her majefty's protecfion, to dishonour her ma-
jefty as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring of them; I wrote
to yow what the conspiracy was, the taking of the king, the kil-
ling of the earle of Arran, and some others, the taking of the
castle of Edinr, and bringing home the earles, to take the charge
of the king; all which (says he) is by Drummond confeffed, and
by the provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
flable of the castle thereupon fled; the earle brought Drummond
with him as far as Langton, where he lay to have confeffed the
conspiracy before me, but having, at his lighting, received a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further, I re-
plyed that I thought verily they would not work any such prac-
tices, in refpeLt of the queen's majesty, abiding within her realme,
and if there be any such pra&tices, they have proceeded from o-
thers, and they not privie unto them; and that if it be not ap-
parently proved against them, that it will be thought to be some
praaice to aggravate the fault, and to make them the more odi-
ous to the king. He answered me, that it should be proved so
fufficiently, that they ihould not be able, with truth, to deny it,
for their own hands is to be fliowed to part of it, and therefore
concluded, that if her majefly ihould so press the king for them

at this time, that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty,
nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides he as-
sured me, that if he would, he dare not, this last matter being
fallen out as it is; and fuerly if this matter had not fallen out, I
would not havw doubted the restoring of the earle of Marr very
fliortly, if her majesty would have, employed me therein, but fur
the earl of Argus, I pere've the kliiig is perfauded that both he,
and the reft of the Douglaffes) have conceived so mortall an hat-
red against him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the earl
of Morton, as if they were at home, tomorrow next, they would
not leave to praclice and conspire the death of them both, and
therefore a hard matter to do any thing for him: finally, he con-
cluded and required me to assure her majefly from the king, that
there shall nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone
that may fatisfie her majesty with reason, and that the king shall
never do any thing, nor consent to have any thing done in her
prejudice, so long as he had any credit with him, or authority
under him. Having this far proceedpd, he desired to show me
his commission, which is under the great feal, to himself only,
which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie coun-
cel there with him, but not one in commilflion, nor present, nor
near us all this time; having spent almofL five hours in these mat.
ters ; he presented to me the Mafler of Gray, who delivered to
me a letter from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive
the king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore requires a
safe condua for his paiTage, which I pray yow procure, and so
fend it so soon as you may; I let him underfland of the lord Sea-
ton's negotiation with the French king. He swore to me, that
Seaton was but a knave, and that it was partly against his will,
that he thould be sent thither. But his commission and infiruc-.
tion being of no great importance, lie yielded the sooner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his inftrudions, which Arran drew him-
self, he will make Seton smart for it. Touching William New-
gate, and Maik Golgan, he protested he never heard of any such;
he says there was a little poor foul, with a black beard, come
thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Desmond, to whom
he gave a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots
man going into Ireland, he says ther_4s no such matter; if there
be, there may be some few rafkels tift he knows not of; and
touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he says it is
but the slanderous devise of the king's enemy's, and such as would

lave the world believe the king were ready to revolt in religion,
who the world (hall well fee will continue as conflant therein, as
what prince soever profeffed it most and the earle himself dos
protest to me, that, to his knowledge he never saw a jesuit in his
life, and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they should
not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if
they preach such do&rine as they did in Scotland; and touching
one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from Mr. Col-
vil, the earle avows constantly that he knows not, nor hath not
heard of any such man, but he would inquire at the justice clerk,
and would inform me what he could learn of that ; thus I have
made yow as short a discourse as I can of so many matters, so long
discoursed upon, but these are the principal points of all our talk,
so near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to
;)e Almighty. At Berwick, the x4th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majefly's pleasure,

,Arran's answers to the grieffs or articles proponed to

the lord Hunfdane, set down in another form.

As to the strait and severe persecution of all such, as have been
noted to have been well affeled to the queen's majesty, it cannot
appear they were either for that cause punished, or hardly dealt
with, since his majefly of late has been so careful and diligent to
choice out good instruments to deal betwixt her majesty and him,
as his majesty has done in electing of your lordship and me ; be-
sides that in all their accusations, their good will and affedlion
born to her majesty was, at no time, laid to their charge, but ca-
pital acions of treason many way tried now be the whole three
eflates, and more than manifest to the world,

As for his majesty inhibiting, be publick proclamation, such as

were banished, not to repair in England; the bruits and whisper-
ings that came to his majefty's ears, of their conspiracies, and
treafons, which since fyh they accomplished, so far as in them lay,
moved his majefly to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near
his majefly's realm, least they should have atempted these things,
which fliortly they did atempt, being farther off, and more distant
both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majefly fugative,

and not delivering them according to his promise, as your lordlliip
propones, his majefly would be most glad that so it might fall out
by your lordfhips traviles, that no fugitive of either realme (hould
be received of either, and when so (hall be, it (hall not fail on hbi
maajefty's part, albeit in very deed this time by gone his majefly
has been confirained to receipt her majefty's mean rebells and fu.
gitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majefCy hath receipt,
in effedt, the whole and greatest rebells and traitors his majeldy
in his own blood ever had ; as for the agreement with his majetly's
.mother anent their association, his majefly has commanded me, ia
presence of your lordfhip's servant, to assure her majefly and your
lordlhip, in his majefty's name, that it is altogether false, and a4
untrlth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your lordship,

that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty has, by any means
direst or indired, sent any message to the pope, or received any
from him; or that his majefly has dealt with Spain or any so-
reigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his majefly could
have no honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majefty's mini-

fiers, sent unto his majefly, his majesty used none of them so; and
if his majefly had, fufficient cause was given by them, as some of
their own writs do yet teflify; as I more particularly fhewed you~
lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Book VII. Vol. IT. p. 12.)

Letter of Mary to 4. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,

Cott Lib. M'ASSEURANT que vous avez eu communication d' une lettre do
Col.B.VIII.
Fol. 147.An Gray que voltre homme Semer me livra hier foubz le nom de
Original. mon filz y recongnoiffant quasi de mot a mot les mefmes iaifons

que le dit Gray m'elcrivit en chifre eflant dernierenient pres de
vous defmontrant la fuffifance &- bonne intention du personage je
vous prieray feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant
infltantement importune que vous me permettiez defclaircir libre-
ment & ouvertement ce point de l'affociation d' entre moy & mon
filz & me deflier les mains pour proceder avec lui comme je juge,
ray efire requis pour son bien & le mein. Et j'entreprerdz quoy

que Pon vous die & puiife en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit
brouillon qui perfnad8 par aucuns de vos minifires a entrepris
cette separation entre moy & man enfant, & pour y commencer
je vous fupplie m'o&royer que je puiffe parler a ce justice clerk
qui vous a este nouvellement envoy6 pour mander par luy a mon
filz mon intention fur cela, ce que je me promis que ne me refu-
ferez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demonfirer en effe& la bonne
intention que vous m'avez afleur~e avoir a Paecord & entretient
de natural devoir entre la mere & I'enfant qui dit en bonnes ter-

mes eftre empefche pour vous me tenant captive en un desert ce
que vous ne pourrez mieux defmentir & faire paroitre voflre bon
defir a notre union que tne donnant les moyens d 'y proceder, &
non m' en retenir & empcfcher comme aucune e vos. miniilres
pretendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiftres
praftiques entre nous, La lettre porte que l'affociation n'eft pas
pass6e, auflli ne luy al-je jamals dit, blenque mon filz avoit accep-
t & que nous en aviouns convenu ensemble, comme l'ace sign6
de fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, que en France en font soy,
ayant donne ce meme temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs
ambaffadeuri & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne 1'ofer faire
publiet par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour vous
refifer d'ayant de fe declarer si ouverterment eflant journellement
persuade au contraire par vos miniftres qui luy prometoyent avec-
que une entreire a Yorck le faire declarer votre heretier. Au
surplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de
s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je
ne puis penfer que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretient6 le vouliffiez en cela applaudir ou meintenir pour luy
fayre acquerir ma maledidfion, ains que plutos introviendrez pour
lay faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & evidant devant Dieu
& les hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays
donner avec droit ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du
tout commife a vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne
en foye pis qu' aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale
defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus
grande affliaion qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon
fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas qu'il perfifle en cette
ni'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que de luy ou de moy il vous plaift
advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves a-
greable de pourfuivre avec moy a part la trait6 commence6 entre
nous de quoy je vous requires fans plus attendre de refponce de
Ce mal gouverne enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' affeftion

Sh ij

tection me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il
vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemys & diffimulez arys,
commeje le desire de me consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui
pourchafflent un tel malheur entre la mere & l'enfant. Je ceffe.
ray de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive
quelqu, consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le sup-
plie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Voftre fidelement voue6 fcur

& obeiffante coufine,

A la reyrie d'Angleterre

madame ma bonne faeur & MARIE Q
coufine.

No. XI. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 12.)

A Teflament by t. Mary.

Cott. Libr. N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Mr
Vefpas. I.
16. p. i45. Crawford late regius profeffor of church history in the uni-

verfity of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, according to him,
is written by Nau6 Mary's secretary, the reft with the
queen's own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's
hand.

CONSIDERANT par ma condition prefente 1'eftat de vie humaine, si
incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt affeurer, finnon
foubs la grande et infinie misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant
prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pour-
roient inopinement furvenir en cette captivit6, mefmes a cause des
grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete6 detenu6 jufques a pre.
sent; j'ay advif6 tandis qui j'ay la commodite, ou raison en juge-
ment, de pourvoir apresma la falut de mon ame, enterrement de
mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat, & affaires, par ce
present mon testament et ordonnance de mon dernier volont6, qui
s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit. Premiere-

ment, me recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec plus d'offences
envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfaafion par toutes les adverfites que
j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa bont6. Et m'appuyant fur la
eroix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recom-

eende inon ame a la benoifte et individue Trinit6, et aux priereg
de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges fain&s and fainc-
tes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et interceflion, eftre ayde6
aobtenir de efIre faide participante avec eulx de felicit6 eternelle.
Et pour m'y acheminer de cucur plus net et entier, defpouillant
desa prdfent tout refentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et
aultries offenfes, qui tue pourroint avoir eft6 fai&es durant ma
Yie, par mues fubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis) J'en retriet la.
vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affec-
tion, que je luy requiers pardon ames faultes, et a tous ceuls et
celles pue je puis avoir offenfe de fai&s ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs con-
ain direElions concerning the place and circuna/ance of her burial.]
Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de
I' Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la quelle je veulx
vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe mon filz y peuft etre reduiet
contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres grand re-
gret en 1'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe feul er
unique heritier de mon royaume d'Efcoife, de droift que je pre-
tende juftement en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays que en de-
pendent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et im-
meubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de ce present
teflament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie,
Je cede, tranfporte, et fai&e don " de touts et chacuns mes
" droids, que je pretende et puis pretendre a la couronne d'Ang-
" leterre, et aultres droiqs, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en depen-
" dantz, au roy catholique, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira,
" avefques advis, confentment de fa faintet6; tant pour le vouyr
" aujourdhuy le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique que
" pour reconoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens

" recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma plus grande
" neceffit6; et refguard auffi an droid que luy mefme peut pre-
" tendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays, je le fupplie qu'en recom-
" pence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si il ce
" pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de la race de laquelle je
" fuis sortie au cofte de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere,
" que mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours
" voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de l'accepter, ou
" faillant une de fes niepces marie6 comme fa fille.
." Je layffe mon filz a la protedion du roy, de prince, et ducs
" de Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, aux puelz je recom-

" mende et son eflat en Efcoffe, et mon droi; en Angleterre,
" si il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefie royne."

Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tena

pas feu son pere, et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier
et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en ceft en roit a mon volonth.

Je veulx'et ordonne toutes les fommes et deniers, qui fe trove.

ront par moy deues, tien mis cause de doi& eftre faits " a Lobli.
ven" ette promptement pay6s et acquitt6s, et tout tort et griefs
repares par lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la conscience,
Oultre, &c. [Follow two or three paragraphs concerning parti-
cular legacys, and then is added] Faiat au manoir de Sheffield en
Angleterre le jour de- Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

.After a H!ank page follows in the queen's hand.

" Si mon filz -meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamil.

" ton lequel fe mantreia le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus constant
",en religion, -au jugement de .Dues de Lorraine et de
" Guyfe, ouje le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay
" la charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condi.
" tion de fe marrier ou allier en la dite mayfon ou par feur
f advis."

.

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" Et le, remets ma tante de Lenox au droid quelle peut pre-

" tendre a la contc d' Angous avant l'acort fait par mon com-
" mandment entre ma dite tante de Lenox et Ie comte de Mor-

ton, veu quil a efIt fait & par le feu roy mon Mary. et moy,

' fur la promeffe de fa fidelle affiflaiiee, si luy et moy encourions
*' dangler et befoing d'ayde, ie qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecrete'
'. ment au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu' attemtprient contre fa vie,
" et pour ceft asset pris les armes, et ont port6 les bannieres def.
" ploicis, contre nous, je revoque auffi toute autre don que je
"luy ay fait de cont6 de Morton fur promeffes de fes bons ser.
" vices a advenir, et entends que la dite Conte foit reunie a la
" couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes trahifons tant
" en la mort'de maon feu MIary, que en mon baniffement, et
, pourfuit de la mienne Pont merite. Et defends a mon filz de
' fc jamays fervire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a
' fes parents, la quelle je crains ne s'eflende jufques a luy, Ie

connoincL:,t da tout affe&ionn6 aux ennemis de mon droite en

" ce loyaume, du quel il eft penconnaire.

V< Je recommende rnon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et
" luy commande detenir pres de luy layffe le bien du conte do
; Boduel son oncle, en refpe6t qui'l eft de mon fang, mon filleul,
o et ma eit6 laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

" Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abb6 de St. Croix
4' na'en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le ne fut jamays
*' mon intention, comme it apret par la revocation que j'ay fayte
*' depuis, et eti aoufi faite d'avant la afge de xxv. ans, ce que
' j'aimois deliberer si it ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe do
" defayre aulx eftats je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reune a la
" couronne comme une de plus neceffaires, pour mon filz, et fans
4' la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Les filles de Morra ne parvient accefli hieriter, ains revient
' la cont6 a la Conronne, si il luy pleft luy donner f4 ot
f' lle en maariafge, Ct it nome I'en fienne ligne."

No. XII. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 19.)

A Letter from MJr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of

Scots,

PLEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the date the 12th April.-
of Novr, and in like manner has seen some part of the contents Harl. Lib,

37. B. 9. so,

of one other of the fame date, diredted to Monfr. de Movifir, i26.
ambassador for his majesty the motl Chrillian king, both which
are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your high-
ness desires to know the true cause of my baniftiment, and offers
unto me all favour if I shall be innocent of the heinous fa&s com-
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so by the
other the said ambassador is willet to declare unto me, if your
hufband's murder could be laid justly against me, that you could
not follicit in my cause, neither yet for any person that was par-
ticipant of that execrable fad, but would seek the revenge there-
of, when you flhould have any means to do it; your majeflty's of-
ser, if I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable, and your
desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable ; and
therefore that I should with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth
answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that your prince-
ly dignity may be my help, if my innocence shall fufficiently
appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any
matter, except in the knowledge of the evil disposed minds of
the most part of your nobility against your said husband, and not
revealing of it, which I am alTured was fuiciently known to

himself, and to all that had judgment never so little in that re.
alm ; which also I was confirained to underfland, as he, that was
specially employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
of your nobility, that they might with all humility intercede at
your majefty's hand for his relief, in such matters as are more
specially contained in the declaration following, which I am con.
firained for my own justification, by this letter to call to your
majefty's remembrance. Notwithstanding that I am assured to
my grief, the reading thereof will not finally offend your prince.
ly mind. It may please your majesty to remember, that in the
year of God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majefly, and ba.
nithed your realm for insolent murder committed in your majef.
ty's own chamber, which they alledged was done by command
of your husband, who notwithstanding affirmed that he was com-
pelled by them to subscribe the warrant given for that effea,
howsoever the truth of that matter remains amongst them; it ap.
pertains not to me at this time to be curious; true it is that I
-was one of that number, that heavily offended against your ma.
jeflly, and passed in France the time of our banishment, at the
desire of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chris.
tian king, to interceed that our offences might'be pardoned,
and your majefty's clemency extended towards us, albeit divers
of no small reputation, in that realm, was of the opinion, that
the said fad merited neither to be requisite for, nor yet pardon-
ed. Always such was the careful mind of his majesty towards
the quietness of that realm, that the dealing in that cause was
committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was direced at that time
to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your
son, whom Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve
in happy eflate and perpetual felicity ; the careful travel of
the said de Movifir was so effe&ual, and your majefty's mind
to inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Murray,
Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and fecretY Ledington, in the name
and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Linfay, and re-
manent complefis, that they might make offer in the names of the
said earl, of any matter that might satisfy your majefty's wrath,
and procure your clemency to be extended in their favours; at
my coming to them, after I had opened the effe& of my message,
they declared that the marriage betwixt you and your hulband
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm, and if

your, huiland should be fuffered to follow the appetite and mind
of such as was about him, that kind of dealing might produce
vith time worse effets ; for helping of such inconvenience that
might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it con-
venient to join themselves in league and band with some other
noblemen, resolved to. obey your majefly as their natural fove-
reign, and have nothing to do with your huiband's command
whatsoever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to humbly
request and travel by all means with your majesty for his pardon,
but before they could any farther proceed, they desired to know
the laid earl's mind herein; when I had answered that he nor
his friends, at my departure, could not know that any such like
itatter would be proponit, and therefore was riot infiruaed what
to answer therein, they desired that I should return fufficiently
inflru&ed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptifin, of your
fan, whom God might preserve ; this message was faithfully de-
livered by me at Newcastle in England, where the said earl then
remained, in pirefence of his friends and company, where they
all condefcended to have no farther dealing with your huIband,
Wnd to enter into the laid band. With this deliberation I re-
turned to Sterling, where at the request of the Most Christian
king and the queen's majesty of England by their ambassadors
present, your majefty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condition always that they ihould remain banished
forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther during
your majefty's pleasure, which limitation was after mitigated
at the humble request of your own nobility, so that immedi-
ately after the said earl of Morton repaired into Scotland to Quhit-
tingaime,, where the earl Bodvell and secretary Ledington come
to him; what speech passed there amongst them, as God fliall be
my judge, I knew nothing at that time, but at their departure I
was requefled by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl Bod-
tell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such afifwer
as they flould obtain of your majefly, which being given to me by
the said persons, as God shall be my judge, was no other than these
words," Schawtothe earl Morton that the queen willhear no speech
" of that matter appointed unto him;" when I crafit that the an-
fwer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington said, that
the earl would fufficiently understand it, albeit few or none at
that time understand what passed amongit them. It is known to
all men, als veill be railling letters past betwixt the said earl and

Volume II. li

Lidington when they become in divers faEtions, as also ane buck
sett fartht by the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of
Morton has confeffed to them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling away off the
king your husband, to the which proposition the said earl of Mor-
ton affirms that he could give no answer unto such time he might
know your majefty's mind therein, which he never received. As
to the abominable murder, it is known too by the depositions of
many persons that were executed to the death for the committing
thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and at the com-
mand of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for that effeft
by this unplcafant declaration, the most part thereof known to
yourself, and the remainder may be underflood by the aforesaid
witnesses that was examined in torture, and that are extant in the
custody of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency so far
as may concern any fadt does appear fufficiently to your majesty.
And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged
therein, but as what would accuse the vessel that preserves the
vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such as immoderately
nfe the fame. As for the special cause of my banishment, I think
the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was
able to accuse the earl of Morton of so much matter as they al-
ledge himrelf to have confeffed before he died, and would not be
induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part thereof. If
this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what puniflh.
ment I should deserve I remit me to your roajefly's better judg.
ment, who well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman should be
6f his fame, reputation, and honour, and how far ever ilk man
ihould abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would have
been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin,
notwithstanding all the injuries I was confirained to receive at his
hand all the time of his government, and for no other cause, but
for lhewing of particular friendship to particular friends in the time
of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff,
be such kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always
for my own part I have been banished my native country those
three years and four months, living in anxiety of mind, my holl
guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and difponit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my
last troubles at the desire of Monfr. de Movifir, attended to know
your majefty's pleasure, and to await upon what service it hould

please your majesty for to command. Upon the 8th of April
your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I flhould retire myself
where I pleased, I declared unto him I had no means whereby I
might perform that desire, until such time as 1 fliould receive it
from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to direc6 me, until such time as I fliould have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by
perrmifion, I have taken the hardrefs to write this present letter,
whereby your majesty may understand any part of my troubles
past, and strait present. As to my intention future, I will never
deny that I am fully resolved to spend the rell of my days in your
majefly's service, and the king your fon's, wheresoever I fliall be
direfted by your majesty, and for the better performing thereof,
if so shall be your majetty's pleasure, to recommend the tryal of
my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding nar-
ration, to the king your son, with request that I may be pardoned
for such offences as concerned your majefty's service, and var com-
mon to all men the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except
to me, I thould be the bearer thereof myself, and be direted in
whatsoever service it thould please your majefly for to command.
Molt humble I beseech your majefly to confider hereof, and to be
so gracious as to give order, that I may have means to serve your
majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning, and so expet-
ing your majelty's answer, after the killing your hand with all
humility, I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 32.)

Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald DcuzLs'

his ambafrtdor in England, October, 1586.

RESERVE up yourself na langer in the earnest dealing for my mo- Cott Lib.
ther, for ye have done it too long; and think not that any ycur Cn. ria
travellis can do goode if hir lyse be takin, for then adeu with my al in the

t
I I king's

dealing with thaime that are the special infirumentis thaieof: And , d.
theirfore, gif ye looke for the contineuantce of my fav6ur towartis
you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but reade my letter
wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie to the
contentis thairof, and in this requcift let me reap the fruiais of
youre great credit there, ather now or never. Fairwell. Ofto-

ber 1586. Ii ij

Letter to fir William Keith, ambaf ador in England, pro-

bablyfromfecretary Maitland. Nov. 27, 1586.

A copy in By your letter sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no plea-
the colle&.
of fir A. sant fubjef) his majesty conceives well of your earneflnefs and
Dick Vol. fidelity in your negotiations, as also of Mr. Archibald's adivity

and diligience, whom you so greatly praise and recommend. I
wish the issue correspond to his majefty's opinion, your care and
travell, and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes
this rigorous proceeding againif his mother deeply in heart, as
a matter greatly concerning him both in honour and otherwise.
His highnesses acions and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of
that process, and of what moment he esteems it. There is ari
ambaffade shortly to be direfed, wherein will be employed an
earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend the con.
tinuance or dissolution of the amity and good intelligence be-
tween the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther
extremity be used, and his majefly's suit and request disdain.
ed, his highness will think himself diflonoured and contemn.
ed far besides his expe&ation and deserts. Ye may perceive his
nmajefty's disposition by his letter to you, which you thall impart
to Mr. Archibald, and both deal according thereto. I need not
to recommend to you care, concerning your mafter's service both
in weil and in honour. As you and your colleague shall behave
yourself in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your
affedcion to your master. I am glad of that I hear of yourself,
and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Archibald, whose
friends here make great account of his profeffed devotion to the
queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majesty her son.
Farther I am constrained to remit to next occasion, having scarce
time to scribble these few lines (which of themselves may bear
7vitnefs of my haste.) Wishing you a prosperous issue of your
negotiation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Novr. 27th, 1586.

The people, and all estates here are so far moved by the rigor-

ous proceedings against the queen, that his majefly, and all that
have credit are importuned, and may not go abroad for excla-
Inations against them, and imprecations against the queen of Eng-
land.

No. XIV. (BookVII. Vol. II. p. 34.)

To the king's majefly, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

PLEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the date the 28th 16 OL.
of September, the 5th of Oaober, which was the fame day that

From the

I diredced Wm. Murray towards your highness ; by such letters Original ia

the colle&

as he carried, and others of several dates, your majelly may per- of fir A.
ceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach Dick. Vol,
pnto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in
the said letter befor the receipt thereof, which by these presents
I rnufi repeat for answering of the faidis. As to the first, so far
as may concern the interceeding for the queen your majefty's mo-
ther her life, I have divers tinles and in every audience travelled
with this queen in that matter, specially to know what her full
determination must be in that point, and could never bring her
to any further answer, but that this proceeding againfr her by
order ofjuflice was no less against her mind, than against their
will that loved her bell: As towards her life she could give no
answer thereunto, until such time as the law hath declared whether
fie was innocent or guilty. IHerewithall it was her pleasure thus
far to inform me, that it was a number of the affociants that ear,
nefily pressed her that the law might proceed against her, giv-
ing reasons that so long as she was fuffered to deal in matters,
so long would never this realm be in quiet, neither her life,
neither this state in assurance, and in the end they used this pro-
teftation that if the would not in this matter follow their advice,
that they (hould remain without all blame whatsoever ihould fall
out; whereupon Ihe had granted them liberty to proceed, least
such as had made the requell, might hereafter have charged her-
self with inconvenience if any should happen.

And by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both
papist and proteflant has behaved them, as it hath been her plea-
sure to declare, but upon divers refpelfs, the one to avoid fufpi-
cion that otherwise was conceived againfi them, the other upon
zeal and care that they will be known to have for preservation of
their fovereign's life and slate in this perrelous time, upon confi-
deration whereof, I have been constrained to enter into some
dealing with both, wherewith I made *her majesty acquainted i
the proteflants, and such as in other matters will be known to
ear no small favour uuto your maj efty 's service, hath prayed that they

may be excused from any dealing in the contrary of that, which
by their oath they have avowed, and by their speech to their
sovereign requested for, and that before my coming in this
country j if they fihould now otherwise do, it would produce
no better effe& but to make them fubjeat to the accusation of
their sovereign, when it thould please her to do it, of their
inconstancy, in giving councel whereby they might incur the
danger of ill councelirs, and be consequent worthy of punifa.
ment. Such of the papifts, as I did deal with, went immedi-
ately, and told her majefly what I had spoken to them, who
albeit the understood the matter of before, sent for me and
declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to them, will.
ing me for the weil of my maifter's service to abfitain from deal-
ing with such, as were not yet fufficiently moved to think of my
master as the did. I craved leave of her majesty, that I might
inform them of your majefly's late behaviour towards her, and
the state of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave
her consent. At my late departure from court, which was upon
the 5th of this inflant, and the day after that the lords of this
grand jury had taken their leaves of her majesty to go northw'ard
to Fothringhame, it was her pleasure to promise to have further
speech in this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to
'give full answer according to your majefty's contentment to the
remainder matters, that I had proponit in name of your majety.
As to the 2d part concerning the association, and desire that the
promise made to the matier of Gray concerning your majefly's title
may be fulfilled ; it appears by the said letter, that the very
point, whereupon t-e question that may bring your majefty's title
in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said letter
considered, which I take to have proceeded for lack of reading of
the ac& of parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by
the queen to the said master, and nothing may now cause any
doubt to arise against your said title, except that an opinion flhould
be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are so vehe-
ment at this time against the queen your majefly's mother, that
your majefly is, or may be proved hereafter assenting to her pro-
ceedings, and some that loves your majefty's service were of that
opinion that too earnest request might move a ground, whereupon
fuopicions might grow in men so ill affecled in that matter, which
I tho't might be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parlia-
ment of your majefty's innocence at this time, and by reason
that good nature and public honefly would constrain you to in.

tercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
itself, without any further, some suspicion that might move
ill affeted men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly
craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws, might
be moved to advise with the words of the association, and the mi-
tigation contained in the ad of parliament, and withall to advile
what suspicious effe&s your majefty's request might work in there
cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might be best
moved to receive reason ; and upon all these considerations they
might have formed the words of a declarator of your majefty's in-
nocence to be obtained in this parliament, and failing thereof,
the very words of a protestation for the fame effea that might
best serve for your majefty's service, and for my better informa-
tion. Albeit this was my simple opinion, I (hall be contented
to follow any diretion it shall please your majesty to give; I have
already opened the substance hereof to the queen of this realm,
who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty
to deal therein with such of the parliament as rhay remain in any
doubt of" mind. This being the fum of my proceedings in this
matter, besides the remainder, contained in other letters of feve-
ral dates, I am constrained to lay the whole open before your ma-
jefty, and to humbly pray that full information may be sent unto
me what further to do herein, in this midde time, while I fliall
receive more ample direclion I (hall proceed and be doing ac-
cording to such diredion as I have already received. And so,
most gracious sovereign, wishing unto your majesty all happy fuc-
cess in your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London, this
x6th of Oar 1586. Your majefty's most humble fubje& and
obedt servant.

A memorial for his majle/y by the Maflter of Gray.

IT will please your majesty, I have tho't meeter to let down all 1 Jan.

.586.

things as they occur, and all advertisements as they came to my An Origi-

nal in his

ears, then jointly in a lettre. own hand

I came to Vare the 24th of Deer. and sent to nWm. Keith, and in the col.
Mr. Archibald Douglas to 'advertize the queen of it, like as they A. Dick.
did at their audience. She promised the queen your majefly's Vol. A. fol.
mother's life should be spared till we were heard. The 27th, 222'
they came to Vare to me, the which day fir Robt came to Vare,
where they slewed us how far they had already gone in their
negotiation, but for that the discourse of it is set down in our

general letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will teflify unio
your majefly that Win. Keith hath used himself right honeftlyand
justly till our coming, respecting all circumfiances, and chieflyhis
colleague his dealing, which indeed is not better than your ma.
jefly knows already.

The 29th day of Deer. we came to London, where we were

no ways friendly received, nor after the honest fort it has pleased
your majefly use her ambassadors, never man sent to welcome or
convey us. This fame day we underflood of Mr. de Bellievre
his leave taking, and for that the cuflom permitted not we feat
oir excuses by Mr. George Young.

The ift day of Janry, Wrm. Keith and his colleague according

to the cuflomn sent to crave our audience. We received the an.
fiver contained in the general letter, and could not have anfwet
till the 6th day, what was done that day your majesty has it in
the general, yet we was not out of expecdation at that time albeit
we received hard answers.

The 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our

conferrence was, as is set down in the general. I remarked this,
that he that day said plainly the detaining of the queen of Scot.
laud prisoner was for that she pretended a succession to this crown.
Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majesty as ye shall hear
a little after.

The 9th day we speak with the French ambafflador, whom

we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse of all his pro.
ceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thanked him in your majefty's
name, and opened such things as we had to treat with this queen,
save the last point, as more largely set down by our general.

It is tho't here, and some friends of your majefly's advised me,

that Bellievre his negotiation was not effe&ual, and that the refi.
dent was not privy to it, as indeed I think is true, for since Bel.
lievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafteauneuf his servants
taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he was sending
in France, for that they charge him with a conspiracy of late
against the queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has
confeffed the matter, but whom I shall trust I know not, but till
I fee proof I shall account him an honest man, for indeed so he
appears, and one (without doubt) who hath been very inflant in
this matter. I thew him that the queen and earl of Leiceflef
had desired to speak with me in private, and craved his opinion,
he gave it freely that he tho't it meeteft, I shew him the reason

hy I communicate that to him, for that I had been fulpeaed by

mie of her majefty's friends in France to have done evil offices
in her service, that he should be my witncfs that my earnest deal-
ing in this fliould be a fufficient teflimony that all was lye-, and
that this knave Naue who now had betrayed her, had in that
done evil offices ; he desired me, feeing the saw only with other
folks eyes, that I thould no ways impute it to her, for the like
ile had done to himself by Naue his perfuaflon. I answered he
lhould be my witness in that.

The 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got
the loth day; at the first, (he said a thing long looked for should
Ie welcome when it comes, I would now fee your mattler's cicrs.
I answered, no man makes oIlers but for some cause ; Ne would,
and like your majefly, fiil know the cause to be extant for which
we offer, and likewise th.at it be extant till your maje.ly has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not proiil for a. hobor,
bat you think to shift in that fort. I answered we rciid not to
thift, but to offer from our sovereign all things that wi'h reafoa
may be ; and in special, we offered as is set down in our general,
all was refused and tho't nothing. She called on the thiee that
were in the house, the earl of Leicester, my lord admiral, and.
chamberlafn, and very dcfpitefully repeated all our offers in prc-
fence of them all. I opened the late part, and said, Madam, foc
what refpea is it that men deal against your person or estate for
ter cause P She answered, because they think (he (hall succeed to
me, and for that flhe is a papist, appearingly said I both the causes
may be removed, the faid-dfle would be glad to underfland it. If
Madam, laid I, all that (he has of right of fucceflion were in the
king our fovereign's person, were not all hope of papifls removed,
She anfv,,red, I hope so. Then Madam I think the queen his
mother thlali willingly demit all her rights in his perfoa. She
answered the hath no right, for (he is declared unable, Then I
bid, if the have no right, appearingly the hope ceases already, so
that it is not to be feared that any man attempt for her. The
Queen answered, but the papiiLt allow not our declaration ; the.'
let it fall, says I, in the king's person by her aflignation. The
earl of Leicester answered, She is a prisoner, how can thie dcmit.
I answered the demiflion ih to her Ion, by the advice of all tl,,;
friends file has in Europe, and in ,afe, as God forbid, that any
attempt conttit the queen here away, who (hall party with her
to prove the demiflion or assignation to be ineffectual her son being
opposite party and having all the princes her fliends for him, ha%
ag bonded for the efficacy cf it with his majesty of before. ThL

Volume II. E k

queen made as she could not comprehend my meaning, and i
Robt opened the matter again, (he yet made as tho' fhle under.
flood not. So the earl of Leicester answered that our meaning
was, that the king (hould be put in his mother's place. I4 it so,
the queen answered, then I put myself in a worse cafe than of be.
fore ; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own throat, and for
a dutchy, or an earldome to yourself, you or such as you would
cause some of your desperate knaves kill me. No, by God, he
shall never be in that place. I answered he craves nothing of
your majefly but only of his mother. The earl of Leicester an.
fwered that were to make him party to the queen my miftrefi. I
said, he will be far more party, if he be in her place thro'her
death. She would stay no longer, but said (he would not have
a worse in his mother's place. And said, tell your king what
good I have done for him in holding the crown on his head since
he was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now sands
between us, and if he break it shall be a double fault, and with
this minded to have bidden us a farewell ; bat we efcheuit. And
I speak craving of her that her life may be spared for fifteen days:
(he refused. Sir Robt. craved for only eight days, flie said not
for an hour; and so geid her away. Your majesty fees we hav;
delivered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for flhe and
her councel has laid a determination that they mind to follov
forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council than herself, which
I like the worse for without doubt, fir, it shall cut off allfriend.
ship ye had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned
well to your majesty, yet remembring themselves, that they hare
medled with your mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope
great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for.; further
your majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I proponit,
if they had meaned well to your majefly, they had used it other-
wife than they have done, for reason has bound them. But I
dare not write all. I mind something to speak in this matter, be-
cause we look fhurly our letters (hall be troucit by the way.

For that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de.

termination, altho' the queen again and the earl of Leicester has
desired to speak with me in particular ; I mind not to speak, nor
shall not ; but assuredly (hall let all men fee that I in particular
was no ways tyed to Englaqd, but for the refpe& of your majefty's
service. So albeit, at this time, I could not effetuate that I de-
fired, yet my upright dealing in it (hall be manifested to the
w'orld. We are, God willing, then to crave audience where we

Imind to use sharply our infiru&ions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for
yoar majesty, than the French ambassador has said for his master.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in your
service, and not the effe&, for had it been double by any I might
have here had credit, but being I came only for that cause I will
not my credit shall serve here to any further purpose. I pray
God preserve your majesty and fend you a true and sincere friend-
ihip. From London this I2th of Jan. 1586.

I underfland the queen is to fend one of her own to your ma-

jetty.

io the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary

to his majefly, from the mafler of Gray.

Mt lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to his majeftly, 12th Jan.

I j6, an O-

whereby your lordship shall understand how matters goes here. riginal in
And before all things I pray your lordship move his majesty to the eolle&.

of fir A.

refpelf my diligence, and not the effe& in this negotiation, for I Dick. Vol.
foear if it had been for the crown of England to myself I could A. fol. x79.
do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the
world shall fee that I loved England for his majefty's service only.
I look shortly to find your lordship friend as ye made promise,
andby God I shall be to you if I can. Wrm. Keith and I desired, if
matters had gone well, to have run a course that your lordship
might have here been in credit and others disappointed, but now
I will do for you as for myself ; which is to care for no credit
hiere, for in conscience they mean not honestly to the king our
sovereign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is gone
or shortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind of scruple I
pray you to advise him the best is not this way. They fay here,
that it has been said by one who heard it from you, that ye de-
fired not the king and England to agree, because it would rack
the noblemen, and give an example of it by king James the fourt,
I answered in your name that I was assured you never had fpo-
ken it. Mr. Archibald is the speaker of it, who I assure your
lordship has been a poison in this matter, for they lean very
mickle to his opinion. He cares not, he says, for at length the
king will be fain 'to deal this way, either by fair means or ne-
ceflity, so that when he deals this course lie is assured to be wel-
come, to set down all that is past of the like purposes, it would
consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting.

Kk ij

There is a new conspiracy alledp-ed against the queen to hate
been intended, for the French ambassador resident three of hig
men taken, but I think in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr.
Stafford, who is ambassador for this queen in France, is touched
vith it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm
in our negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till this in.
vention was found forth. I remit all other things to the inclosed.
We minded to have sent to his majesty a discourse, which we have
set down of all our proceedings since our hither coming, but we
are surely advertized that the bearer is to be truffant by the way
for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our own coming , this I
have put in a privy part beside the pacqaet. We shall I think
take leave on Fryday the 13th day, where we mind exaaly to
follow the rigour of our inflrufions, for it canrnot fland Wi~th the
king's honour that we fay less than the French ambassador, which
was, le roy mon maiftre ne peult moins faire que fe refentir. So
that about the 24th I think we shall, God willing-, be at home,
except that some flay come which we look not for. The queen
and the earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me. I refu-
fed save in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a determi-
nation which particular credit cannot help, and I crave no credit
but for that cause. It will pleafc your lordship retire the inclof-
ed from his majefly and keep it. So after my service commend-
ed to yourself and bedfellow, I commit you to God. From Lon-
don the

T 2th of Jan. 1586.

To the kin,'s mnjej, frciiifr Robert Melvil.

W.Lt Jan. IT may please your majeftjy, fin'e the direction of our former let-

6485. An

Original in ters, we had audience, and her maiefly appearedtotake our over-
his own tures in gcod part in presence of her council; albeit no offence
I and,inthe
coile& of would take place with them, having taken resolution to proceed
fir A. Dick. with extremity, not the less it pleased her majefly to desire us to
Vol. A. fol.
781. flay for two days on taking our leave, until she had advifcd upon

our prop, fitions; since which time, her majefly is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from Scot-
land, making some hope to believe that your majesty takes not
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in effe6t, and had
of before removed the like opinion out of her majefty's mind,
which by finiftr information was credite.d, their reports has hin-
dered our commission, and abused this queen, fearing in like man-

well enough known to all men how heavily your majefly takes
these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have by this
occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our ne-
gotiation. As also Allynour Stewart is to be directed in their
party, by our knowledge, who has awantyt more of his credit,
than I believe he may perform, and we willed him to desist from
this dealing, saying it does harm, and he is not meet for that pur-
pose, remitting to your majefty's good direclion to take order
herein as we shall be answerable to your majefly not to omit any
point we have in charge, as the truth is, the master of Grhaye
has behaved himself very rightly and difereetly in this charge,
and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who were of before
his friends. We have been behalding to the menftrals who has
born us best company, but has not been troubled with others.
Wylzeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he had in charge.
As for matier Archibald he has promised at all times to do his
dewoyr, wherein he shall find true report made to your majefly,
craving pardon of your majefly that I have been so tedious, after
I have kissed your majefty's hand I humbly take my leave. Pray-
ing God to grant your majefly many good days and happy, in
whose protedtion I commit your majefly at London, the 20th of
Jan. 1586.

SIR
ALBEIT Mailer George has not been in commifion, he is
,ot inferior in his service to any of us, as well by his good ad-
vice and diligent care he takes for the advancement of your ser-
vice, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's mnajefy, from the mafler of Gray and fir

Robert Melvill.

PLEASE it your majefly in the last audience we had, since our last 2ift Jan,

x586. An

advertizeffient, by Wm. Murray, we find her majesty at the re- Original in
fuming our offers something mitigated, and inclined to confider the colle&.

of fir A.

more deeply of them, before we got our leave, at our reasoning, Dick. Vol.
certain of the council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Chriflo- A. fol. i8o.
pher Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart, being pre-
sent in the chamber, gave little share of any great contentment
to have her from her former resolution. now caffin in perplexity

vwhat (he should do, always we left her in that state, and finic
have daily pressed conferrence with the whole council, which to
this hour we have not yet obtained. This day we have sent
down to crave our leave. The greatest hinder which our nego-
tiation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have here that ei-
ther your majesty deals superficially in this matter, or that with
time ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great diffi.
culty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters written
to them of late from Scotland has found some place of credit with
them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special message, they have made choice of fir
Alexander Stewart to try your highnefs's meaning in it, and to
persuade your majesty to like of their proceedings, wherefrom
no terror we can lay out unto him is able to divert him, he has
given out that he has credit with your majesty, and that Ihe doubts
not to help this matter at your highnefs's hand. If he come there
that errand, we think your majesty will not oversee the great
disgrace that his attempts shall give us here, if he be not tane or-
der with before that he be further heard, and if so be that any other
be dire&ed (as our intelligence gives us there shall) our humble
suit is to your majefly, that it may please your highness to hear
of us what we find here, and at what point we leave this matter
with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the causes
whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your ma-
jefty for the present to God's eternal protecion. From London
this 2ift of Jan. 1586.

ADDITIONAL.

A P P E N D I X,

I had no opportunity of feeing several of the following papers, till

thofejheets of the hbjIory, to which they relate, were printed off.
For this reason no references are made to them there; but I have
supplied that defect by marking the particular passages in the hif/q-
ry which they serve to illufirate,

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 253. line 31.]

Account of the fintence of divorce between the earl of

Bothwell and lady Yean Gordon his vise. From a
manuscript belonging to Mr. David Falconar, advo-
cate. Fol. 455-

UPouN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert
Maitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson doaor in the
laws, two of the senators of the college of juflice, Mr. Clement
Little, and Mr. Alexander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edenr ;
compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for Jean Gourdoune
countes of Bothwell, coftlitute be her for purfewing of ane pro-
ces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James erie Bothwell
ter husband for adultery, committed be him with Bessie Craufurde,
the pursuers servant for the time; and ficklyke, for the said erle,
compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who ester he had perfued and cra-
ved the purfuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just
caus to perfew the said aftion, and obtened it, denyd the lybell,
and the said Mr. Harrie took the morne, the last day of Apryle,
to prove the fame pro prima. The quhilk day, having produced
some witnesses, he took the next day, being the I of May, to do
farther diligence. Upon the quhilk I of May, he produced some
moe witnesses, and renounced farther probatioune. After quilk,
he desired a term to be assigned to pronounce sentence. To whom
the said commiffars assigned Setterday next, the 3 of May to pro-
nounce sentence therein, fecundum alligata et probata, quilk ac-
cordingly was given that day in favour of the perfewar.

At the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl

of Bothwell contra his lady,- for to have their marriage declared
pull, as being contra&ed against the canons, without a difpenfa-
tion, he and his lady being within degrees defendand, viz. ferdis
a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a com-
miffioune grantit to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognoce and
determine it, and Rot. bishop of Dunkeld, William bishop of
Dumblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and parson
of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cook
chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderflonne, chanon
in Dunbar and prebendar of Peltoune, or any ane of them. This
commiffione is datit 27 Aprile 1567, was presented to two of the
faids commissioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfuid and Mr. John Man-
derfloune on Secterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson
of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the'erle of Bothwell, who ac-
cepted the delegatioune, and gave out their citation by precept,,
direted. Decano Chriftianitates de Hadingtone, nec non vicano
feu curato eccle. parochiae de Creichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri
capallano debite requifitis, ser summoning at the said erles inflance,
both of the lady personally if flie could be had, or otherwile at the
parofche kqrk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at her dwel.
ling place before witnesses, primo, fecundo, tertio et peremptorie
unico tamen contextu protuplice edido. And likeways to be wit-
neffes in the said matter, Alex. bishop of Galloway, who did mar-
ry the said eile and his lady, in Halyreud-houfe kirk, in Feb. I65,
fir John Bannatyne ofAuchnoulejuftice clerk, Mr. Robert Creich-
toune of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers pro-
voft of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael-- abbot
of Melrofs, and to compear before the faids judges, or any one of
them, in St. Geils kirk in Edenr. on Monday the 5 of May, be
thamfelves, or their procurators. Upon the said 5 day, Mr. John
Manderftoune, one of the juges delegat only being present conm-
peared the fame procurators for both the parties that were in the

Twowords former proces, Mr. Edmond Hay ( erticulatlie )
rentheisp- and some of the witnesses faimmond produced, and received fcr
illegible. proving of the fame. The said procurator renounced farder pro-

batioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the 6th of May, ad
publicandum produaca, nempe depofitiones ipforum teftium. The
quhilk day, post publicatas depofitiones praedidcas, Mr. Hen.
Kinroffe, procurator for the lady inflanter objecit objectiones jo-
ris generaliter, contra pro dua&, infuper renunciavit- ulte~iort
defenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hiEc ino

taufa, judex proedilus flatuit craftinum diem pro termina, ad pr6o-
nunciandam fuam fententiam definituram, ex deduafis coram eo,
in prMfenti caufa et proceffa. Conform hereunto, on Wednesday
the 7th of May, the said judge gave out his sentence in favors of
the erle, declaring the marriage to be, and to have been nallfrom
the beginning, in refpeft of their contingence in blood, which
hindered their lawfull marriage without a di(penfation obtained of
befoir.

No. XXXII. (Vol. I. p. 284. line 24.)

S2ueen Mary to jtueen Elizabeth.

MADAM,

ALTaHOUG the neceflity of my cause (which maketh me to be Cott. Lib.
importune to you) do make you to judge that I am out of the Aopy, anC
way ; yet such as have not my pa[lion, nor the refpefts whereof probably a

trantlation,

you are persuaded, will think that I do as my cause doth require.
Madam, I have not accused you, neither in words, nor in thought,
to have used your self evil towards me. And I believe, that you
have no want of good underflanding, to keep you from perfwafion
against your natural good inclination. But, in the mean thue, I
can't chufe (having my senses) but perceive very evil furtherance
in my matters, since my coming hither. I thought that I had
fufficiently difcburfed unto you the difcommodities, which this
delay bringeth unto me. And especially that they think, in this
next month of August, to hold a parliament against me and all
my servants. And in the mean time, I am flayed here, and yet
will you, that I should put myself forther into your country,
(without feeing you) and remove me further from mine ; and
there to me this dishonour, at the requests of my rebels, as to fend
commissioners to hear them against me, as you wold do to a mere
fubjef, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have
promised you to come to you, and having there made my moan
and complaint of these rebels, and they coming thither, not as
poffeffors, but as fubjea.s, to answer. I would have besought you
to hear my juflification of that, which they have falfly set furth
against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof, you might
then discharge your hands of my causes, and let me go for such
as I am. But to do as you fay, if I were culpable I would be
better advis'd ; but being not so, I can't accept this difhon-
bur at their hands, that being in. poffeffion they will come and
wecufe m'e before your commifflioners, whereof I can't like : And

Volume II. LI

feeing you think it to be againfl your honour and confignage to
do otherwise, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy5
untill you may fee how I can discharge myself every way. And
to fuffer me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain
me ; or at the least to go into Scotland, with assurance that if
there come any firangers thither, I will bind myself for their re-
turn without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do
thus, I protest that I will not impute it to falfhood, if I receive
strangers in my country, without making you any other discharge
for it. Do with my body as you will, the honour or blame (hall
be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my faithful ser.
yants may be fnccoured (tho' you wou'd not so) by firangers,
than to fuffer them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive,
in time to come, particular commodity. There be many things
to move me to fear that I fliall have to do, in this country, with
others, than with you. But forasmuch as, nothing hath followed
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I

have as lees to eidre f my fortune, as to seek it, and not find
it. Further, it pleased you to give licence to my fubjeas to go
and come. This hath been refused by my lord Scroop and Mr.
Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, because I would not
depart hence to your charge, until I had answer of this letter,
tho' I fhewed them that you required my answer, upon the two
points, contained in your letter.

The one is to let you briefly underhfand, I am come to you to

make my moan to you, the which being heard, I would declare
unto you mine innocency, and then require your aid, and for lack
thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to God, that
I am not heard in my just quarrell, and to appeal to other princes
to have refpea thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, ma-
dam, first of all, when you flhall have examined your confeience
before him, and have him for witnefs.-And the other, which is
to come further into your country, and not to come to your pre-
fence, I will esteem that as no favour, but will take it for the
contrary, obeying it as a thing forced. In the mean time, I be-
feech you, to return to me my lord Herries, for I can't be with-
out him, having none of my counfal here, and also to fuffer me, if
it please you, without further delay, to depart hence whithersoever
it be out of this country. I am sure you will not deny me this
simple request, for your honour's fake, feeing it doth not please
you to use your natural goodness towards me otherwise, and fee-

Ing that of mine own accord, I am come hither, let me depart
again, with yours. And if God permit my causes to succeed
well, I shall be bound to you for it; and happening otherwise,
yet I can't blame you. As for my lord Fleeming, feeing that
upon my credit you have fuffered him to go home to his house, I
warrant you he (hall pass no further, but shall return when it (hall
please you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) de-
ceive you. But from Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Perhaps
Fleeming (hall be in the Tower. For they which are within it, for.
will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't assure them of
yours; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them
in charge, to have more refpea to my servants and to my eflate,
than to my life. Good fifler, be of another mind, win the heart,
and all fliall be yours, and at your commandment. I thought to
satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the
serpent, that floppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your
filler and natural cousin. IfCaefar had not difdained to hear or read
the complaint of an advertiser, he had not so died ; why liould
princes ears be flopped, feeing tiat they are painted so long ?
Meaning, that they should hear all and be well advised, before
they answer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and less of
the chameleon, to turi you to my likeness, and tho' I fhou'd be
so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you are fufficiently arm'd
with contlancy and with justice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to use it well with long and happy life. Fromi
Carlile, the 5th of July, i568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 85. line 35.)

A Letterfrom my lordHerries to my lord Scroop and fir

F. Knollis, September 3d, 1568.

My lords, pleafit your honourable lordfliips, I am informit by Cott. Li .
James Borthwick, lately come from the queen's majefly your

- Cal. C. an

Original in

verane, that it is fchawin to her highness, I fuld have ridden in his own
Crawfurdmure, fen my last cuniing into this realm, upon the earl hand.
of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld have caufit, or been of
counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpul-
zie her majefty's fubjeas.

My lords, I thought it right needful becaiufe your lordfhips is;

be your foverane, commanded to attend upon the queen's majefly
my mistress, so having daily access in thir matters, to declare uponr

Ll ij

the truth; hurmbly desiring that your lordfliips will, for Godh
cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife has had

knowledge of ony Scottifman's rydihg in England, to do the sub-
jeds thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the siege of Leith; and
as I understand it shall be fund true, that gif ony sic open hurt be
done, it is by the queen my fovereign's difohedients, and that Ihave
not ridden nor hurt no Scottifhman, nor commanded any hurt to
be done to them, fen my coming from the queen's majefly of
England, it is well kend, for that never ane will complain of me.

I have done more good to Crawfurdmure, nor ever the earl of

Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them any harm, than
he will. Except the queen's majesty your sovereign, command
sic false reports to be tryit, quhereof this is altogidder an inventit
leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men
here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that baithwould serve hir,
and may, better than they unworthy liars.

My lords, I understand the queen's majesty your sovereign is

not contented of this bruit, that there fiuld ony Frenchman come
in this realm, with the duke of Chattlerault. Truth it is, I am
no manner of way the ccunfall of their cuming, nor has no fie cer-
tainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
majefly your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is
true indeed, her grace self is all the wyitt, and the counfal that
will never let her take order with my mailtrefs cause. For that
our sovereign havand her majefly's promise, be writing, of luff,
friendship, and assistance giff need had so requirit, enterit that
realm, upon the 16 day of May, fen that time the queen's ma.
jefty has commanded me diverse times to declare she would ac-
cept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in peaceable pcs-
felTion of this realme, and when I required of her majesty, in my
maiftrefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her
special trust was (he wold) according to her former promises, or
otherwise gif her counfal wold not consent, (as I flow her grace
I sand diverse repugnant) then that the would permit her to pass
in France, or to some other prince, to feck support, or failing
hereof, (quhilk was agains all reason) that fie wold permit her to
return in her awin countrie, in sic fempil manner as (he came out
of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, of her honour, would not
be refufit, fecand that fle was corned in her realm upon her writ-
ings and promises of friendship. And ficlike, I said to her high-
neis, if roy maiftrefs had the like proraife of her nobility and

Olates, as the had of herself, I should have reprovit them highly,
gif thay had not condefcendit to one of thir three, and so I fay,
and so I write, that in the warld it shall be maift reprehendable,
gif this promise taketh not other good effec, nor yet it does.
Notwithilanding, I get gud answer of thir promises of friendship
made to my sovereign, and to put her grace in this her awia
countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary working by Mr.
Middlemore, dire&it from her highness to flay the army that cuift
down our houses. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pre-
tendit parliament, promised twenty days before the time to myself
to have caused it been difchargit. And yet contrary to this pro-
mise, have they made their pretendit manner of forfaulture of 31
men of guid reputation, biihops, abbottis, and barronis obedient
fubjefs to our sovereign, only for her caule.

They have also difponit, fen our sovereigns cause was taken up.
on hand be the queen's majesty of that realm, an hundred thou-
sAnd pounds Scots worth of her awin true fubjeas geir, under the
color of their law, groundit upon their false, treasonable, flowin,
authority.

The murders, the opprefions, the burnings, the ravishing of
women, the deftruation of policy, both ecclesiastical and tempo-
ral, in this mean time, as in my former writings I said it was la-
mentable to ony christian man to hear of, except God gif grace,
the profeffion of the evangile of Jesus Christ profeflit be your
prince, counfall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld in-
amity that has fiand betwixt the realms, many of my country-
men will doubt in this article, and thir proceedings puttis my
felfin fans Thomas belief.

Now my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realm, upon
quhais promise and honour my maiflrels came there, as I have
said will leave all the French writings, and French phrases of
writings, quhilks amongis them is over meikle on baith the sides
unfit, and plainly, according to the auld true custom of Ingland
and Scotland, quherein be a word promift truth was observed,
promise, in the name of the eternal God, and upon the high ho-
nour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhereof she is defcendit, and presently wears the diadem, that
ihe will put my maiftrefs in her awin country, and cause her as
queen thereof in her authority and firength to be obeyit, and to
do the fame will appoint an certain day within two months, at
the farthest. As we understand this to be our well, fua will we,
or the maiat part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the French-

len, and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore, and
for the true perpetual friendihip of that realm, will condition,
and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God, keep sic heads
and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men can conde.
scend upon, for the weill of this haill island. As I have been part.
lings declaring to the queen your sovereign, quhilk I shew to
your lordihips felfis, both in religion, in the punishment of the
earl Bothwilie, for the queen's last hufband's slaughter, and for
a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amaingis us.

Doubtles, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and

friendful, working, as may gif us occasion baith to forgett Mid-
dlemore, and this late pretendit parliament, we will turn the leaf;
leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where the is, under
the promise -of friendflhip. As I have baith said, and will ever
affirm, made be your sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her
graces coming in that realme, and seek the help and moyen of
French, or Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable and false pre-
tendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

My lords, I desire your lordfhips confider, that it is he, thai

maitd desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to continue;
and of a poor man best cause has, that writes this.

My brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your

lordfhips communing with him, it appearit to him, your mind
was we fhold fuffer the earl of Murray to work, altho' it ware
agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's msje'fty,
and her highness wald fee it reformft. My lords, her majesty
will be over meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have sus-
. tainet already. For I am sure, gif reason and justice may have
place; our maifirefs, and we her fubjeds, have received expref3
wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds sterling, in the
time of this unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa
great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly law
of oblivion in fie matters so meikle pra&is'd, I think nowther for
the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordfhips would fiua mean,
nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give
your sovereign fie advertisement hereof, as your good wifdonm
flall find in this cause meet. It will be true and friendful work-
ing for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases, nor boafling,
and finding little other effef, that will cause us to hold away the
Frenchmen. This, is ilainly written, and I desire your lord-
ships plain answer, for in truth and plainness langeft continues
gud friendship, quhilk.in this matter I pray God may lang con-

tinue, and have your lordihips in his keeping. Off Dumfreis,
the 3d day of September 1568.

Your lordfhips at my power

to command leifully

HERRIS.

jueen Mary to .,. Elizabeth.

AMADAME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, d'une mef- 27 Aug,
me date ; l'une,.ou vous faites mention de l'excufe de Monf'. de Lib. Ca. i
Murra pour tenir son pretendu parlement, qui .me femble bien An OriAilr
froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que je m'efiois perfunde
n'avoir par voftre promefie, quant a n'ofer donner commlffion de
venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblesse alors,
je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatre d'avantage, qui euf.
sent auffi bien dit leur opinion hors de parlement, qui n'a eUfi tenu
tant pour cette effect, mais pour faire ce qu' expreffement nous a-
vions requis eftre empefch6s, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjeds
pour m'avoir eflts fidelles, ce que je m'affurois, jufques a hier, a-
voir eu en promeffe de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup
e Maitre Knoleis vous induire a ire contre culx, voire, a les en-
fayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal pris, j'en fuis plus
parrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur
parole, je 'ay si divulguement affuray que pour vengeance que
j'en defiraffe, ii non rnettre difference entre leur faux deportemens,
et les miens finceres. Dans voftre lettre auffi dat6e du icrme
d'Aouft, vous mettles ces mots. " I think your adverse party,
" upon my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all;
"' and if they do, it shall be only in form of an assembly, to accord
" whom to fend into this realm, and in what fort 5 for otherwise,
" if they lhall proceed in manner of a parliament, with any aa
" of judgement againit any person, I shall not, in any wife, allow
" thereof3 and if they shall be so overseen, then you may think
" the fame to be of no other moment, than the former procedures;
" and by such their rash manner of proceeding, they shall most
" prejudice themselves ; and be assured to find me ready to con-
" demn them, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay contremand6 mes
ferviteurs, les faifant retirer, fouffrant felon voftre commandement
d'etre fauffement nommds traitres, par ceulx, qui le font de vray;
et encore d'etre provoques par efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de
mues gens et lettres, et au contraire vous ctes inform6e que mes

fubje-Is ont evahis les voftres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'eft
pas homme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont efles
mes rebelles depuis le commencement ; enquir6s vous, s'ils n'ef-
toient a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois offri refpondre de fa frontiere,
ce qui me fut refus6, ce qui m'endevroit asses defcharger, nean.
moins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelit6, et de leur falfit6, s'il
vous me fayte donner le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier, je
commanderay mes fubjeas les pourfuivre, ou si vous voules que ce
foit les voftres, les miens leur ayderont; je vous prie m'en man-
der voftre volontd, au rtfie mes fubjeas fidelles feront refponfables
a tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voftres, ni les
rebelles, defpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux
Franqois, j'efcrivis que 1'on m'en fit nulle pourfuite, car j'efperois
tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,-je ne fceu si le dif au-
ra en mes lettres mais, je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fcay
chose du monde de leur venue, que ce que m'en aves manday, ni
n'en ai oui de France mot du monde, et ne le puis croire pour celt
occalion, et si ils si font, c'eft fans mon fceu ni confentement, Pour-
quoy je vous fupplie he me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis
prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mester Knoleis, et vous
assure que voftre amit6, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera rescue avant
toutes les chofes du monde, quant France fervit la pour presser
leur retour a cefte condition, que prenies mes affaires en mein, en
foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma France eft en vous; mais une
chose feule me rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre o-
reille, laquelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes aaionA
vous font defguif6es, et falfement raportees, par quoi il m'eft im
possible de m'afluarer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait
pour deflruire voftre bonne volont6 de moy; par quoy je desire-
rois bien avoir ce bien vous faire entendre ma sincere et bonne
affeaion, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que rues enemis a tort
ne la decolor6. Mabonne foeur, gagnes moy; envoyds moy que-
rir, n'entr6s en jalousie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire
que votre bonne grace; je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui
je me fuis librement defcouvcrte, et apres vous avoir bais6e les
mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en sant6, longue et heureufc
vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques
voftre bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs mentent. Ce :6
4d Aoiaft.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 350. line 25.)

Letter of Waljhingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3- 1580-1" Cott. Lib.

S X Calig. c. 6

I HAve received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter
ps the 25th of the last dire&ed unto his lordship, containing a re-
port of your negotiation with the king and his councill, in your
second audience, wherewith having made her majesty acquainted,
the seemed somewhat to mflike, that you flould so long defer to
dealfor the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made answer in
your behalf, that I thought you were direced by the advice of
the said Empedoclesfriends, in the folliciting of that cause, who
knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal therein, with
most effe&t, and best success, with which answer, her majesty did
in the end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

Your putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won

at her majefty's devotion, was at first interpreted to have been
ironie spoke by you. But since it feemeth you insist upon it, I
could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man, or at least
kept that opinion to yourself, for considering the end and purpose
of his cominginto Scotland, as may be many ways fufficiently prov-
ed, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and reception into
that government, to overthrow religion, and to procure a foreign
match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you
may use to good purpose there, shall partly give you some light;
there is no man here can be persuaded that he will change his
purpose, for so small ad'vantage, as he is likely to find by it, and
therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
firing, as I have already written to you. The prince of Orange
sending, I fear will not be in time that it may do anyigood, for besides
that these people are in themselves flow in their resolutions, their
own affairs are, at present, so great, their state so confused, and
the prince's authority so small, that he cannot so soon take order
in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or
careless in the matter, having more than three weeks past, sent
one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear nothing. The
letters, you desire should be written thither by the French mini-
fiers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I
doubt not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I (hall have

Volume II. IM i

them to fend you by the next. And so I commit you to God.
At Whitehall the third of February 158o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.

This letter is an orginal, and in fomeparts of it wrote in cyphers

and explained by another hand. By Empedocles is underjiaod
-Morton, by Villenarius the king of Scots, D'Aubigney is mar-
ked thus a ' o.

3 Feb. 1580.

Sundty Notes gathered upon good diligence given, and

in time to be better manifested, being now thought meet
to be in convenient fort used, and laid againy' D'Au.
bigny, to prove him abusing the king, the nobility, and
that Jiate.

Cott Lib. FIRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubig,
Calig. C. 6.
An Origin. ny was privy and acquainted with La Naue, the king's mother's
al. secretary, coming into Scotland, and of his errand there, tending

chiefly to perfaade the king, to think and efleem it an evil prefi-
dent for princes, that fubjeds might have power to deprive their
lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by any mean, to defeat him, either of the present government of
that realm, or yet of the poffefflion of the crown and inheritance
thereof, but rather to assure the fame to him; and that for the
accompliihment of that assurance, the king should have been ad-
vised and drawn to have governed, for some fbort time, as prince,
calling D'Aubigny to rule as governor of the prince, by commis.
sion from the queen his mother, until the king's enemies were sup-
pressed; after which time, D'Aubigny should have power given
to establish and reiign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's
voluntary consent, whereby all such, as had before been in aclion
against the queen or her authority, might be brought to fland in
the king's mercy. And for that the king might live in more
surety, D'Aubigny should be declared both second person in fuc-
ceftion of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and
that D'Aubigny, before his departure out of France, receivcd
commiflion from the king's mother to the effets remembered, or
near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference with the
bishops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with Sir James Baford, with
which persons, and with the Duke cf Guise, he had and hath fre-
quent intelligence, and by Sii James BEIford he was advifcd, to

Confer with the Lord John Hamilton before his repair into Scot-
land, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one John
Hamilton to the said Lord John to excuse him in this part, al-
ledging, that he did forbear to come to him, left thereby he thould
marr or hinder greater effeEts to be executed by him in Scotland.

That before his coming into that realm, the nobility and coun-

try were well quieted, and united in good concord, with great
love betwixt the king and nobility, and amongst the noblesse, but
he hath both drawn the king against sundry of the chiefeft of his
nobility, that have been most ready and have expended their
blood and poffeflions to preserve religion, and defend the king's
person, his government and eflate, and also hath given occasions
of great suspicions and offence to be engendered betwixt the king
and his nobility, and especially with such as have been in adion
against the king's mother, and her authority, who by force and
means of the said commission and pracice, should have been
brought into most dangerous condition ; and who also may find
themselves in no small peril, whiles he poffeffes the king's ear,
abufeth his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and
ports of his realm, as he presently enjoyeth. -

That he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great be-

nefits done to him and his realm, by the queen's majesty of Eng-
land, but also to requite the fame with sundry signs of great un-
thankfulness, and wounding therewith the honour of her majefly,
and thereby hath adventured to shake the happy amity long time
continued betwixt those princes.

And whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters

and good offers, to have passed, and been done betwixt them:
In which refpef, the king and council having,refolved to write
to her majefly, for her her highnefs' better fatisfafion in the late
negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had giv-
en order to the king's secretary to frame that letter : He mind-
ing to break the bond of amity in funder, willed the secretary to
be sure that nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby
the king should crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to
cut off all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the declaration
of the said secretary may be better learned, and thereupon further
approved.

That under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's pro-

teflion, Alexander King presumed with that boldness to make
his lewed harangue, and by his means hath hitherto escaped chaf-
tifement and correaion, due for his offence.

IVI m ij

That Sir James Baford, condemnd of the slaughter of the king*

father, hath been called into that realm by Lennox, without the pri-
vity of the king, And whereas the said Sir James found in a
green velvet deik, late the earl of Bothwell's, and saw, and had
in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that mur.
der, and can best declare and witness who were authors and exe-
cutors of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to suppress the truth,
and to accuse such as he himself knoweth to be innocent; and as
by order of law, will be so found, if they may have due trial,
which, contrary to all justice, is by Lennox means denied.

This is the charge againfl D'Aubigny, mentioned in the foregoing

letter by WaIingham; but by Baford they mean Sir James Ba/four.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. 6. line 27.)

The Scottiyh queen's offers upon the effed- of her liberty

propounded by her secretary Naw, November 1584.

Cott. Lib. THE queen my mifirefs being once well assured of your majefly's
Calig. C. 8.
A copy. amity,

I. Will declare openly that (he will (as it is sincerely het

meaning) firaitly to join unto your majesty, and to the fame to
yeild and bear the chief honour and refpeft, before all other
kings and princes in Christendom.

2. She will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere forgetful-

ness of all wrongs which she may pretend to have been done un-
to her in this realm and will never, in any fort or manner what-
soever, shew oitehce for the fame.

3. She will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own parti-

cular name, as also for her heirs and others descending of her for
ever, your majefly for just, true, and lawful queen of England.

4. And consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as for

her said heirs, all rights and pretences which the may claim to the
, rown of England, during your majefty'slife, and other prejudice.

5. She will also revoke all acts and shews, by her heretofore

made, of pretence to this said crown, to the prejudice of your
majesty, as may be the taking of the arms and file of queen of
England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord and
husband.

6. She will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may be

expounded to turn in her favour, and for her behoof, touching
the deprivation of your majesty, and will declare that flie will
never help and serve herself with it.

7. She will riot prosecute, during your majefty's life, by open
force or otherways, any publick declaration of her right in the
fuccellion of this realm, so as secret assurance be given unto her,
or at the least publick promise, that no deciding thereof lihall be
made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, during your
majefly's life, nor after your decease, untill such time as they
have been heard thereupon, in publick, free, and general affem-
bly of the parliament of this said realm.

8. She will not pracife, direcly or indireetly, with any of
lour majefty's fubjefs, neither within nor out of your realm,
any thing tending to war, civil or foreign, against your majefly
and your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for civil and
politick government.

9. She will not maintain or support any of your fubjeas de-
clared rebels, and convi&ed of treason against you.

to. She will enter into the aflociation, which was ihewed her
at Wingfield for the surety of your majefty's life, so as there be
mended or right expricated some clauses, which I will shew to
your majesty, when I shall have the copy thereof, as I have be-
fore time required.

ii. She will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any
war or trouble against this slate, and will renounce, from this
time, all enterprises made or to be made in her favour for that
refpea.

12. Furthermore, this realm being assailed by any civil or so-
reign war, she will take part with your majesty, and will assist
yoa in your defence with all her forces and means, depending of
berfelf, and with all her friends of Christendom.

13. And to that effe&, for the mutual defence and maintain-
ance of your majesty, and the two realms of this isle, the will
enter with your majesty in a league defensive, as shall be more
particularly advised, and will perfwade as much as in her the
king her son to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad
remaining firm, and especially the antient league between France
and Scotland, in that which shall not be against this present.

14. She will enter into a league offenfive, having good affur-
ance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of her right in the
lucceffion of this crown, and promise, that happening any breach
betwixt France and this realm, (which she prayeth God never to
happen) the just value of her dowry shall be placed for her in
lands of the revenue of the crown.

i5. For assurance of her premises and covenants, she doth f.

ser to abide herself in this realm for a certain time, (better had.
age can she not give than her own person) which, so as lhe be
kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in cafe toefcape
secretly out of this country in the sickly slate fthe is in, and with
the good order which your majesty can take therein.

16. And in cafe your majefly do agree to her fall and whole

deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this realm, the
said queen of Scots she will give fufficient hostage for such timn
as will be advised.

17. If flie abide in this realm, the will promise not to depat

out of it without your licence, so as it be promised unto her that
her slate, in such liberty as shall be accorded unto her, fthall not
be in any fort altered, until after tryal to have attempted againi
your life, or other trouble of your eflate.

18. If the go into Scotland, (he will promise to alter nothing

there in the religion which is now used there, she being fuffered
to have free exercile of hers, for her and her boufhold, as it was
at her return out of France; and further, to pull out every root
of new division between the fubje&s that none of the fubjefs of
Scotland shall be sifted for his conscience, nor constrained to g
to the service of the contrary religion.

19. She will grant a general abolition of all offences done a.

gainil her in Scotland, and tLings fliall remain there as they are
at this present, for that refpe&, saving that which hath been done
against her honour, which she meaneth to have revoked and an-
nulled.

20o. She will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation

between the nobility of the country, and to cause to be appointed
about the king her son, and in his council, such as shall be fit for
the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the country, and the
amity of the realm.

21. She will do her best to content your majefly, in the fa-

vour of the Scots lords banilhed, and refuged hither, upon their
due fubmiTlion to their princes, and your majefly's promise to ao-
fill the said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they hap.
pen to fall into their former faults.

22. She will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with

the advice and good counsel of your majefly.

23. As the will pats nothing without the king her son, so doth

flhe desire that he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, for

die greater and perfecter assurance thereof; for otherwise any thing
can hardly be ellablithed to be found and continue.

24, The said Scotch queen trulleth, that the French king her
good brother, according to the good affeftion which he hath al.
rays ihewed her, and hath been afresh testified unto me by
)Ionfr. de Mannifliere for this said treaty, will very willingly
intervene, and will assist her for the surety of her promises.
25. And so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following
the will of the said king, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of Christendom, the will assay
to obtain the like of them, if for greater solemnity and approba.
tion of the treaty it be found to be necessary.

27. She doth desire a speedy answer, and final conclusion of
the pren.iffes, to the end to meet in time with all inconvenien-

cies.

28. And in the mean time, the more to firengthen the said
treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, the defireh that
demonstration be made of some releafement of her captivity.

Objehions again/1 the Scotti/b queen, under secretary

Walfinghame's hand, November 1584.

THE queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill affeaed to her
majesty, and therefore it cannot be but that her liberty should
bring peril unto her majesty.

That her enlargement will give comfort to papifts, and other
ill affeced fubje&s, and greatly advance the opinion had of her
title as facceffor.

That as long as Pfe shall be continued in her majefly's posses-
son, the may serve as it were a gage of her majefly's surety, for
that her friends, for fear of the danger the may be thrown into, in
cafe any thing should be done in her favour, dare not attempt
any thing in the offence of her majeftly.

November What course were fit to be taken with the

1584" queen of Scots, either to be enlarged or

L not.

THE course to be taken with the said queen may be considered of Cott. Lib.
in three degrees ; either, Cal. .

i. To continue her under cuflody in that fate she now is.
2. To restrain her of the present liberty the now hath.

3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
I. Touching the firfi, to continue her under cuflody undertlit

dRate she now is; it is to be considered, that the princes that fa.
,vour that queen, upon the complaint she maketh of hard usage,
are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and promise
to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose, her mi.
nifters follicit them daily.

And to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquainteth

them with her offers made to her majefly, which appeared tobe
no less profitable than reasonable for her majesty, so as the refusal
and rejeaing giveth her friends and favourers cause to think her
hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground
and reason, attempt somewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

It is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding

her cafe desperate, will continue her practice under hand, both
at home and abroad, not only for her delivery, but to attain to
the present poffeffion of this crown upon her pretended title, at
she hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is most manifest by let.
ters and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of
Scotland, which hath proceeded altogether by her diredion,
vvhereby a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majefly's ene.
mies, so as it appeareth that th.s manner of keeping her, with
such number of persons as finhe now hath, and with liberty to write
and receive letters, (being duly considered) is offenfive to the
princes, the said queen's friends rather chargeable, than profit-
able to her majefly 5 and fubjed to all such pra6lices as may peril
her 4majefly's person or state, without any provision for her ma.
jefly's safety, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. Touching the second, to restrain her in a more firaighter

degree of the liberty she hath hitherto enjoyed.

It may, at firfi fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop the

course of the dangerous pracices foflered heretofore by her: For,
true it is, that this remedy might prove very profitable, if the
realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to her majesty, as
few years past it did ; and if the king of that realm were not
likcly, as well for the release of his mother, as for the advance-
ment of both their pretended title, to attempt somewhat againri
this realm and her majefly, wherein he fnhould neither lack so-
reign assistance, nor a party here within this realm : But the king
and that realm flanding affeled as they do, this restraint, inflead
ps remedying, is likely to breed these inconveniencies followinrg,

F'irf, It will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft

,cf the princes her friends that mifliked of her restraint.

Secondly, It will give them just cause to take some way of

redress.

Lastly, It is to be doubted, that it mayprovoke some desperate

ill disposed person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt
somewhat against her majefly's own person, (a matter above all
others to be weighed) which inconveniency being duly confider-
ed, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in a flraighter
degree, is likely to prove a remedy fubjea to very hard events.

The latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen at

liberty, miniftreth some cause of doubt, touching the manner of
the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be performed, whether to
be continued here within the realm, or to be restored into her

own country.

But first, this proposition, before the particularities be weigh-

ed, is to be considered in generality.

For it is very hard for a well affe&ed fubjeta, that tendreth

her majefty's surety, and weigheth either the nature of the Scot-
tifh queen, being inclined to anmbition and revenge, or her former
a&tions, what pra&ices she hath set on foot most dangerous for
her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not
made acquainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make
it less perilous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may,
in some fort, be deviled to prevent both her ambition and malice;
and therefore to make this apparent,

It is to be considered, that the danger that was in the mother,

is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title she
doth: Such as do affect her, both at home and abroad, do affe&
him: (and he is the more dangerous for that he is unmarried,
which may greatly advance his fortune ; and that he is a man,
whereby he may enter into adion in his own person) where lie
is restrained, he is at liberty ; his own realm is now altogether
at his devotion, and the party affected to this crown abased; so
as the matter duly considered, neither her liberty nor restraint
doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majesty, unless
by such promises as may be made by way of treaty with her, the
danger likely to grow from the king her son be provided for.

But in this behalf it may be objeted, that so long as the mo-

Iher remains in her majefty's hands, the ki ig will attempt nothing
for fear of his mother's peril.

Volume II. N n

To this objeaion it may be answered, firfi, That they hope that

her majesty, being a prince of justice, and inclined to mercy, will
not puniih the mother for the fon's offence, unless fl(e thall be
found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily, That men will not
be over-hafty, considering in what predicament the king flandeth
touching his expectation of this crown, to advise any thing that
in time future may be dangerous to the giver of such council as
may reach to his mother's peril.

And lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being strong in

the field through both foreign affiflance, and a party here within
the realm, will appear so weak a remedy, (which may rather ex-
afperate both him, and her party, to proceed with more courage
and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure should be offered
unto her) as they will suppose for the reason above specified, that
no fuach extremity will be used.

It may also be objected, that the fcetting of her at liberty will

greatly encourage the papifts both at home and abroad; but
herein, if the provision be duly considered, that may be made by
parliament both here and there, they flall rather find cause of
discomfort than otherwise.

These two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the

mother appearing most rianifeflly to be seen in the son accom-
panied with more danger, with due consideration had also of such
remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the dangers,
that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of; there will
be good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed be-
nefit than perils.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty shall be perform-

ed ; if it shall be thought meet (lie shall be continued within the
realm with some limitation, especially in that place where the
now refideth, the country round about being so infected in reli-
gion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much in.
crease the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides,
flie flhould have commodity, with much more ease, and speed, to
entertain practices within this realm, than by being in her own
country.

If abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France,

then flall her majefly lose the gages of her safety, then flhall she
be at hand to give advice in furtherance of such pracices, as have
been laid for to flir trouble in this realm, wherein the hath been
a principal party.

For the first, it is answered before, that the refpefl of any perils

that may befal unto her, will in no foit restrain her son. For the
other, if it be considered what harm her advice will work unto
herself, in refpe& of the violation of the treaty, and the provision
that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought, that
(he will then be well advised, before filhe attempt any such matter,
which now she may do without perrill. Besides such princes, as
have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot with hon-
our assist her, wherein the French King will not be found very
forward, who, in moil friendly fort, hath lately rejeaed all such
requests, propounded either by her, or her fon's ministers, that
might any way offend her majesty. And so to conclude, feeing
the cause of her grief shall be taken away; the French king gra-
tified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that, by any
Spanish pra&ice, (he should be drawn to violate her faith ; that
the reft of the princes shall have no just cause of offence, but ra-
ther to think honourably of her majesty, considering the Scottish
queen's carriage towards her, which hath deserved no way any
such favour ; the noblemen of Scotland shall be reflored, who
will be a good flay of such counfells as may tend to the troubling
of this realm, especially having so good a ground of warrant as
the parliament to fland unto the charges and perrills which her
pra&tices might have bred to this realm shall be avoided ; and
lastly, the hope of the papifts shall be taken away, by such good
provisions, as in both the realms may be made, whereby the perils
that might fall into her majefty's own person, (a matter of all
others to be weighed) (hall be avoided, when by the change that
may grow by any such wicked and ungodly practice, they shall
fee their cafe no way relieved in point of religion.

Reasons to induce her majefly to proceed in the treaty

under Secretary Wal~ingham's hand.

THAT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to Cott. Lib.
the raising of trouble within this realm) have grown from the Calig. C. 8.
Scots queen's ministers and favourers, not without her allowance
and seeking: Or,

That the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes

to give ear to the said plots, is principally grounded upon some
commiseration had of her restraint.

That the flay, why the said plots have not been put in execu-

Nni

t'on, hath proceeded, for that the said princes have, for the mo0t
part, been entertained with home and domeftick troubles.

That it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin

to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in her favours by
the said princes.

That it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted

by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of
her majesty.

That for the preservation thereof, it shall be convenient for her

majesty to proceed to the finishing of the treaty, not long fithence
begun between her and the said queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 24. 1. 25.)

A Letter from S. Amias Pawlet.

S IR,

Origin.Cal. I DID forbear, according to your direeion signified in your letterd
c. 9. of the 4th of this present, to proceed to the execution of the con-

tents of Mr. Waades letters unto you, for the dispersing of this
lady's unnecessary servants, and for the feafing of her money,
wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (alk
though in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters'of the 7th of
this instant, which I doubt not are with you before this time;
but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5th, which came not
unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by reason as did ap-
pear by indorfement, that they had been mistaken, and were sent
back to Windsor, after that they were entered into the way to-
wards me, I considered, that being accompanied only with my
own servants, it might be thought that they would be intreated
to fay as I would command them, and therefore I thought good,
for my better discharge in these money matters, to crave the
assistance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who repairing unto me the next
morning, we had access to this queen, whom we found in her bed,
troubled after the old manner with a defluxion, which was fallen
down into the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of
one of her hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of
her former praffifes, doubting left the would persist therein by
corrupting underhand some bad members of this fiate, I was ex-
prefly commanded to take her money into my hands, and to reft
answerable for it, when it shall be required ; advising her to de-
iver the said money unto me with quietness. After many de-

Wials, many exclamations, and many bitter words against you, (I
fay nothing of her railing against myself) with flat affirmation
that her majesty might have her body, but her heart the should
never have, refutfing to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called
my servants, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
upon (he yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five
rolls of canvass, containing five thousand French crowns, and two
leather bags, whereof the one had, in gold, one hundred and four
pounds two thillings, and the other had three pounds in silver,
which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that (he had no
more money in this house, and that the was indebted to her ser-
vants for their wages, Mr. Waades note maketh mention of 3
rolls left in Curle's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was mifrec- Curie can
koned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths of tell you the'

truth of

diverse persons, as also by probable conje&ures; so as in truth we thismatter.
found only two rolls, every of which containeth one thousand
crowns, which was this queen's guifte to Curle's wife at her mar-
riage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain
worth by estimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one
bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore
and fix pounds eighteen thillings. AlPthe foresaid parcells of
money are bestowed in bags, and sealed by Mr Richard Bagot,
saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve in
my hands, for the use of this houfhold, and may be repayed at
London, where her majesty (hall appoint out of the money, re-
ceived lately by one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I
feared left the people might have dispersed this money in all this
time, or have hidden the fame in some secret corners, for doubt
whereof, I had caused all this queen's family, from the highest to,
the lowest, to be guarded in the several places where I found
them, so as yff I had not found the money, with quietness, I had
been forced to have searched first all their lodgings, and then
their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a fin-
gular blessing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contraiy
success might have moved some hard conceits in her majefly.

Touching the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I have
done so much, as may fuffice to satisfy her majesty for the time,
wherein I could not take any absolute course, untill I heard again
from you, partly because her majefly, by Mr. Waade's letter,
doth refer to your consideration to return such as (hall be difcharg-
ed to their several dwellings a.nd countrys, wherein, as it feemeth,

you have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that as
yet, I have received no answer from you, of your resolution, upon
the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, what persons you
will appoint to be difmift 5 only this I have done, I have bellow-
ed all such, as are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four
several rooms, as the fame may fuffice to contain them, and that
their meat and drink shall be brought unto them by my servants.
It may please you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what
fort, and for what course, I shall make their passports, as also, if
they shall fay that they are unpaid of their wages, what I shall do
therein. Yt is said that they have been accustomed to be paid of

'This Lady their wage at Christmas, for the whole year. Her majefty's charge
hath good will be somewhat diminished by the departure of this people, and
itore of mo-
ney at pre- my charge, by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the per.
sent in the sons, all save Baftian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there
Ambaffa- was no great cause to fear their pradices, and upon this ground,
dor'shands. I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all this difmiffcd train

should have followed their miffrefs, until the next remove, and
there to have been discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that
the said remove might be delayed, yf the did fear or expe& any
hard measure.

Others shall excuse their foolifli pity as they may; but for my

part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing
that I have said, written, or done, I have had any other refpea
than the furtherance of her majefly's service; and so I shall most
earnefily pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not feafing
of the money by Mr. Manners, the other commissioners and my-
self. I trust Mr. Waade hath answered, in all humble duties,
for the whole company, that no one of us did so much as think
that our commifflon reaching only to the papers, we might be
bold to touch the money, so as there was no speech of that allto
my knowledge, and as you know I was no commissioner in this
fcarch, but had my hands full at Tyxhall, discreet servants are
not hastily to deal in great miatters, without warrant, and efpeci-
ally where the cause is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

Your advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly

comfortable unto rme. I will not fay, in refpe& of myself, because
my private interest hath no measure of comparison with her ma-
jcfty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God grant a hap-
py and fpcedy yifue to these good and godly counsels; and so I
commit you to his merciful proteftion. From Chartley the ioth
of SerteAber 1386.

No. XVIII. (Vol. II. p. 39. line 16.)

Copy of a Letter from the earls of Shreutfury and Kent,

Sc. touching their proceedings with regard to the death
of the Scottiqh queen, to her majefly's council.

IT may please your honble good lordihips to be advertised, that,
on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Robert Beale came to the
house of me the earl of Kent in the county of - to whom
your lordfhip's letter and message was delivered, and her majefly's
commifion shewn; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts
for the slaying of such hues and cries as had troubled the country,
requiring the officers to make flay of allfuch persons, as should bring
any such warrants without names, as before had been done, and
to bring them to the next juflice of peace to the intent that upon
their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites
might be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the
said earl of Kent flhould on the Monday following, come to Lyl-
ford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale came
to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commission,
&c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that
fir A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not able to repair to the
earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix miles of; it was
thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go
unto him, which we did on morning; and together with
the delivery of her majefty's commission, and your lordthip's let-
ter, imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent and we thought
meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordship hither the day
following, to confer with me the said earl, concerning the fame;
which his lordship promised. And for the bette, colouring of the
matter, I the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice
of peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to whom I
communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under your
lordfhip's hands, for the slaying of the hues and cries, requiring
him to give notice thereof to the town of Peterborough, and e-
specially unto the justices of peace of Huntingdonshire, and to
cause the pursuers and bringers of such warrants to be flayed, and
brought to the next justice of peace; and to bring us word to So-
theringay cafttle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and
what he should in the mean time understand of the authors of such

bruites. Which like order, I also fir Amias Pawlet had taken q
Monday morning in this town, and other places adjoining. The
fame night, the fheriff of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordfhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were
Lent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewfbury's intention
and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other letters were
also sent with their lordfhips assents to fir Edward Montague, fir
Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to be here on Wed.
nefday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time it was
thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday,
we the earls came hither, where the fheriff met us; and upon con-
ference between us it was resolved, that the care for the sending
for the surgeons, and other necessary provision should be commit.
ted unto him against the time. And we forthwith repaired unto
her, and first in the presence of herself and her folks, to the in-
tent that they might fee and report hereafter that the was not 0.
therwife proceeded with than according to law, and the form of
the statute made in the 27th year of her majefly's reign, it was
thought convenient that her majefty's commiftion ihould be read
unto her, and afterwards mhe was by sundry speeches willed to pre.
pare herself against the next morning. She was also put in re-
Imembrance of her fault, the honourable manner of proceeding
with her, and the ne.ceflity that was imposed upon her majefly to
proceed to execution, for that otherwise it was found that they
could not both fland together, and however, fithence the lord
Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracys were attempted, and
fo.would be still; wherefore since ihe had now a gpod while since
warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to thipk ppon and
prepare he;felf to die, we doubted not but that she wyas, before
this, fettled, and therefore would accept this message in good part.
And to the effe& that no christian duty might be said to be omit-
ted, that might be for her comfort, an.d tend to the salvation both
of her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her
that if it would please her to confer with the bishop and dean of
Peterborough, she might: which dean, we had, for that purpose,
appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Hereto she
replied, crossing herself in the narYe of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, saying that she was ready to die in the catholic
Roman faith, which her ancefiors had profeffed, from which (he
w'ould not be removed. And albeit we used many perfuafionsot
the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when lhe

Cn-Aipded the admittance of her priest, we utterlydenied that unto

her. Hereupon, (he demanded to understand what answer we had
touching her former petition to her majesty, concerning her pa-
pers of accounts, and the beftowing of her body. To the first we
had none other answer to make, but that we thought if they were
not sent before, ihe 'fame might be in Mr. Wade's custody, who
was now in France, and feeing her papers could not any wife
pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but that the fame should be
delivered unto such as she should appoint. For, for our own parts,
we undoubtedly thought that her majefly would not make any
profit of her things, and therefore (ii our opinions) she might set
down what she would have done, and the fame should be impart-
ed unto her majesty, of whom both she and others might expe6c
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her majefty's
pleafare, and therefore could neither fay that her petition (hould
be deny'd, or granted. For the pra&tice of Babington, (he utter-
ly denied it, and would have inferred it, that her death was for
her religion; whereunto it was eftsoons by us replied, that for
many years (he was not touched for religion, nor (hould have been
now, but that this proceeding against her was for treason, in that
she was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for destroying her ma-
jefty's person; which she again denied, adding further, that al-
beit (he for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her
death, yet she doubted not but that God would take vengeance
thereof. And being charged with the depositions of Naue and
Curl to prove it against her, (he replied, that she accused none,
but that hereafter when (he shall be dead, and they remain alive,
it lhall be seen how indifferently (he had been dealt with, and
what measure had been used unto her; and afk6d whether it had
been heard before this, that servants had been pra&tifed to accuse
their mistress, and hereupon also required what was become of
them, and where they remained.

Upon our departure from her, for that it seemed by the com-
million, that the charge of her was in the disposition of us the
earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue Drurie to re-
ceive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number'of soldiers to watch that night, and that
her folks should be put up, and take order that only four of them
lhould be at the execution, remaining aloof of, and guarded with
certain persons, so as they should not come near unto her,
which were Melvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and a-
pothecary.

Volume II. 0

o

Wednesday morning, after that we the earls were repaired un.

to the caflle, and the (heriff had prepared all things in the hall
for the execution, he was commanded to go into her chamber,
and to bring her down to the place where were present, we which
have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq ; fir Edward
Montague, knt. his son and heir apparent, and William Monta.
gue his brother, fir Richard Knichtly knt. Mr. Thomas Brude-
nell, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forest,
and Raynor, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and
others.

At the flairfold, mhe paused to speak to Melvil in our hearing,

which was to this effe&, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honelf
servant to me, so I pray thee continue to my son, and commend
me unto him. I have not impugn'd his religion, nor the religion
of others, but with him well. And as I forgive all that
have offended me in Scotland, so I would that he ihould also;
and beseech God, that he would fend him his holy spirit, and il.
luminate him." MelviPs answer was, that he would so do, and
at that instant, he would beseech God to assist him with his spirit.
Then she demanded to speak with her prietf, which was denied
unto her, the rather for that she came with. a fuperflitious pair of
beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have her women to
help her, and upon her earnest request, and saying that when 0.
ther gentlewomen were executed, she had read in chronicles that
they had women allowed unto them, it was permitted that the
should have two named by herself, which were Mrs. Curle and
Kennedy. After she came to'the fcaffold, first in presence of
them all, her majeftie's commission was openly read ; and after-
wards Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according to a dire&cion which
lie had received, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd have
made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye well in the
fear of God and charity to the world. But at the first entry, flie
utterly refused it, saying that flhe was a catholique, and that it
were a folly to move her, being so resolutely minded, and that our
prayers would little avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it
might appear that we, and the whole assembly, had a chriflian
desire to have her die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr.
Dean, was read and pronounced by us all. " That it would
please Almighty God to fend her his holy spirit and grace, and
1aifo if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of h6

mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlasting kingdom,
and finally to bless her majesty, and confound all her enemies;"
whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair up (hortly, can shew your
lordship a copy.

This done, (he pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this es-

set, " To beseech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that she
trusted to receive her salvation in his blood, and of his grace to
be received into his kingdom, besought God to forgive her en-
nemies, as she forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this
land, to bless the queen's majeftie, that she might serve him.
Likewise to be merciful to her son, to have compaflion of his
church, and altho' she was not worthy to be heard, yet she had
a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray unto
her Saviour to receive her." After this, (turning towards her
servants) (he desired them to pray for her, that her Saviour would
receive her. Then, upon petition made by the executioners, she
pardon'd them ; and said, she was glad that the end of all her
sorrows was so near. Then (he miflik'd the whinning and weep-
ing of her women, saying, that they rather ought to thank God
for her resolution, and kissing them, willed them to depart from
the feaffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneel'd down, and
having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck,
whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incon-
tinently removed, and order taken that none should approach un-
to her corps, but that it should be embalmed, by the surgeon ap-
pointed. And further her crosse, apparell, and other things are
retained here, and not yielded unto the executioner for inconve-
niences that might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by
such as sent him hither.

This hath been the manner of our dealings in this service,

whereof we have thought good to advertise your lordfhips, as par-
ticularly as we could, for the time, and further have thought
good to signify unto your lordflips besides, that for the avoiding
of all sinister and slanderous reports, that may be raised to the
contrary, we have caused a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the
fame effe& in writing, which we the faids lords have subscribed,
with the hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen a-
hove named that were present at the action. And so beseech-
ing Almighty God long to bless her majesty with a most prof-
perous reign, and to confound all his and her enemies, we

Oo ij

take our leaves. From Fotheringay Castle, the 8th of Februa.
ry 1586, in haft.

Your lordihips at commandment.

N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix,

is taken from a collection made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drum.
soy, historiographer to Q Anne, now in the library of the
faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omit.
ted to mention the book in the Cott, Lib. where it is to be
found.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. 42. 1. 25.)

The objedions againIf Mr. Davison, in the cause of the

late Scotti/h queen, must concern things done either,
1. Before her trial at Fotheringay. a. During that
fefion. 3. After the fame,

Cott. Lib. 1. BEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had
Gal. ' any hand at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing

whatsoever, concerning the fame dire&ly, or indirefly.

2. During that session, he remained at court, where the only

interest he had therein, was as her majefty's secretary, to receive
the letters from the commissioners, impart them to her highness,
and return them her answers.

3. After the return thence, of the said commiffionprs, it is

well known to all her council,

i. That he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatfo.

ever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause of the said
queen, till the sending down of her majefty's warrant unto thq
commissioners, by the lords-and others of her council.

2. That he was no party in signing the sentence, passed against

her.

3. That he never penned either the proclamation publishing

the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any other letter, or
thing whatsoever, concerning the fame. And

That the only thing, which can be specially and truly imput-

ed to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto her majesty
to be signed. She sending a great counsellor unto him, with her
pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great feal of England,
by her own special dire&ion and commandment.

For the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
1. That the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, wa*

delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her majefty's own pri-
vity, to be ready for to sign, when flie flhould be pleased to call
for it.

2. That being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or

fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry it up, till fhq
sent a great counsellor unto him for the fame, and was sharply
reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majefty's own presence,

3. That having signed it, Ihe gave him an express command-

ment to carry it to the feal, and being feal'd to fend it immedi-
ately away unto the commifllioners, according to the direction.
Herself appointing the hail of Fotheringay for the place of exe-
cution, mifliking the court-yard, in divers refpe6ts, and in con-
clution absolutely forbad him to trouble her any further, or let
her hear any more thereof, till it was done. She for her part,
having (as she said) performed all that, in law or reason, could
be required of her.

4. Which direcions notwithflanding, he kept the warrant

feal'd all that night, and the greatest part of the next day in his
hands, brought it back with him to the court, acquainted her ma-
jefty withal, and finding her majesty resolved to proceed therein,
according to her former direcions, and yet desirous to carry the
spatter so, as she might throw the burden from herself, he abfp-
lutely resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. And hereupon, went over unto the lord treafurer's chamber,
together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence
refttored the fame into the hands of the said lord treasurer, of
whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth kept it,
till himself and the refl of the council sent it away.

Which, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the
said Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be preten4-
ed to the contrary.

Touching the sending down thereof unto the commiffloners,

that it was the general as of her majefty's council, (as is before
mentioned,) and not any private ac of his, may appear by

j. Their own confeffion. 2. Their letters sent down there-

with to the commissioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and
vthers to whom they were direCted. As also 4. of Alr. Beale,
by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majefty's firit
pornmiffion for their calling to the liar-chamber for the fame, ;nd

private appearance and submission afterward instead thereof, be.
fore the lord chancelor Broomley. 6. The confeffion of Mr.
Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By the fen.
tence itself upon record. 8. Besides a common a& of council,
containing an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottilk
ambassador then remaining here, avowing and justifying the
fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some extraordina.

Ty futherance thereunto, the contrary may evidently appear by

i. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of association,

being earnestly pressed thereunto by her majefty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commiflioner,

in the examination of Babington and his complices, and avoid-
ing the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commissioners from pronoun-

cing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they
should return to her majefty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefent.

ed, without once offering to carry it up, till her majefly sent ex.
prefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was feal'd unto the

commiflioners, as he was specially commanded, slaying it all that
flight, and the greatest part of the next day in his hands.

6. And finally, his refloring thereof into the hands of the lord

treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

Which are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison did

nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the
place he then held in her majefly's service.

Cal. C. 9.

This seems to be an original. On the back is this title,

The innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scot-

tifh queen.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p. 104. line 20o.)

7Trn n' Letter from o, Sir Robert Cecil, to his Majefly Kitg
triginalt
Bibl. Sac. amizes.
Jur. Edin.

X. 34. MOST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affeclion-

ates have been such, as hath inforced silence in him, who is faith-

folly devoted to your person, and in due time of trial, will un-
dergo all hazards of fortune, for the maintenance of the just re-
gal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is
invested in your royal person. Fall not then, most noble and re-
nowned prince, from him, whose providence hath in many dan-
gers preserved you, no doubt to be an instrument of his glory, and
the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have been revealed
to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited person near your majeftly in council and favour; no man
in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath no foundation
from any, with whom, for your service, I have held correspond-
ence; otherwise, I had, long since, been disabled from perform-
ance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth:
being only known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one
noted in all parts of Chriftlendom for his fidelity to your person
and state, and to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal servant, my
first and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom
I have found in all things that concern you, moil secret and al-
fared. It may, therefore, please your majefly, at the humble
motion of e, which jargon I desire to be the indorfement of your
commands unto me, that by some token of your favour, he may
understand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and ser-
vice. My paflionate affection to your person, (not as you are a
king, but as you are a good king, and have just title, after my
sovereign, tobe a great king) doth transport me to presumption.
Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
altho' mixed with defecLs in judgment.

i. I, therefore, first beseech your majesty, that for the good

of those, whom God, by divine Providence, hath deflined to
your charge, that you would be plcafed to have an extraordinary
care of all praticers, or pracices, againit your person ; for it is
not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of am-
bition, fa&ion, or fear, there are many that desire to have their
sovereign in minority, whereby the sovereignty and slate might
be fayed by partiality of subalternate persons, rather than by
true rule of power and justice. Preserve your person, and fear
not the pradices of man upon the point of your right, which will
be preserved and maintained against all assaults of competition
whatever. Thus I leave the protection of your person, and royal
posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bless and pre-
serve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to his glory.

L. Next to the preservation of your person, is the confervitiod

and secret keeping of your councells, which, as I have said, are
often betrayed and discovered, either out of pretended zeal in
religion, turbulent faaion, or base conception, the which your
majeftly is to regard with all circumfpefion, as a matter molt
dangerous to your person and slate, and the only means to ruin
and dzilroy all those, that fland faithfully devoted to your majef.
ty's service. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I
make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this
nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majefly may be fur-
ther informed.

3. The 3d point considerable is, that your majesty, by all

means possible, secure yourself of the good affedion of the French
king and States, by the negotiation of some faithful feeret confi-
dent ; the French naturally diflafiing the union of the British
Islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you
have many allies and friends, but by reason of their remote slate,
they do not so much importe this affair, which must be guided by
a quick and sudden motion.

4. When God, by whose Providence, the period of all persons

and times is determined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her
majesty, (altho' I do assuredly hope that there will not be any
question in competition, yet for that I hold it not fitting to give
any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature) I do hum-
bly beseech your majefly to design a secret, faithful, and expe-
rienced confident servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity
and judgment, continually to be here resident, whose negotiation;
it were convenient your majefly should fortifie, with fueh secret
trust and powers, as there may not need 14 days respite, to poll
for authority, in a cause, that cannot endure io flours respite,
without varieties of danger. In the which it is to be confldered,
that all such as pretend least good to your eflablifhment, will not
in publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambition,

"ill seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of common
good to the fiate, in propounding of good conditions for dif-
burthening the common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy im-
positions, corruptions, opprefflions, &c. which is a main point to
lead the popular, who are much difgufled with many particulars
of this nature. It were therefore convenient, that these motives,
out of your majefty's providence, should be prevented, by your
free offer in thcfe points following, viz.

a. That your majesty would be pleased to abolish purvaiors and

purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offenfive to the common
people, and the whole kingdom, and not profitable to the prince.

2. That your majesty would be pleased to dissolve the court

of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of
this realm, by base matches, and evil education of their children,
by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. The abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally re-

pined against by the fubjed, in regard of their uncertainty, being
many times altered from their true meaning, by variety of inter-
pretation.

4. That your majefly will be pleased admit free outport of the

native commodities of this kingdom, now often restrained by sub-
alternate persons for private profit, being most prejudicial to the
commerce of all merchants, and a plain deftru&ion to the true in-
duftry and manufa&ure of all kingdoms, and againuf the profit of
the crown.

These, being by your majefly's confidents in the point of time

propounded, will assuredly confirm unto your majeffie the hearts
and affe&ions of the whole kingdom, and abfo utely prevent all
insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of pretext
of common good, would seek to patronize themselves in popular
opinion and power, and thereby to derogate from your majefty's
bounty and free favour, by princely merit of your moderation,
judgment, and jufiice.

Your majefty's favour, thus granted to the fubjet, will no way

impeach the profits of the crown, but advance them. The dif-
proportionable gain of some chequer officers, with the base and
mercenary profits of the idle unnecessary clerks and attendants,
will only fuffer some detriment 5 but infinite will be the good unto
the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majefly the universal
love and affeaion of the people, and establish your renown in the
bigheft esteem to all poflerity.

The Lord preserve your majeglie, and make you triumphant

ever all your enemies.

My care over his pexfon, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and

will die before he leave to be yours, shall be no less then of mine
own life, and in like efleem will I hold all your faithfull confi-
dents, notwithstanding I will hold myself reserved from being
known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affe&ions unto

VouIme IL P P

your majefly, only this extraordinary worthy man whose associate
I am in his misfortune doth know my heart, and we both will
pray for you, and if we live you shall find us together.

I beseech your majesty burn this letter, and the others ; for

altho' it be in an unusual hand yet it may be discovered.

Your majefly's most devoted

and humble servant,

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

C R I T I C A L

DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness

of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

IT is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which
the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary to Bothwell,
have given rife ; far less to appear as an adversary to any particu-
lar author, who hath treated of them. To repeat, ahd to expose
all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points, which
have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from partiality,
from malevolence, and from diflionefty, would be no less irksome
to myself, than unacceptable to most of my readers. All I pro-
pose, is to assist others in forming some judgment concerning the
facs in dispute, by slating the proofs produced on each fide, with
as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame atten-
tion and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scottish history.

In order to account for the King's murder, two different
systems have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell both to
have contrived and executed this crime. The other imputes it
to the Earls of Murray, Morton, and their party.

The decision of many controverted fads in history, is a matter
rather of curiosity than of use. 'I hey hfand detached ; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the flory
remains untouched. But the fad under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion
which an Historian adopts with regard to it, he must vary and
dispose the whole of his subsequent narration. An historical
system may be tried in two different ways, whether it be consist-
ent with probability, and whether it be supported by proper evi.
dence.

Pp ij

Those who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue ia

the following manner 4 and though their reasonings have been
mentioned already in different places of the narrative, it is ne.
ceffary to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they,
was a sudden and youthful paffoen. The beauty of his person
was his chief merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the
Queen a difguit, which broke out on different occasions. His
engaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust
into an indignation, which she was at no pains to conceal. This
breach was perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable ; the King cer.
tainly wanted that art and condescension which alone could have
repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and fettled hat.
red effaced all remains of affecion. Bothwell observed this, and
was prompted by ambition, and perhaps by love, to found on it a
scheme, which proved fatal both to the Queen, and to himself.
He had served Mary at different times with fidelity and success.
.He insinuated himself into her favour, by address and by flattery.
By degrees he gained her heart. In order to gratify his love, at
least his ambition, it was necessary to get rid of the King. Mary
had rejeEted the proposal made to her for obtaining a divorce.
The King was equally hated by the partizans of the house of
Hamilton, a considerable party in the kingdom ; by Murray, one
-of the most powerful and popular persons in his country; by
:Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived; and whom
.Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour. Among
the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He ex-
peded, for all these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pass without any inquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own
address and good fortune, he trusted for the accomplishment of
the reft of his wifthes. What Bothwell expe&ed really came to
.pass. Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an
a2tion which rid her of a man whom she had such good reason to
detest. A few months after, (he married the person who was both
fitfpeated and accused of committing the murder.

Those who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason

in this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless am-
bition. Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had
early fdrmed a design of ufurping the Crown. On the Queen's
return into Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and
engrossed the whole power into his own hands. He set himfeli
against every proposal of marriage which was made to her, lell
his own chance of succeeding to the Crown (hould be deflr~vd.

lIe hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him. In order to bi
revenged on him, he entered into a sudden friendship with Both-
well, his ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to perpe-
trate the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the Queen-.
All this was done with a design to throw upon the Queen herself
the imputation of being accessory to the murder, and under that
pretext, to dellroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, and ta
seize the sceptre which he had wrested out of her hands.

The former of these systems has an air of probability, is con,
ftlent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter,- some as-
fertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effecs
appear, of which no fufficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and by
his prudent adminiitration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with ease to quash a formidable infurre&ion
railfed by himself in the year 1565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her ne-
glecf, had reduced to the lowest slate of contempt, and who, after
a long disgrace, had regained (according to the moil favourable
supposition) the precarious poffeftion of her favour only a few days
before his death ? It is difficult to conceive what Murray had to
fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no
previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chi-
merical than a scheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose
wife was fill alive, and who was not only fufpeaed, but accused,
of murdering her former husband. But that such a scheme
should really facceed is frill more extraordinary.-If Murray had
iniligated Bothwell to commit the crime, or had himself been ac-
cefdory to the commission of it, what hopes were there that Both-
well would silently bear from a fellow criminal all the perfecu-
tions which he fuffered, without ever retorting upon him the ac-
cufation, or revealing the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient
and deadly feud had fuablied between Murray and Bothwell; the
Queen with difficulty had brought them to some terms of agree-
ment. But is it probable that Murray would chufe an enemy,
to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his confident in the
commission of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on the other hand,
would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife man, first to
raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that afterwards he thould
find some opportunity of depriving him of that power ? The molt

adventrous politician never hazarded such a dangerous experiment.
The most credulous folly never truited such an uncertain chance.

But however strong these general reasonings may be, we muit

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we
how proceed to examine.

That Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, I. From

the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary hifiorians.
2. From the confeflion of those persons who fuffered for assisting at
the commiflion of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumstances. Anders. vs. 2. 165. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commiflioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
v. 2. 213. 4. From the express teflimony of Lefly Bishop of Ross
to the fame effe& with the former. Def. of Q. Mary's Hon.
And. 2. 76. Id. v. 3. p. 3 E. 5. Morton, at his death, declared
that Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in
the conspiracy formed againfi the life of the King; and that he
was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that
*Bothwell was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The
letter from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to
Book VII. vol. II. No. 12. confirms Morton's teflimony. 6. Lord
Herries promises, in his own name, and in the name of the nobles
,who adhered to the Qiueen, that they would concur in punifling
Bothwell as the murderer of the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23,

The most direct charge ever brought against Murray is in these

words of biihop Lefty, " Is it unknown," addressing himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your face open-
" ly, even at your own table, a few days after the murder was
" committed ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of
" the fame murder? Did not he, nu/la circuitione ufus, flatly and
" plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming with on6
" of your moti assured and trudty servants the fame day whereon
" you departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk,
*" This night e're morning Lord Darnly shall lose his life ?" Def.
of OQMary, Anders. v. 2. 75. But the assertion of a man so
heated with faation as Lcfly, unless it were supported by proper
evidence, is of little weight. The servant, to whom Murray is
fald to have spoken these words, is not named; nor the manner in
which this facret conversation was brought to light mentioned.
Lord Herreis was one of the most zealous advocates for Mary,
and it is remarkable that in all his negociation at the court of Eng-
land, he never once repeated this accusation of Murray. In an-

fwering the challenge given him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had
a fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the mur-
der; but though he openly accuses of that crime some of those
who adhered to him, he industriously avoids any insinuation a-
gainft Murray himself. Keith, Pref. XII. Mary herself, in a
ponverfation with Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and Mait-
land of being privy to the murder, but does not mention Murray.
And. 4. 55. When the Bishop of Ross and Lord Herries them-
selves appeared before the English council, January II, 1569,
they declared themselves ready, in obedience to the Queen's com-
mand, to accuse Murray and his associates of being accessory to
the murder, but, " they being also required, whether they or any
" of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said Earl in special,
" or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty thereofi" they
answered, " that they took God to witness that none of them did
" ever know any thing of the coufpiracy of that murder, or were
" in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither who were de-
" vifers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it was publick-
"ly discovered long thereafter by some of the affaffins who sus-
" fered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 3o8. These words
are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herries themselves,
and seem to be a dire& confutation of the biffihop's assertion. The
biflhop himself repeats the fame thing in fill fironger terms.
And. 3- 31.

The Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Prote/lation touching
the murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference at
Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given an account
vol. I. p. 233. add " So after these premiffes, the murder of the
" King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold for cer-
" tain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Lething-
" ton were authors, inventors, counsellors and caufers of the fame
" murder, in what manner, or bywhatfomever persons the fame was
"executed." Anders. v. 4.. 188. But, i. This is nothing more
than the private opinion or personal affirmation of these two no-
blemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no conneation
with the premiffes on which they found it. Because Murray pro-
posed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband with
her own consent, it does not follow that therefore he committed
the murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll were
at that time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and a-
nimated with all the rage of fation. 4. Both of them were Mur-
py's personal enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment

.which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. At.
gyll was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whomhe
-lived on no good terms. Knox, 328. and by whom he had no
children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's sifter, and by his
interest he had obftructed.that design. Keith, 551. These cir.
cumftances would go far .towards invalidating a positive teftimo.
oy; they more than .counterbalance an indeterminate suspicion.
5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntly and Argyll ever
subscribed this protestation. A copy of such a proteflation as the
Queen thought would be of advantage to her cause, was traaf.
mitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4. 186. The protefation itself
publiflhed by Anderson is taken from an unfabfcribcd copy with
blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On the back of this
copy is pasted a paper, which Cecil has marked ." Answer of the
" Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Huntly and Ar.
" gyll." Anders. 194, T95. But it can scarce be esteemed a reply
to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date
at London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's letter, in which
the inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton,
January 5, 1568. Now it is fearce to be supposed that the copy
could be sent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and
be seen and answered by Murray within so short a time. Mur.
ray's reply seems intended only to prevent the impression which
the vague and uncertain accusations of his enemies might make
in his absence. Cecil had got the original of the Queen's letter
into his cuflody. Anders. v. 4. 186. This naturally leads as to
conjeture that the letter itself, together with the inclosed pro-
teftation, were intercepted before they came to the hands of
Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjecure alone. The
uetter to Huntly, in which the protestation was inclosed, is tobe
found. Cott. Lib. Cal. C. i. fol. 280, and is an original fubfcrib-
-ed by Mary, though not written with her own hand, becaufeflhe
seldom chose to write in .the Euglifh language. The protestation
is in the fame volume, fol. 282, and is manifestly written by the
fame person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is a clear proof
that both were intercepted. So that much has been founded on
a paper not subscribed by the two Earls, and probably never seen
by them. Betides, this method which the Queen took of sending
a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
-with regard to a conference held in their own presence, appear5
formewhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and not
so liable to any mifinterpretatiop, to have desired them tq write

the most exaa account, which they could recolle& of what had
paifed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

The Queen's commifflioners at the Conferences in England ac-
cufed Murray and his associates of having murdered the King.
Good. 2. 281. But these accusations are nothing more than loose
and general affirmations, without descending to such particular
circumfiances, as either ascertain their truth, or discover their
falsehood. The fame accusation is repeated by the nobles affem-
bled at Dumbarton, Sept. 1568. Good. 2. 359. And the fame
observation may be made concerning it.

All the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-
ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
pose, that he might have a pretence of diflurbing the Queen's ad-
ministration, and thereby rendering ineffeaSual her general Re-
vocation of Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his
associates of the befll part of their estates. Lefly Def. of Mary's
Hon. p. 73. But whoever considers the limited powers of a Scot-
tifh Monarch, will fee that such a revocation could not be very
formidable to the nobles. Every King of Scotland began his reign
with such a revocation ; and as often as it was renewed, the power
of the nobles rendered it ineffe&ual. The best vindication of
Murray and his party from this accusation is that which they pre-
fented to the Queen of England, and which hath never hitherto
been published.

Anfivers to the objecions and alledgance of the 49ueen,

alledging the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl
of Morton, Marr, Glencairn, Hume, Ruthven, Sc. to
have been moved to armour, for that they abhorred
and might not abide her revocation of the alienation
made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it ap- Paper Of-
pears God has bereft, the alledgance of all wit and good remem- fice.
brance, for thir reasons following.

Imprimis, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to
grudge thereat, in refpea the queen made him privy to the fame,
and took resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordship know flie would assuredly in the famine except all things
ffie had given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament, as
fie did indeed and for that cause wifthed my Lord to lecave behind

Volume II. Qq

himn Master John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom lhe
declared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it should
be provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before ever he
demanded, as it came to pass without any let or impediment, for
all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the Parlia.
ment, but any difficulty.

Item as to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

Only my Lord of Mart, had ane little thing of the property

quilk alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him in the said
parliament preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of
miscontent of that revocation, far less to have put their lives and
heritage to so open and manifest ane danger as they did for sic ane
frivole cause.

Gyf ever any did make evill countenance, and show any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyllin
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents
to the Queen herself, and did complain of the manifest corruption
of ane a& of Parliament pafll upon her majeffy's return, and fa
did lett any revocation at that time; but the armor for revenge of
the King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there
was no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thereof.

Having thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to enquire whether the Queen herself was accessory to the mur-
der of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than strong

suspicions arose, among some of her fubjesf, that Mary had giv-
en her consent to the commission of that crime. And. 2. I 6.
We are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Arch-
bishop of Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head
were no less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her
nobles loudly atcufed her of that crime, and a great part of the
nation by supporting them, seem to have allowed the accusation
to be well founded.

Some crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce

admit of a positive or direl proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom

be brought perfel1y to light. Where persons are accused not of
being Principals, but only of being Accef/aries to a crime; not of
having committed it themselves, but only of giving consent to the
commission of it by others; the proof becomes fill more difficult:
and unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by
circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attain-
ed. Even in judicial trials, such evidence is sometimes held to
be fufficient for condemning criminals. The degree of convi&ion
which such evidence carries along with it, is often not inferior to
that which arises from positive testimony; and a concurring series
of circumstances satisfies the underflanding no less than the ex-
press declaration of witnesses.

Evidence of both these kinds has been produced against Mary.
We shall first confider that which is founded upon circumstances
alone.

Some of these suspicious circumstances preceded the King's
death: others were subsequent to it. With regard to the for-
per, we may observe that the Queen's violent love of Darnly
was soon converted into an averflon to him no less violent; and
that his own ill condu&, and excesses of every kind were
such, that if they did not justify, at least they account for this
fadden change of her disposition towards him. The rife and
progress of this domestic rupture, I have traced with great care in
the history, and to the proofs of it which may be found in papers
publilhed by other authors, I have added those contained in
App. N0. XVI. and XVII. The Earls of Murray, Morton, Both-
well, Argyll and Huntly considered the scheme of procuring for
the Queen a divorce from her husband, as one of the most flatter-
ing proposals they could make to her, and employed it as the most
powerful inducement to prevail on her to consent to a measure,
which they had much at heart, but from which they knew her to
be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 188. Du Croc the French
ambassador, who was an eye witness of what he defcribes,not
only represents her disgust at Darnly to be extreme, but de-
clares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do as- December
sure you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of ,

'.I 66,

her disease to consist in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem
poflible to make her forget the fame. Still the repeats these
words, I couldv wih to be dead. You know very well that the
injury fie has received is exceeding great, and her Majesty will
ever forget it.- - To speak my mind freely to you, I do not

SQqij

expe&, upon several accounts, any good understanding between
them [i. e. the King and Queenj unless God effedtually put to

Decem. 23. his hand.- -His bad deportment is incurable, nor can there

ever be any good expeted from him for several reasons, which
I might tell you was I present with you. I cannot pretend to
foretel how all may turn, but I will fay, that matters cannot fuhb
sift long as they are, without being accompanied with sundry bad
confequences." Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural
death, at this jundure, it muff have been considered as a very
fortunate event to the Queen, and as a seasonable deliverance
from a husband who had become altogether odious to her. Now
as Henry was murdered a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing
had happened to render the Queen's aversion to him less violent,
the opinion of those who confider Mary as the author of an event,
which was manifestly so agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to
some of our readers to be neither unnatural nor over refined.
If we add to this, what has been observed in the hiflory, that ia
proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her husband, Both-
well made progress in her favour; and that he became the objet
not only of her confidence but of her attachment, that opinion
acquires new strength. It is easy to observe many advantages
which might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from the
King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event.
Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was, in that
age, thought no violent imputation on Mary's charater, to sup-
pose that the had consented to the deed.

The fieps which the Queen took after her hufband's death add

flrength to that supposition. I. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, asserts that " every body finfped.
ed the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to
others, said plainly that it was He." p. i55. 2. Mary having
issued a proclamation, on the 12th of February, offering a re-
ward to any person, who should discover those who had murder-
ed her hutband; And. I. 36, a paper in answer to this was affx-
ed to the gates of the Tolbooth, February 16, in which Bothwell
was named as the chief person guilty of that crime, and the
Queen herself was accused of having given her consent to it.
And. 2. 156. 3. Soon after, February 20, the Earl of Lennox,
the King's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring her, by every rno-
tive, to prosecute the murderers with the utmaci rigour. He

plainly declared his own fufp'cions of Bothwell, and pointed out
a method of proceedjng against him, and for discovering the other
authors of the crime, no less obvious than equitable. He advised
her to seize, and to commit to sure custody Bothwell himself, and
those who were already named as his accomplices; to call an Af
fembly of the nobles; to issue a proclamation, inviting Both-
well's accusers to appear ; and if, on that encouragement, no per-
son appeared to accuse them, to hold them as innocent, and to
dismiss them without further trial. And. I. 40. 4. Archbi-
ihop Beatoun, her ambafl'ador in France, in a letter to Mary,
March 9th, employs arguments of the utmoit weight to persuade
her to prosecute the murderers with the greatest severity. " I can
conclude naething, (says he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to
me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to take a
rigorous vengeance therof, that rather than it be not actually
taine, it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life
and all. I ask your MVajeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can
heir neathing to zour prejudife, but I man conftraindly writ the mul/
famin, that all may come to zour knawledge for the better re-
mede may be put thereto. Heir it is needfull that ze forth shaw
now rather than ever of before, the greite vertue, magnanimitie,
and constance that God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope
ze fall overcome this most heavie envie and difpletir of the com-
mitting thereof, and conserve that reputatioun in all godliness,
ze have conquift of lang, quhich can appear na wayis mair clear-
lie, than that zow dojfck juffice that the haill warld may declare f~ch
zour innocence, and give teflimony forever of thair treason that whole
has committed (but fear of God or man) so cruel and ungodlie
a murther, quhairof there is fa meikle ill spoken, that I am con-
firainit to alk zow mercy, that neither can I or will I make the much
rehearsal therof, which is owr odious. But alas ! Madame, all toe
over Europe this day there is na purpose in head fa frequent-as of
zour Majefltie, and of the present state of zour realm, quhilk is
in the most part interpretit finiflerly." Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Eli-
zabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the
fame thing in firong terms. 6. The. circumflances of the cafe it-
self, no less than these folicitations and remonfirances, called for
the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her own presence. Her
fubiets were filled with the utmost horror at that crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, had been publitkly accused
as author of it. RefleAions, extremely dilhonourable to herself,

had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of juilice,
did not prompt her to pursue the murderers with ardour, dccen.
cy, at least, and concern for vindicating her own charater,
ihould have induced her to avoid any appearance of remifnefs or
want of zeal.

But instead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her ac-.

tions, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. i. On the i5th
of February, five days after the murder, she beflowed on him the
reversion of the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year 1565 ihe had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This
grant was of much importance, as it gave him not only the com-
mnand of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of'
keeping poffeffion of it *. 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous
to obtain the command of the castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government

* Copy from the original in the Charter-house of the city of Edinburgh of an

Ajfignation to the reverfroi of the superiority of Leith by %teen Ma1ry to the
-.arl of Bothwell.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos

praefentes literze pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam re..
ducentes multiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam
noftra chariffimre matri Marix Regine regni noftri pro tempore in nofira
minoritate fa&um et impenfum, verum etiam nobifmet ipfis, tarn intrapar-
tes Gallize quam intra hoc nostrum regnum, ad extentionem noftri honoris et
au&oritatis in punitione furum, melefadorum, et tranfgrefforum infra idem,
per nostrum confifum confanguineum et confiliarium Jacobun comitem Both-
mile, dominum Halis, Vreighton et Liddifdale, magnum admirallum regni
noftri, commiffionem et onerationem ad hunc effe&um habentem, per quas
ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in perfor-
matione et extentione nofiri di&i fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fummam
viginti millium mercarum hujuo nofiri regni, alienavit ac hIfit. Et nos co.
gitante" quod, ex noftra principali honore et devoria, di&um nostrum con-
ffum confanguineum & confiliarium cum quodam acidente et gratitudine re.
compenfare et gratificare incumbit que nos commode fibi concedere poteri.
mus, unde ipfe magia habilis omnibus affuturis temporibus effe poterit, et
ad hujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis feu eventibus : In recompen.
fationem quorum prcmifforum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris rationabilibus cau.
sis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dinum Jacobum co-
mitem Bothuile, &c. ac fuos hieredes makfulos quofcunque noftros legittimos,
&c. affignatos in et ad literas reverficnis fa&as, &c. per Symonem Preston
de eodem militem, prxpofitum, balivos, confuoes, et communitatem hujus
noftri burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccelfbribus, &c. nobis, noftrif.
que heredibus, fuccefforilous, et allignatis pro redemptione, &c. fuperioritati,
totius villaede Leith, &c. impignorat*per ncs diis prxpofito, &c. fubreverfiona

of it, offered to commit the young prince to his cuflody. Mar
consented; and she instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the
caflle. And. I. Pref. 64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conduct-
ed with the utmost remifnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against
this. And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as
is evident from a circumfiance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his master
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbish. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the Queenis
fervandis the keyis of her (halmir. Quhilk the Laird of Tilli-
bardin hearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground. Ester quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
tion." And. 4. P. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to
search into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much
importance merited the most careful inquiry. 4. Notwithftand-
ing Lennox's repeated follicitations, notwithilanding the reason-
ablenefs of his demands, and the necessity of complying with them,
in order to encourage any accuser to appear against Bothwell, she
not only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove
him from her presence and councils ; And. I. 42, 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other circumfiances,
discovered an increase of attachment to him. s. She could not
avoid bringing Bothwell to a public trial; but flie permitted
him to fit as a member in that meeting of the Privy Council,
which directed his own trial ; and the trial itself was carried on
with such unnecessary precipitancy, and with so many other fufpi-
cious circumstances, as render his acquittal rather an argument of
his guilt than a proof of his innocence. These circumstances have
all been mentioned at length, Vol. I. p. 243, &c. and therefore
are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary
gave a public proof of her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him

alienatE continentis fummam decem millium mercarum monetre proefcripti
numerandam et calculandam in parochiali ecclesia de Edinburgh, luper
premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris eft, veluti in diais reverfionis li-
teris, &c. de data 8vo O&lob. 1565, &c. (The reft is form, and contains a.
Clause of absolute warrandice.) IN CUJUS REI TESTIMONIUM przefentibus mag-
num figillum nostrum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, decimo quinto die
menfis Februarii, anno Domini millefimo quingentefimo fexagefimo sexto,
At regni noitri vicefimo quinto.

The great feal entire.

to carry the sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliament.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, she granted him a ratifica.
tion of all the vast pofTeffions and honours, which the had confer.
red upon him, in which was contained an ample enumeration of
all the services he had performed. And. 1. 117. 8. Thorgh
Melvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Bothwell would at
length induce her to marry him, warned her of the infamy and
danger which would attend that aftion, (he not only disregarded
this salutary admonition, but discovered what had passed between
them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil to his indignation.
Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell ieized Mary as (he returned from Stir.
ling, April 24. If lie had done this, without her knowledge and
consent, such an insult could not have failed to have filled her
with the most violent indignation. But according to the account
of an old M. S. " The friendly love was so highly contra&ed
between this great princess, and her enormous fubjed, that there
was no end thereof (for it was conflantly elleemed by all men
that either of them loved other carnally) so that she fuffered pa-
tiently to be led where the lover lift, and all the way neither
made obtacle, impediment, clamour or refiflance, as in such ac-
cidents use to be, or that she might have done by her princely
authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly, and
secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil, who
was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the officer,
by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was done
without the Queen's consent. Melv. 158. 1o. On the i2th of
May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that she
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended
her by seizing her person, she was so much satisfied with his duti-
ful behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for past ser-
vices, that {he not only forgave that offence, but resolved to pro-
mote him to higher honours. And. I. 187. 10. Even after
the confederate nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's pre-
fence, and though (he saw that he was considered as the murder-
er of her former husband by so great part of her fubjeFts, her as-
fedion did not in the least abate, and (he continued to express
the moui unalterable attachment to him. " I can perceive (says
Sir N. Throgmorton) that the rigour with which the Queen is
kept, proceedeth by order from there men, because that the Queen
will not, by any means, be induced to lend her authority to pro-
fecute the murther; nor will not consent by any persuasion to a.
bandon the Lord Bothwell for her husband, but avoweth con-

tlantly that she will live and die with him ; and faith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquiih her crown and kingdom, or
the Lord Bothwell, she would leave her kingdom and dignity to
go a simple damsel with him, and that (he will never consent that
he shall fare worse, or have more harm than herself. App. p. 57.
See also p. 61. From this long enumeration of circumstances,
we may without violence, draw the following conclusion. Had
-Mary really been accessary to the murther of her husband; had
Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her consent, or at her com-
mand; and had she intended to flifle the evidence against him,
and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, the could scarce have
taken any other fleps than those she took, noi could her condut
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of prudence and of
decency.

The positive evidence produced against Mamv may be classed

under two heads.

I. The depositions of some persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who
was Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was twice ex-
amined, and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of
the other, are still extant. It is pretended, that both these are
notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
a'iveti which it is almost impossible to imitate; they abound with
a number of minute fads and particularities, which the most dex-
terous forger could not have easily assembled, and conneded to-
gether with any appearance of probability; and they are filled
with circumfiances, which can scarce be supposed to have entered
the imagination of any man, but one of Paris's-profeffion and cha-
rader. But, at the fame time, it must be acknowledged that his
depositions contain some improbable circumstances. He seems to
have been a foolish talkative fellow ; the fear of death; the vio-
lence of torture; and the desire of pleasing those in whose power
le was, tempted him, perhaps, to feign some circumstances, and
to exaggerate others. To fay that some circumstances in an affi-
davit are improbable or false, is very different from saying that
the whole is forged. I fufped the former to be the cafe here, but
I fee no appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some of the
most material fads in Paris's affidavits reft upon his single tefli-
mony; and for that reason, I have not in the History, nor shall
I in this place, lay any firefs upon them.

Volumne II.

2. The letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. Thef

have been frequently published. The accident, by which the
QLeen's enemies got them into their poffetfion, is related Vol. 1,
352. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or internal e.
vidence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

I. External proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. i. Mur.

xay and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon their word
and honour, that the letters were written with the Quecn's own
hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2. 64, 92.
2. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament of Scot.
land, December 1567, Good. 2. 360; and were so far considered
as genuine, that they are mentioned, in the act against Mary, as
pne chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3. They were
shewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In the ac.
count which they give of this matter to their Mistress, they seem
to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion of any
forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter contain-
" ed in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and de.
" vised by any other than herself; for that they discourse of

f" ome things, which were unknown to any other than to herself

" and Bothwell; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so the
" matter of them, and the manner how these men came by them
" is such, as it feemeth that God, in whose fight murder and
" bloodshed of the innocent is abominable, would not permit the
" fame to be hid or concealed." Good. 2. 142. They seem to
have made such an impression on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a
subsequent letter to Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has thefre
words, " If the matter shall be thought as detestable and mani-
" fest to you, as for ought we can perceive it feemeth here to us."
Good. 2. 154. 4. After the conferences at York and Wellmin-
fter were finished, Elizabeth resolved to call together the Earls
who were then at court, and to lay beforethem the whole pro-
ceedings againftl the Scottish Queen, particularly that " the let-
" ters and writings exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of
" Scots letters and writings, should also be fhewed, and confer-
" ence Si. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight, with the
" letters of the said Queen's being extant, and heretofore written
" with her own hand, and sent to the Queen's majefly; whereby
" may be searched and examined what difference is betwixt them."
Good. 2. 252, They assembled, accordingly, at Hampton Court,

December 14 and 15, 1568; and " The originals of the letters
" supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand, were
," then also presently produced and perused; and being read, were
" duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
" fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters long since
" heretofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
" Queen's Majesty.- In collation whereof no difference ?3as
" found." Good. 2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical
letter for her condu& to the Countess of Lennox, July io, 157o*,
the transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland; and he return-
ed to the Countess the following answer: " Seeing you have re-
" mittit to me, to answer the Queen the King's Mother's letters
" sent to you, what can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir
" writ the best she can for hirfelf, but to feame to purge hir of
" that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly perfuadit of the
" contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knawledge, but by
" her handwritt, the confelionis of men gone to the death, and
" uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that is hable

* Mary's letter has never been puiblifhed, and ought to have a place here,
where evidence on all sides is fairly produced. " Madam, if the wrang and
false reportis of rebellis, inemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and
alace to muche trusted of me by zoure advice, had not so far flurred you
aganis my innocency, (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have
not onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie, hot so hated me, as some
wordis and opene deideis hes teftifeit to all the warlde, a manyfeft mif-
lyking in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I would nothave omitit thus lang my
dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me of those untrew reportis made of me.
Bot hoping with Godis grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to zow,
as I truf it is already to the maift pairt of all indifferent perfonis, I thocht
it best not to trouble zow for a tyme till that such a matter is moved that
tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure littil tfone, and my onelie
child in this cuntrey. To the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald
be glaid to have zoure advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I
have born him, and God knawis with quhat daunger to him and me boith;
and of zow he is difcendit. So I meane not to forzet my dewtie to zow, in
fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how unkyndlie that ever ze have
delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and respect zow as my moder
in law. And gif ye ples to knaw farther of my mynde in that and all uther
thinges betwixt us, my ambassador the Bishop of Ross fall be ready to con-
ser with zow. And so after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me to my
faide ambassador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zow to the pro-
te&tioun of Almyghty God, quhom I pray to preserve zow and my brother
Chareles, and caus zow to knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chatif-

oTOrth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladle Lenhox Youre natural gude Nice

my mroder in law. and lovyng dochter.

Rrij

( to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black quhyt.
" or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa weill knawin.
" The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
" and my cause, and of the just occasion of our milykyng. Hir
" richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parties interest, were
" hir trew confeflioun and unfeygned repentance of that lament.
" able fa&, odious for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us
" to think of. God is just, and will not in the end be abused;
" but as he has manifested the trewth, so will he puneife the ini-
" quity." Lennox's Orig. Regis/. of Letters. In their publick
papers the Queen's enemies may be fufpe&ed of advancing what
would be most subservient to their cause ; not what was agree-
able to truth, or what flowed from their own inward conviction.
But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox had no occasion.
to dissemble ; and it is plain, that he not only thought the Queen
guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to Bothwell.

2. With regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of

the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, I. That when-
ever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness
of the forger to eflablifh the point in view, his follicitude to cut
off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncer-
tainty, always prompt him to use expreflions the molt explicit and
full to his purpose. The passages foitled into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romilli
faints; the suppositious deeds in their own favour produced by
monasteries; the false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 8.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim seems to be more
certain than this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much,
but seldom falls into the error of proving too little. The point
which the Queen's enemies had to ellabiiih, was " that as the Earl
" of Bothwell was chief executor of the horrible and unworthy mur-
" ther perpetrated, &c. so was she of the foreknowledge, counsel,
" device, persuader, and commander of the said murder to be
" done." Good. 2. 207. But of this there are only imperfect
hints, obscure intimations, and dark expressions in the letters,
which however convincing evidence they might furnish if found
in real letters, bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity
of evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All the advo.
cates for Mary's innocence in her own age, contend that there is
nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof of her guilt,
Lefley, Blackwood, Turner, &'c. abound with passages to this-
purp'fe 3 nor are the sentiments of thole in the present age diffe*-

eat. " Yet flill it might have been expeaed (says her latest
" defender) that some one or other of the points or articles of
" the accusation flould be made out clearly by the proof. But
" nothing of that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is no-
" thing in the letters, that could plainly shew the writer to have
"been in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder,
" far lefsto have persuaded or commanded it; and as little is there
"about maintaining or juflifying any murderers." Good. 1. 76.
How ill advised were Mary's adversaries to contraa so much
guilt, and to pra~fife so many artifices in order to forge letters,
which are so ill contrived for eflablifhing the conclusion they had
in view ? Had they been so base as to have recourse to forgery,
is it not natural to think that they would have produced some-
thing more explicit and decisive ? 2. As it is alraofl impofihble to
invent a long narration consisting of many circumfiances, and to
conned it in such a manner with real facs, that no mark of fLaud
shall appear ; for this reason skilful forgers avoid any long detail
of circumstances, especially of foreign and superfluous ones, well
knowing that the more these are multiplied, the more are the
chances of dete&tion increased. Now Mary's letters, especially
the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circumflances, extreme-
ly natural in a real correspondence, but altogether foreign to the
purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would have bee
perse& folly to have inserted if they had been altogether imagi-
nary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and reality of fe-
veral circumfiances in the letters, and these, too, of no very pu-
blick nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence.
Lett. i. Good. 2. p. i. The Queen is said to have met one of Len-
nox's gentlemen, and to have some conversation with him. Tho-
mas Crawford, who was the person, appeared before Elizabcth',
commiafioners, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this cir-
cunrftance. He likewise declared, that during the Queen's flay
at Glasgow, the King repeated to him, every night, whatever had
paffcd, through the day, between her Majesty and him, and that
the account given of these conversations in the first letter, is near-
ly the fame with what the King communicated to him. Good. 2.
245. According to the fame letter there was much discourse be-
tween the K'ng and Queen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Wal-
car. Good. 2. 8, Io, II. What this might be, was altcgether
unknown till a letter of Mary's preserved in the Scots College at
Paris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it to be an affair
of so much. importance as merited all the attention tfie paid to it

at that time.. It appers by a letter from the French ambaiTader,
that Mary was fubjef to a violent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid.
This circumstance is mentioned, Lett. I. p. 30. in a manner so
natural as can scarce belong to any but a genuine produc&ion. 4. If
we fihall still think it probable to suppose that so many real cir.
cumftances were artfully introduced into the letters by the for-
gers, in order to give an air of authenticity to their produ8ion;
it will scarce be possible to hold the fame opinion concerning the
following particular. Before the Queen began her first letter to
Bothwell, flie, as is usual, among those who write long letters
concerning a variety of fubje&s, made notes or memorandums of
the particulars she wished to remember; but as flie fate up writ-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
sfleep, her paper failed her, and she continued her letter upon
the fame sheet, on which she had formerly made her memoran-
dums. This ihe herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for
it: " It is late' I desire never to cease from writing unto you,
" yet now after the kifflng of your hands, I will end my letter.
" Excuse my eviltwriting, and read it twice over. Excuse that
" thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper zeflerday, quhen I wrait
" that of the memorial." Good. 2. 28. These memorandums fill
appear irf the middle of the letter; and what we have said seems
naturally to account for the manner how they might find their
way into a real letter. It is scarce to be fappofed however that
any forger would think of placing memorandums in the middle
of a letter, where, at firfi fight, they make so absurd and so un-
natural an appearance. But if any shall still carry their refine-
ment so far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as to
throw in this circumRlance, in order to preserve the appearance
of genuineness, they must at least allow that the Queen's enemies,
who employed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design
and meaning of these short notes and memorandums; btrt we find
them mistaking them so far as to imagine that they were the cre-
dit of the bearer, i. e. points concerning which the Queen had
given him verbal inftrufions. Good. 2. 152. This they cannot
possibly be; for the Queen herself writes with so much exa&nef
concerning the different points in the memorandums, that there
was no need of giving any credit or inftru&ions to the bearer con-
cerning them. The memorandums are indeed the contents of the
letter. 5. Mary, mentioning her conversations with the King a-
bout the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &.c. says, " The morne [i.e.
fo-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that point ;" and then adds,

" As to the reft of Willie Heigait's, he confeffit it; but it was
the morne, [ i. e. the morning] ofter my cumming or he did it."
Good. 2. 9. This addition which could not have been made till
after the converfaticn happened, seems either to have been in-
ferted by the Queen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps, 4he
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence into the
text. If we suppose the letter to be a real one, and written at
different times, as it plainly bears, this circumflance appeals to
be very natural; but no reason could have induced a forger to
have ventured upon such an anachronism, for which there was no
necessity. An addition, perfectly similar to this, made to a ge-
nuine paper, may be found, Good. 2. 282.

But, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for
her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by
her enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to justify
their own rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the ar-
guments, which were produced, in her own age, in fuppolt of
this opinion ; the observations which we have already made, con-
tain a full reply to them. An author, who has inquired into the
affairs of that period with great induflry, and who ha sacquir--
ed much knowledge of them, - has lately publiffied (as he as-
firms) a demonfiration of the forgery of Mary's letters. This
demonitratio4 he founds upon evidence both internal and xter-
nal. With regard to the former he observes that the French co-
py of the Queen's letters is plainly a translation of Buchanan's
Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a translation of the Scottish
copy; and by consequence, the assertion of the Queen's enemies,
that she wrote them originally in French, is altogether gxound-
less, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. He accounts for
this fitrange succession of translations, by supposing that when the
forgery was projeced, no person could be found capable of writ-
ing originally in the French language, letters which would pass
for the Queen's ; for that reason they were first composed in
Scottish; but unluckily, the French interpreter, it would seem,
did not underfland that language; and therefore Buchanan tranf-
lated them into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered in-
to French. Good. i. 79, 80.

It is scarce necessary to observe that no proof whatever is pro-

duced of any of these suppositions. The manners of the Scots,
in that age, when almost every man of rank spent a part of his
youth in France, and the intercourse between the two nations

was great, render it altogether improbable that so many compli,
cated operations fliould be necessary, in order to procure a few
letters to be written in the French language.

But without insisting farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced
by Murray and his party in the Scottish parliament, and at York
and -Weftminfler. But this he has not attempted; and if we at-
tend to the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious,
must have been unfuccefsful. The letters were first published at
the end of Buchanan's Detejion. The first edition of this treatise
was in Latin,' in which language three of the Queen's letters
were fubjoined to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 157.
Soon after a Scottish translation of it was published, and at the
end of it we reprinted likewise in Scottish, the three letters which
had formerly appeared in Latin, and five other letters in ScottiIh,
which were not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French
tranflati6n of the Detection, and of seven of the letters; this
bears to have been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem 1572,
The name of the place, as well as of the printer, is allowed by
all parties to be a manifefl impoflure. Our author, from obferv-
ing the day of the month, on which the printing is said to have
been finifhied, has asserted that this edition was printed at Lon-
don ; but no itrefs can be laid upon a date found in a book, where
every other circumstance with regard to the printing is allowed
to be false. Blackwood, who (next to Lefly) was the best in-
formed of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that the
French edition of the Detection was published in France: " 11
[Buchanan] a depuis adjouft6 a cefte declamation un petit libelle
du pretendu mariage du Due de Norfolk, et de la facon de son
proces, et la tout envoy' aux freres a la Rochelle, lefquels voy-
ants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, P'ont traduit en Francois, et
iceluy fut imprimne a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par
Thomas Waltem, nom apofit et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie.
Jehb. 2. 256. The author of the Innocence de Marie goes far-
ther, and names the French translator of the Detedlion. Et
iceluy premirement compos6 (comme i1 femble) par George Eu-
chanan Efcoffoys, et depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un
Hugonot, Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant
gentilhomme, et un de plus remarquez fediteux de France.
Jebb. 1. 425, 443. The concurring testimony of two cotempo-

rary authors, whose residence in France afforded them fufficient
ineans of information, must outweigh a flight conjedure. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the original French
letters as written by the QuOeen herself; he eiprefsly declares that
he translated them from the Latin. Good. I. 103. Had our
author attended to all these circumstances, he might have saved
himself the labour of so many criticisms tq prove that the present
French copy of the letters is a translation from the Latin. The
French editor himself acknowledges it, and so far as I know no
person ever denied it.

We may observe that the French translator was to ignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French,
partly in Scottish. Good. I. 103. Had this translation been pub-
blifhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his direftion,
so gross an error would not have been adniitted into it. This
error, however, was owing to an odd circumstance. In the
Scottish translation of the Detection, there was perfixed to each
letter two or three sentences of the original French, which break-
ing off with an &c. the Scottift translation of the whole follow-
ed. This method of printing translations was not uncommon in
that age. The French editor observing this, foolishly concluded
that the letters had been written partly in French, partly in
Scottish.

If we carefully confider these few French sentences of each.

letter which still remain, and apply tb them that species of criti-
cifm, by which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof
will arise, that there was a French copy not translated from the
Latin, but which was itself the original from which both the
Latin and Scottish have been translated. This minute criticism
must necessarily be disagreeable to many readers, but luckily a
few sentences only are to be examined, which will render it ex-
tremely short.

In the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, y fazfoit bon. It is plain that this expression veu ce
Oue peut un corps fan ccur is by no means a translation of cum
plane perinde ejfem atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence
has a spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin
nor Scottish have retained. J'/fues a la dine is not a translation
of toto prandii tempore ; the Scottish translation qubile denner-time
expresses the sense of the- French more properly 5 foi anciently
quhile signified until! as well as during. fe n'ay pas tenu grand
propos is not justly rendered neque contulerim fermonem cam quo-

Volume 11. S f

quamn; the phrase used in the French copy, is one peculiar to that
language, and gives a more probable account of her behaviour,
than the other. .Jugeant ben qu'il n'y fazfoit bon, is not A
translation of ut quijudicarent id non ele ex u/u. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with apprendre. It is evident
that both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted alto-
gether these words, et toutefoirje nepuis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with presenter. y'aye veilliplus
tard la haut is plainly no translation of diutius illic morata fum;
the sense of the French is better expressed by the Scottish I have
walkit laiter there-up. Again, Pour excuser vofire aqfaire is very
different from ad excufandum nofra negotia. The five remaining
letters never appeared in Latin ; nor is there any proof of their
being ever translated into that language. Four of them, how.
ever, are published in French. This entirely overturns our au-
thor's hypothesis concerning the neceflity of a translation into
Latin.

In the Scots edition of the Detecion the whole sonnet is

printed in French as well as in Scottiflh. It is not possible to be-
lieve that this Scottish copy could be the original from which the
French was translated. The French consists of verses which have
both measure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far
from being inelegant. The Scottish consists of an equal number
of lines, but without measure or rhyme. Now no man could
ever think of a thing so absurd and impracticable, as to require
one to translate a certain given number of lines in prose, into an
equal number of verses, where both measure and rhyme were to
be observed. The Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifefily
to be a translation of the French ; the phrases, the idioms, and
many of the words are French, and not Scottish. Besides, the
Scottiflh translator has in several infiances miflaken the sense of
the French, and in many more eyprcflcs the sense imperfeftly,
Had the sonnet been forged, this could not have happened. The
direcors'of the fraud would have underflood their own work. I
Thall satisfy myself with one example, in which there is a proof u5
both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je vcux garder sant& et vie,
Pour luy toute vertu de fuivre j' ay envie.
For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

,Attend in the firfi line is not a Scottish but a French phrase i

the two last lines do not express the sense of the French, and are
ahfolute nonsense.

The eighth letter was never translated into French. It con-

tains much refined myflicifai about devices, a folly of that age, of
'vhich Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circum-
itances, particularly from a letter concerning imprefas by Drum-
mond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her let-
ters, they were certainly employed very idly when they produ-
ced this.

From these observations it seems to be evident tlhat there was

a French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottilh
were only translations. Nothing now remains of this copy but
those few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish tranfiation.
The French editor laid hold of there sentences, and tacked his
own translation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a ser-
vile and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin ; where-
as in those introductory sentences, we have discovered Itrong marks
of their being originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

It is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottish tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Scottish translator has more
perfet-ly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the
Latin. And as it appears that the letters were very early tranf-
lated into Scottish, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Buchanan
made his translation not from the French but from this Scottish
copy. Were it necessary, several critical proofs of this might be
produced. One that has been already mentioned seems decisive.
Diutius illic morata fum bears not the least resemblance toj'fay
veille plus tard la haut; but if, inflead of Iwalkit [i. e. watched]
laiter there up, we suppose that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. this
niftake, into which he might so easily have fallen, accounts for
the error in his translation.

These criticisms, however minute, appear to be well founded.
But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the other
arguments with regaxrd to the internal evidence reniain in full
force.

The external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which
our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already examined. According to Mur.
ray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January
21, 1567 ; the arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the

Ss ij

27th; she, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the
28th, flayed in that town only one night, and returned to Edin-
burgh before the end of the month. But according to our author,
the Queen did not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th,
as she flayed a night at Callendar, the could not reach Glasgow
sooner than the evening of Saturday the 25th, and (he returned
to Linlithgow on Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the first
letter which supposes the Queen to have been at least four days
in Glasgow, as well as the second letter, which bears date at
Glasgow Saturday morning, whereas she did not arrive there till
the evening, must be forgeries. That the Queen did not set out
from Edinburgh sooner than the 24th of January, is evident (as
he contends) from the public records, which contain a Precept of
confirmation of a life-rent by James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers
granted by the Queen on the 24th of January at Edinburgh;
and likewise a letter of the Queen's, dated at Edinburgh on the
fame day, appointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son.
That the King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow on the
28th, appears from a deed in which they appoint Andrew Ferrier
keeper of their palace there, dated at Linlithgow January 28.
Good. i. IS.

This has been reprcfented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by
Mary ; but how far it falls fhbirt of this, will appear from the
following considerations.

I. It is evident from a declaration or confeffion made by the

Bishop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of Odober 1568, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters
Tvhich her fubjeas accused her of having written to Bothwell.
3rown's trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly pro-
bable that the Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote
the defence of Queen Mary's honour, in the year 1570. They
were published to all the world together with Buchanan's De-
te&ion, A. D. 1571. Now if they had contained any error so
gross, and so obvious, at that time, to discovery, as the supposing
the Queen to have passed several clays at Glasgow, while (he was
really at Edinburgh ; had they contained a letter dated at las-
gow Saturday morning, though (he did not arrive there till the
evening; is it poflible that flie herself, who knew her own mo-
*:ions, or the able and zealous advocates who appeared for her in
.hat age, should not have publiflhed and exposed this contradiction,

;nd, by so doing, have blasted, at once, the credit of such an im-
poflure ? In difquifitions which are naturally abfLrufe and intri-
cate, the ingenuity of the latest author may discover many things,
which have escaped the attention, or baffled the sagacity of those
who have formerly considered the fame fubjeat. But when a
matter of fact lay so obvious to view, this circumstance of its
being unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any of her adhe-
rents, is almost a demonflration that there is frome mistake or fal-
lacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any either of our
historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in quellion the
common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the least.
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this
point. But farther,

2. Those papers in the public records, on which our author

rells the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions,
are not the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or
translations of copies of those originals.' It is not necessary, nor
would it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unac-
quainted with the forms of law in Scotland; but every Scotfmart
conversant in business will understand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin
copy or note of a precept, which was sealed with the Privy Seal,
on a warrant from the signet office, proceeding on a signature
which bore date at Edinburgh the 24th of January ; and that the
deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a letter, sealed with
the Privy Seal, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh January 24. From all this we may argue with some
degree of reason, that a proof founded on papers, which are so
many removes diflant from the originals, cannot be but very lame
and uncertain.

3. At that time all public papers were issued in the name both

of the King and Queen; by law, the King's subscription was no
less requisite to any paper than the Queen's ; and therefore unless
the original signatures be produced in order to ascertain the par-
ticular day when each of them signed, or to prove that it was
signed only by one of them, the legal proof arising from these
papers would be, that both the King and Queen signed them at
Edinburgh, on the 24th of January.

4. The dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the fove-

reign, in that age, seem to have been in a great measure arbitrary,
and affixed at the pleasure of the writer i and of confenuence,

these dates were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found
to be so pernicious, that an at of parliament, A. D. 1592, de.
dared the affixing a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. There ffill remain, in the public records, a great numberof

papers, which prove the neceflity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the diflance of two centuries, to prove any parti.
cular date to be false, yet surprising inflances of this kind shall
be produced. Nothing is more certain from history than that
the King was at Glasgow 24th January 1567 and yet the re-
cord of signatures from 1565 to 1582, Fol. 16th, contains the
copy of a signature to Archibald Edmonfiton said to have been
subscribed by our Sovereigns, i. e. the King and Qeen, at Edin.
burgh, January 24th I567 ; so that if we were to trust implicitly
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our author's argu.
ment to be good, it would prove that not only the Queen, but the
King too, was at Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

It appears from an original letter of the Bishop of Ross that on

the 25th of Odober 1566, Mary lay at the point of death;
Keith, App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the public
records, which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day.
Privy Seal. Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlony.

According to papers in the fame book, fol. 113, the Queen

anuft have been at Edinburgh December 21, 1566. According
to other papers, fol. 99, 100. fine must have been at Stirling
December 21 ; and if we depend upon other papers, fol. n112,
1he must have returned to Edinburgh on December 22d. These
various motions are altogether repugnant to hiflory. The Queen
during all that time remained at Stirling, on account of the
prince's baptifin ; and we particularly know that she was there
December 22d, by a letter of Du Croc the French ambassador,
"ho mentions an interview he had with her at Stirling on that
day. Keith, Pref. VII.

Bothwell seized the Queen as she returned from Stirling, April

24th 1567, and (according- to her own account) c.rried her to
Dunbar with all diligence, And. 1. 95. But our author relying
on the dates of some papers which he found in the records, sup-
poses that Bothwell allowed her to stop at Edinburgh, and to
tranfat business there. Nothing can be more improbable than
this supposition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to
i7iht: P;iivy Seal, Lib. 36. fol, 43. and which is mentioned by

our author, Vol. 1. 124. among the instances of the false dates,
of papers which were iflued in the ordinary course of business in
that age. Our author has miflaken the date of the other paper
to Forbes, ibid. it is signed April i4th, not April 24th.

If there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is, that
fihe remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her
thither, till (he returned to Edinburgh along with him in the be-
ginning of May. Our author himself allows that she resided
twelve days there, Vol. I. 367. Now though there are deeds
in the records which bear that they were signed by the Queen at
Dunbar during that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh ; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh,
April 27th, Privy Seal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said
to be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524,
j26. lb. lib. 32. No. 154, 157. There are some signed atDun-
bar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh April 30oth, Lib. 32.
Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May illt. Id. ibid. No. i58.
These different charters suppose the Queen to have made so many
unknown, improbable, and inconsistent journeys, that they afford
the clearest demonstration that the dates in these records ought
not to be depended on.

This becomes more evident from the date of the charter faiid
to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of federunt, then kept by the Lords of
Sellion.

From this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of
the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far
from amounting to demonfiration.

Another argument against the genuineness of these letters is
founded on the itile and compolition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produ&ions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in a
fair hand, that she valued herself on those accomplishments, and
was desirous of being efleemed an elegant writer. But when flhe
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy ap-
pear. A remarkable instance of this may be found ip a paper
published, Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ-
ten in the utmost hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of
a translation, they arc not destitute either of spirit or of energy.
The manner in which she exprcfifs her love to Buth'vcll. h'a.I

been pronounced indecent and even thocking. But Mary's tem.
per led her to warm expressions of her regard ; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce between the
sexes, were, in that age, but little known, even among persons of
the highest rank. Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series
of letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the
Harleian Library, P. 37. B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares
her love to that nobleman in language, which would now be
reckoned extremely indelicate:

The sonnets and forme.of Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ.

ten before the murder of her husband ; some of them after that
event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are
prior to the death of her husband abound with the fondest ex-
preffions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their
familiarity had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too,
some dark expreffons, which her enemies employed to prove that
Ihe was no firanger to the schemes which Were forming againl
her hufband's life. Of this kind are the following passages,
" Alace ! I nevir diffavit ony body ; hot I remit me altogidder
to zour will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhat.
faever thing come therof, I fall obey zow. Advise too with zour-
self, gif ze can find out oriy mair secret inventioun by medecine,
for he fuld tak medecine and the bath at Cragmillar." Good. z.
22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa mekle
praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faithfull travellis quhilk I
fuflene for to merite hir place. For obtaining of the quhilk,
aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may impefche me. God
forgive me," &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit laiter thair-up, then
I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw something out of
him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairefl com-
modity that can be offerit to excuse zour affairls. Ibid. 32. From
the letters posterior to the death of her husband, it is evident that
the scheme of Bothwell's fcizing Mary by force, and carrying
her along with him, was contrived in concert with herself, and
with her apprcbation *.

* That lctte s of so much importance as those of T'aiy's to Bothwell

Fiould have been entirely loft, appears to many altogether unacountable.
After being produced in England before Elizabeth's commilffoners they were
de.liered back by them to the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 235. Ie seems to
have kept them in his poffeflon during his life. After his death, they fell
into the hands of Lennox his fuccefoir, who reffored them to the Earl of
M1orton. Good. 2. 9 r. Thgugh it be not necessarily connefted with any of

'Having thus slated the proof on both sides; having examined

.at so great length the different fyflems with regard to the fads
son controversy ; it may be expeded that I fliould now pronounce
sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
.can be drawn from the facts which have been enumerated.

One, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and pre-
-fuming on her attachment to himself, struck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of tfltifying much indig-

the queflions which gave occasion to this Dissertation, it may perhaps fa-
tisfy.the curiosity of some of my readers to inform them, that after a very
diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to
*Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
-only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time.of their being de-
livered to Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr Birch.

Extra& of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador from Queen Eli-.
zabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secre-
tary of fiate, from the original register book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from
isth of Augul 1i582, to 28th September 1583, in the poffeflon of Chritlopher
Hunter, M. D. of Durham.

58.l , Pth November, from Edinburgh.

Albeit I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein were the ori-
ginals of letters between the Scottish Queen and the Earl of Bothwell, had
been delivered to sundry hands, and thereby was at prefont wanting, and-
unknown where it rested, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of iluf-
cardyne's means, that both the coffer and also the writings are come, and
now remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly in-
treated to make delivery to her Majefly according to her Majefty's desire.

This time past I haye expended in searching where the coffer and writings

tere, wherein without the help of the prior I thould have found great difficul-
ty; now I will essay Gowrie, and of my fuccecs you (fall be shortly advertised.

i2th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

Because I had both learned, that the caiket and letters mentioned in my last,

before these were come to the poffeilon of the Earl of Gowrie, and also
found that no mean might prevail to m in the fame out of his hands without
his own consent and privity; in which behalf i had employed fit inftrnments
that nevertlelefs profited nothing, therefore I attempted to essay himself,
letting him know that the said caiket and letters should have been brought
to her Majesty by tlie offer and good means of good friends, promi-ing to have
delivered them toherMajefty, beforetheycame into his hands and custody, and
knowingthat hedidbearthelikeaffeftion,and was readyto pleasure herN ajefty
in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far tendered to her
Majefly, and which thereby flhald be well accepted, and with princely thanks
and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentment; I moved him that
they might be a present to be sent to her Majesty from him, and that I might
saufe the fame be conveyed to her Majefly, adding hereunto such words
Sad arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and also best effc

T ',

nation at the deed, or discovering any resentment againfl Both.
well, who was accused of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conduEted his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it impossible to discover his guilt, and soon after,
in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, vo-
luntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every confidera-
tion flhould have induced her to detest. By this verdid1, Mary
is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her

the purpose; at the first he was loth to agree that they were in hispoffeflion,
but I let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they were
delivered to him by Sanders Jordin, whereupon he pressed to know who did
so inform me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Morton had done
it or no; I did not otherways in plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but
thathe might think thathe hadtoldme, as the prior is ready, to avouch andwell
pleased that I shall give him to be the author thereof; after he had laid
[though] all these letters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant
nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any person without the consents
and privit;es, as well of the King, that had interest therein, as also of the
reft of the noblemen enterprifers of the adion against the King's mother,
and that would have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good
that afion. And albeit I replied, that their action in that part touching
the affignatin of the crown to the King by his mother, had received such
eflabliffhment, confirmation, and firength, by a&s of Parliament and other
publick authority and infirumer ts, as neither should that cafe be fuffered to
come in debate or question, nor such ferolls and papers ought to be fhewed
for the strengthening thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered
to the hands of her Majefly, to whom they were destined before they fellin
Lhs keeping; yet he would not be removedor satisfied, concluding, after much
reasonings, that the Easl f 3Morton,nor any other that had the charge and
keeping thereof, durst at any time make delivery, and because it was the
firt time that I had movedhimtherein, and thathewould gladlyboth anfiver
her Majeftly's good expe&ation in him, and also perform his duty due to
his sovereign and associates in the a&tion aforesaid, therefore he would seek
out the said casket and letters, at his return to his house, which he thought
should be within a short time; and upon finding of the fame and better ad,
vice, and consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This resolution I have received as to the thing; and for the present I could
not better, leaving him to give her Majefly such testimony of his good will
towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as she may have cause to confirm
her highnesses good opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn
to greater goodness towards him. I stall frill labour him both by myself
ard also by all other means, but I greatly distrust the desired success herein,

24th of November I582, from Edinburgh.

For the recovery of the letters in the coffer, ccme to the hands of the Earl
of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnefily therein, letting him know the
purpose of the Scottilh Queen, both giving out that the letters are counter.
feited by her rebels, and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her
or defaced, and that the means which she will make in this behalf thallhc

hufLand, or even of having previously given her consent to his
death ; but she is not acquitted of having discovered her appro-
bation of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the
author of it.

The other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to eflablihs, " That as James, fometymme Erie of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy

so great and effectual, as these writings cannot Le safely kept in that realm
without dangerous offence of him that hath the cuitody thereof, neither shi-ll
he that is once known to have them be fuffered to hold them in his hands.
Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that ation,
and the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now oper.ly
known to have the poffelion of thefewritings, and I have lettin him fee what
surety it shall bring to the said cause and all the parties therein, and to
himself, that these writings may be with fecrecy'and good order committed to
thekeepingof her Mlajefty, that willhave them ready whensoever any use fiall
be for them, and by her Highnesses countenance defend them and the parties
from such wrongfull objections as shall be laid againif them, offering at
length to him, that if he be not fully satisfied herein, or doubt that th.e reft
of the associates flall not like of the delivery of them to her majesty in this
good manner, and for the interest rehearsed, that I shall readily, upon meet-
ing and conference with them, procure their assent in this part; (a matter
more easy to offer than to perform) and, laily, moving him that (for the
secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her Majefly's good opinion towards
himself may be firmly fettled and confirmed by his acceptable forwardness
herein) he would, without needless scruple, frankly commit thee wri.i: gs
to her Majefty's good custody for the good uses received. After long debate
he resolved, and said, that he would unfeinedly shew andd)toher MajefLy
all the pleasure that he might without offence to the King his Sovereign,
and prejudice to the associates in the aftion, and therefore he would firit
make search and view the said letters, and herein take advice what he
might do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty; promif-
ing thereon to give more resolute anfier; and he concluded flatly, tlat
after he had found and seen the writings, that he might not make delivery
of them without the privity of the King. Albeit I flood long with him
againfl his resolution in this point, to acquaint the King with this matter
before the letters were in the hands of her Majefiy, letting him !ee that
his doings there fliould admit great danger to the cauCe; yet I could not
remove him from i:. It may be that he meaneth to put over the matter
from himself to the King, upon fight whereof I shall travel effeftually to
obtain the King's consent, that the letters may be commited to her Majefty's
keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the pre-
sent love and affection that he beareth to her Highness, then to win any
thing at the hands of the associates in the ation, whereof forne principal of
them now come and remain at the devotion of the King's mother; in this
I (hall still call on Gowrie to search out the coffer, according to his promise;
and as I (hall find him minded to do therin, so thall I do my best anl whole
endeavour to effec the success to her Majefly's bell contentment.

Tt ij

murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of glidS
memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis lauchful
husband ; fa was file of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise, per-
fwadar and commander of the said murder to be done." Good.

2. 207.

Which of there conclusions is most agreeable to the evidence,

that has been produced, I leave my readers to determiire.

2d December 1382, from Fdinburgh,

Because I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter, to the Earl

ds Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I
put him in mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox
had fought earnestly to have had those letters, and that the King did know
where they were, so as they could not be delivered to her Majelly without
the King's privity and consent, and he pretended to be Mfill willing to plea-
Lure her Majefly in the fame, so far as he may with his duty to the King
and to the reft of the associates in that acion ; but I greatly distrust to es-
set this to her Majefty's pieafure, wherein, nevertheless, I shall do my ut-
termoft endeavours.

Whether James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death, A. D. 1j84.

and seized all his effe-s, took care to defiroy his mother's letters, for whose
honour he was at that time extremely zealous ; whether they have perish-
ed by some unknown accident; or whether they may not still remain unob-
served among the archievs of some of our great families, it is imnpofflb
to determine.

T HE- EN D'

# A CONCISE STATE OF THE Controversy respecting QUEEN MARY.

CONCISE STATE

OF TIRtE

Controversy refpeaSing QUEEN MARY.

FE w fubje&s of political controversy have more engaged the
attention of this nation, or been attended with more formidable
and more fatal effe6ts of party-rage, than the present question.-
The barbarity, the bigotry, and enthusiasm of the times, in which
ihe lived, all conspired to harden the hearts of her cotemporaries
against this unhappy princess, and to cause them shut their eyes
against the cleareff evidence in her favour; while the ambition
of those who usurped, or wiflied to usurp, her authority, prompt-
ed them to invent numberless falsehoods to her prejudice, which
were greedily swallowed as undeniable truths by the unthinking
multitude; and as such have been transmitted to latter times.
On the other hand, the general spirit of inquiry, and liberality of
sentiment, which so greatly diftinguift the present age, have in-
fluenced many learned men to undertake the defence of this il-
luftrious princess, whose misfortunes cannot but inspire every one
with compassion, and make even- her enemies sincerely lament het
fate.

In slating the evidence on both sides, however, it must be re-
amernbered, that, in all controversies whatever, some allowance
must be made for the prejudices of the authors who write upon the
fubjef. It is undeiiable, that the motives already mentioned
must have operated very powerfully on the minds of those who
accused her originally ; while many authors of later date, bred
tp in the belief of those calumnies, have been unwilling to allow
themselves to think candidly on the fubjec. But it is equally
undeniable that a consideration of the beauty, the fufferings, and
magnanimity of Mary in her adversity, are apt to create an op-
pofite prejudice in the minds of her advocates 5 and to lead themn
inadvertently into an unwillingness to admit those faults which
justice must certainly aferibe to her. Thus it becomes difficult,
tfter all that has been written upon the fubjed, to know which
of the two parties to believe; nor does it appear to us possible to
atain to a knovwlcdge of the truth, without a very rigid invefit-

gation of the writings, as well as a consideration of the partisc.
lar situations of those who have hitherto engaged in the contro.
verfy.

The dispute originated with the celebrated historian Buchanzn,

His great literary talents, and fume appearance of fanflity deriv.
ed from his translating the Psalms into Latin, gave a prejudice in
favour of what he advances. It is difficult to suppose that a man
who must have been at much pains in searching for truth, as his
hiflory thews him to have been, would wilfully have fluffed his
writings with malicious ffafehoods ; and it is unnatural to ima.
gine that one, who had spent so much time in perusing the Scrip.
tures, would, without a very juil ground have fct himself to ruin
his sovereign. To this prejudice in favour of his literary talents
and uprightness, we must ascribe the partiality thewn to his f.
fertions by the celebrated French writers De Thou, Bayle, and
Voltaire. Mary appeared once in much splendor as queen of France;
so that it was otherwise natural for the French, who have been
remarkable for extolling the great qualities of their sovereigns,
to be lavish of their praises towards such an amiable and accom-
plifhed princess. To the assertions of Buchanan therefore, an
eminent writer in this controversy * ascribes the unfavourable ac-
counts of Queen Mary, given by these authors, which have late.
ly been refuted with success by Mademoiselle de Keralio.

To remove this prejudice in favour of our eminent hiforian,

we have only to confider his situation at that time. He was pre.
ceptor to the Prince, Mary's son, who was not under her tuition.
Of consequence he was independent of the Queen with refpet to
his personal interest, nay it would have been much against his
interest at that time, to have appeared her advocate. We can-
not suppose him to have been a great favourite with the Queen,
after she perceived his ingratitude towards her, and, we may not
unreasonably suppose, that fonme share of personal ill will or resent.
mert lurked in his breast

i so 'that, considering all these circum-

*

' Mr. De Thou, Bayle, Voltaire, and other French writers, says he, fe.

duced by Buchanan, had adopted his falsehoods. To remove what they had
inculcated, was reserved for Mademoiselle de Kerallio; for the pen of a
French lady, to refore the character of a Queen of France, who was once
in high esteem there, and iiho once shone among the most illuffrious cha.
ra&ors in that kingdom.

" This, Mademoiselle de Keral:o bas efTecually done. She has completed

the triumph of Queen Mary, by a work which does honour to her sex, and
to her country." Tytler's Ena:dry, V7l. I. p. 31. etfeq. edit. 1790.

tances, .we can hardly suppose that any person in a similar fitua-
tion would now-a-days be sustained as a legal witness in any
Court. In this a priori way of arguing therefore, we have in
Buchanan's favour, his learning, affilduity in colleaing truths, his
fidelity as an hiflorian ; and his humanity, and duty as a Chris-
tian. On the other hand, we have interest, party-zeal, and re-
fentment against the person concerning whom he writes; and
which of these two sets of motives are most likely to prevail,
when placed in competition in the human breast, we must leave
to the judgment of the reader.

The antagonist of Buchanan, even in his own age, was Le'ly

bishop of Rols. Being the Queen's amba.Tador at the Court of
England, there is the highest reason to believe that he was pof-
feSed of every evidence and authentic document that could be
procured either for or against the unfortunate princess, -who was
the fubjef of dispute. No doubt his interest was in some degree
connedted with the honour and reputation of his mistress; but,
had he abandoned her, it can scarce be supposed that he would
have been a loser. We muff confider that Mary was the fuffer-
ing party. Her antagonist Elizabeth hated her as a pretender to
her Crown. She dreaded her as one capable of influencing the
Catholic Powers to make a dangerous invasion of her kingdom;
while she viewed her with all that envy and jealousy which fills
the mind of a woman that cannot bear an equa!, when she be-
holds herself outfhined in beauty and person.1 accompliifhments.
Add to all this the party-rage, on account of religion falsely so
called, which we fee, even in our own times, can fearcely be
kept within bounds; and which in those days, comparatively bar-
barous with refpea to ours, we are fare must have been much
worse. Considering, therefore, Elizabeth as a powerful princess,
and capable of liberally rewarding those who favoured her cause,
while the partisans of Mary fulfered contempt, oppression, and
indignity, we must as naturally be inclined to give our assent to
the evidence in favour of the latter, as to doubt of that which
is against her. Should the evidence produced by Lefly, there-
fore, be found void of truth, we must flill account him an hone
man though miflaken; but the name can by no means be applied
to Buchanan if his assertions shall be found ill-grounded.

Thus far we naturally find a prejudice in favour of Mary, arif-

ing, if we may be allowed the exprefflon, from impartiality itself,
or the mere consideration of those circumfitances in which the
parties flood in her time ; and how the motives which operated

ipUOTn them may be (uppofed to have had an influence on thei
conduct. But when .we confider the evidence itself, we mua
certainly be disposed to rejed it entirely, if it does not contain
the most full and direc proof of her guilt. When a person is in the
hands of those who are his enemies as well as judges, and who
have unlimited power to produce every evidence that can be pro.
aduced, the want of a single article must be in a manner decisive
against them; and even should their evidence be the most ex.
plicit that can be required, we could not be altogether void of
suspicion. On the other hand, whatever is urged in favour as
,the supposed culprit must appear with aggravated force; for this
plain reason, that we know it is natural for such judges to sAp-
press true, and to coin false evidence.

With refpe6& to the modern authors who have written upoq

this fubjea, we can by no means attribute to them any of the
motives which must evidently have influenced those who were
immediate a&ors in the scenes under consideration. A desire of
literary fame might make some contradia, and others agree with
a celebrated author, such as Buchanan; while some no doubt
were mostly influenced by a desire of investigating the tiuth,
and either vindicating the memory of an illuflrious princess from
the afperflons thrown upon her in her lifetime, or fixing them
for ever as indubitable fads. At any rate, their rivalfhip has
undoubtedly served to bring to light, and elucidate fadts which
would othelwife have remained involved in obscurity, if not bu-
ried entirely in oblivion.

The whole of this controversy, important as it has been, hinges

on a single question, viz. Whether are certain letters and love
sonnets addressed to the Earl Bothwell, and said to be found a-
mong his papers after his flight, to be looked upon as genuine
or not ? If they are genuine, Mary's moral conduct cannot
be vindicatedi but it is impossible to justify that of her adver-
faries whether they are or not ; for it never was pretended that
there was any legal proof of these letters before she was taken
prisoner, and forced to resign her kingdom.

It has already been remarked, that even in the time of Queeq

Mary herself, this unfortunate princess was not without an able
defender in Lefly bishop of Ross. He published a Defence of
Mary's Honour, in which the authenticity of the papers in quef-
tion was very ably contested ; but this was suppressed by Queel
Elizabeth. Many others appeared on the continent, but non,
were fuffered to come into England ; and, even in France, when

we confider the little inclination Phewn by that power to save the
ife of Mary, we cannot wonder that any vindication of her fame
lLould be negled6ed; and hence every thing published in that way
was soon allowed to fall into contempt and oblivion. In the mean
time, Buchanan's performance intitled ADeteR1ion of the Acilons of
,Vary, &c. was patronized by Elizabeth in the highest degree;
receiving every recommendation which authority and influence
wsould give ; being formally presented to the Queen of England
herself, and circulated through the kingdom by her ministers. In.
Scotland it was received with the utmost avidity as well through
refpec to the abilities of Buchanan, as the aversion entertained
against the unhappy princess herself on account of religious mat-
ters. Thus the generality of people in this country were brought
up in the belief of Mary's guilt, and every attempt to justify, or
even to clear up the dispute concerning her, was soon over-
whelmed and loft. Many of these, however, had undoubtedly
made their appearance ; for Anderson, in his preface to his Col-
lesion of Papers upon this controversy, informs us, that he had
seen more than forty books written expressly on the fubjei, and
sixty in which it was treated of in a slighter manner.

In foch a multitude of writings it is no wonder that it should
be difficult to come at the truth; and Mr. Anderfon's work in.
four volumes quarto, seems to have been the first flep towards an
elucidation of these obscure points. But it was not till the year
1754, that any profeffed advocate of note appeared in defence of
Mary. The first was Mr. Goodall, keeper of the Advocates' li-
brary in Edinburgh, a gentleman very much acquainted with re-
cords, and endowed with a patience, to search into these unenter-
taining repositories, not often to be met with. He traced the
letters in question from their very first appearance in the hands
of the Earl of Morton, and remarked every thing that passed
concerning them before Queen Elizabeth, her Council, and the
Comminilioners. In his Collection many papers in favour of Mary
are to be met with, which Anderson had omitted.
The merit-of Mr. Goodall's performance was for some time
loft in the obstinacy of prejudice, or the ignorance of inattention.
Even the celebrated hiflorians Hume and Robertson took the
apposite fide, and, by the refpel deservedly paid to their abili-
ties, seemed, for some time, entirely to countera&t the little in-
fluence which the writings of Mr. Goodall had with the public.
They were fuccefsfully opposed by Mr. Tytler, who improved
the arguments of Mr. Goodall, furnished new ones of his own,

Volume II. U u

and by writing in a more lively and perspicuous manner, roused
the public attention very remarkably. Dr. Robertson feemedto
confess a defeat, by making no reply ; and Hume did the fame,
by replying to Mr. Tytler's performance ; though he had laid it
down on all other occasions, as an invariable rule, never to an.
fwer an adversary. His reply, however, did not appear till a
long time after the publication of Mr. Tytler's book ; and then
consisted of a single ill-natured note, in which the cause of Mary
was touched only in one single point. Mr. Tytler defended him.
self in a Postscript to a new edition of his work, which has ne-
ver been answered by any body. He was followed by Dr. Gil.
bert Stuart, whose elegant and sprightly manner has been much
admired; and Mr. Whitaker confeffes, that it was the feconde.
dition of this work which put him upon fludying the fubjeaf with
such attention as to be enabled to write a profeffed Vindication
of Mary. In this he thinks he has elucidated some things con.
cerning the letters more fully than had been done by any of her
advocates. Thus it appears that the evidence one way or other
must be complete, and a fair slate of what has been already laid
before the public by different hands, must contain all that can be
said upon the fubjedc.

The Accusations against Mary first appeared in the form of a

treatise by Buchanan, under the title of a " A Detedlion of the
Actions of Mary Queen of Scots, concerning the Murder of her
Husband, and her Conspiracy, Adultery, and pretended Marri-
age with Earl Bothwell, &c." The time when it was writ.
ten is somewhat uncertain ; nor is it well known whether it was
originally written in Scots, and translated into Latin by the au-
thor, or first written in Latin and then translated into Scots.
Certain it is, however, that it appeared in Scots, English, Latin,
and French. The argument it contains may be reduced to the
Sfollowing heads.

i. Queen Mary having, without due consideration, married

Lord Darnly, soon began to thew marks of disregard for him,
without any apparent cause. An instance of this is given of hi
being denied a share in the administration of public affairs, and
going one winter to, Peebles with such a slender retinue as was
below the dignity even of a private nobleman. Instances of this
want of affection, he says, were notoriously known.

2. After the OQeen's delivery in i166, she began to put in

execution those plots which had been before concerted to get rid
of her husband, and to marry Bothwell. Her first step was to for

diflention betwixt Darnly and the nobility ; taking care on every
occasion to feed the flame of discord when lhe perceived it be-
ginning to languish i and accounting it her advantage that they
should come to blows, whichever party got the better. An in-
fiance is given of her having a conversation with her husband till
late at night, during which the persuaded him that there was a
general conspiracy of the nobility against his life. Immediate-
ly after the King left her, the Queen sent for the Earl of Mur-
ray, and told him that the King was so highly displeased on ac-
count of the Earl being in great favour with her, that his life
was in danger.

3. The next article is of such a nature, that we choose to

give it in the words of Buchanan himfelf.-" When this attempt
failed her, she assailed the young and unexperienced gentleman
(her husband) with a new and subtile pracdice. She earnestly
laboured him, that, while lthe was great with child, he ihould
chufe some young gentlewoman, whereof there was great flore,
whose company he might use in the mean time. She promised
him assent and furtherance, with pardon and leave to commit the
offence. She named to him the Earl of Murray's wife , not for
that she efleemed that most noble lady most apt for such a vil-
lany, but because (he thought by that way to be revenged of
three enemies at once, the King, the Earl, and his wife ; and
therewithal to win a colour and cause of divorce, to make empty
bed-room for Bothwell*."

4. When the King paid her a visit after delivery, the Queen
and her attendants manifefled their hatred to him by every pofiible
method ; while Bothwell was caressed, and the only way to pre-
ferment was by his means. This is followed by several others
relative to the Queen's immodest behaviour, which we omit, as
being incapable of proof.

5. The King having gone from place to place, disconsolate
on account of his wife's unkindness, at last, hearing of her sick-
ness at Jedburgh, paid her a visit there, but met with the fame
indifferent reception, while the Queen, after her recovery, lived
in such an open manner with Bothwell, " as they seemed, says
Buchanan, to fear nothing more, than left their unkindness fthould

* It is obvious to remark, that this abominable accusation corntradias the
aflertion made in the former, viz. that Mary began to sow dissension be-
tween the King and nobles, only ajter her delivery; for this was plainly
kfore it.

Uuij

be unknown." Yet, a little after, he tells that the people'sff.
picion of Mary's unchaltity with Bothwell'was exceedingly in.
creased by the King's residence at Stirling. Had her condua
been so flagrant as he alleges, fjfpicion could not have had a place.

6. The Queen after her recovery received some letters faom

her husband, which affeed her so much, that fte instantly dt-
dared, if the could not by some method be rid of him, fihe would
never have a moment's ease ; and rather than live in contincal
sorrow, she would put an end to her life. Afterwards she pro-
posed a divorce ; but laid aside all thoughts of it on being put in
mind that such a step would affed the legitimacy of her son;
though in the next sentence our author insinuates that she hada
mind to take away the life of that very child whose illegitimacy
was such an objea of dread *.

7. At the baptism of the young prince, the King was not al.

lowed to enter the presence of the ambassadors; the nobility
were commanded not to attend him, nor were the foreign am.
baffadors allowed to hold any communication with him. In con.
sequence of this unkind usage, he left Stirling castle, and went
to Glasgow to his father; but " the Queen flill pursued him with
her wonted hatred 5" as an inflanFe of which, the took away all
his silver plate, and gave him pewter in the place of it. He
had not gone a mile from Stirling, before he felt an itching in
all parts of his body, an evident effefi of poison, according to
our author. On his arrival at Glasgow, certain black pimplek
broke out with such itching and pains through his limbs that his
life was despaired of; and during all this time the Queen woulI
not allow any physician to attend him.

8. Mary finding at last that her husband was not likely to die

of the disease, paid him a visit, not with a friendly intent, but on
purpose to murder him. Bothwell, according to agreement, pro-
vided an house for the king in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh,
in a desolate place ; an excuse for which was, that the air Was
more wholesome than in the palace at IIolyroodhoufe; though
our author denies any superiority in this refpedl. In a fliort time
the death of the King happened by gunpowder, as is generally
supposed, the house being Llown up, as is related in the hiflories
of Scotland.

* " This answer, when f2-e had a whvle tsffed in her mind, amr knew

that he said truth, and that fee dturft not as yet difclcef her purpose tomr.ct
away her son, (he gave over the device cf divcrce, 'c." Bchanan's Deo

etion, p. 14.

9. After the cruel aa was perpetrated, the Queen, inflead of

giving herself up to lamentations, seemed to vie with the great-
eft heroines of antiquity ; sending out most of her attendants to
inquire into the matter, and not only composed herself to reft,
but slept till next day at noon. Not satisfied with this unnatural
behaviour, fthe feasted her eyes for a long time with the fight of
her hufband's body, and at last caused him to be buried privately,
and in a very mean manner, hard by David Rizzio. In twelve
days flie left Edinburgh, and went to Lord Seton's house, where
Bothwell lodged at the time; and though persuaded by M. le
Croc, the French ambassador, to return to the capital, fthe very
loon left it again to return to the fame place, where council was
held how to get Eothwell acquitted of the charge of murdering
the King. The scandalous manner in which the trial was con-
ducted, is likevwife set forth in firong terms. Mary's being carried
off by Bothwell, her subsequent marriage and misfortunes, are all
eflablihed hiflorical fatis, which need no confirmation, and there-
fore we shall not trouble the reader with what Buchanan has said
upon them. It is obvious to remark, that all the articles above
mentioned, contained only assertions unsupported by the smallest
fthadow of proof; and, in some places, inconsistent with them-
selves. An ORATION is added, containing fifty-five pages in quar-
to, in which the learned author tells us it is " by necessary argu-
ments plainly proved, that fihe (Qieen Mary) was guilty and
privy to the said murder." Of this Oration we shall only fay,
that it is far beyond our powers of abridgement; for which rea,
son we shall only present our readers with one of the necessary ar-
guments, in the words of the author himself. The point to be
proved is, that Mary administered poison to her husband.

" When he was preparing to depart from Glasgow *, she cauf-

ed poison to be given him. You will ask by whom ? In what
manner ? What kind of poison ? Where had the it ? Ask you
these questions ? As though wicked princes ever wanted minis-
ters of their wicked treacheries. But still you press me, perhaps,
and flill you ask me, Who are their ministers ? First, that he
was poisoned, it was certainly known: for, though the shame-
leflhefs of men would not flick to deny a thing so manifest, yet
the kind of disease, strange, unknown to the people, unacquaint-
ed to the physicians, especially such as had not been in Italy and
Spain; black pimples breaking out over all his body grievous itch

* From Stirling it ought to have been, to make the Oration confilfent

with the Narrative.

in all his limbs, and intolerable flench, disclosed it. If this cause
were to be pleaded before grave Cato the Censor,, as this were
easy to prove before him that is persuaded that there is no adul.
tercrts, (adulteress, we suppose) btut the fame is also a poisoner.
Need we seek for a more fubfiantial witness than Cato, every one
of whose sentences antiquity efleemed as so many oracles ? Shall
we not in one manifest thing believe him, whose credit has, in
things doubtful, so often prevailed ? Lo, here a man of singular
uprightness, and of most notable faithfulnefs and credit, bears
witness against a woman burning in hatred of her husband, and
in love of an adulterer; and in both their diseases of corrupt as-
fe&ions unbridled, untemperabilly by her estate, raging by her
power, and indulgently following the wantonness of her wealth.
But let us oinit old and disused things, and let us fever the cre-
dit of the inconstant multitude from the cafe of princes. Let us
in so great a matter admit no witness in whom either his eflate
may be fufpeded, or his manners may be blamed. *What wit-
neffes then Ihall we use ? For, by this condition, we may bring
forth none under the royal degree of a king or a queen. But
fcuh vile als are not wont to be committed by noble and good
men, but by lewd and wicked miniflers. Howbeit, that herein
also the most precise may be satisfied, go to let us bring forth a
royal witness. Read her own letter; her letter, I fay, written
with her own hand. What mean these words? lie is not much
deformed, and yet he has received much. Whereof hath he re-
ceived much ? The thing itself, the disease, the pimples, the fa-
vour, do tell you. E-ven that he received, that brought defor-
mity; forsooth very poison. This is fufEcient for me that is
there said, that, though he received much, he is not much de-
formed ; or that though he he not much deformed, yet he re-
ceived much. WVhat means this word yet ? What else but this,
that whatever it was that he received, the fame was the cause of
his deformity; which, though it were much, yet it was not much
enough to work such deformity as was desired. But, b6 it were
not poison. What then was it else ? &c."

On this piece of reasoning we need make very little comment;

as we believe every man of common sense will acknowledge that,
had the author taken pains to burlesque his own cause, and make
the enemies of Mary appear ridiculous, he could not have done
it more effectually than by such a rhapsody as we have transcribed.
On this occasion he appeals to the letters written by the Queen
herself; which appeal, in the most explicit manner, shows, that,

had not these letters exified, there could have been no proof at
all. On the authenticity of these letters therefore, as we have
said, the whole controversy turns. If therefore the most full and
undoubted proof be not produced, the controversy must be at
once decided in favour of Mary; probability declaring originally
on the fide of her innocence for the reasons given in the begin-
ning of this Treatise. The following is Buchanan's account,
and indeed the only one we have of them.

" That in the Caille of Edinburgh there was left by the Earl

Bothwell before his flying away, and was sent for by one George
Dalgliefh his servant, who was taken by the Earl of Mcrton, a
fmall-gilt coffer, not fully a foot long, being garnished in sundry
places with the Roman letter F, under a king's crown; wherein
were certain letters and writings well known, and by oaths to be
affirmed to have been written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
to the Earl Bothwell. Besides these writings there was also ex-
tant a writing written in the Roman hand in French, to be a-
vowed to be written by the Queen of Scots herself; being a pro-
mise of marriage to the said Bothwell; which writing being with-
out a date, and though some words therein seem to be contrary,
yet it is upon credible grounds fuppofcd to have been made and
written by her before the death of her hulband. The tenor where-
of thus begins :

" Nous Marie par la grace de Dieu, &c.
" We Mary by the grace of God, 'c."

There is also another writing in Scots, avowed to be wholly

written by the Earl of Huntly, dated the 5th of April, 1567,
containing a form of contra& for marriage betwixt the said Queen
and the Earl Bothwell, subscribed Mary, which is avowed to be
the proper hand of the said Queen; and underneath it )'ames Earl
Bothwell, which also is to be avowed to be the proper hand of
the said Earl Bothwell; at which time he was commonly defamed
of the King's slaughter, and not cleansed or acquitted thereof be-
fore the 1 2th of April following. It appears also from the words
of the said contra&, that it was made before sentence of divorce
betwixt Bothwell and his former wife; and also, in very truth,
before any suit of divorce begun between him and his former wife,
though some words in the contra& seem to fay otherwife."

In the fame casket were found " certain French sonnets writ-

ten by the Queen of Scots to Bothwell before her marriage with
him; and, as it is said, while her husband lived ; but certainly
before the divorce from his wife, as the words themselves shew ;

before whom flie prefers herself in deserving to be beloved of
Bothwell *."

Having thus given a brief account of what the firfl, and whom

we might readily suppose to be the most formidable, adversary of
Mary had to fay against her, we must next take some notice of
Lefly's Vindication, of which Anderson has preserved a copy
written in the year 1570, said to be done by Morgan Philips,
Bachelor of Divinity, and printed at Liege by Walter Morbers,
in 1571.

This gentleman does not write a formal answer to Buchanan ;

the DeteElion not having been printed till the year 1572 ; ne-
verthelefs it probably contains as full an answer as could have
been given by any fludied refutation. He reduces the whole of
the charges againit the Queen to three points. i. That her mind
was alienated from her husband. 2. The letters already mention-
ed. 3. Her pretended marriage. Having thus slated the accu-
fations, he next complains, that her accusers had produced no-
thing by any lawful means ; and declares, that, had this been
the cafe, neither he nor any who interested themselves in her be-

* As some of our readers may perhaps have a curiosity to know how such

an accomplished princess expressed her love, we shall present them with the
following specimen, translated by the celebrated Buchanan.

" 0 Gods have of me compassion!
" And show what certain proof
" I may give, which shall not seem to him vain,
" Of my love and fervent affe&ion.
" Alas ! is he not already in poffeflion
" Of my body, of heart that refuses no pain
" Nor dishonour in the life uncertain
" Offence of friends, nor worse affli&ioun.
" For him I efleem all my friends less than nothing,
" And I will have good hope of my enemies.
" I have put in hazard for him both fame and conscience,
" I will for his fake renounce the world,
" I will die to set him forward.
" What remains to give proof of my conflancy?"

The following lines, in which the author of this poem speaks of Lady

Bothwell, are very unlike a _ueen.

" She for her honour owes you obedience;
" I in obeying you may receive dishonour,
" Not being (to my displeasure) your wife as she;:
" And yet in this point she shall have no pre-heminence,
" She uses conflancy for her own profit,
" For it is no little honour to be mistress of your goods!" t'.e

half would have done so, but would " have yielded arid giveii
place to an open known truth." He complains likewise that her
adversaries went upon presumptions, not of the surest or most
probable fort. In criminal cafes also he puts the reader in mind,
that it is better to be " prone to favour than to hatred ; to be
readier to absolve and release, than to detain and condemn ; and
that it is far better, and a more sure, and more indifferent and
upright way, to save the guilty, than to condemn and calt away
the innocent. I trufi, adds he, and am in an assured hope, that
all the indifferent readers hereof will, without all partiality,
weigh and confider the allegations of the one and the other fide,
and judge of the matter as it falleth out accordingly. Which is
the very thing we most defire."

The bishop next sets forth thl improbability that there was of

Mary's guilt, and the probability of the opposite. The fironger
presumptions, he says, ought to destroy the weaker. The fair
sex abhor cruelty and blood/hed; and Queen Mary was a very
accomplished princess, who, till she came to Scotland, was high-
ly esteemed for her many excellent qualities. Again, it is not
to be supposed, that any man or woman /hould fall into such ex-
tremities of vice at once. The human race attain to vice, as
well as virtue, by degrees ; and he challenges them, in all the
former part of her life, to bring a single instance whereon to
ground their presumptions. He upbraids them with the treafons
her fubjec-s had committed, and which she had so often pardon-
ed. Was it likely, then, that the would entertain a thought of
committing a crime of such a black dye as the murder of her
husband. But, adds our author, though " he was her head in
wedlock, yet was lie otherwise but a member of her common-
wealth, subject to her as to his supreme governess, and to the
laws, by the due and ordinary process whereof he might have
been conviced and executed, as well for the murder of David
her secretary, in whose body his dagger was found stabbed, as
for the imprisoning of the Queen, and for attempting to remove
her from the civil government, to intrude himself into it. Who
can now reasonably think, that, where she, by law and juflice,
might have fully satisfied her alleged desire, omitted every law-
ful opportunity, in order to accomplilh his deftrudicn in an un-
lawful one. This vehement prcfumption of her innocence is much
holpen for that fle would not consent to a divorce between her
and the Lord Darnly, though hie were moved thereto by a great
number of her nobility."

Voiume II. X x

The bilhop next urges it as a great presumption of Mary's in-

nocence, that she voluntarily came into England, where fte knew
both the father and mother of Lord Darnly were. Neither could
the death of her husband be of any service to her, especially hy
such means; as it muff tend greatly to embarafs the affairs of her
government. Leaving, however, these presumptive proofs ofthe
Queen's innocence, our author now enters on a conflderation of
the charges brought direaly against her.

i. It is said that her affeaion was alienated from her husband.

This is not denied; but if a husband gives his wife such provo-
cation as must necessarily alienate her affection, he cannot reason-
ably complain; neither can they who are the fomenters of dif-
cord betwixt husband and wife reasonably blame either party, or
any body but themselves for the consequences. In the present
cafe it is to be doubted whether greater provocations could be
given by a man to a woman than were given by Lord Darnly to
Queen Mary. Every one, in the least acquainted with the sex,
must know that the following are the four greatest provocations
that can poMbly be offered to a woman. I. To abandon her for
the fake of others. 2. To charge her openly with infdelity to
her husband. 3. To threaten to leave her; and, 4. To thwart
and contradic her in those things which she has a right to ma-
nage. There are but few husbands that unite all those provoca-
tions in their own persons ; but it is impoftible to deny that Darn-
ly was guilty of every one of them; and that in a degree which
no private pe:ron can be guilty of. With regard to the firil, John
lKnox himself bears witness, though in Darnly he does not speak
of the crime with such abhorrence as on other occasions. He on-
ly tells us that he was expert in the " games of Venus." With
regard to the second, she was chargzd, in a most infamous man-
ner with carrying on a criminal intercourse with her secretary
David Rizzio. The third was no less notorious, insomuch, that
even the Parliament interfered to prevent him from leaving the
kingdom; and as to the fourth, we may fay that fne was thwart-
ed in the management of almost every thing she had a right to
from the moment she came into the kingdom. It must be re-
membered that ifarjy, and not her hufard, ought to have had the
adminiflration of public affairs; yet this was what he rperpet:lly
attempted to deprive her of. In the mofl cuel and detc-ablc
manner he, with other barbarians, murdered David Rizzio in her
presence, and afterwards :irprifoned herself. This acion was at-
e,:Icd \ith fach circumitanccs of cruelty as aie scarce to be a-

ralleled. The QOeen was at that time with child, when women
naturally expefl miore tendesnels and compassion than at others;
yet was this unhappy princess used in such a barbarous manner as
one lhould think mnght have excused the most violent resentment
on her part. But the sac; was, that Mary never had the autho-
rity of a sovereign. The savage nobility uforped her power, and
in order to attain it, or to fapport themselves in it, Lhewed them-
selves absolutely indifferent as to every enormity. When Mary
found her husband taking part with these nobles therefore, we
cannot wonder that this, joined to other offences, thould alienate
heraffelion. Well might Eiflop Lefly exclaim, " Fie, and double
Fie upon the impudence of those mischievous traitors, now to lay
to the Queen's charge, and reprcachfully to objec to her the
changing of her mind towards her hun.and, which rose and be-
gan upon causes for the wlich they had long before been truiTed
up, if they had net fortuned upon and met with to gracious a
Alifrefs, as I know, and they, though undefcrving it, cdo well
feel, that the world hath very few her liEe."

On this futbjet the binhop farther observes, that, before his

death, the King and Qpeen were thoroughly reconcded, as ap-
peared by her viltia nghim at Glasgow, and 'the tcndernefs with
which (he behaved towards him at Edinburgh. Notwithflanding
the many and grievous provocations therefore which (he had re-
ceived, it appears that her aff-etion for her husband was not era-
dicated, but capable of beirg av.akened aoain, and a&ually was
so; so that the firit part of the charge of necefity falls to the
ground.

2. With regard to the letters to Bothwcll, and the murder of the
King. The enemies of Mary, who could not deny that'an aa/.-
rent reconciliation had taken phace, next pretend that it was on-
ly signed upon her part, and that it appears by her own letters,
that (he had nq other intention than thit of enticing him to I,-
dinburgh for his own deilruftion. On this the bil.op justly ob-
serves, that it was altogether impoflible to reaion with such peo-
ple; for, being themselves grieved that a reconciliation should
have taken place at any rate, their next resource was to fly that
it was feigned on the part of the Queen. With regard to the
letters themselves, he lays, that the very time at wh:ch they were
taken betrays the falsehood of the whole. Dalglieflh is taid to
have received them from Sir James Balfour to convey them to
his mailer, the Earl of Bothwell. 2ut Sir James hirfelfwas Bcth-
-well's enemy, and had formerly drinn him out of Elmnlur i

Xx .j

eafile; so that it is incredible either that Sir James would be 9,
ay confident of Bothwell's, or that he would fliew him the least
mark of attention.

" Nevertheless, says the biflhop, when you have taken your best

advantage you can of these letters, they contain no express com-
mnandment of any unlawful ad or deed to be committed and per-
petrated; not ratifying, or specifying the accomplilhment of any
such faet already past, but by unsure and uncertain guesses, aims,
and conjectural fuppofings, are not able in any wife to make a
lawful presumption, much less any good and fubflantial proof."

On the subject of the letters our author further presses his ad-

verfaries in the following manner. In all criminal accusations, it
is absolutely necessary that the matter in question should be fairly
proved by good and lawful witnelfes, or by some other evident
proofs or presumptions. The letters in queflion are neither sub-
fcribed by the writer, nor directed to any person; neither have
they a date of day or month; nor is any bearer mentioned by
-whom they were sent. The person who was said to carry them,
and who was executed for being concerned in the murder, pro-
tested before God, that he never carried any such letters, and
that the Queen knew nothing of the matter. Again, were these
letters ever compared with the Queen's hand writing ? This would
have been done even in a money matter. Perhaps it may be said
that a proper comparison was made; but, by whom was it done?
by those very persons who were the Queen's mortal enemies;
-who could counterfeit her hand; nay, who had often done it, by
sending letters to England and elsewhere in her name, which flib
knew nothing about.

Our author next retorts the charge upon his adversaries in the

following manner. " Either you must bring forth good and ap-
parent witnesses to prove it her hand, or fume such as were privy
to the meaning of the said letters, which ye neither yet have
done, nor are likely-ever to do; or you mull grant that you were
privy to them yourselves with the Queen, or at least with the said
Earl, whom ye surmise to have received these letters; or that all
this is by you maliciously driven or concluded." From this di-
lemma it seems difficult to fee how the adversaries of Queen Ma-
ry can escape; as the letters themselves mention nothing plainly;
and those who fhewed such knowledge in the interpretation of
ambiguous sentences, undoubtedly indicate, in the very fame pro-
portion, their knowledge of the fabrication of them.

The bi[hop now proceeds to a consideration of one of the char,
ges brought againll the Queen by Buchanan, viz. That she ihewe4d
no sorrow for the King's death, nor kept herself in mourning for
any decent time; the acquittal of Bothwell also, and her marriage
with him so soon after her former hufband's death being also taken
into the account. To the first part of the charge he replies, that
Darnly's body was embalmed, and laid in the fame sepulchre with
King James; the funeral being attended by the Lord Juflice
Clerk, Traquair, and several others of the nobility; though by
reason that most of the Council were Protestants, the fewer cere-
nonies were made use of. The flory of Mary's indifferent beha,
viour he utterly denies. He argues also that such kind of queens
as Mary were not fubjed to the rules prescribed to others; Ma-
r.y being a sovereign, but her hulband only a private man, and a
Ufbjet. Besides, in certain cafes, womenl are by the civil law
cxcufed for omitting the cuflomary forms of mourning. He a-
vers also, that the Council themselves did vehemently persuade
the Queen to fliorten the time of her mourning, and to go to some
more open and wholesome air. Notwithflanding all which, the
very persons who advised her to the flops fle took were the first
to complain of her for them, and to represent her in the worst
imaginable light on that very account. The second, and indeed
the most important part of the charge, was that of the acquittal
of Bothwell. To this he replies, that Bothwell was acquitted
by his peers according to due forms of law; and none were more
active in procuring his acquittal than the Lords Morton, Semple,
Lindsay and others, who became afterwards the Queen's most in-
veterate enemies. It appears, therefore, that in every inflance the
persons who had the greatest share in promoting these tranfac-
tions, raised the very first and loudest clamours against them.
The marriage with Bothwell, (undoubtedly the worst flep that was
ever certainly known to be taken by Mary) was promoted by the
nobility; nay, they were the first persons who persuaded her to
marry again; by alleging the dangerous situation in which she
flood, so that there was a necessity for her to have a hulband and
assistant, who might be capable of defending her against every ad-
verfary. If fie would be contented to do so, they promised o-
bedience to the Qieen, and fcrvice to the person whom she chose
for a husband. Many of them even bound themselves by an o-
bligation under their hands to afimt, maintain, and defend, him a-
gainft all men that fliould impute the King's murder to him.
Thus it is plain, that the charges of \iary's adverf.aiL s retort up-

on themselves, and had they not in a lucky moment found the
box of letters, they could not have had the lea( fiadow cf proof;
and the finding of it at such a critical moment is certainly a very
firong presumption that the whole was fabricated.

This is the fum of what the bilhop has advanced with regard

to the crimes directly charged upon Queen Mary; which we fee
depend entirely upon the authenticity of the letters. It is plain,
therefore, as these letters had not in his time received any fatis-
fadory proof, that they were genuine, there could then be no
xeal proof of her guilt. Her greatellt adversary in that age, Bu-
chanan, has of consequence failed in his attempt; so that now we
must have recourse to the more modern champions, of whom Mr,
Hume and Dr. Robertson are the principal.

The arguments in favour of the authenticity of the letters, ur-

ged by Mr. Hume, are, I. It is difficult to suppose them forge-
Ties; because, though it be easy to counterfe.it a subscription, it
is far more difficult to carry on the deception through a number
of pages. They were compared with Mary's hand-writing by the
Englifli Privy Council, and a great many of the nobility, amorg
whom were several partizans of the Queen. They might have
been examined by the Eifnop of Ross, Herries, and others of
Mary's commissioners; and as the Regent must have expeced
them to undergo such a test, we may be assured that he well knew
they were able to bear it. 2. Bishop Lefly declined a compa-
xifon of the hands, which he calls no legal proof. Goodall,
Vol. II. p. 389. 2. The letters are very long, which increases
the difficulty, and makes the forgery rnQre liable to a deception.
3 They are not so gross and palpable as forgeries commonly are,
as they still left a pretence for Mary's friends to afiert, that their
meaning was strained to make them criminal. 4. There is a long
contrad of marriage said to be written by Huntly, and signed by
the Queen, before Eothwell's acquittal; and it is not to be sup.
posed that Morton, tuppofed to be the forger, would have thus,
without any cause, doubled the difficulties in carrying on his own
Icheme. 5. The letters were iadifcreet; but such was apparent-
ly Mary's condut at that time. They are inelegant; but they
Lave a careless natural air, like letters hafily written between
two familiar friends. 6. They contain such a variety of particu-
lar circumstances as no body could have thought of inventing;
specially as they must have afforded more readily the means of
detection. 7. We have not the originals cf the letters w!'ich

were in French; we have only a Latin and Scots translation from
the original, and a French translation expressly done from the La-
tin. Now, it is remarkable, that the Scots translation is full of
Gallicifms; which is a clear proof that the original was French.
8. There is a conversation which she mentions between the King
and herfclf one evening; but Murray produced, before the Eng-
lilh Commiflioners, the teflimony of one Crawford, a gentleman
of the Earl of Lennox, who swore that the King, on the Queen's
departure from him, gave him an account of the fame converfa-
tlion. 9. There appears no reason why Murray and his associates
hould run the riik of such a dangerous forgery, which muff have
rendered them infamous if detc&ted; since their cause, from Mary's
known condu& at the time, was fufficiently good without them.
10. Murray expofcd these letters to persons qualified to judge of
them ; the Scottish Council, the Scottifli Parliament, Queen Eliza-
beth and her Council; who were pcffeffed of a great number of
Mary's genuine letters. IY. He gave Mary herself an opportuni-
ty of refuting and exposing him, if she had chosen to lay hold of
it. 12. The letters tally so well with all the other parts of Mary's
conduc during that tranfa<tion, that these proofs throw thec
firongeft light on each other. 13. The Duke of Norfolk, who
had examined these papers, and who favoured so much the Queen
of Scots that he intended to marry her, and at last loft his life
in her cause, yet believed them to be authentic, and was fully
convinced. of her guilt. This appears not only from his letters
above mentioned, to Queen Elizabeth and her Miniflers, but by
his secret acknowledgments to Bannister, his most trufly confi-
dent. In the conferences between the Duke, Secretary Liding-
ton and the Bishop of Ross, all of them zealous partizans of
Mary, the fame thing is always taken for granted. Indeed the
Duke's full persuasion of Mary's guilt, without the least doubt or
befitation, could not have had a place, if he had found Lidington
or the bilhop of Ross of a different opinion, or if they had ever
told him that these letters were forged. It is to be observed, that
Lidington, being one of the accomplices, knew the whole bottom
of the conspiracy against King Henry; and was besides a man of
such penetration that nothing could escape him in these matters.
14. MIary refused to answer to the charge concerning the gc-
nuinenefs of these letters. The only excuse for the silence is, that
she fufpeded Queen Elizabeth to be a partial judge: It was not
indeed for the intercflt of that Princess to acquit and juffify her ri-
val and compctitor  and we accordingly find that Lidington, from,

the secret information of the Duke of Norfolk, informed M.\ty
"by the bifllop of Ross, that the Queen of England never meant to
come to any decision; but only to get into her hands the proofi
of Mary's guilt, in order to blast her characer. But this was a
better reason for declining the conference altogether, than for
breaking it off upon frivolous pretences, the very moment the
chief accusation was unexpectedly opened against her. Though lihe
could not exped Elizabeth's final decision in her favour, it was
of importance to give a fatisfalory answer, if ihe had one, to the
accusation of the Scottish Commitfioners. That answer could have
been dispersed for the fatisfaation of the public, of foreign nations,
and of pofierity. And surely, after the accusation and proofs were
in Queen Elizabeth's hands, it could do no harm to give in the
answers. Mary's information, that Queen Elizabeth never in-
tended to come to a decision, could be no obflacle to her juflifi-
cation. i5. The very disappearance of these letters is a prefump-
tion of their authenticity I hat event can be accounted for no way
but from the care of King James's friends, who were desirous to
destroy every proof of his mother's enemies. The disappearance
of Morton's narrative, and of Crawford's evidence, from the
Cotton Library, muff have proceeded from a like cause.

An objecion is made to the authenticity of the letters, front

the vote of the Scottish Privy Council, which affirms the letters to
be written and subscribed by Queen Mary's own hand; whereas the
copies given into the parliament a few days after, were only
wiitten, not subscribed. But it is not considered that this cir-
cumfitance is of no manner of force. There certainly were let-
ters, true or false, laid before the Council, and whether-the let-
ters were true or false, the mistake proceeds equally from the in-
accuracy or blunder of the transcriber. The millake may be ac-
counted for, the letters were only written by her: the second con-
trac with Bothwell was only subscribed. A proper distinction was
not made; and they were all said to be written and subscribed.
Mr. Gcoda1l has endeavoured to prove that the letters clash with
chronology; and that the Queen was not in the places mention-
ed in the letters on the days there afligned: to confirm this he
produces charters, and other deeds signed by the Queen, where
the date and place do not agree with the letters. But it is well
known, that the date of charters, and such like grants, is no
proof of the real day on which they were signed by the sovereign.
Papers of that kind commonly pass through different offices: the

the date is affixed by the first office, and may very long precede
the day of the signature.

" The account given by MIorton of the manner in which these

papers came into his hands, is very natural. When he gave it to
the Englith Commissioners, he had reason to think it would be
convaffed with all the severity of able adversaries interefled in the
higeft degree to refute it. It is probable that he could have con-
firmed it by many circumstances and teflimonies, since they de-
clined the contest.

" The sonnets are inelegant; insomuch that both Brantome

and Rofard, who knew Q.ieen Mary's flyle, were assured when
they saw them, that they could not be of her composition. But
no person is equal in his produdions, especially one whole flyle
is so little formed as Mary's must be fppofed. Not to mention,
that such dangerous and criminal enterprises leave little tranquilli-
ty of mind for elegant poetical compositions. In a word, Queen
Mary might have easily condu6ted the whole conspiracy against
her husband, without opening her mind to any person except
Bothwell, and without writing a scrap of paper about it: but it
was very difficult to have managed it so that her condudt thould
not betray her to men of discernment. In the present cafe, her be-
haviour was so gross as to betray her to every body and fortune
threw into her enemies hands, papers by which they could con-
vi&t her. The fame infatuation and imprudence, which happily
is the attendant of great crimes, will account for both."

These arguments of Mr. Hume, as well as those urged by Dr.

Robertson in his Dissertation, have been replied to at confider-
able length by Mr. Tytler in his Historical and Critical Re-
view, &c. He observes, what indeed muff be remarkably ftrik-
ing to every one who considers the matter, that it is amazing
how Mary ihould commit to writing such palpable evidence a-
gainft herself; and it must surprise nolefs how Bothwell, to whom
the letcers are addressed, flould keep them in his hands. But
these presumptions, though they naturally excite firong suspicions
against the authenticity of the papers in queflion, do not a-
mount to any positive proof. As it is abundantly evident, how-
ever, that no woman of common prudence or modefly would have
written such letters, and as it is certain, that they passed through
the hands of the Earl of Morton, who was Mary's inveterate
enemy, it is necessary to examine minutely into the circumltan-
ces of this alleged discovery.

Volume 11. Y y

In this examination it is very remarkable, that though Mortesd

was present at the trial of Dalglieth who was executed for the
King's murder, and from whom Morton is said to have receiv.
ed the box, yet not a single queflion was asked him about a mat-
ter of such importance. It was natural to think that as Dal.
gliefh had been apprehended only fix days before, that he would
have been confronted by the persons who took him, and asked, at
least, what orders he had received from his master, Bothwell, about
it; and as this was not done, it gives considerable suspicion that
it was not then prudent to put such questions.

The letters themselves did not appear till the 4th of December

i567; when an ac& was subscribed by the Earls of Murray, Mor.
ton, and others of that party, declaring that their rising in arms,
taking the Queen prisoner, and confining her in Lochlevin cafile,
was on account of these letters, written and subscribed by the
Queen. Nevertheless, only ten days after, Murray's first parlia-
ment juffify the proceedings of the Lords, because the letters
were written " wholly with her own hand." This contradidion
betwixt the two accounts is so glaring, that Mr. Hume was redu-.
ced to the neceflity above mentioned, of ascribing it to the blun-
der of the clerk. To this Mr. Tytler replies, that thepapers said
to be written, and subscribed by the Queen's hand, are the
" privy letters written and sent to James Earl of Bothwell."
These words can by no means apply to a contracd; nor is there
the smallest reason to imagine that the framing of two such im-
portant a&s would have been left to a clerk. It is certain that the
letters produced before the parliament had no signature ; though
Murray, Morton, and other conspirators asserted, before the Secret
Council, that they were subscribed as well as written. Mr. Tytler
accounts for this contradiaion in the following manner: " The
ardour of the forgers, to make the letters to Bothwell fully con-
clufive against the Queen, might very naturally prompt them at
first to affix her subscription to them, and in this shape they were
asserted by Murray, Morton, and others, before their own Secret
Council, to be written and subscribed with her own hand. But as-
ter these cunning politicians came to confider deliberately, That
" those horrible letters, (to cite the opinion of the Englili
Commissioners in their own words) contained such foul matter,
and abominable to be either thought of or written by a prince;"
upon cool refle&ion, that it might shock the credulity of ma-
ny people to believe, that the Queen would not only be so
wicked as to wvrite such letters, but even so far deprived of

common sense as to put her name to them; they might very
caturally, in the copies they produced before the Parliament,
fink the subscription, and, in place of mentioning the letters to
be written and subscribed by the Queen, fubflitute written wholy
by her own hand; in which form they ever afterwards appeared."

Whether this account of the matter will be more fatisfaaory
than that of Mr. Hume, we muff leave the reader to determine.
,On the latter, however, we cannot help remarking, that by Mr.
Hume's extreme readiness to solve this contradi&ion, in favour
of Mary's accusers, he must evidently have prejudged the cause,
and been willing at all events to find that unfortunate princess
guilty. No condlufion can be drawn from contradicory evi-
dence ; and indeed Mr. Hume himself seems to give up the let-
ters by informing us, that Murray and his party had abundance
of evidence against the Queen, without making any use of them.

Our author next observes, that the letters were not mentioned

from December 15, 1567, till the month of Oatober, 1568; and
at this time they were not produced publicly, but shewn at a pri-
vate conference by Buchanan, Lethington, and M'Gill, in a fe-
cret conference with the Bifllop of Ross and others, on the part
of Queen Mary, in presence of the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, as Commilioners for the Queen of
England. At this conference they protefled that they did not
shew the letters to the English noblemen as Commifflioners, but
for their intlru&ion; after the declaration of such circumiftances
as led and induced to vehement presumption to judge the Queen
guilty of the King's murder. Thus they had the advantage of
calumniating the Queen, at the fame time that they refused o-
penly to bring forth the proofs of her guilt, though called for by
the Commifioners at that time. It was on this occasion that Ma-
ry, in the infitucions to her Commiftioners, complained that there
were people in the kingdom who could forge her hand ; and that
these forgers were " principally such as were in company with
themfelves," meaning the conspirators.

The letters being thus flewn privatejly, an abftra& of their

contents was next drawn up and sent to Elizabeth, which is flill
extant and on this proceeding Mr. Tytler very justly observes,
that it " has too much the air of affaffination ;" and he observes
that Dr. Robertson passes it over entirely in silence. It is plain,
however, as our author also very juffly observes, that by such
proceedings the English Court fhewed no inclination to adopt a
plan for saving Mary's honour, and that even at this time the

Y y ij

Duke of Norfolk was the dupe of Murray, who soon after be.
trayed him.

The conferences betwixt the Commifioners from both king.

doms being adjourned to Weftminfler, Murray and his party
were graciously introduced to Elizabeth, and on the 26th of No.
vember gave in their accusation against their Sovereign. Mary
being informed of this proceeding, demanded also to be introdu.
ced to the presence of the Queen of England; but this was re-
fused, until flie thould clear herself from the accusations of her
fubjeas, at the fame time that Elizabeth declared that she would
receive proof upon these accusations.

It is difficult, nay impoflible, to read an account of fueh fliame,

ful partiality without indignation. The Queen accused her sub,
jeas of crimes of a public nature, viz. Treason and rebellion
and these needed no proof; for the taking up arms against their
sovereign, imprisoning, and then driving her out of the kingdom,
were matters so notorious, that all the world knew of it. On the
other hand, Mary was accused by them of crimes in her pri.
vate capacity as a woman, and as a wife; and however enormous
these might be, her fubje4ts had not any right to try her, much
less to punish her first, and then attempt to prove her guilt, which
they most certainly did. Elizabeth, therefore, ought to have ad-
mitted none of the parties into her presence ; or to have admitted
both. Nay, though Mary had been admitted, the Earl of Mur-
ray ought at any rate to have been refused, as being the arch-re-
bel, who had assumed the sovereign authority, and whose crimes
against the slate could not be palliated even for a moment. It is
no wonder, therefore, that the Scots Commil;ioners inflantly broke
vp the conference. They remonstrated against the proceeding
as " a prepoflero,.s order, never used in any treaty or conference,
yea, not even in cafes of judicial procedure, to receive probation
before the party was heard to anf'wer the allegiance, and efpeci-
ally in so weighty a cause. They, therefore, protested, that no
further be proceeded in this conference."

This piece of partiality was inflantly followed by another.

Though Elzabeth had nothing farther to do in the matter, after
this declaration of the Scots Commiflioners, yet resolved not to
let her escape whom she so much hated ; the demanded, at that
very meeting, from Munay and Morton, the proofs they had of
I'J'ary's guilt ; in consequence of which, the box with the papers
and bnonets were immediately put into her hands, along with the
depositions of Hay, Hepburn, Digiliefh and Powrie, four of the

servants of Bothwell; who, though they all concurred in accusing
their mailer, yet none of them pretended to lay any thing to the
charge of the Queen; nay, it was asserted by their friends, and
not denied by the opposite party, that all of them concurred in
declaring her innocence.

Thus, again, it appears contrary to Mr. Hume's assertion, that

the conspirators had no evidence whatever to produce besides
the letters in question ; and it was their interest to defend them
to the utmost of their power ; and, in this most important point,
they were so intolerably defective, that the single affirmation of
Morton, giving an account of the way in which they came into
his pofleffion, is all that they have to produce.

Morton affirmed that he got them in the way already mention-

ed, from Dalglietf, Bothwell's servant; and Crawford, a depen-
dent of the Earl of Lennox, gave his teflimony in favour of
meeting with Mary, and some other incidents of little confe-
quence. But here, Mr. Tytler observes, that whoever did write
the letters, would take care to inform himself of every circum-
itance he could which might serve to establish the credit of his
narrative. Home himself takes notice that Crawford was inform.
ed by Darnly of a conversation which passed between the Queen
and him; and if he, as a husband, was so filly as to inform others
of the discourses he had in private with his wife, it is no wonder
to find her enemies poffeffed of the knowledge of many particu-
lars which othervwife they would not have known. Surmises, calum-
ny, and scandal, would furniih a great deal more; and it was easy
to fabricate a letter, in which the Queen should own the truth of
what, perhaps, the letter-writer himself was the inventor, and of
which the never heard.

Our author has already taken notice of the firange behaviour

of Morton in not confronting Dalglieflh with the witnesses who
seized the box; but this deficiency was still more manifest in his
not calling in a witness, who was living at that time, though Dal-
gliefh had been hanged soon after his confeffion of the murder of
the King by Bothwell. This was one Paris, or Nicholas Hu-
bert, a servant of Bothwell, mentioned in one of the letters,
and who is said to have been the person intrufied to carry the
letters fron the Queen to Bothwell. " This man, says our au-
thor, had been kept in close confinement in St. Andrew's all
this time. Now, when one fees the remarkable care and at-
tention of the party in collecling every circumfiance which they
supposed could be matter of proof against the Qucen, in fop-

port of their accusation, their penury of proof notwithftand,
ing, and the pinching necessity of supporting the only evidence
they had (that of the letters) by the bare and single affirmation
of Morton himself, the Queen's accuser and most inveterate ene.
my, it is impossible to overlook, without the firongeft suspicion,
their omitting to have produced so very material an evidence as
this Frenchman, in person, to have answered to the queflions of
Mary, or her Commiflioners, before the English Council, and to
the part assigned to him in the letters themselves.

" Mr. Hume has been very sensible of this defe& of Murray's,

in not calling upon Paris, and he endeavours to supply it in a
pretty extraordinary manner. " On giving in the letters, (says
" he) Murray fortified this evidence by some testimonies of cor-
" responding faas; and he added, some time after, the confeffion
" of Hubert, or French Paris, a servant of Bothwell, who had
" been executed for the King's murder; and who dire&ly char.
' ged the Queen with being accessary to that criminal enterprife."
He afterwards adds, " It is in vain at present to seek for im-
" probablities in this confeflion : it was certainly a regular judi-
" cial paper, given in regularly and judicially, and ought to have
" been canvassed at the time." From this account Mr. Hume
would make one believe, that that piece of evidence, Paris's
confeflion, had been' given in by Murray a few days after the let-
ters, at least while the conferences subsisted; yet nothing can
be more false. The conferences broke up, and the Earl of
Murray and his party got licence from Queen Elizabeth to re-
turn home to Scotland, in January 1568-9. Paris, after lying
in close confinement till August 1569, was then put to death;
at which time it is pretended he made these confeffions against
the Queen."

Mr. Tytler now considers the subsequent condu& of Mary,

and vindicates it from the censures of Dr. Robertson, by whom
she is blamed for proceeding any farther in the matter. The
Do&or condemns her also on account of an accommodation which
Lord Herries had proposed with Murray and his party, as a tacit
acknowledgment of her own guilt; but, though Mr. Tytler agrees
that this proposal was made at a very improper time, he observes
that it ought not to be imputed as any presumption against Mary;
because both ilerries and Ross declared that it was made without
her knowledge, and the accusers had not then produced any part
of their proof. Her subsequent condu&, he thinks, was the best
fie could poflibly make of matters as they flood. Her accusers

had taken care to produce their proofs already to Elizabeth, and
though her Commissioners had declined any further conference,
she still continued to proceed. For this reason Queen Mary wrote
a letter to her Commissioners, dated 19th December, 1568, de-
firing the inspection, and copies of the letters and papers which
had been produced againfi her. Inflead of this, however, Eliza-
beth only desired an extraRt, or summary of the contents of them
to be given her; and whatever this was, Mr. Tytler supposes it
was no more than a copy of her accusation. No other answer
could now be returned by Mary than that the letters were for-
ged; and she again insisted for an infpecion of the original letters,
and to have copies of them, in which cafe, fihe would make the
forgery manifest. Even the copy, however, though from a copy
no forgery could have been detected, was constantly denied her.
Instead of this, Elizabeth modejfly proposed that Mary thould
resign the crown in favour of her son, and remain in England as
a private person. Even this proposal was in contradiction to what
(he herself had said before the box and letters were produced;
for then she was of opinion that it was inconsistent with Mary's
honour and innocence to have the matter ended by appointment;
and now when the proofs against her were produced, the perfidi-
ous English princess absolutely refused her an opportunity of via-
dicating her innocence.

The answer made by Mary to this ignominious proposal shew-

edat once her high spirit and conscious innocence. She was.de-
termined rather to die than submit to such an indignity, and the last
words of her life thould be as Queen of Scotland. She was now
determined, though juflice could not be expected at the hands of
Elizabeth, to vindicate her innocence, and to prove that Murray,
Morton, and Lethington, whom (he had already publicly accused,
were the devifers and perpetrators of the murder. This, how-
ever, was totally inconfillent with the views of Elizfabeth. She
had encouraged Murray and his party publicly to accuse their
sovereign, and had got into her hands what they called a proof of
her guilt. She was assured that this proof would be sustained by
the world-as genuine, until it was exposed, and its fallacy deteet-
ed; but, as Elizabeth had no mind that this should be done, it
was now time to dismiss Murray and his associates, both to pre-
vent Mary from vindicating herself, and likewise to free them
from a dangerous attack from her.

The farce, however, was still carried on. The traitors defir.

ed to know whether the Scots Commissioners would accuse them

personally. To this they replied, that they had already been
commanded to accuse the Earl of Murray, and his adherents, by
letters under the Queen's signet 5 that they had already given in
their accusations, and would abide by them, as well as by the
defence of the Queen's innocence and as soon as they were fur.
nifhed with copies of the letters, &c. they would enter upon
particulars. This resolute way of proceeding proved so disagree.
able to Murray and his accomplices, that the very next day they
desired leave to depart for Scotland, which was very readily ob.
tained. The day following, the Bishop of Ross and Lord Herries
vwere acquainted by Secretary Cecil, that Elizabeth would not refuse
the copies of the letters, provided Mary would fend a letter signed
with her own hand, promising to answer to the charges contained
in them. The Scots Commissioners inflantly replied, that this
had already been done by two writings shown and read in pre.
fence of Elizabeth herself, in which she offered to answer upo0
certain conditions there expressed; " so being that fthe might have
the writings, or at least the copies of them." Cecil made no an-
fwer; indeed it was difficult to invent an answer on such a try.
ing occasion. Mary's Commissioners, however, took the opportu-
nity of complaining in name of their miflrefs, that " the Earl of
Murray and his adherents, who had been publicly accused by
the Queen, were allowed by the Queen of England to depart for
Scotland, without abiding to hear Queen Mary's defence of her
innocence, or to answer to her charges against themselves. In
which cafe it was but reasonable to allow the Queen to depart al-
so; the injuflice being apparent of detaining the onein England,
and allowing the others to go off."

The answer given to this reasonable demand was, that Murray

had promised for himself and his company to return to England
whenever the Queen should call him but in the mean time their
mniftrefs could not be fuffered to depart for many reasons.

" In this manner, says our author, did Murray and Morton,

with their box and letters, withdraw from the conferences in
England. What became afterwards of the letters, we know not.
They are now loft, or have been destroyed, nobody knows how.
This we are certain of, and have seen, that Queen Mary, not-
withflanding her frequent assertions that they were forged by her
accusers, and her repeated earnest fupplications, both under her
hand and by the mouth of her Commissioners, to fee the letters,
to answer them, and prove the forgery upon Murray, and Mor-
ton, could not prevail in so reasonable a request. And, to her

dying hour, there very letters upon which only, at this day, her
enemies pretend to found any proof of her guilt, were most in-
duflrioufly hid from her, and at last buried forever in the fame
pit of darkness from which they had at first emerged."

Mr. Tytler having thus set forth, in a strong point of view, the

ignomimnus manner in which QOeen Mary was treated by the per-
fidioas Elizabeth, and her no less treacherous allies, Murray, Mor-
ton, &c. proceeds to point out a contradicion in Hume's ac-
count of the matter. That hiflorian informs us that Mary abfo-
lutley refafed to answer by her Commiflioners to the charges pro-
dited againfr her; for which they gave this " extraordinary rca-
fon;" that as their ruitrels was a Sovereign Princess, fie w.s
not accountable to any tribunal; and they required that she
thould be previously admitted into Queen Elizabeth's presence.
He tells us also, that Elizabeth had always pretended to enter
into the conferences only as the friend of Queen Maiy, and by
her own consent; without assuming any jurifdiaion over her, in
which cafe, when she refused to answer, no more could be done
in the matter.

" If this, says Mr. Tytler, was a necessary consequence of Ma-

ry's refuling to answer, (unless in person, Mr. Hume should have
added) it may be asked, How carie Elizabeth, notwithilanding,
to proceed in the trial, in absence of both Mary and her Com-
milTioners ? Was not this the height of partiality in this pre-
tended fiiend of Mary, to hear her enemies by themselves, or to
receive any thing from their hands as fufficient proof against her,
upon their word only ? And, when she did so, ought she not in
common juflice, to have communicated the fame to Mary ?"

Mr. Hume further informs us, that besides the letters and son-

nets, Murray fortified his charge by certain corrcfponding fads
and testimonies, to which he added, " some time after, the dying
confeffion of Hubert, who had been executed for the King's
murder, and directly charged the Queen, &c." " Would not
any one, says Mr. Tytler, believe, from this account, that Hu-
bert had been hanged before the time here spoken of by Mr.
Hume, aud that his confeffion was produced during the confer-
ences ; and yet we have seen that Hubert was alive all the time
of the conferences, and no confefflion from him, nor the least
mention made of his name for ten months after they broke up."

Mr. Hume goes on to assert, that Mary's Commissioners had

endeavoured to avoid this dilemma ; and, being unable to an-
fwcr fatisfaaorily, gave no answer at all, but bioke up the

Volume i. Z z

conferences ; and he considers this recoiling from the inquiry, as
he calls it, to be an undeniable proof of Mary's consciousness of
her guilt. In answer to this, Mr. Tytler quotes the record dat.
ed at Hampton-Court, December 25, 1567. This paper sets
forth, that on that day Mary's Commissioners declared, that their
mistress could not fuffer their slanderous accusations to remain un-
answered; but would answer them in defence of her own inno-
cence, and in accusation of them as authors, inventors, and exe-
cutioners of the King's murder. " Which being read before her
Majesty and her council, they most humbly desired her Majefly
to cause them have such writings as were produced against their
mistress by her adverfaries."

As Mr. Hume undoubtedly perused this record, it is by no

means easy to fee how he could fall into such a strange miflake
but Mr. Tytler observes, that his account is direaly contradia.
ed almost in every sentence of the records, which it appears, he
himself has perused. " At the fame time, adds our author, it is
easy to perceive the poor evasion that Mr. Hume pretends to
make for this so firange a detail. Yjt, That Mary had insisted to
confront, personally, Murray and Morton, her accusers, in pre.
fence of Elizabeth, the whole English nobility, and foreign am-
baffadors; which Mr. Hume is pleased to fay, was such a request
as could not be granted: and, 2dly, That, this request being re-
fused, Mary's Commissioners had protefled against all further pro,
cedure, on the 9th of December; the conferences, therefore, ac-
cording to Mr. Hume, were from that minute, as he has said a-
bove, finally broken off. But this is such a pitiful fltift, in which
our author has followed Anderson, who breaks off his Colledions,
and gives us no more of the proceedings of the English Council
after the 16th of December x56j. Mr. Hume has told us, that
Elizabeth only entered into these conferences as the friend of
Mary, and by her own consent, without assuming any jurifdi&ion
over her. In consequence of this, Mary demands to be personal-
ly heard, upon her defence, to confront and interrogate her ac-
cufers in presence of all the world : A demand, that, without re-
gard to Mr. Hume's.opinion, will, I presume, be thought a most
just and necessary one. Elizabeth refuses it : Mary's Commis-
fioners, on so manifest a partiality, protest against all further pro-
cedure in the matter. What follows : Do the conferences final-
ly break up ? No, 'tis quite otherwise : On the 16th of Decem-
ber 1567, Elizabeth " would not consent that any of the Scots
Commissioners should depart the kingdom before the end of this

conference." She allowed Murray and his associates to proceed,
and produce the proof of their accusation ; and, twelve days as-
ter the protest, she wrote to Mary, and advised her to make an-
fwer. This Mary ha4 determined to do, before the date of Eli-
zabeth's letter of the 2ifl of December ; and had already writ-
ten her resolution to her Commilioners, on the x9th of that
month, to have infpe&ion of Murray's proof, and doubles of all
the writings; " and, with God's grace, (says she) I shall mike
such answer to their accusation, as my innocence shall appear, and
their guilt." It is plain, therefore, that, as the conferences were
entirely founded on the consent of parties, allowing that Mary's
Commissioners, or even that the herself had broke them off, yet,
as Murray and his associates, on their part, were till going on
before the English Council, it was still in Mary's power to ret
fume her defence, as Elizabeth herself desired that the thould do;
and which she did accordingly, in the firongeft manner, by let-
ters under her hand and signet. We also fee, from the records of
Queen Mary's register, that the proceedings at Hampton-Court
were both frequent and regular: On the ioth of January 1568-9,
at Queen Elizabeth's command, Cecil, her secretary, declares to
Murray and his accomplices, that " There had been nothing sus-
ficiently produced, nor Ihewn by them against the Queen their
fovereigrn, whereby the Queen of England should conceive or
take any evil opinion of the Queen her good sifter, for any thing
yet feen." On the xith of January 1568-9, Murray, Morton,
and their adherents, were publicly accused by Q.een Mary, for
being guilty of the King's murder ; notwithstanding which, the
very next day, Murray and his adherents got public licence to
depart; and the conferences were continued from day to day,
until the 2d of February 1568-9."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to a more particular consideration of

the genuineness of the letters in queflion. From the above slate
of the cafe, the partiality of Queen Elizabeth to the enemies of
Mary is evident. That the had ever any intention of vindicat-
ing the honour of the Scottish princess is absolutely incredible;
since every step she took tended more and more to blacken her;
and having now, as she pretended, got the proofs of her guilt in-
to her hands, they were not long in being circulated. Copies of
the Love Letters and Sonnets were publiflhed to the world ; but
though there is Bo doubt that Mary would in this way procure
copies as well as others, yet it was impossible to give any other
pnfwer than by a simple denial, and by setting forth in as firong

Zz ij

terms as pffirble, the circumfiances which tended to thew tL,
improbability of her being guilty; and this undoubtedly was done
over and over, though without any good effect. What the bi-
shop of Ross said concerning them has alreqdy been taken notice
of. He mentions also the dying confcfflon, but difflers widely
in his account of it from what is recorded by tle enpemis of
IMvary; for he tells us, that, " at his execution, he took it upon
his death, as he should answer before God, that he never canied
any such letter, nor that the Queen was participant, nor of coun.
cil in the caufe."

From this time, these letters were no more heard of, till the

time that Euchanan published his Detection, which Mr. Tytler
dates in 1571, though Anderson makes it a year later. The
,box with the originals, having long been loft, the French copy
which is now extant, has been supposed to be taken from the ori-
ginal, and underwent several editions as such ; but Mr. Goodall
has endeavoured to shew, from a consideration of the letteis
themselves, -and by comparing the different copies with one ano,
ther, that they cannot possibly be genuine.

His arguments are reduced by Mr. Tytler, to the following.

I. The letters said to be written in French by the Queen, as
mow extant, have been held by all parties as true copies, of the
originals produced by Morton. Buchanan not only had them in
his custody, but translated the three first of them into Latin; and
the Scots copy contained eight letters, with the love veifes. A
French translation of Buchanan's DeteFion, was printed at Lon-
don in 1572, under the name of Thomas Waltam ; but there ne-
ver was any printer of that name in Scotland. 2. Ey comparing
those different copies together, Mr. Goodall has shewn, that in-
Read of the Scots and Latin being translated from the French,
the latter is plainly a translation from the Latin, and the Latin
from the Scots. 3. The Latin translation is full of errors; and
as often as these occur, the French always follow them. 4. As
often as there happens to be a blunder in the Scots copy, both
the Latin and French follow it; of which among several others
-we shall mention the following very remarkable one. The
Queen is made to fay, that she was going to seek her reft till to-
morrow ; when, says (he, I shall end -my bihle, in place of her
bi//, a word used commonly at that time for any kind of writing.
Both the Latin and French copies have this blunder in them i
and it is absolutely certain, that it would not have e. ginatcd 1i
the F'ench ; so that this single circumitance f.a:'s, ahnolt de-

cifively, that the letters have been fabricated. 5. l\Ir. Goodall
has proved so clearly, that the letters we have at present are
translations from Buchanan's Latin and the Scots copy, that even
Mr. Hume and Dr. Robertson have been obliged to own, that
the original copies are loft ; and that the French are palpable
translations from the Latin and Scots.

Our two learned hilforians have endeavoured to evade the

force of this argument, in the following manner : " The original
letters, fay they, are loft, and we know nothing of them." Mr.
Tytler cites the following passage from Robertfon's Dissertation
in answer to Goodall. " All this author's premises may be grant-
ed, and yet his conclusions will not follow, unless he likewise
prove, that the French letters, as we now have them, are a true
copy of those which were produced by Murray and his party in
the Scots parliament, and at York and Westminster ; but this he
has not attempted." Mr. Goodall is obliged to the learned Doc-
tor for having done it for him in his Dissertation, by fairly ac-
knowkdging that Buchanan made his translation not from the
French, but from the Scots copy. The hiflorian here ingenu-
o.ily tells the truth, though, perhaps, he was not aware of the
conf-quences. Had there been any other French letters than
the present, what occasion had Buchanan for the Scots, when he
himself mult have had poiefflion of the originals ? Buchanan was
actually one of the affiflants appointed to the Scots Commifflion-
ers, and intruffed with the condu6t of the v!ole process, and did,
with Lethington, M'Gill, and Wood, a Lord of the Session, ex-
hibit the original letters, and explain their contents in private to
the Englifih Commissioners. Buchanan could not have loft or
rmilaid them, because is is evident from Mr. Anderfon's account,
that these letters were translated by Buchanan at London, during
the time of the conferences.

It now becomes very reasonably a matter of queflion whether

any letters besides those which we now have, ever existed.
" Surely, says Mr. Tytler, it is a fair conclusion to aflert, that,
if they did not exist with Buchanan, they did not exist at all;
and if the Scotti:n Commiflioners, who were said to produce them,
never saw them, nobody else ever did. It cannot be pretended
that Buchanan did not understand the French. He passed most
of his life in that country, and taught a school there. Indeed,
since the Dodtor has been driven to deny that the French letters
are true copies of the originals, by all the rules of proof and cri-
ticifin, it was his business to produce these originals. But, how is it

possible to fix men, who, after having, for two hundred years, quot,
ed and insisted on these letters as originals, and have even com-.
mended the elegancy of their composition, on finding themselves
forced to give them up, have now recourse to other letters, which
they acknowledge to be loft; and now pretend to fay never were
seen, even by Buchanan himself who was employed by the pu.
blic to produce them. None of the adversaries of Queen Mary
ever pretended that the present French letters were vitiated tranf.
lations. Not even Morton himself, nor Buchanan, who lived
many years after their publication, ever said so; which it was
incumbent on them to have done; neither did any body ever pre.
tend that they were vitiated, before Mr. Goodall demonfirated
them to be so. It is incumbent, therefore, upon those who infill
on their authenticity, to produce the originals. Mr. Hume tells
us that " it is in vain at this day, to objeEt to the letters; they
were regularly and judicially given in, and ought to have been
canvassed at the time." Had the Queen remained silent at the
time when Murray produced these letters, there is no doubt that
the argument would have held good ; but this was by no means the
cafe. On the contrary, she endeavoured by repeated fupplications,
to have them for the infpeflion of herself or her friends; in
which cafe she would have undertaken to prove forgery; but so
far was this from being the cafe, that the box with its contents
were sent back in haste to Scotland with Murray and Morton, and
what they did with them nobody can tell.

" But now, that it is said the original papers are loft, how is

it poflible to make good the accusation against the Queen ? By
copies it would appear. Let it be so; these copies have now been
examined, and deteated to be vitiated in such a manner, as it is
forced to be acknowledged, that the Queen could not have writ-
ten such letters. We are now told, that although the letters ex-
tant at present cannot be said to be either the originals, or copies
from the originals, yet they are translations from translations,
at the third hand. " The French translator declares that he
translated them from the Latin." He says, indeed, that, having
no manner of knowledge of the Scots language, he chose rather
to express all that he found in the Latin. That this could not
comprehend all the letters is plain, because only three of them
were put into Latin by Buchanan, and the reft" were in Scots, a
language which, he says, he knew nothing of. How then got
he these last ? But, in order to expose the deception, here it
will be necessary to trace the hiflory of the French letters for

some time back. " We have already seen that Buchanan publish-
ed his libel called Dete67io Marie, both in the Latin and Scots
languages to which he fubjoined a Latin translation of the three
first French letters, and all the eight letters in the Scotti(h lan-
guage. The very next year, about the time of the Duke of Nor-
folk's examination, and while a treaty was carrying on betwixt
Elizabeth and the King of France, it was thought proper to pub-
lifh a French translation of the Dete6tion, with all the letters,
which being said to be written by the Queen in French, were
surely pirrted verbatim from the originals. But this French tranf-
lator has declared that " he had no knowledge of the Scots lan-
guage, and therefore chose to express all he found in the Latin."
But Buchanan translated only three of the letters into that lan-
guage: from what hand therefore did this supposed Frenchman
procure the other four letters in French ? For he published seven
of them that were propuced by Murray and Morton. Will it be
said, that after finding he could not procure copies of all the ori-
ginal French letters, he translated the three first from Buchanan's
Latin'verfioni and for the other four, he had recourse to some
friendly Scotsman, who translated these into Latin, from which
the Frenchman translated them again into French, in the shape
they now fland ? How firange a process this ? How contrary to
all credibility ?

" But even to make this ill-contrived tale go down, he tells

a dire& lie. He says, that all the French letters were translated
into Latin ; from which language he choafe to translate all that he
found. From all which it seems pretty evident, that the affe&ed
disguise and lies of this impoflor, were contrived to make us be-
lieve, that the book was not printed in London."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to flhew that the probable reasons of

all this deceit and lying were, that, in this year (1571), there
were negociations going on for a marriage betwixt the Duke of
Anjou and Queen Elizabeth. Mary had conflantly an ambaffa-
dor at that Court, soliciting her release from the hands of her
enemyi and, at this very period, her relation, the Duke of Guise,
was in the height of glory and power at that Court. To defeat
these folicitations, therefore, and to afford a plausible reason for
keeping Mary in prison, it was necessary to represent her in the
blackest colours possible to the princes on the continent; which
had already been done fufficiently in England, by the publication
of several editions of Buchanan's Deteition, and Mary's letters.

That this was the cafe, is extremely plain from the inftruiflon

given to the Englifli minifler at the Court of France, " It were
not amils to have dii ers of Buchanan's little Latin books- to pre-
sent, if need were, to the King, as from yourself, and to some of
the other noblemen of the Council, for they will serve to good
ef'c to d'fjgrace her."

Dr. Robertson has produced the testimony of two French writ-

ers, to prove' that the book was not printed in London; but Mr.
Tytler has shown that one of his teffimonies makes rather againti
-him. The author indeed says, that the Latin Detlion of
Buchanan was translated into French by one Camuz ; but th:s
nobody will pretend to diCpute; though it says nothing as to the
place where it was printed. On the other hand, it is plain,
from his words, that it was not printed in that country, but sent
thither afterwards, and dispersed through that kingdom. Nay,
one of them, Blackwood, says, that it was translated and printed
at Rochelle ; but if that was the cafe, who furnished them with
the materials for this translation. But wherever they were print.
ed, theie can be no doubt that the publisher muff have printed
them from the originals. If in London, there they were in eve-
iy body's hands; and if in France, one of the author's quoted by
Dr. Roberfon asserts that Buchanan sent over the whole to his
brethren in that country.

Another argument brought by the Do&or, is, that, in the Scots

translation, there was prefixed to each letter two or three fen-
tences of the original Fiench; which, breaking off with an &c.
the Scottish traiilation of the whole followed. The French
editor, oblerving this, foolishly concluded, that the letters had
been written partly in French, and partly in Scots. In answer
tn this, however, our author oLfcrves, that nothing can be in-
ferred from the woids of an author whose intention was manifest-
lv to deceive

; though it will by no means be easy to convince

us that he was either ignorant or foolish.

The Doclor next endeavourstofupporthis argument, by ffewing

that the firil sentences, by the ipirit and elegance in them, ap-
pear to be the orly remaining parts of the original French, as
written by the Queen; and what follows them are only servile
translations from the Latin version of Buchanan. This, at best,
muoit be a very vague argument, and depend on the fancy of
every reader. Mr. Tytler owns that, in some instances, the
French has a happier turn than the Latin translation ; but this
proves no more than that, in a few feattexed sentences, qn a poor,

low translation may express a thought better than an original,
Mr. Goodall, however, has thewn that the Scots copy is the
only original one ; and this by such arguments as cannot easily be
refuted. We have already taken notice of the scandalous error,
bible for bill; which has run through both the French and La-
tin. In like manner, the Scots word irkit, i. e. weary, has
been written nakit, and though it makes the sentence plainly non,
sense, has been translated in the Latin nudata, and in the French

nue.

Another argument used by Mr. Hume is, that the Scottish let-

ters are evidently a translation from some French original which
we now have not ; but the answer to this is obvious. In
the time of Queen Mary, and long after, the intercourse be-
tween the French and Scottish nations had intermixed the lan-
guage of the former with that of the latter; so that even French
words were sometimes used in the language of Scotland; the re-
mains of which are not to this day totally eradicated. In-
flances of this are pointed out by Mr. Tytler, from many other
writings; so that the argument of Mr. Hume, drawn from this
quarter, must fall to the ground.

Laf/ly, Mr. Tytler confideis the flyle of the Scottish copy of

those letters, and finds a number of proverbial sentences and
phrases peculiar to the language of this country, to which the
French have nothing similar in their language. Both Mr. Hume
and Dr. Robertson own, that this Scottilh copy is the original of
the French and Latin translations ; and if there ever was any o-
ther, it is incumbent on those who take the affirmative fide of
this question to produce them, or at least to shew that there ever
existed another copy than the present, as well as to explain in
what manner this supposed original came to be loft, after being
in every body's hands, both in England and Scotland, which
farely must be accounted a matter of no little difficulty.

Our author now proceeds to answer particularly the arguments

of Dr. Robertson, of which he gives a summary; and this,
through the arguments at large, are to be found in the Differta-
tion contained in the body of this volume, we shall here tran-
scribe for the ease of the reader's memory. They are as follow,

" x. Murray, and his adherents, affirmed, upon their word of

honour, that the letters were written with the Queen's own hand.

" 2. The letters were produced in the Regent's parliament,

and are mentioned in the aa against Mary, as the chief argument
of her guilt.

Volume II. 3 A

" 3. They were shewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, Earl

of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's Commiflioners at
York, who considered them as genuine.

" 4. They were believed by Elizabeth and her miniflers to

be genuine: They laid them before the English Council; who,
on comparing them with other letters of Mary, believed them to
be genuine.

" 5. The Earl of Lennox, and his lady, believed Mary guilty

of the murder."

Besides the Doctor produced the following internal evidences

for the authenticity of these letters.

i. That " whenever a paper is forged with any particular design,

the forgers take care to make it as full and explicit as may be,
to avoid any appearance of uncertainty, and all kind of cavil.
Forgers seldom err in proving too little, but are apt to fall into
the other extreme." Had the letters in question, therefore, been
forged, the Do&or thinks it probable, that inflead of obscure
hints, and dark ambiguous expressions, there would have been the
most full and open proofs of her guilt. All Mary's advocates in-
sift that there is nothing in the letters which amounts to a proof
of her guilt. It was not to be supposed, therefore, that the for-
gers would have been at so much needless trouble to involve them-
selves in guilt and danger when, after all, it did not answer their
purpose.

2. Skilful forgers avoid any long. details, on account of the

difficulty of keeping a proper conne&ion in a long chain of cir.
cumftances without discovering the fraud. But Mary's letters,
especially the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circumstances,
" extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether so-
reign to the purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been absurd to have inserted, had they been altogether with.
out foundation."

3. The reality of several circumstances in the letters are con-

firmed by undoubted collateral evidence ; of which the flory of
Crawford, gentleman to the Earl of Lennox, already mentioned,
is brought as an instance. " He declared, that, during the
Queen's flay at Glasgow, the King repeated to him, every night,
what had passed through the day betwixt her majesty and him,
and that the account given of these conversations in the first let-
ter, is merely the fame with what the King communicated to
him. According to the fame letter, there was much discourse
between the King and Queen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and

Walcar. This was altogether unknown, till a letter of Mary's
preserved in the Scots College at Paris, and publithed by Keith,
discovered it to be an affair of so much importance, as merited
all the attention she paid to it at that time." The pain to which
the Queen was fubjet in her fide, is likewise mentioned in the
Doaor's opinion so naturally, that it can scarce belong to any
thing but a genuine production.

4. In her first letter, the Queen mentions her having fat up

late writing ; and that the had written out all her clean paper,
so the continued'the writing upon a sheet on which she had formerly
written notes or memorandums. " These memorandums still ap-
pear in the middle of the letter; and what we have said, seems
naturally to account for the manner how they might find their
way into a real letter. It is fearce to be supposed, however, that
any forger would think of placing memorandums in the middle
of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so absurd and unnatu-
ral appearance. But if any shall flill carry their refinement so
far as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this
circumitance in order to preserve the appearance of genuineness,
they must, at least, allow that the Queen's enemies, who employ.
ed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of these short notes and memorandums ; but we find them mif-
taking them-fo far as to imagine, that they were the credit of
the bearer, i. e. points concerning which the Queen had given
him verbal inftru&ions."

5. " Mary, mentioning her conversations with theKing about

the affair of Mynto, Iliegait, &c. says, ' To-morrow I will speak
to him upon that point;' and then adds, ' As to the reft of
Willie Hiegaits, he confefled it ; but it was the morning after
my coming before he did it.' This addition, which could not
have been made till after the conversation happened, seems either
to have been inserted by the Queen into the body of the letter,
or perhaps, the having written it on the margin, it was taken
thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to be areal one,
and written at different times, as it plainly bears, this circum-
fiance appears to be very natural ; but no reason could have in-
duced a forger to have ventured upon such an anachronism, for
which there was no neceflity."

In answer to these arguments, Mr. Tytler observes, i. That

the exhibition, and collation of these letters was made entirely by
the Queen of England and her Council, along with Murray,
Morton, and the reft of the Queen's adversaries; and that upon

3 A ij

Mary and her Commifioners infifling for a fight of them, or for
copies, they were inflantly sent off to Scotland

5 which confider-

ation undoubtedly cuts off every argument that can be drawn
from the words of Murray or Queen Elizabeth.

i. Though the eagerness of a forger would naturally have hurri-

ed him on to make the letters quite explicit with regard to Ma-
ry's accefflon to the murder, the observation cannot be said to
hold universally. Had a single person been the author of these
letters, no doubt it might have been allowed to hold good; hut
it must be considered that Murray, Morton, Lethington, and
Buchanan, are said to have been the a&ors in this scene, to which
society we cannot possibly ascribe much of the rashness in quef-
tion. One instance, however, of this ralhnefs.has been given
-in their first producing letters with a subscription annexed to
them ; and afterwards others without it. Considering afterwards,
however, that to affix a signature to such shameful letters would
have a suspicious appearance, they afterwards suppressed this copy,
and produced others, the only mark of authenticity of which was,
their being wholly written with the Queen's hand.

The Docor, our author obfcrves, has shown no great imparti-

ality in drawing an argument againil the Queen from the apolo.
gy made by her friends, that the letters were not conclusive.
He asks, what could any person have done more than to insist on
being brought pesfonally before Queen Elizabeth, the nobility of
England, and the foreign ambassadors, to plead her cause in per-
son. She asserted, in the firongeft language, that the letters were
forged by Murray, and his agents, and that she would prove it;
nor can we suppose that they would have denied the charge in
more energetic terms, than it was urged home upon them by her
advocate the bifllop of Ross.

2. and 3. In answer to what is said, that the contents of the

letters were natural, and that they were replete with many inci-
dents known to be true, Mr.'Tytler considers the plan which the
manufa&tLrers of these letters must necessarily have followed.
One of their first steps must have been to get good information of
the Queen's situation at the time, with an account of those who
were about her person, and what occurrences happened in her pre-
fence. In all this there was no difficulty. Murray, Morton,
and Lethington, were all in the Queen's confidence, and none of
them could be ignorant of her having a pain in her fide; and we
have already taken notice of the way in which Crawford procu-
red his intelligence, so that his testimony could not in the least

have proved the letters to be genuine, but rather the contrary. It
is remarkable that this person declared, not only that he was told
every word by the King, of what passed between the Queen and
him in conversation through the day, but that he wrote down
every word, that he might be the more ready to give an account
of it whenever the Earl of Lennox should think proper to call
upon him to do so. Now, says Mr. Tytler, " Let me aik why
this exaanefs to write down what he could tell Lennox, who was
himself at Glasgow, by word of mouth, the next minute? And,
for what end did he keep these writings by him after he had told
them to Lennox ? From inspiration or foresight, no doubt; that,
some years after, he would be called upon to relate over again
these conversations to Queen Elizabeth and her Council, to give
faith to letters, which at the time that he set down his notes did

not exift."

From all this it appears, that there was not in this letter any

thing but what was either publicly known, or publicly reported
at the time ; so that, unless the letter-writer had discovered
something which could not have been known without it, there
cannot be the least reason to suppose, from its contents, that it is
genuine ; private letters are not ufually' written about public
conversations, or common reports. One exception, indeed, is
made by the Dodcor, viz. the affair of William Hiegait, Mynto,
and Walcar, which, he says, remained altogether unknown, till
a letter from the Queen to the Archbishop of Glasgow, published
by Keith, discovered it to be an affair of importance. Were this
information jutt, there it no doubt but it would be acknowledged
to have great weight. But so far is this from being the cafe, that
from the contents of the letter, it appears that the matters fpo-
ken of in it had already been circulated all over the country.
The matter was, that this William Walcar, a servant to the
Archbishop of Glasgow, came to the Queen at Stirling and de-
clared, that it was openly reported, that the King designed, with
the assistance of the nobility, to crown his son, and assume the
government in his own hands; and, being pressed upon the sub-
jet, he named William Hiegait as his author. But on their exa-
mination before the Council, both of them denied separately, as
well as when confronted together; only Walcar confeffed that he
heard a report of a design to imprison the King.

Thus the arguments for the authenticity of the letters in quef-

tion, drawn from their contents hitherto divulged, fallto the ground.
The most remarkable of all, however, yet remains, viz. Concerning

the notes and memorandums in the middle of the first letter.
This argument is taken from a passage in that letter, where the
Queen is made to fay, " Excuse that thing that is scribbled; I
had no paper ycfterday, when I fvrote that of the memorial."
For lack of paper, then, says the Dotor, she was obliged to con-
tinue her letter upon a separate paper, upon which she had writ.
ten down her notes and memorandums, which is a circumstance
that no forger could possibly have thought of. " I own, fays-Mr.
Tytler, that this observation is ingenious, and shews with what
attention the acute dissertator has ferutinized this matter. But,
high as my opinion is of this gentleman's penetration, I cannot
give him the preference to his friends Murray, Morton, Lething-
ton, and Buchanan, whose talents for conduating'fo dark an affair,
I am of opinion, could not be exceeded by any person. To make
out his argument, therefore, we must believe, as the dissertator
tells us, that the above four sage politicians, who were poffeffed
of the letters, and knew every circumstance that is mentioned in
them, or relating to them, and so recent as within a few months
of their supposed date, were so entirely ignorant of their contents,
that they made a blunder in explaining their meaning to the Com.
miflioners at York, which blunder this ingenious gentleman, at
the distance of two hundred years, has now discovered and set to
rights. The Queen is made to refer Bothwell to the bearer of
the letter for full information as to several things which she had
not time or intention to treat fully of. " Upon this point, says
the writer of the letter, the bearer will flhew you many things."
Again, " this bearer will telL you the reft; and if I learn any
thing here, I will make you memorial at even." The letter is
made to be written at different times, in the space of two days:
and, at the conclusion of each night's writing, there is added a
few notes, profeffedly a recapitulation of the preceding heads of
the letter ; and at the end of this letter, the Queen is made to
fay, " Excuse that thing is scribbled, for I had not paper yester-
day when I wrote that of the memorial." I ask the reader now,
Is it possible to apply this to any other memorial, than that of the
many small things concerning which (he referred Bothwell to the
bearer to explain to him fully ? This is the plain sense of the
words themselves, and in this sense only did Lethington and
Buchanan explain them in their conference with the English
Commissioners at York. The memorial there meant, " is in
the credit (fay they) given to Paris the bearer." Can any thing
be more natural than this ? " But, says our authsr, these gentle-

men were in a mistake as to this, and understood nothing of the
matter; for how the dissertator has discovered, that thisfcribbled
,writing, called the memorial, was no other than a part of her
very letter on which she had previously made some jottings, but
was now forced to scribble her letter upon it, for want of paper.
If we can possibly suppose that to have been the cafe, all the fcrib-
bling upon a paper, already blotted with notes and jottings, must
undoubtedly have appeared upon the face of the letter itself in
which cafe it isimpollible to suppose that Lethington and Buchan-
an would have mistaken the sense of this passage in the letter.

" This letter appears to have been the fubje& of two nights

writing; at the end of the fifit night the Queen is made to fay,
she is going to bed, ' yet I cease not to scribble all the remains
of the paper.' Then follows a thort note of the heads of what she
had written. The night after, when hle comes to the very close
of her letter, there are added likewise a few jottings or memo-
randums, such as, ' Remember you of the purpose of Lady Re-
xes, &c.' all which is natural." Now if, according to this dif-
covery of the dissertator, (he was obliged to write part of the let-
ter upon her paper of notes which she had kept for jotting down
what occurred; by what flrange accident came it to pass that
this paper of notes came to be so luckily divided, that one half
of these notes falls so very a propos as to make an exaa summary
of the preceding part of the letter, and no more ? After which
the letter proceeds to the end, when a few other notes are again
as naturally introduced, and with which this letter concludes.
From all which, I think it is pretty plain, that these notes were
always meant to pass for what at present they appear to be, " part
of the letter itfelf."

The next evidence brought against Queen Mary, is the dying

confeffion of Nicholas Hubert, commonly called French Paris,
servant to the Earl of Bothwell, and named in the letters them-
selves, as the bearer of them from the Queen to Bothwell.

Four of Bothwell's servants were apprehended in June, 1567,

as acceffaries to the murder of the King, and publicly tried be-
fore the High Court of Jufficiary at Edinburgh and all of them
were condemned and executed on their own confeffions, as guil-
ty of the murder ; but none of them accused the Queen. On
the contrary, in the inftru&ions given to the Commifioners of
Mary, it is mentioned that they declared at all times, the Queen
to be innocent. The evidence of this is inconteftible ; as there
were prefeut no fewer than nineteen of the first peers of the king-

The names of the four criminals already mentioned, are, Dal-

glielh, Hay, Powrie, and Hepburn. As for Paris, who was sup-
posed to be the confident of the whole intrigue betwixt the Queen
and Bothwell, he was carried to the prison in St. Andrew's, where
the Earl of Murray resided, and kept there for two years, during
the whole time of the conferences at Weftminfler and York.

The fnfpicious conduc of Morton, with regard to Dalgliefh, in

whose custody it was said the box was found, has been repeatedly
taken notice of; and one more conclusion drawn by Mr. Tytlcr
from the silence of Morton at this time, is, that he and his aflo-
ciates had either forgot the matter of the box altogether, or that
the letters did not at that time exist, but that the whole story
-was trumped up after Dalgliefh had been executed. Still, how-
ever, if the evidence of Paris could have availed them any thing,
he might have been produced. Besides, making the firange
supposition, that the exiflence of this witness could have been
forgot, the conduct of Murray himself, after this time, throws
such a violent suspicion upon him, as never can be removed by
any aat whatever.

Mary having, as we have seen, been denied her request of being"

furnished with copies of the letters, or infpeaing the originals, and
having publicly accused Murray of being guilty of the murder;
the latter, instead of waiting to exculpate himself, inflantly set
out for Scotland, and after residing there seven months, caused
this Paris, the only person who could vindicate his own inno-
cence, and prove the QuOeen's guilt, to be hanged. " Let us now
fee, says Mr. Tytler, the method Murray takes to wipe cff this
foul aspersion, and to avoid all fuipicions of pradifing, by the
force of torture or promises, upon a poor, ignorant, friendless
creature, then in his hands, to mould him to his purpose.
Does he fend him to JIondon to be examined before the En-
glifh Council, as his other witnesses, Crawford ,and Nelson,
had been ? Does he even venture to produce him before his own
privy council at Edinburgh, to be interrogated there ? Or, last-
ly, Does he bring him to a puolic trial in the ordinary form, be-
fore the High Court of Jufticiaiy at Edinburgh, as was allowed
to Dalgliefh and the other servants of Bothwell? No! As to
these last, the experiment had not at all succeeded. In spite of
torture, they had, with their dying breath, spoke out the truth,
and acquitted the Queen. This man, Paris, was the last card

Murray had to play : a new method, therefore, mufft be follow-
ed %with refped to him. He was confined in an obscure dungeon,
in Muriay's citadel of St. Andrew's; there he was kept hid from
all the world, and at Lfti condemned by the Earl of Murray him-
self, in a manner nobody -knows how. * Several months after his
death a confefaon was taken, clandeflinely, without mentioning
any person who was present when it was made, by Paris, and sent
up privately to London to Secretary Cecil, but at what peiiod
nobody knows, accusing the Queen in the blackest terms, and
extolling the Earl of Murray to the skies. And, to crown the
whole, this precious piece of evidence is kept a profound secret
from the Queen and her friends, who never once saw or heard of
this confchfion.

" All that iemains of this poor creature, are two confefflons,

one on the 9th, and the other on the ioth ofAuguft i369. The
firit, said to.be the original, and marked on some leaves with the
initial letters of his name, is flill extant in the Cotton Libra-
ry. It charges Bothwell with the murder, but says nothing of
the Queen or the letters; but the other expressly charges her
with the whole."

Mr. Tytlcr is of opinion, that these confefflors were kept fe-

cret, and never flown to Mary, from the following circumftan-
ces, viz. that the only cotemporary writers who mention the
condemnation and death of this Frenchman, are Lefly bishop of
Ross, and the author of a manuscript Hiflory of Scotland during
the reign of Queen Mary, and the four Regents, Murray, Len-
nox, Mar, and Morton; which was afterwards published by
Crawford, hifloriographer to Queen Anne. The author of the
manuscript mentions, that " the Regent (Murray) proceeded
from Stirling to St. Andrew's ; where Palis, a Frenchman, was
hanged for the murder of the late King, though he denied the
facl." We have already taken notice of biflhop Lefly's assertion,
that Paris vindicated Mary from the crimes laid to her charge;
from whence it is plain, that neither the QOeen nor the Bishop
had seen or heard of the second confeffion, in which she was so
violently accused. " And the above passage from Crawford, says
Mr. Tytler, fully explains the good reason that Murray then had
for keeping this pretended confeflion of Paris a profound secret, to
all except his own confederates and Secretary Cecil, viz. Because
it was at this time universally known, by every body in Scot-
land, that this very Paris, at his execution,, had publicly given
the lie to any pretended confeflion, by solemnly denying the faat."

Volume II. 3 B

Our author now attempts to determine betwixt the two fetsof

contradicory evidence before us on the present question. He
quotes a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, in which she gives hinr
a great chara&er. " In our judgment, says the, ye have not any
in loyalty and faithfulnefs can over-match him " and on this oc-
cafion, Mr. Tytler observes, what is indeed very surprising, that
Dr. Robertson should call Lefly " a man heated with fadion, so
that no firefs can be laid upon what he fays." From the abftra&
of his arguments already given, however, the reader will be en-
abled to judge how far the Doaor is in the right in his affer-
tions ; and it is impofflble to hesitate a moment at giving the bi-
thop the preference to Buchanan, in point of argument, candour,
and humanity.

On the other fide of the quefflion, we must confider, that by

the condua of Mary, her accusers had an opportunity of contra-
dicting the reports concerning the confeffion of Paris ; but this
they did not ; and the only answer they made to the vindication
published by the bilhop of Ross, was to suppress the book altoge-
ther, on pretence of its containing some dangerous points with
regard to Mary's title to the crown of England. By reason of
this suppression, it may be said, that Murray and Morton had no
opportunity of feeing the Queen's defence with regard to Paris
but this we can fearcely suppose, as the book was soon diffribu-
ted, and some copies of the firfi edition are even extant at this
day. As the order for fupprefling it came from Elizabeth, the
book must have been in the hands of her ministers, and Murray
and Morton had always an ambassador there, who could not fail
to fee it. Nay, the Earl of Morton himself was at London in
the year 157 1; having gone up at that time as Commissioner for
the Earl of Lennox, then regent of Scotland, in order to treat
with Elizabeth for the deposition of Mary altogether. " What
reason then, says Mr. Tytler, can be assigned for this reserved-
ness, this determined silence of Morton and Murray, with re-
fpeft to this assertion of the bishop, as to Paris's dying teflimony
of Qgeen Mary's innocence, when they could at once have crush-
ed it, by publithing the genuine confefilon said to have been
made by Paris himself, which they had at that time in their
pocket ? Two reasons, very different indeed from each other
may be imagined: Either that this confeffllon of Paris, in Mor-
ton's cuflody, was not fit to bear the light, or that some small
regard fcr Mary's fame made them conceal it from her."

That the adversaries of Mary had not at this time, nor indeed

at any other, the smallest regard for her fame, seems very plain
from the whole tenor of their conduct already mentioned, as well
as from what we have yet to deliver. This fame year Buchan-
an published his Detedion, in which nothing was omitted that
.could possibly serve to blacken her chara&ter. The whole in-
trigue betwixt her and Bothwell, her amours in France as well
as in Scotland, her repeated attempts to poison the King, and
his aaual murder at the last by her contrivance, as it was said,
are all set forth in such a manner, as nothing but the most ran-
corous malice could have prompted even an adversary to have
done. The letters to Bothwell are printed at full length, toge-
ther with the confeffions of Bothwell's four servants ; and yet
the pretended confeffions of Paris are omitted. The book was
presently dispersed all over the kingdom ; " but, says Mr. Tyt-
ler, what is most surprising, although Paris is often mention-
ed therein, as the confident of the whole scene betwixt the
Queen and Bothwell, with respect to the King's murder; and
that Biflhop Lefly, in his printed Apology for Queen Mary, had
affirmed in the face of the world, as a fa& universally known,
that Paris, at his execution, had publicly asserted the Queen's
innocence; although the letters give only some suspicions and dark
hints, from which the Queen's knowledge of the murder is in-
ferred ; whereas Paris's confeffion, of the ioth of August, 1569,
expressly charges her as the contriver of it, and is the only evi-
dence that does so ; yet, in Buchanan's book there is not the
least mention made of any such confeffion. Buchanan lived ma-
ny years after this; his Detection underwent several editions;
nay, he wrote his history at large, which was not published for
several years after this period; and, though he there again makes
mention both of Paris and the letters, yet not one word is said of
any such confeffion made by this person to the prejudice of the
Queen."

Our author also takes notice that a copy of this confefflion is

fRill extant, attefied by one Alexander Hay, a notary. This man
appears to have been Murray's a&ive inftrin-ent in the tranfac-
tions of those times, and by degrees arrived to be clerk to his fe-
cretcouncil. In this capacity, he attests the confeffion of Paris, but
without any witnesses ; nay, Mr. Goodall has brought forth a very
envious letter of his to John Knox, wherein he tells that reform-
er that the evil deeds of Queen Mary had been set forth both in
[atin and English; and " in appearance, says he, they havw zoi

3 B ij

thing nfet forth tendia'g to her infamy." Thus he tacitly gl-es
up the confefion of Paris altogether. " This fame Hay, says
Mr. Tytler, had attested the copy of Palis's confeffion on the
iothof Augufl, 1569, which was sent to London that year ; and
yet in this letter, wrote to his friend John Knox, though he knew
well that his own copy of this confeflion was in the hands of the
very fame people who had publi'hed the above scandalous collec-
tion against the Queen; yet, so well does he know so- the very
nature of his own manufaaure, that this confeflion of Hubert's
durst not be exposed to light; and so far from enumera'iing that
piece among the above colle6tion, he finrs it altogether, as if no
such paper had ever existed. He tells his fLiend that the above
collecion contained every thing that could tend to the Queen's
infamy, when, at the fame time, lie knew well, that the blackest
piece of all, which he himself bad furnished them with, was omit-
ted. From all which circamfiances, the violent presumptions that
arise from their carrying this poor ignorant stranger from Edin-
burgh, the ordinary feat of justice, their keeping him hid from all
the world in a remote dungeon, and not producing him with their
other evidences, so as he might have been publicly questioned
the positive and direct testimony of the aathar of CrawNford's ma-
nufcript, then living, and on the spot at the time, with the pu-
blic affirmation of the biflion of Ross at the time o' Paris's death,
that he had vindicated the Queen with hil dying breath; the be-
haviour of Murray, Morton, Buchanan, and even Hay, the at-
teftor of this pretended confeflion on that occasion; their close
and reserved silence at the time when they must have had this
confeffion of Paris in their pocket; and their publithing every
otter circurmflance that could tend to blacken the Queen, and yet
omitting this confeffion, the only dire& evidence of her supposed
guilt; all this, duly and difpafionately considered, I think, one
may safely conclude, that it was judged not fit to expose so soon
to light this piece of evidence against the Queen, which a cloud
of witnesses, living, and present at Paris's execution, would freely
have given clear teflimcny against, as a notorious imrpoflure."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to slate the evidence arising from this

confection itself. Onthis he obfrvdsthat the absurdities of the piece
are so glarin-g, that the remark formerly made Ly Dr. Robertfen,
about forgers over-doing their work, is here verified in its full
extent. " Their caution,' says he, in not making the QOeen
speak such plain language in her letters, as this person does, was
wife: here they forget thcmfelves by putting the grCiefe words

in his mouth. His charaier, they knew, was low enough to
bear it; and they were resolved to make him speak out, so as to
leave no doubt of the Qjeen's infamy as a proffitute and a mur-
derefs!"

Dr. Robertson has taken notice of the absurdities and incon-

fillencies in this confeflion, but does not think that from thence
there is fufficient reason to reject it entirely. " It must be ac-
knowledged, says he, that his depositions contain some improba-
ble circumitances. He seers to have been a foolif talkative
fellow; the fear of death; the violence of a torture; and the de-
fire of pleasing those in whose power he was, tempted him, per-
haps, to feign some circumf.ances, and to exaggerate others. To
fay that some circumfiances in an affidavit are implobable or false,
is very different from saying that the whole is forged. I fufpeft
the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance of the
latter."

In answer to this, Mr. Tytler takes notice, that it has always

been supposed a fuficient reason for disregarding the teflimony of
a witness, if le be found inconsistent with himself in any single
point; and in the present cafe, when the several objections arising
from the external view of the testimony are taken into confidera-
tion, this rule of judging must operate with double force. The rea-
son afligned by the Doctor for Paris's interlarding his flory with
improbabilities does not appear at all satisfactory; but, on the con-
trary, if it proves any thing, it proves too much. If Paris had a
mind to please them, there is no doubt, that accusing the Queen
at any rate, was the most likely way to do it and if we believe
this to have been his design, which from the nature and circum-
flances of the cafe there is no reason to doubt, we must also be-
lieve that the whole of his narrative is a lie. It is natural, in-
deed to suppose, that a poor forlorn and distressed creature like
>aris would be tempted to falfify in this manner, in hopes of ob-
,ining his life ; but there is one circumstance which cannot be
Vsfonably derived even from this motive. One of the particu-
la of his confeflion is, that he took the liberty to fay, one day,
to'le QOcen, " Madam, Monsieur Bothwell hath commanded
tr"o bring to him the keys of your chamber, as he wants to do
fomhing there; that is, to make the King fly in the air with
pcA r!" This speech, in Mr. Tytler's opinion, is too horrid to
be foofed to come from the mouth even of Paris; and indeed
it mube owned, that if he really did fay 'any such thing, it
mufft I accounted the effe& of insanity rather than any thing

else. The long confinement in prison, and the miseries he sus-
tained there, may not unreasonably be fuppoied to have affeted
his brain.

In the farther examination of this confeflon, it appears more

and more, that it has been obtruded on the world merely as a
scheme of the conspirators to ruin the fame of Queen Mary. Mr.
Tytler observes, that the confeffion, as we have it at present, is
by no means judicial. It mentions no person whatever that was
present when it was taken. All the other confeffions of Dal-
gliefh, Hay, Hepburn, &c. taken before the High Court of Jus-
ticiary, mention the judges before whom the confeffion was made;
and at the end of the depositions is the subscription at large of
Sir John Ballenden, Lord Justice Clerk, bearing that the prin-
cipal depositions were in the records of the books of the High
Court of Juificiary; but- the confeflion of Paris has not a single
mark of authenticity, excepting the signature of Alexander Hay,
Murray's clerk, who attests it as a notary, without any witnesses.
" All the world knows, says our author, that a copy of any pa-
per, attested by a notary, requires the solemnity of two reputable
witnesses, to give faith to the notary's atteflation. To this pa-
per, however, though of the greatest importance, there are no
witnesses. The whole, then, depends entirely upon the naked a'-
fertion of this noted clerk of Murray alone, contradidted, as we.
have seen, in the most public manner by all the world, and even
tacitly disavowed by himfelf."

The confefflion of the 9th of August, does not charge the

Queen with the murder; but our author takes notice, that Mr.
Goodall has likewise given very good reasons for supposing it
also to be an imposture. He takes notice of what Mr. Hume
says upoin this fubjeft, viz. that the confeflion was a regular and
judicial paper, given in regularly and judicially ; and ought tv
have been canvassed at the time, if the persons whom it concert-
ed had been assured of their innocence." Mr. Tytler obfervs,
however, that it evidently was not a judicial confeflion: " The a-
per itself does not bear any such mark ; nor does it mention uat
it was taken in presence of any person, or by any person, q by
any authority whatever ; and, by comparing it with the juicial
examinations of Dalgliefh, Hay, and Hepburn, it is apirent
that it is deflitute of every formality requisite in a t&icial
evidence. In what dark corner, then, this firange roduc-
tion was generated, our author, Mr. Hume, may e/eavour
to find out if he can. As to his affcrtion that it was-gularly
and judicially given in, and therefore ought to be cantled dur.

I~g the conferences, we have already seen that this, likewise, is
not faa. The conferences broke up in February 1569; Nicho-
las Hubert was not hanged till August thereafter ; and his dying
confeffion, as Mr. Hume calls it, is only dated the ioth of that
month. How then can this gentleman gravely tell us, that this
confeflion was judicially given in, and ought to have been, at that
.very time, canvassed by Queen Mary and her Commiffloners.
Such positive assertions, contrary to fa&, are unworthy the cha-
racer of an historian, and may very justly render his decision with
regard to evidences of a higher nature very dubious. In answer,
then, to Mr. Hume : As the Queen's accusers did not chufe to
produce this material witness, Paris, whom they had alive, and in
their hands, nor any declaration from him, at the critical and
proper time for having it canvassed by the Queen, I apprehend our
author's conclusion may be fairly used against himself: That it is
in vain at present to support the improbabilities and absurdities in a
confeffion taken in a clandestine way, nobody knows how; and
produced, after Paris's death, by nobody knows whom; and
from every appearance destitute of every formality requisite and
common to such fort of evidence. For these reasons, I am under
no fort of hesitation to give sentence against Nicholas Hubert's con-
feflion, as a gross impoflure and forgery."

These are the principal arguments used in favour of Queen Mary
by Mr. Tytler, who may not unjustly be said to have exhausted
the fubjec, and to have set forth, in a very candid and judicious
manner, every thing of importance that can be said upon the
fubjet. As two other writers, however, of considerable repu-
tation, viz. Dr. Stuart and Mr. Whitaker, have very warm-
ly entered into a defence of Queen Mary, we thall frill give an
abftraa of the arguments made use of by them.

Dr. Stuart observes, that when Murray and his party had

proceeded to such extravagant lengths against Mary, by destroy-
ing and imprisoning her, it was natural for them to think of some
method of securing themselves from danger. They could have
no security that Elizabeth would not take part with the Queen of
Scotland; and they were likewise apprehensive that the Court of
France might interfere. To give a colour of juflice to their pro-
ceedings, they inflituted an inquiry before the Privy Council into
their own condut; and as they were in this cafe both judges and
parties, there could be no doubt of the decision being favourable.
The origin of the misfortunes of the Queen, they said, lay in her
own mifcondu&, and they affirmed that fle was a party with the

Earl of Bothwell in the murder of her late husband; and, to sup-
port this assertion, they appealed to the letters of which we have
heard so much. Our author takes notice of the inconfiflency in
their account of this matter ; it being impossible that the disco-
very of letters, poflerlor to the date of their taking arms againit
their sovereign, could in any manner of way be the cause of that
event. Another piece of inconsistency in their conduct is, th.,t
at the very time they were endeavouring to eflablifh the proofs of
Mary's guilt, by authenticating these letters, they gave in a ma-
Pifeflo to Throgmorton, the English ambassador, upon the Iith
of July, representing the Queen as entirely innocent of the death
of her husband, and setting forth that the crimes of Bothwell
had been the occasion of their taking up arms. Dr. Stuart is
even of opinion, that it is not irapoflible to ascertain the date of
the forgery of the letters in queflion. In some dispatches to
Queen Elizabeth from her ambassador Throgmorton, dated 25th
July 1567, he informs her that the enemies of Queen Mary de-
signed to charge her with incontinency, with several persons be-
sides Bothwell, and with the murder of her husband also. Of
this last, says Throgmorton, " they fay, they have as apparent
proof againit her as may be, as well as by the teflimony of her
hand-writing, which they have recovered, as also by fufficient
witneffes." '*Dr. Stuart considers this as overturning entirely
the idea of the letters being discovered on the 20th of June; as
in the end of July they were only thinking of establishing their
charge. In this, however, his reasoning does not appear altoge-
ther conclusive ; for they might have been for a few weeks in
poffeflion of the letters, without making the use of them that they
intended. It is a fironger argument which he next adduces, viz.
that when Throgmorton was about to depart for England, they
did not shew him the box and letters, though they were at that
time very much disposed to blacken Mary's charafter. Throg-
Mnorton departed on the 30th of August this year; and our au-
thor supposes, that the letters were fabricated betwixt the 3oth
of August, and the 4th of December, when they were produced
to the Earl of Murray's secret council. In the aft of council
published at this time, " the conspirators, says Dr. Stuart, dif-
cover the greatest anxiety for their pardon and security. Nbw, if
the letters had been genuine, this anxiety would have been most
unnatural; the notoriety of her guilt would have operated mott com-
pletely their justification and pardon. In this Aci of Council they
betray the utmost solicitude to eftabliith the criminality of tlhe

Queen. Yet, if the letters had been real, her ciiminality would
have been eflabliffied from the moment of their discovery. This
anxiety, therefore, for themselves, and this attempt againlt
the honour of the Queen at a jundure so particular, are more
than suspicious. They appear to be obviously the suggestions of
their guilty fears; and the steps by which they thought to accom-
plifh their purposes are a new evidence against them, and a freflh
intimation of their guilt. It was with a view to the approaching
convention of the Eflates, that this a& of council had been formed
and managed. It was a preparation for the parliament, in which
the conspirators had secured the fullest fGvay ; and where they
proposed to effcdtuate their pardon and security, and to establish
the letters as decisive vouchers againfl the Queen.

In the parliament which assembled on the I5th of the fame

month, the letters were sustained as authentic, without either in-
fieStion or inquiry. They were not at this time produced to
public view, nor was the Queen brought from her confinement
to defend herself, or any advocate fuffered to speak for her. The
difference of formn betwixt those laid before the Privy Council,
and those described in Parliament, does not pass unnoticed by
our author; and he remarks, that they had neither dates, direc-
tion, nor feal. It is impoflible to imagine that they could have
been sent to Bothwell as loose papers ; or that Nicholas Hubert,
a person of the lowest rank, and naturally indiscreet, would have
been the messenger. From the contents of the letters also, it is
evident, that they cannot be the performance of the Queen.
" They have, says our author, a vulgarity, an indelicacy, and
a coarseness of manner and exprefilon, that do not apply to her;
and while they are disgusting from their want of elegance, they
violate chronology. From a comparison of them with national
records of undoubted faith, they appear to have been written up-
on days when the Queen was differently employed, and in places
where she was not atually present. It is not in one inflance on-
ly, that they exhibit this wild inconsistency ; the examples of
it are frequent, and attended with peculiarities that are palpable.
The objeaions, therefore, to their authenticity upon this head,
seem decisive; and are not to be contradicted, or even palliated,
without a violence and scepticism that are altogether deflruative
of historical evidence."

Dr. Stuart next proceeds to show, that the criminality of the

Queen does not receive any confirmation from history. It is said,
by her adversaries, that (he was concern'd in the murder of Darn-

Volame 11. 3 C

ly, in order to accomplish the marraiage with. Bothwell. Her mar.
riage with this nobleman was by no means voluntary. While
Ihe was detained at Dunbar, those who rebelled against her pro-
sessed to be the great friends of Bothwell, and inflead of attempt-
ing to rescue the sovereign from his hands, they gave him every
opportunity he could with ; and even furnished him with a bond
declaring his innocence of the murder, and recommending him 'to
be her huAband inIhe molt unequivocal terms. Had the Queen been
consenting to all this, there would have been no occasion for so
much force and scandalous behaviour on the part of the nobility.
XWith regard to Bothwell himself, he seems to have been entire-
ly void of every principle oPdecency or humanity. Dr. Stuart
is of opinipn, that [he never entertained any great affection for
him previous to the marriage. Inflead of being enamoured of him,
the Dotor is of opinion, that he used the most abominable means
to make her subservient to his purposes. These were, as he sup-
poses, intoxicating and amatorious potions. Mary herself, in her
inrfruaions to the Bilithp of Dumblane, her ambassador to Frarce,
after mentioning his declarations of love and impoitunities, says,
' by these means, and many others he brought us to his intent.'
In the proclamation againlt Bothwell, it was said, that the
Queen was seduced by unlefome ways, and the apology made by
the faEtion of the Earl of Murray to Throgmorton the Englif
ambassador, it is said, that ' the QO.een was led captive, and by
fear, force, and other extraordinary and more un/auful means,
compelled to become bed-fellow to another wife's hufband.'
Had the Queen beea engaged in a criminal amour with Both-
well before her hufband's death, what occasion would there have
been for all this fracas when (he was of herself fufficiently in.
clined to yield to his inclinations ?"

The Dotor agrees with Mr. Goodall and Mr. Tytler, that

the letters were written originally in the Scots language, and
that no French originals ever existed. He finds fault with
Goodall, however, on account of his excessive admiration of
Mary, and his attempting to vindicate the character of the Earl
of Bothwell; and he pays high compliments to Mr. Tytler, on
account of the merit of his work, which he thinks is in many re-
fpe&s complete, and flands in need of no assistance from any
quarter. He observes that the infuiinciency of the letters, is evi-
dent from the extreme caution with which the conspirators pro-
duced them to the world, even after all the pretended fanclion
they could give them. After having got them authenticated by

the three Estates, on the 15th of December 1567, he ifewed the
letters privately to Elizabeth ; and obtained from her a prcmife
that they should be held good and valid proofs, before he would
prefer his accusation. For this purpose, he procured the box and
letters from MIorton ; giving, at the fame time, a receipt for
them with such formality, that Dr. Stuart is of opinion, it, of
itself, throws some suspicion on the genuineness of the lettels in
question *. It was dated on the l6th of September 1563, and
contains the first mention that appears in hillory of the difcov, y
of the letters, as in the acTual poffeficn of Dalgliefh, upon the
20th of June 1567. It is true, he ssas alive on the 4th of De-
cember 1567 ; but it was neither proper at that time, nor on the
15th of the fame month, when the letters were authenticated by
the Estates, to mention his name particulaly i though, after his
execution, which took place in January I568, there was then
no longer any danger cf his difovering any thing in contradic-
tion to what they were plealed to rtport concerning the Q(ien,
and then they also thought proper to mention Dalgliclh's .anie.

* This remarkable receipt is couched in the following terms:

" Apud Edii.burgh, 16th September, Anno D m. ij63.

" The which day, the noble and potent Prince James, Earl of -Murray,

Lord Abernethie, regent to our Sovereign Lord, his realm ard lieg s,
granted and confeffed him to have received from James, Earl of Mortc n,
Lord of Dalkcith, Chancellor of Scotland, -a silver box overgilt wiLh gold,
with all miflive letters contracs, or obligations for marriage; sonnets or
love-letters, and all other'letters contained therein, lent and paired betwixt
the Queen, our Sovereign Lord's mother, and James, sometime Lord Bo'h-
well. Which box, and haill pieces within the fame, were taken and found.
with umqehile George Dalglieffh, servant to the said Earl Eothwell, upon.
the 20th day of June, the year of God 1567 years; and therefore the Lord
Regent for himself, and taking the burden upon him for the remaining
noblemen and others, profelling the querrel and obedience of our said So-
vereign Lord, exoners, quitclaims, and discharges the said Earl of Mor-
toun of the box, and of all the fails mifive-wr'tings, contraats, obligations,
sonnets, love-ballads, and other letters whatsoever, found and contained
therein, the time of his receipt and intromillion therewith ; teflifying and
declaring, that he has truly and honestly observed and kept the said box,
and haiRl writs and pieces forefaids within the fame, without any altera-
tion, augmentation, or dimii u-ion thereof, in any part or porion: Ai d
the said Lord Regent, upon his honour, faithfully promises, that the said
haill letters and writings fball he always ready and forthcoming to the said
Earl of M rton, and remaining noblemen that entered into the querrel of
revenging the King our Sovereign Lord's father's murder; when-tfocver they
fnall have to do therewith, for manifesting the ground and the equity of
their proceedings, to all whom it effcirs."

3Cij

" This, however, says our author, is not the only suspicious cir-
cumfiance recorded in the receipt. In the aRf of Privy Council,
and in the ordination of parliament in December 1567, when the
Earl of Murray and his associates were infinitely anxious to efla-
blifh the criminality of the Qgeen, the only vouchers appealed to
of her guilt were the letters; and at that time, doubtless, they had
prepared no other papers to which they could allude. But, in
the Earl of Murray's receipt in September 1568, there is men-
tion made of other vouchers besides the letters. He acknow-
ledges that he received from the Earl of Morton, contracs or
obligations, and sonnets, or love-verfes. These remarkable pa-
pers, though said to have been found upon the 20th day of June
1567, appeared not until September 1568 ; and this difficulty is
yet to be solved by those who believe them to be genuine. The
general arguments which affe6l the authenticity of the letters ap-
ply to them in full force; and circumfilances peculiar to them-
selves, evince, at the fame time, their fabrication. They are
not to be accounted for or explained on the supposition of the
genuineness of the letters. But upon the hypothesis of the for-
gery of the letters, their use, and the sera of their invention,
may be pointed out with an obvious clearness. When" the Earl
of Murray had agreed to accuse the Queen of Scots, his anxiety
about his proofs were redoubled. His apprehensions were excef-
five and alarming. The private communication of the letters to
Elizabeth, in June 1568, produced a wish that he could fortify
these vouchers; for the letters only were at this time exhibited
to the English Queen. The notion that the love of Mary to
Bothwell was inordinate, required to be supported. It was a
fundamental principle with the conspirators, and they had no fa&s
by which it could be fixed and illustrated. Between the months,
therefore, of June and September i568, between the dates of
the communication of the letters to Elizabeth, and of the re-
ceipt of the box from the Earl of Morton, the contracs and son,
nets were invented ; and that they might answer the intention,
they were made to express. and imply, in a strong degree, the
affcition of Mary to Bothwell. The forgery was now finifhned;
and the papers, while they mutually evince the weakness and
impropriety of one another, all concur to eflablifh the certain
and uniform criminality of the enemies of the Queen.

" As to the casket or box, in which the papers were deposit-

ed, it is said to have contained them from the 20th day of June
I.567, when it is urged that they viere fitA difcoverAd. Yet, of

this box, in conne&ion with the letters and papers, there is no
mention of the aft of Council, or the ordination of the Parlia-
ment where the letters are defciibed; nor at the time vhen they
were privately communicated to Queen Elizabeth. The 16th day
December 1568, is the date of the first mention of the box, as con-
taining vouchers against the Queen. The box had belonged to Ma-
ry, who received it from her husband Francis II. The initial letter
of his name, with a crown over it, appeared upon many places of
the box. It is rather against the conspirators that they should
have employed a box of the Queen's to contain papers flie had
sent to Bothwell. It is not very probable that she would have
given to that nobleman a box which she had received from Fran-
cis., The box might with greater probability have been made to
contain letters from Bothwell to Maiy ; and if that unfortunate
and flagitious man had been killed at the Orkney Isles by Sir
William Murray and Kirkcaldy of Grange, it is very possible,
that the forgery of the confpisators to defame the Queen would
have assumed this form. The Queen had been accustomed to
keep her jewels in this box, but when the conspirators seized up-
on her jewels, it was appropriated by them and they conceived
that it woutd give a propriety to their forgeries to lodge them in

it.

" The next date of the diftlintion of the box and its contents,

was upon the ioth day of O&ober 1568. In the true fpihit of
the forgery, and, with the moil guilty anxieties, the Earl of
Murray communicated them by his agents to the English Com-
miflioners at York, in a clandestine manner, not in their public
capacity. His scheme was to avoid the necessity of a judicial or
exaa examination of them ; and, to give them the flamp of au-
thenticity, and of finilhed and decisive evidences against the
Queen of Scots, by his own oath, and the oaths of his associates.
His intrigues with Norfolk are flill farther illustrative of the na-
ture of his sensibilities and consciousness. The disappointment of
Elizabeth, occasioned by his caution, guilt, and timidities, pro-
duced the removal of the conferences from York-to Weftminfler.
Her refentments against Mary, the fatisfa&ion fihe afforded to his
scruples, and her promises of proteiflon, brought him finally to
the points she had in view. His public accusation of the Queen
of Scots was delivered ; and at length it was succeeded by his
public exhibition of the box and its contents.

" When the English Commifflioners received from the Eail of

Murray the contents of the casket, they read the letters and the

sonnets, and comparing them with undoubted and real difpatchms
from the QOeen, found the hand writing to be similar; but there
were many persons besides Maitland of Lethington, already men-
tioned, who could counterfeit the Queen's hand; particularly a
young woman named Mary Beaton, one of the maids of honour
to the Queen, whose hand writing could with difficulty be dif-
tinguiffed from hers ; and it has been supposed that this peifon
bad been allured to lend her assistance to the Earl of Murray and
his faclion. The examination of the letters by the English Com-.
miffioners was a mere faice. No scrutiny was made, and no care
to attain the truth was exerted as has already been fully ex-
plained.

" Murray having collated, as he pretended, the originals with

the copies, took the former into his keeping; and the latter were
detained by the Commissioners. At their next meeting, the
Commiflioners perused tranilations of the letters and sonnets, and
examined the other writings produced by the Earl of Murray.
The Earl of Morton then unfolded the manner in which the box
with the letters, sonnets, and contiacas, was discovered. It was
then requested by Murray, that Thomas Nelson, and Thomas
Crawford should be examined. The former had beep a servant
to the King, and communicated some particulars concerning the
murder ; but though he related that event in such a way as to
insinuate a suspicion against the QOeen, there yet appeared in his
evidence, no direat accusation against her. From the examina-
tion of the latter it may be gathered, that some incidents founded
upon the letters were real ; and as the conspirators were well
acquainted with all the transaCtions of the Qoeen, it must have
been firange, indeed, if they could not have communicated aa
air of authenticity to their forgery, by the introduction of some
particulars which could be attefled. No information, however,
was given by him, which was of power enough to criminate the
Queen. By these depolitions, which are fiivolous in a great de-
gree, and by the declaration of the discovery of the box made by-
the Earl of Morton, the most unprincipled man of a most un-
principled age, it was thought that the authority of the letters
would receive a confirmation and fupport."

Our author likewise takes notice of the absurdity of not cal-

ling in the evidence of Nicholas Hubert, and adheres to the opi-
nion of his exculpating the Queen with his dying breath. He
observes, that according to Mr. Goodall, the sonnets were writ-
ten originally in the Scottish language; but he takes notice of

the opinion of Lord Hailes, that they are a version from the
French. " The sonnets, says he, convey the idea that Mary was
influenced with the love of Bothwell to a degree of frantic and
passionate ardour." This idea, which receives no aid from hifto-
rical memorials, corr-fponds exa&ly with the pra&ices of the
conspirators. From internal evidence, it is obvious, that the son-
nets are so fabricated as to have been written by Mary in the in-
terval between the 24th of April 1567, when she was forcibly
conveyed to Dunbar by Bothwell, and the 15th day of May fol-
lowing, when fnhe married him. In this period, however, it is
certain, that flie must have been under the agitation of so many
passions and cares, that (hle could not have-found leisure or
inclination for the amusements of poetry. By a comparison. too,
of the sonnets with the infirudions of Mary to the Bithop of
Dumblane, whom she sent ambassador to France to apologize for
her marriage with Bothwell, it appears that the author of the
former had minutely attended to the latter. Now, the inftruc-
tions to the Biihop of Dumblane were not drawn up till fame
time after the I qth day of May, when the Queen was married;
and the sonnets, if real, must have been composed before the marri-
age. The forger of the founets having afhifted his invention by
a perusal of the infftrultions, opened thus a source of detecTion
against himself; and its power and meaning are fufficiently expli-
cit. Buchanan observes, that the sonnets are not inelegant.
This commendation, feeble as it is, seems remaikable from a per-
son of his satirical disposition, and of his principles. But, as he
is more than suspected of a concern in the forgeries against the
Queen, this negative praise may be accounted for. He did not
wish to diferedit altogether, even in point of literary ability, a
fabrication in which his pen had been too busy ; and indeed the
sonnets, though they appear to have been made and framed for
an end, are by no means so despicable as they are often represent-
ed to be. The author, whoever he was, had the disadvantage
of being in fetters, and under conflraint 5 and it is probable, that
he had to flruggle with the embarra,'nents of impoffing in a so-
reign tongue. But whatever may be the merit of the sonnets as
a composition, they cannot without great violence be imputed to
the pencil of Maiy. Brantome and Ronsard, who were well
acquainted with her poetical writings, had no difficulty in pro-
nouncing that they could not pofimbly have proceeded from her.
Upon this topic, too, there is a flandard from which a judgment
ir.ay be formed. The c:gy written by Mary upon the death

of Francis II. has come down to us ; and it seems fully fufficient
to juflify the sentence of Brantome and Ronsard. There is a
fancy, a delicacy, an elegance, a character in it, which give it
the greateil charm ; and the sonnets to Bothwell are in a strain
and manner altogether opposite.

" There were two contra&s or obligations which were for-

ged. That supposed to be written by Mary has been critically
examined, and very able judges have compared it with the hand-
writing of the Queen; and found it to bear no accurate refemb-
lance; neither was her subscription done in the usual manner.
It was a promise of marriage to Bothwell. The other supposed
to be written by Huntly, is also an engagement to marry Both-
well. In this obligation, she is made to press herself upon Both-
well, and to insist humbly and reverently that he would insist on
the divorce of his wife, the Lady Jane Gordon. This made-of
proceeding, must have been unnatural in the Queen, even if fihe
had aaually been in love with Bothwell, and can only correspond
with that inordinate and extravagant vehemcncy of affection im-
puted to her by the conspirators. It is observable, too, that the
conspirators thought not of calling the Earl of Huntly before the
Commniffioners to attest the authenticity of this paper; and in
fa&, as early as the 12th day of September, when the trial of the
Queen was in agitation, this nobleman had put his name to a
public deed, which asserted her innocence in the marriage with
Bothwell, and which affirmed the guilt of Murray and his con-
federates. He was also soon to join with the Earl of Argyle in
a dire&t charge against the Earl of Murray and his faaion, of a
concern in the murder of the King. The general argument a-
gainft the authenticity of the ltters holds equally against the son-
nets and contracts."

But however plain it may appear, or however evident it might

even then have been, that these writings were all forged, the
conspirators behaved with the greatest effrontery ; producing
them in the most confident manner, as if they had been acual
witnesses to the writing of them. Murray and his aflociates had
formerly (worn in the mofi solemn manner, to act with integrity
and uprightness; and they affirmed before the Engliih Commis-
fioners, upon their honours and consciences, that the letters, son-
nets, and contra&s, wele positively the hand-writing of the Queen,
excepting the contra& written by Huntly, which, however, they
understood, and perfecly knew to be fubfciibed by her. These
oaths, which no man could lawfully have taken, unless he had

been an eye-witness to the writing of the papers, were fuflained
as good and authentic proofs by the English Commifflioners.

In the mean time, Queen Elizabeth, with the perfidy and dif-

simulation which so strongly marks her chara&er, pretended to
the English nobility that she was thoroughly convinced of Mary's
guilt, while to Murray, Morton, and the reft of the associates,
the declared that they had produced nothing of any moment a-
gainft her. Dr. Stuart indeed brings forth the most authentic proofs,
that, so far from having any intention to allow this unfortunate
Princess to exculpate herself, or wishing to save her honour, she,
from the beginning, intended never to allow her to depart out
of England. From what has been already delivered, it must ap-
pear evident, that the pretended proofs of Mary's guilt never ap-
peared fatisfadory to a single person, even at the time they were .
produced ; nor could any thing besides the industrious manner in
which, the reports were propagated, and handed down from fa-
ther to son, without any proof at all, have prevented the memory of
these vile associates from being long ago fligmatized in the man-
ner in which it now so juffly is.

The silence of the two learned historians, Mr. Hume and Di.

Robertson, is a most convincing proof that they had nothing to
reply to the arguments used by Mr. Tytler. The former, indeed,
did make a kind of reply, which, to gratify the reader's curiosity
we fliall here transcribe. " There is a person who has writ an
Inquiry, Hflorical and Critical, into the Evidence againjti Maty
-1een of Scots ; and has attempted to refute the foregoing narra-.
tive. He quotes a single passage of the narrative, in which Ma-
ry is said simply to refuse answering ; and then a single passage
from Goodall, in which she boasts that she will answer ; and he
very civilly, and almost direcly, calls the author a liar, on ac-
count of this pretended contradicfion. That whole inquiry, from
beginning to end, is composed of such scandalous artifices ; and
from this instance the reader may judge of the candour, fair deal-
ing, veracity, and good manners of the inquirer. There are, in-
deed, three events in our history, which may be regarded as
touchstones of party-men. An English Whig, who asserts the re-
ality of the Popish plot ; an Irifl Catholic, who denies the maf-
sacre in 1461, and a Scots Jacobite, who maintains the innocence
of Queen Mary, must be considered as men beyond the reach of
argument and reason, and must be left to their prejudices."

On this Billingsgate we may remark, that there are other two

sets of men, who are equally impregnable to reason; viz. the

enthusiastic four faced bigot, who condemns to eternal punlfhment,
allwho differfrom him; and the conceited'philofophicaldeift,whobe-
lieves in a God that has neither courage nor good manners.* Mr. Tyt-
ler, however, has given a more serious answer, and fliews that he has
not quoted him at all unfairly, as Mr. Hume accuses him of hav-
ing done. On the contrary, " he has quoted almost the whole of
that hiftorian's narrative concerning Queen Mary's rcfufal to an-
fwer, and likewise her request to be prcfent at the trial of her
cause, and that, too, in the hiflorian's own words. In his quota-
tion he particularly mentions the grounds upon which that author
says Queen Mary's Commissioners founded their refusal to an-.
fwer."

In support of this assertion, Mr. Tytler quotes the whole pas-

sage with which Mr. Hume finds fault ; and, having vindicated
hirnfelf from the charges brought againit him, proceeds next to
confider Mr. Hume's proposition, from which he has inferred,
that Queen Mary absolutely refused to answer Murray's accufa-
tion, and recoiled from the inquiry. lie allows that Mary, at
first, sensible of Queen Elizabeth's gross partiality, did refuse to
answer ; but afterwards she thought better upon it, and offered
not only to anfier the charge conditionally, but atually gave in
her answer. He combats, witrigreat flrength of argument, Mr.
Hume's position, that Mary could not be admitted into Eliza-
beth's pretfence, and brings his reasoning to the following con-
clufion: " Let me suppose, says he, that QOeen Mary's request,
to be admitted to Queen Elizabeth's presence, had appeared un-
reasonable or improper, and was therefore refused ; was that a
good reason for refutfing her requet to fee the letters ? If, after
inspecting the evidence against her, Qgeen MAlry had remained
silent, and made no answer, the consequence is plain, the letters
muff have been held as genuine, and she flood convicted to Eli-
zabeth, and the whole world, by her own letters. On the other
hand, I apprehend, that unless a good reason can be shown for refu-
sing Mary's request to fee the letters, that refusal is equally decisive
of the question in her favour. I call upon Mr. Hume, therefore,
and desire him, with all his ingenuity, to give ime a solid reason for
Elizabeth's refusing to allow Mary to fee these letters. I will
venture to fay that only one reason, confilent with common
fente, can be given, ~which is this, That Queen Elizabeth and
the penetrating Cecil saw, or fulpeded a forgery ; and, Ly the

* See IIume's poflhumus works, where thcfe two qualitics are denied to

the Deity.

many flifts which, through whole course of the conferences were
devised to elude a scrutiny and infpe&ion of these letters, it is
evident they were resolved to guard against a detecion ; and to
close the scene, and prevent Queen Mary from ever getting a
fight of this forged evidence, they took a very effecual way, by
difmiifing Murray and them together from the conferences. To
this let me join the proof which has lately been brought by
Goodall againt the letters, which I am warranted to fay, in the
opinion of many of the first critics of the age, does cleaily demon-
firate the forgery."

Having now given a full account of the arguments on both

sides, used by the most celebrated writers upon this controversy,
we (hall close our fubjed with a few remarks fom Mr. Whitaker
on the condud of Queen Elizabeth. That gentleman has taken
the part of Mary with great warmth, and condemned the con-
dud of Elizabeth in the firongeft terms poflible ; nay, he even de-
clares himself ashamed of her as an English QOeen. It is obferv-
able, that though unchaflity was one of the principal charges
brought against Mary by her adversaries, yet it is a charge which
retorts upon Elizabeth with aggravated force. Mary might be
unchaftle ; but Elizabeth's unchastity was proclaimed to all the
world ; as appears by the following account of an ad of parlia-
ment, which Mr. Whitaker mentions as a disgrace to the Englith
nation. " At the treaty, says he, which was held in 1570 be-
tween Mary and Elizabeth, it was specified, by the latter, that
the former should succeed to the throne ' in cafe of Elizabeth's
demise without any iffue.' Mary altered the limitation thus,
' without /auful ifliue;' and Elizabeth would agree only to have
it altered thus, ' without issue by a lawful hufiand.' This re-
markable fad, which was prior to the law, shews us, in union
with it, the firmness and audacity with which Elizabeth pursued
her purposes upon the succession. She tried at first to make way
for any ifue. She then adhered resolutely to any by a lawful
husband; because flhe could cure the baflardy by a marriage.
And (he at last spoke out with more than her original explicitness ;
spoke out even to her parliament; and had her natural illue, by
name, rendered capable of succeeding her. Indeed, the existence
of such a law as this, upon our ftatute-book, is a full proof of the
effrontery of Elizabeth in vice, and of the obsequiousness of the
nation in meanness; and the law itself flands as a strong note of
infamy upon both at prcfent."

3D ij

Mr. Whitaker is of opinion, that the melancholy with which

Elizabeth was seized at the close of her life proceeded not, as
has been commonly supposed, from her love to the Earl of Essex,
whom she had caused to be beheaded; but from a remorse of con-
science on account of her cruel treatment of Mary. Mr. Tytler
is of the fame opinion. " We cannot help, says he, subscribing
to the opinion of Mr. Whitaker in this matter, ' That Eliza-
beth had a more solid ground for melancholy and remorse arising
from the fling of her own conscience on the reflection of her in.
human treatment of Queen Mary.' To imagine that the mafcu-
line spirit of Elizabeth would evaporate in a love-sick fit of whin-
ing for an insolent fubjet, who had braved her authority, and at-
tempted an insurrection in her very capital, is neither credible, nor
in the leafi confiflent with the chara&er and fortitude of the haugh-
ty, unfeeling Elizabeth. Her whole condu& with regard to the
Queen of Scots was such as indeed to afford just cause for the
most bitter remorse in the last flage qs her life, on the dreadful
refleaion of the long, deliberate, premeditated schemes, framed
andprofecuted by her for the deftru.tion of that princefs.-Now in
the decline of life, in her seventieth year, her popularity beginning
to fade, and the approach of bodily infirmities, all must have a-
wakened her to reflecion, and to the bitter sensation of her
crimes, and of her inhuman treatment of the Queen of Scots.
How forcibly muff the awful dying words of that princess, (in a
letter sent to Elizabeth after Mary's condemnnation) have vibrat-
ed in her ear! ' Think me not presumptuous, that now, bid-
ding farewell to this world, and preparinig;.for a better, I put you
in mind, that you must also die, and niuft 'anfwer to the Tribu-
nal of the most High for your condu2tl' Happy for Elizabeth,
if unfeigned contrition, and penitence in her last moments, has
expiated her crimes!"

THE END.
