THE

S T O RY

OF THE

REI G'N

OF THE

EMP ER OR CHARLE

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTO-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. II.

BASIL:

PRINTED BY J. J. TOURNEISEN.

MD CC LXXX VIII.

HI

V.

Ve

t8
6½\

IV4A04

# BOOK I.

THE

H I S T 0 'R Y

OE THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OB THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.

H AR LES V. was born at. Ghent on the BOOK I.

twenty - fourth day of February, in the Bith of
year one thousand five hundred. His father, Charles vY
Philip the Handsome, Archduke of Austria,
was the son of the Emperor Maximilian, and
of Mary, the only child of ,Charles' the Bold,
the last prince of the house of Burgundy. His
mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, King arid Queen of
Castile and Aragon.

A LONOG train of fortunate events had opened His domi"

. 10nions, and

the way for this young prince to the inheritance the events

VOL. 11. B

BOOK I. of more extensive dominions, than any European
by which nmonarch, since Charlemagne, had poffeffed. Each
he acquired *

h

tiem. of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or pro-

vinces, towards which their profped of fuc-
ceflion was extremely remote. The rich pof-
fefions of Mary of Burgundy were destined for
another family, the having been contraded by
her father to the only son of Louis XI. of
France; but that capricious monarch, indul-
" ging his hatred to her family, chose rather to
fbrip her of part of her territories by force, than

. to secure the whole by marriage; and by this

xnifcondud, fatal to his posterity, threw ·all the
Netherlands and Franche Comt6 into the hands
* of a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II.

of Castile, far from having -any profped of that
noble inheritance which fie transmitted to her
grandson, passed the early part of her life in
obfctrity and indigence. But the Caftilians,
exasperated against her brother Henry IV. an
ill-advifed and vicious Prince, publickly charged
him with impotence, and his Queen with adul-.
tery. Upon his demise, rejeding Joanna,
whom the King had uniformly, and even on
his death-bed, owned to be his lawful daughter,
and whom an assembly of the states had ac-
knowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed
Isabella on the throne of Castile. Ferdinand
owed the crown of Aragon to the unexpeded

I

death of his elder brother, and acquired the Boo0K L
kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by violating the
faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of
blood. To all these kingdoms, Christopher
Columbus, by an effort of genius and of intre-
pidity, the boldest and most fuccefsful that is
recorded in the annals of mankind, added a new
world, the wealth of which was one confider-
able source of the power and grandeur of the
Spanish monarchs.

DON JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Philip and

Joanna, his

Isabella, and their eldest daughter, the' Queen father and
of Portugal, being cut off in the flower ofmo·rer, vi"
youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and Si"aR
her posterity. But as her husband, the Arch-
duke, was a fitranger to the Spaniards, it was
thought expedient to invite 'him into Spain, that
by residing among them, he might accuftomr
himself to their laws and manners; and it was
expeded that the Cortes, or assembly of states,
whose authority was then so great in Spain, that
no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless
it received their fandion, would acknowledge
his right of fucceflion, together with that of the
Infanta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing
through France in their way to Spain, were
entertained in that kingdom with the utmost io .
magnificence. The Archduke did homage to
Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders, and

BOOK I. took his feat as a ,peer of the realm in the par-

liament of Paris. They were received in Spain
with every mark of honour that the parental
affedion of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the
refped of their fubjels, could devise; and their
title to the crown was soon after acknowledged
by the Cortes of both kingdoms.

Ferlinand BUT amidst there outward appearances of fa-
ehips Of tisfadion and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed
power. upon the mind of each of these princes. The

stately .and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish
court, was so burdensome to Philip, a prince
young, gay, affable, fond of society and of
pleasure, that he soon began to express a desire
of returning to his native country, the manners
of which were more suited to .his temper. Ser-
dinand, observing the declining. health of his
Queen, with whose life his right to the govern-
ment of Castile muff cease, easily foresaw, that
a prince of Philip's disposition, and who already
discovered an extreme impatience to reign,
would never consent to his retaining any degree
of authority in that kingdom; ,and the profpe&
of this diminution of his power, awakened the
jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

foicitude, ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural
with refpe to a mother, the indifference and negled with
Shi. au.nd Which the Archduke treated her daughter, who

teer.

was destitute of those beauties of person, as well BOoaK I.
as "thofe accomplishments of mind , which fix.
the affeaions of an husband. Her understand-
ing, always weak, was often disordered. She
doated on Philip with such an excess of childifl
and indiscreet fondness, as excited disgust rather
than affedion. Her jealousy, for which her
hufband's behaviour gave her too much cause,.
was proportioned to her love, and often broke
out in the most extravagant adions. Isabella,
though sensible of her defeds, could not help.
pitying her condition, which was Loon rendered
altogether deplorable, by the Archduke's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle of winter
for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Ifa'-
bella intreated him not to abandon his wife to.
grief and melancholy, which might prove fatal
to her, as ihe was near the time of her delivery.
Joanna conjured him to put off his journey for
three days only, that she might have the plea-
Lure of celebrating the festival of Christmas in,
his company. Ferdinand, after representing the
imprudence of his leaving Spain, before he had'
time to become acquainted with the genius, or
to gain the affedions of the people, who were
one day to be his fabjeds, besought him, at
least, not to pass through France , with which
kingdom he was then at open war. Philip,
without regarding either the dicates of hu-
mranity, or the maxims of prudence, persisted,

B3

Boox I. in his purpose, and on the twenty - second of

December set out for the Low Countries, by
'the way of Fra;nce x,

Disorder of FROM the inoment of his departure, Joanna
mind. funk' into a deep and sullen melancholy ', and
Birth of while ihe was in that situation bore Ferdinand
fterdinards her second son, for whom the power of his
Emperor, brother Charles afterwards procured -the king-

doms of Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom
he at last transmitted the Imperial sceptre.
Joanna was the only person in Spain who dif-
covered no joy at the birth of this prince. In-
sensible to that, as well as to every other plea-
"fure, the was wholly occupied with the thoughts
of returning to her husband; nor did The, in
any degree, recover tranquillity of mind, until

i :Q4 fthe arrived at Brussels next year 3

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an

interview with Lo.uis XII. and signed a treaty
-with him, by which he hoped that all the dif-
ferences between France and Spain would have
been finally terminated. But Ferdinand, whose
affairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous
in Italy, where the superior genius of Gonifalvo

Petri Martyris, Anglerii Epiftola: , a.

o 2

S 3-

SId. Epift. 2 5.

Mariana, lib, 7. c. c. I4. Feclhier Vie de Ximen,

t, 19T,

de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on BOOK 1.
every occasion over the arms of France, did not
pay the least regard to what his fon-in- law had
concluded, and carried on hostilities with greater
ardour than ever-

FRom this time Philip seems not to have taken Death of

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet Iabeena.
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella-
should open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of tdiefe events was not far distant.
The untimely, death of her children had made
a deep- impression on the mind of Isabella, and
as ffhe could derive but little consolation for the
losses which the had sustained either from her
daughter Joanna , whdfe infirmities daily in-
creased, or from her fon-in-law, who no longer
preserved even the appearance of a decent re-
spect towards that unhappy princess, her spirits
and health began gradually to decline, and after
languishing some. months, fihe died at Medina del
Campo on the twenty-fixth of November, one
thousand five hundred a-nd four. She was no. less
eminent for virtue, than for wisdom; and whe-
ther we confider her behaviour as a Queen, as a
wife, or as a mother, ihe is justly entitled to the
high encomiums beflowed. on her by the Spanish
historians '.

* P. Mart, Ep. z79..-

BOOK I. A FEw weeks before her death, she made her
Her will, last will, and being sensible, of Joanna's inca,
appointing pacity to assume the reins of government into
Ferdinand
regent of -her own hands, and having no inclination to
Ca"ile. commit them to Philip, with whose conduct she

was extremely diffatisfied, the appointed Ferdi-
nand regent or administrator of the affairs of
Castile, until her grandson Charles should attain
the age of twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdi-
nand likewise one half of the revenues which
ihould arise from the Indies, together with the
grand - mafterfhips of the three military orders;
dignities, which rendered the person who poffeffed
them almost independent, and which Isabella
had, for that reason, annexed to thl crown '.
But, before she signed a deed to favourable to
Ferdinand, the obliged him to swear that he
.would not, by a second marriage, or by any
other means, endeavour to deprive Joanna or
her posterity of their right of succession to any
of his kingdoms 6

IMMEDIATELY upon the Queen's death, Ferdl-

nand resigned the title of King of Castile, and
commanded Joanna and Philip to be pufblickly
proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom.
But, at the fame time, he assumed the character

? P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hist. lib, 28. c. !I. Ser-

reras Hist. Gener. d'Efpagne, to.m. viii, 263,

6 Mar. Hist. lib. 28. c. x14.

of Regent, in consequence of Ifabella's terfa- BooK I.
ment, and not long after, he prevailed on the "er"inan
Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to ledged asre
that office. This, however, he did not procure gent by the
without difficulty, nor without discovering such Cortes
symptoms of alienation and disgust ntmong the The Cafti-
Caftilians as filled him with gre-at uneasiness. ~tiSF.
The union of Castile and Aragon, for almost
thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the *
ancient and hereditary enmity which subsisted
between the natives of these kingdoms, that the
Castilian pride could submit, without murmur-
ing, to the government of a king of Aragon.
Ferdinand's own charader, with which the
Caftilians were well acquainted, was far from
rendering his authority desirable. Suspicious,
discerning, severe, and parsimonious, he was
accustomed to observe the most minute adions
of his fubjeds with a jealous attention, and to
reward their highest services with little libe-
rality; and they were now deprived of Isabella,
whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjeds, often tempered his austerity,
or rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his
government were especially odious to the Gran-
dees; for that artful Prince, sensible of the dan-
gerous privileges conferred upon them by the
feudal institutions, had endeavoured to curb
their exorbitant power z,. by extending the royal

SM1Iarian, lib. 28. c. Iz.

3ooK I. jurifdi&lion, by proteding their injured vassals,

by increasing the immunities of cities, and by
other measures equally prudent. From all these
causes, a formidable party among the Caftilians
united against Ferdinand, and though the per-
tons who composed it, had not hitherto takep.
any publick step in opposition to him, he plain-
ly saw that upon the least ,encouragement from

* their new King they would proceed to the most

violent extremities.

Philip en-' THIERE was no less agitation in the Nether-
deavours to lands Uipon receiving the accounts of Ifabella's
obtain the
government death, and of Ferdinand's having assumed the
of cadile, government of Castile. Philip was not of a

temper tamely to fuffer himself to be supplanted
by the unnatural ambition of his father-in-law.
If Joanna's infirmities, and the non-age 6f Charles.
rendered them incapable of government, he, as
a husband, was the proper guardian'of his wife,
and as a father , the natural tutor of his son.
Nor was it fufficient to oppose to these juft'
rights, and to the inclination of the people of
Castile, 'the authority of a testament, the ge-
nuinenefs of which was perhaps, doubtful, and
its contents certainly iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's resentment, and new vi-
gour infused into his councils by the arrival of
Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's am-
baffador at the Imperial court, but upon the

first notice of Ifabella's death repaired to Bruf-
,fels, flattering himself, that under, a young
:and liberal prince, he might attain to power
and honours, which he could never hope for
iin the service of an old and frugal master. He
ihad early paid court to Philip during his refi-
ldence in Spain, with such assiduity as entirely
·gained his confidence; and having been trained
to business under Ferdinand, could oppofe'his
schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not
inferior to those for which that monarch was
idiftinguifhed ", BOOK 1;

-" By his advice, jambaffadors were dispatched IHe requires
to require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and Ferdinand

S" to resign the

*to resign the government of Castile to those per- regency.
sons whom Philip should entrust with it until
ihis arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Cafti-
lian nobles as had discovered any diffatisfaftion
with Ferdinand's administration, were encou-
raged by every method to oppose it. At the
fame time a treaty was concluded with Louis
XII. by which Philip flattered himself, that he
had secured the friendship and affillance of that
monarch,

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the

arts of address and policy, in order to retaina

8 Zurita Annales de Aragon, toni. vi. p. 2.

ooitt I. the power of which he had got poffeffion. By

means of Conchillos, an Aragqnian gentleman,
he entered into a private negociation .with
Joanna,' and prevailed on that weak princess to
confirm, by her authority, his right to the re.
*gency. . But this intrigue .did not escape the
penetrating eye of Don John Manuel;, Joanna's
letter of consent was intercepted; Conchillos
was thrown into a dungeon; she herself con-
fined to an apartment in the palace, and all
her Spanjih domefticks secluded from her pre:
fence "'.

Ferainana THE mortification which the discovery of this
abandoned. scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much in.
hian nobles. creased by his observing the progress that Philip's

emissaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles
retired to their castles; others to- the towns. in
.which they had influence: they formed them-
selves into confederacies, and began to assemble
their vassals. Ferdinand's court was almost to-
tally deserted; not a person of diftincion but
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, the duke of
Alva, and the marquis of Denia, remaining
there; while the houses of Philip's ambassadors
were daily crowded with those of the higbeft!
rank. .

' P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Annales, vi. p. 14..

EXASPERATED at this universal defe&ion, and BOOiK I,
mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes de- Ferdinand

resolves to

seated by a younger politician, Ferdinand 're-marry, in
solved, in defiance of the law- of nature, and of order to ex-
decency , to deprive his daughter and her pofte- daughter
rit'y of the crown of Castile, rather than ren'ounce from the
Ibe regency of that kingdom. His plan for ac-thro"e.
complifhing this was no less bold, than the
intention itself was wicked. He demanded in
marriage Joanna, the frippofed daughter of
Ienry IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy,
Ifabella's right to the crown of Castile was
founded; and by reviving the claim of this
princess,, in opposition to which he himself had
formerly led armies , and fought battles, he
Ioped once more to get poffeffion of the throne
of. that kingdom. But Emanuel, King of Por-
tugal, in whose dominions Joanna resided, being
iarried to one of Ferdinand's daughters by
Isabella , refused his consent to that unnatural
match; and the unhappy princess herself, hav-
ing loft all relish for the objeAs of ambition,
by being long immured in a convent, discovered
io less aversion to it I",

THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's am-Marries a
bition, were not exhauffed. Upon meeting with niece of the

Frenicl

" Sandov. Hist. of Civil Wars in Castile, Lond.

1 6s.

p. j. Zurita Annales de Aragon, torn. vi. p. 2 I 3.

D'oo~r I. a repulse in Portugal,*he turned towards. France;,

and fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
MVary, the sifter qs Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on against- Ferdinand
in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he
"liftened with joy to a proposal, which furnished
him with an honourable pretence of concluding
peaee: And though no prince was ever more
remarkable than Ferdinand for making all hi
passions bend to the maxims of interest, or be
come subservient to the purposes of ambition
yet so vehement was his resentment against hi
fon-in-law, that the desire of gratifying, it ren
dered him regardless of every other consideration
In order to be revenged of Philip , by detachin
Louis from his interest, and in order to gain
chance of excluding him from his hereditar
throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexe
to it, he was ready once more to divide Spai
into separate kingdoms, though the union d
these was the great glory of his reign, and ha3
been the chief objeat of his ambition; -he con
fented to restore the Neapolitan nobles of thi
French faction to their poffeftions and honours
and submitted to the ridicule of marrying, in ai
advanced age, a Princess of eighteen ".

11 P. Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariana, lib. 28. c. 16. i1

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived BOOK I,

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful
alarm to him, and convinced Don John IVIanuel
|that there was now a necessity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spain '.
MHe accordingly inftruded the Flemish ambaffa-
|dors in the court of Spain, to testify the strong
desire which their master had of terminating all
differences between him and Ferdinand in an
.amicable manner, and his willingness to consent
to any conditions that would re-establish the
ifriendfhip which ought to subsist between a
father and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he A treaty be-
ihad made and broken more treaties than any twen" Ser

"' '

r- . dinand and

prince of any age, was apt to confide so far in Philip.
the sincerity of other men, or to depend so
much upon his own address and their weakness,
as to be always extremely fond of a negociation.
He listened with eagerness to these declarations,
|and soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in Nov.o .
,which it was stipulated, that the government of
|Castile thould be carried on in the joint names
|o0 Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and
ithat the revenues of the crown, as well as the
Iright of conferring offices, ihould be shared be-
, tween Ferdinand and Philip by an equal division '

i

" P. Mart Ep. 293. Zurita Annales de Aragon-

vi. J9. P. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

BooK I. NOTHING, however, was farther from, Philip's

So6. thoughts than to observe this treaty, His sole
Philip and intention in proposing it was to, amuse Ferdi-
Joanna set a penti
ran for nand, and to prevent him from taking any mea-
Spain, fures for obstructing his voyage into Spain. It

had that effec. Ferdinand, sagacious as he
was, did not for some time fufped his design;
and though when he perceived it, he prevailed
on the King of France not only to remonstrate
against the Archduke's journey, but to threaten
hostilities if he should undertake it; though he
solicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his son-
in-law's dominions in the Low Countries, Philip
and his consort nevertheless set fail with a nume-
rous fleet, and a good body of land-forces.
They were obliged by a violent tempest to take
shelter in, England, where Henry VII. in com-
pliance with Ferdinand's folicitations, detained
them upwards of three months +; * at last they
were permitted to depart, and after a more

&prui a prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at Co-

runna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing
by force of arms.

Theo ni- THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged
lity of Caf-
tile declare hitherto to conceal or to dissemble their senti-
for Phiiip. ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip.

'4 Ferrer. Hill. viii. 28

F

Froms

From every corner of the kingdom, persons of BoOit L
the highest rank, with numerous retinues of
their vassals, repaired to their new King. The
treaty of Salamanca was universally condemned,
and all agreed to exclude from the government
of Castile a prince, who, by consenting to disjoin
Aragon and Naples from that crown, discovered
so little concern for its true interests. Ferdi-
nand, meanwhile, abandoned by almost all the
Caftilians, disconcerted by their revolt, and sun-
certain whether he should peaceably relinquish
his power, or take arms in order to maintain it,
earnieftly solicited an interview with his fon-in-
law, who by advice of Manuel studiously avoided
it. Convinced at last, by feeing the number,
and zeal of Philip's adherents daily increase,
that it was vain to think of resisting such a tor-June --.
rent, Ferdinand consented, by treaty, to resign Ser ilana
the regency of Castile into the hands of Philip, regency of
to retire into his hereditary dominions of Ara- castile, and

retir.es to

gon, and to reft satisfied with the mafterlhips of Aragon.
the military orders, and that share of the revenue
of the Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to
him. Though an interview between the princes
was no longer necessary, it was agreed to ,on
both sides from motives of decency. Philip re·
paired to the place appointed with a splendid
retinue of the Castilian nobles, and a confider-
able body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared

VOL, .

IL C

BooIK 1. without any pomp, attended by a few followers;

mounted on miules, 'and unarmed. On that
occafiori Don John Maiuel had the pleasure of
difplayi~'g before the moniarch xhom he had.
deserted the extensive influence \vhich he had
acquired over his new maffer: While Ferdinand
fufferid in pretence of his former subjects the
iwo most cruel mortifications which an artful and
ambitious prince can feel; being at once over-
reached in condud, and stripped of power '.

July. NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would

< fooi open the way for his return into Castile,

he took .care to protest, though with great fe-
crecy, that the treaty concluded with his son-
iu-law, .being extorted by force, o'ught to be
deemed void.of all obligation'",

Philip and P-I4LIP took poffeffon of his new authority
Joanna ac- with a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna,
as king and from whom he deri-ved it, remained during all
queen by these cointefts under the dominion of a deep
the Cortes, melancholy; she was seldom allowed to appear

- in publick; her father, though he had often de-
fired it, was refused access to her; and Philip's

"' Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. zg. c. 19,

20, P. Mart. Ep. 304, 305. &c. 16 Ztrita Annales
de Arag. vi. p, 68, Ferrer, Hist, viii, ,90o,

thief objed was to prevail on ,the Cortes to BOOKi I.
declare her incapable of government, that an
undivided power might be lodged in: his hands,
until his son should attatn to furll age. But such
was the partial attachment of the Caffilians to
their native Prin'cefs, that though Manuel had
the address to gain some members of the Cortes
assembled at Valladolid, and others were willing
to .gratify their new sovereign in his first request,
the great body of the representatives refused
their consent to a declaration which they thought
so itijurious to the blood of their monarchs '.
They were unanimous, however, in acknowledg-
ing Joanna and Philip, Queen and King of
Castile, and their son. Charles Prince of Asturias,

THIS was almost the only memorable event teath or
during Philip's administration. A fever put Philip.
an end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of sept. a;
his age, when he had not enjoyed the regal dig-
aity, which he had been so eager to obtain, full
three months ".

THE whole royal authority. in Castile ought The difordei-
of course to .have devolved upon Joanna. But of J""aa'
the shock occasioned by a disaster so unexpecded creaes,
as the death of her husband, completed the dif-

17 Zurita Annales de Arag, vi. p. 7?
zs Marian. lib. 28. c. 23, CZ

BOOK I. order o£:Jher ;understanding, and her incapacity

for government.;, During all the time of Phi.
lip'sficknefs, no intreaty could prevail on her,
though in the fCxth month of her pregnancy, to
leave ,ihn for : a moment. When he expired,
lowoever, fhe' did notj, shed_ one tear, or utter
single groan. -Her grief was silent and fettled;
She continued to watch the dead body with the
famen ten~derness and attention as if it had been
alive"9, and though at lat fihe permitted it to
be buried, ihe soon removed it from the tomb
Sto her own apartment. There it was laid ibpori
a bed,;of state, in a splendid dress: and having
heard. from- some monk a legendary tale of a
king, who revived after ,he had been dead four
teen years, the kept her eyes almost constantly
fixed on the body,' waiting for the happy mos
mnent of its return to life. Nor was this capri.
cious affedion for her dead husband less tinaured
with jealousy, than that which the had born to
him while alive. She did not permit any of
her female attendants to approach the bed on
which his corpse was laid; The would not fuffer
any woman who did not belong to her family
to enter the apartment; and rather than grant
that privilege to a midwife, though a very aged
one had been chosen of purpose, she bore the

" P. Mart. Ep. 3i6.

'rincefs Catherine without any other assistance BOOK 1.
han that of her own domeftics~".

A WOMAN in such a slate of mind was little She. is inca-
:apable of governing a great kingdom; and pblee of go-
oanna, who made it her sole employment to
)ewail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
ufband, would have thought her attention to
)ublick affairs an impious negleat of those duties
vhich she owed to him. But, though she de,
:lined assuming the administration herself, yet,

>y a strange caprice of jealousy, she refused to

:ommit it to any other 'perfon; and no intreaty
>f her fubjeAs could peifuade her to name a
:egent, or even to sign such papers as were ne-
:effary for the execution of justice, and the sea
:urity of the kingdom.

THE death of Philip threw the Caftilians into-MaximiiiaA
Lhe greatest perplexity. It was necessary to ap- the Empe-

, ror aud Ser-

point a regent, both on account of Joannas dinand comn.
Frenzy, and the infancy of her son; and as there petitors for

not ,the regency.

was not among the nobles, any person so emi-
aently distinguished as to be called by the pub-
lick voice to that high office, all naturally
turned their eyes either towards Ferdinand, or
towards the Emperor Maximilian. The former

'° Mar. Hist. lib. 29, c. 3 & s. P. Mart. Ep. 318. 324.

328. 33.Z C3

BooKx I. claimed -- that dignity as administrator for his

daughter, and by virtue of the testament of
Isabella; the latter thought himself the legal
guardian ofhis grandson, whom, on account of
his mother's infirmity, he already considered as
King of Castile. Such of the nobility as had

* lately been most aftive in compelling Ferdinand

to resign the government of the kingdom, trem-
bled at the thoughts of his being restored so
soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and
who, to those defeAs with, which they were al-
ready acquainted, added that resentment which
the remembrance of tIeir behaviour, and reflec-
tion upon his own disgrace, °must naturally have
excited. Though none of these objedions held
against Maximilian, he was a stranger to the
laws and manners of Castile; he had not either
troops, or money to support his pretensions; nor
could his claim be admitted without a public
declaration of Joanna's incapacity for govern-
ment , an indignity, to which, notwithstanding
the notoriety of her distemper, the delicacy of
.the Caftilians could not bear the thoughts of
fubjeding her.

DoN JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of

the nobles,, who considered themselves as most
obnoxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared
for Maxirni-lian, and offered to support his claim

with all their interest. Maximilian, alw-ays en- BooRK 5
terprizing and decisive in council, though feeble.
and dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the
offer. But a series of ineffeclual negociations
\vas the only consequence of ' this tranfadion.
The Emperor, as usual, asserted his rights in a
high strain, prormifed a great 'deal, and perfdrmed
nothing .

A FEW days before the death of Philip, Fer-Ferdainr1a

dinand had set out for Naples, that, by his own abe't, on a

. -. visit to his

presence, he might put an end, with the greater kingdom of
decency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain, Naples.
whose important services, and 'cautious conduct,
did no't screen him 'from the suspicions 6f his
jealous master. Though an account of his son-
in-law's death reached him at Porto-fi-no, in the
territories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to dif-
cover the secret intrigues which he supposed the
great captain to have been carrying on, and, to
establish his own authority on- a firm foundation
in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him
from the supreme command there, that rather
than discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave
Castile in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque,
by, this delay; his obtaining poffeflion of the
government of that kingdom a.

" Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Annales de Arag. VI. 9 .
* Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 85.

C4

•oox I. NOTHING but the 'great abilities and prnident

conduct of his adherents, could have prevented

acquires the bad effeats of this absence. At. the head of
the regency these was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who,
ofCaftile, ..
chifly though he had been raised to that dignity by
through th.Ifabella, contrary to 'lthe inclination of Ferdi-
influence of
cardinal nand, and though he could have no expedation
Ximenes, of enjoying much power under his jealous ad-

ministration, was nevertheless so disinterested, as
to prefer the welfare of his country before his
own grandeur, and to declare, that Castile could
never be so happily governed as by a prince,
whom long experience had rendered thoroughly
acquainted with its true interest. His zeal to
bring over his countrymen to this opinion, in-
duced him to lay aside somewhat of his usual

S5o7, austerity and haughtinefsi He condefcended,

on this occasion, to court the difaffeated nobles,
and employed address, as well as arguments, to
persuade them, Ferdinand seconded his endea-
vours with great art; and by concessions to
some of the grandees, by. promises to others, and
by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained
many of his most violent opponents 2. Though

Aug. Tr. many cabals were formed, and some commo-
Ferdinand tions were excited, yet when Ferdinand, after
returns to
Spain. having fettled the affairs of Naples, arrived in

Castile, he entered upon the administration with-

" Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 87. 94. 109.

eut oppofifion. The prudence with which he BOOK T.
exercised his authority in that kingdom, equalled
the good fortune by which he had recovered it.
By a moderate, but steady administration, free His udent

7 .adminiftra-

from partiality and from refentment', he en- ion.
tirely reconciled the Caftilians to his person, and
secured to them, during the remainder of his
life, as much domeftick tranquillity, as was con-
fiftent with the genius of the feudal govern-
ment, which frill subsisted among them in full

vigour 2.

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in

his hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation
which the Archduke Charles owed to the wife
regency of his grandfather; he had the fatif-
fadtion, during that period, of feeing very im-
portant acquisitions added to the dbminions over
which he was to reign. On the coast of Bar-

Conquest

bary, Oran, and other conquests of no -fmalloforan.
value, were annexed to the crown of Castile by
cardinal Ximenes., who, with a spirit very un-
common in a monk,' led in person a numerous 509.
army against the Moors of that country; and,
with a generosity and magnificence frill more
singular, defrayed the whole expence of the ex-
pedition out of his own revenues . In Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences no less perilous than

" Mariana, lib. 29. c, io, : Mariarna, lib. 29. c. I8.

BboK I. unjufti as well as by artifices 'the most tiameful

and treacherous, 'expelled John d'Albert, the

acquisition lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre;
ofNavarre. and seizing on that kingdom, extended the li.

mits of the Spariifh monarchy from the Pyrenees
on the one hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on
the other ".

Ferdinand IT was not, however, the desire of aggran-
sealous of dizing the Archduke which influenced Ferdi-
his grand- <
son Charles. nand in this, or in any other of his adions. He

was more apt ot confider that young prince as
a rival, who might one day wrest out of his
hands the government of Castile , than as a
grandson, for whose behoof he was entrusted
with the adminiffration. This jealousy soon
begot aversion, and even hatred , the symptoms

a1o9. of which he 'was at no 'pains to conceal. Hence

proceeded his immoderate joy when his young
Queen was delivered of a son, whose life would
have deprived Charles of the crowns of Aragon,
Naples, Sicily and Sardinia; and upon the un-
timely death of that prince, he difoovered, for
the fame reason, an excessive solicitude to have
other children. This' impatience hastened , in
all probability, the accession of Charles to the
crown of Spain. Ferdinand , in order to pro-
cure a blessing, of which, from his advanced

" 1vMar. lib, 30. c. xI, I2 19; 24

age , and the intemperance. of his youth , he BOOK I,
could have little profped, had recourse to his
physicians, and by their prescription took one Sx 3.
of those potions, which are supposed to add
vigour to the constitution , though they more
frequently prove fatal to it. This was it* effec&
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of
Ferdinand; for, though he survived a violent
disorder which it at first occasioned, it brought
on such an habitual languor and de,jedioia of
mind, as rendered him averse from any serious
attention to publick affairs, and fond of frivolous
amusements, on which he had not hitherto be-
stowed much time ". Though he now despaired
of having any son of his own, his jealouify of
the Archduke did not abate, nor could he help
viewing him with that aversion, which princes
often bear to their successors. In order to gra- i c .
tify this unnatural passion, he made a will, ap- Endeavours
pointing prince Ferdinand , who having been to diminish
born and educated in Spain, was much beloved bvawil in
by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his king-avolr of

. Ferdinand.

doms., until the arrival of the Archduke his
brother; and by the fame deed he fettled upon
him the grand-mafterfhip of the three military
orders. The former of these grants might have

"7 Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 531,

Argenfola Annales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4.

BooI~ I. put it in his power to have disputed the throne

with his brother; the latter would, in any event,
have, rendered him almost, independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous

love of power, which was so. remarkable through
his whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at
the approach of death, he removed continually
from place to place , in order to fly from his
distemper, or to forget it. Though his strength
declined every day, none of his attendants durst
mention his condition; nor would he admit his
father confeffor, who thought such silence cri-
minal and unchristian, into his presence. At
last the danger became so imminent, .that it
could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand re-
ceived the intimation with a decent fortitude.;
and touched, perhaps, with compundtion at the
injustice which he had done his grandson, or
influenced by the honest remonftrances of Car-
vajal, Zapata, and Vargas, his most ancient and
faithful counsellors, who represented to him, that
by inverting prince Ferdinand with the regency,
he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers,, and by beftowing on him the grand-
mastership of the military orders, would fitrip
the crown of itsnobleft ornament and chief
strength, he consented to alter his will in both

there particulars. By a new deed he left Charles BOOK t.
the sole heir of all his dominions, and allotted i x i6.
to prince Ferdinand, instead of that throne of s peruaded
which he thought himself almost secure , anwill,
incotifiderable eftablifhiment of fifty thousand
ducats a year "8. He died a few hours after fign-and daaies.
ing this will, on the twenty-third day of Janu.
ary, one thousand five hundred and sixteen.

CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance Education o

descended by his death, was near the full age Charles V.
of sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low
Countries, his paternal dominions. MVargaret
of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York,
the filter of Edward IV. of England, and widow
of Charles the Bold, two prince'ffes of great
virtue and abilities, had the care of forming his
early youth. Upon the death of his father, the
Flemings committed the government of the Low
Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor
Maximilian i with the name rather than the au-
thority of regent "'. Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend
the education of the young Prince his grand-

" Mar. Hist. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi.

401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, S66. Argenfola Annales de Arag.
lib. I. p. I.

29 Pontius Heuterus Rerum Auftriacarum, lib. xv. Lo-.

1649. lib. 7. c. 2. p. IF5.

Boon I. son °. That -nobleman poffeffed, in an eminent

xS 16,. degree, the talents which fitted him for such an

important office, and discharged the duties of
it with great fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian
of Utrecht a·i ed as preceptor. This prefer-
anent, which opened his way to the highest dig-
nities an Ecclesiastic can attain, he owed not to
his birth, for that was extremely mean; nor to

"° The French historians, upon the authority of M. de

Bellay, MeImn. p. rI. have unanimously asserted, that Philip,
by his last will, having appointed the King of France to
have the diretion of his ion's education, Louis XII. with
a disinterestedness suitable to the confidence reposed in
him, named Chievres for that office. Even the president
Henaut has adopted this opinion. Abreg- Chron. A, D.
1507. Varillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have
seen Philip's .testament. Prait. de 1'~ducation des .Princes,
p. I <. But the Spanish, German, and Flemish historians
concur in contradicting this assertion of the French authors.
It appears from Heuterus, a cotemporary Flemish hilto-.
rian of great authority-, that Louis XII. by consenting to
the marriage of G.ermaine de Foix with Ferdinand, had loft
much of that confidence which Philip once placed in him;'
that this disgust was increased by the French King's giving
in marriagie to the count of Angouleme his eldest daughter,
iwhoml he had formerly betrothed to Charles, Heuter. Rer.
Auftr; lib. v. Ig I: That the French, a short time before
Philipfs death, had violated the peace, which fhbfifted be-
tween them aihd the Flemings, and Philip had complained
of this injury, and was ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid.
.All these circumrftances render it improbable that Philip,
who made his will a few days before he died, Heuter. p.

Q

his interest, for he was :a stranger to the arts of Boor I.
a court; but to the opinion which his country-

-s xi6.

men entertained of his learning. He was indeed
no inconsiderable proficient in those friVolous
fiences, which, during several centuries, assumed
[he name of Philosophy, and had published a
;ommentary, which was highly esteemed, upon
the Book of Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus,.
o&mbardus, considered at that time, as the

[ 2, should-commit the education of his son to Louis XIL
n confirmation of these plausible conjectures, positive tefti-
iony can be produced. It appears from Heuterus, that
hilip, when he fit out for Spain, had entrusted Chievres
,oth with the care of his fon's education, and with the go-
ernment of his dominions in the Low Countries. Heuter.
b.. vii. p.

I s 3. That an attempt was made, soon after

hilip's death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed
egent, during the-minority, of his grandson; but this be-
ag opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to discharge
oth the offices which Philip had committed to him. Heut.
bid. is 3. is .5· That in the beginning of the year

i sog

he Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the regency;
owhich he consented and appointed his daughter -Mar-
aret, together with a council of Flemings, to exercise the
Upreme authority, when he himself should, at any time,
e absent. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and
drian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. Heut. ibid. i ,
157. What Heuterus relates with refpedt to this matter is

cnfirmed by Moringus in. Vita. Adriani, apud Analeta

Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. o; by Barlandus, Chro-
lc. Brabant.. ibid. pl. a ; and by HIarxus, Aril. Brah,,
rl. ii. $50o, &cc

Bporc I.' standard .£ytem, of metapphyfical theology. But

i 16.: whatever -.dmiration .these, procured him in an

illiterate age,. it was fpon found that a man ac.
cuftomed: to,: the retirement of a coll-ge;,, unac,
quainted wifth the world, and withfout .any
tindure of. take or elegance, was by, no means
qualified. for rendering science agreeable to .a
y-ung prince. Ch'arles,,: accordingly, discovered
a4 early aversion .to learning, and an. excessive
-fonidnefs for those violent and martial exercises,
to excel in which was the chief pride, and almofi
the only study of persons of. rank in that age.
Chievres encouraged thisi taste, either from a
desire of "gaining his pupil: by indulgence, or
from tdo. flight an:opinion of the advantages of
literary accomplifhments3". He inftruded him,
however,. .with great care in the arts of goverwn
ment; he made him study the history not onily
of his own kingdoms, but ,of those with which
they were conrie&ed; he: accustomed him, fron
the time of his assuming the ,government, of
Slanders. in the year one thousand five hundred

The first and fifteen, to attend to;bu:finefs'; he persuaded
iopecag oF him to peruse all papers relating to public
ter. affairs; to be present at the deliberations of his

privy-counfellors, and to propose to them hini
self those matters, concerning which he required

SlJovii Vita. Adriani, p.

. 91. Struvii Corpus Hill'

Germ. ii. 967. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. vii. c. 3. p. 17.

their

:their opinion j. From such an education, Charles
contradted habits of gravity and recolletion
which scarcely suited his time of life. The firlt
iopenings of his genius di not dindicate that fu-
periority which its maturer age displayed ". He
did not discover in his youth that impetuosity
of spirit which commonly ulhers in an adive
and enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early
obsequiousness to Chievres, and his other favour-
-ites, promise that capacious and decisive judg-
ement, which afterwards directged the affairs of
one half of Europe. But his fubjeAs, dazzled
'¾with the external accomplishments of a graceful
figure and manly address, and viewing his cha-
rader with that partiali ty which is always Thown
to princes during their youth, entertained fan-
?guine hopes of his adding lustre to those crowns
\thich descended to him by the death of Ferw
tdinand, l-soOR tr

I jl f8

i'THE kingdoms of Spain , s is evident from tie of
thie view which I have given of their political Speiri re-

ionftitutioti , vere, at that time, in a situation, .goirs av

which required an admiriftration, no less vigo. minifra.
rous than .prudent. The feudal institutions, tion.
!Which had been introduced into all its different
]provinces by the G oths the Suevi, and the Van-

; 1\ lmdires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. i

5 7

3q -I. He

. itenr

lib. viii. c. 'i. p. I84; " "3 P. Mrtyr, Ep. 569.i 6 '

VOL. II. D

)300K.L~i;

1516 . dais, subsisted in great force. The nobles, :who

were ipowerful an4 warlike., had long poffeffed
'"al: th.e [exorbitant privileges , which these infti"

.utions vested -in, their }order.. The cities in ,Spain
wvere more numerous and more considerable·,
than the genius of feudal government, naturally
an enemy to commerce, and to regular police,
seemed :-to. admit. The personal rights, and po.
litical influence, which the inhabitants of these
cities had acquired , were extensive. The royal pre.
rogative , circumscribed by the privileges of the
nobility, and by the pretensions of the people,
was confined within very narrow limits. Unde
.such a form of government, the principles a
discord .were -many; the bond of union wa
extremely feeble; and Spain felt not only al
the inriconveniencies occasioned by the defec
in the feudal system, but was exposed to dif
orders arising. from the peculiarities in its owi
constitution.

DURING the long administration of. Ferdi

Xand, no internal commotion, it is true, had
arisen in Spain,. His superior abilities enable
him to restrain the turbulence of the nobles , an
to moderate the jealousy of the commons. ByI
the wisdom of his domestic government, by thl
.sagacity with which he conduded his foreigi
operations , and by the high opinion that hi

subjects entertained of both , he prefei^ed among took t
them a degree of tranquillity, greater than was 5r 1
'tiatural to a constitution , in which the feeds of
diifcord and disorder were so copiously mingled..
13Butt, iby the death of Ferdinand , there restraints
Waere at once withdrawn; and fadibrin and dif.
6siif.tent: , from beirig long repressed, were ready
to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN order to prevent those evils , Ferdinand Ferdinani

':-had .in his last will taken a most prudent pre.- a apoi
tautioi , by appointing Cardinal Xinxenes, arch- ximenes
fbifhlop of Toledo , to be sole regent of Caftile,regento
L until the arrival of his grandson in Spain; The
i^fingulai- charader of this man, and the elxtra-
|'ordinary qualities which marked him out for
|1That 'office, at such a jiundure, merit a particular
sdefcription. He was descended of an honour- is rife adii4
i

able , hot of a wealthy family ; and the circum-chara~ter

fiances of his parents, as iwell as his oivn incli-
inations , having determined him to enter into
the church, he early obtained benefices of great
" value, and which placed him in the way of the
highest prefermneiit.- All these , however , he rte
' nounced at once; and after undergoing a very
Sfevere noviciate, affiumed the habit of' St. Francis
Sin a .monastery of Obfervantine friars , one of
? the most rigid orders in' the -Romish Churcih.
There he Loon became eminent for his uncom-

D

Boox I. mon auftereity of manners, and for those excesses
1516i, of fuperfititous devotion, which are the proper

.charaderifties of the monaftick life. But not::
withstanding these extravagances, to which weak!
and enthusiastic minds alone are usually prone i
this umderftanding, naturally penetrating and de-
cifive, retained its full vigour, 5and acquired
lim -such great authority in his own order,
as raised him to be their provincial. His repu-,
tation for fantity loon procured him the office
of father confeffor to Queen Isabella, which he
accepted with the utmost reludance. He pre-|
served in a court the fame austerity of man-..
ners, which had distinguished him in the cloister.
He continued to imake all his journies on foot;
ie subsisted only upon alms-; his ads of morti.
fication were as severe as ever , and his pen-
ances as rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her'1
choice :, conferred on him, not long after , the
Archbifhoprick of Toledo, which next to the.
Papacy, is the richest dignity in the church of
Rome. This honour he declined with a firm-
ness, which nothing but the authoritative injunc-
tion of the Pope was able to overcome. Nor
did this height of promotion ,change his man.
ners. Though obliged to display in public
that magnificence which became his station, he
himself retained his monaftick severity. Under
his pontifical robes he constantly wore the coarse

frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he used Booc I.
to patch with his own hands. He- at no time 1 6.
used- linen.; but was commonly clad in hair-
cloth. He slept always in his habit, most fre-
quently on the ground, or on boards, rarely in
a bed. He did not taste any of the "delicacies
which appeared at his table, but satisfied him-
self with that simple diet which the rule' of his
order prescribed 3. Notwithstanding these- pecu-
liarities , so opposite to the manners of the
world, he poffeffed a thorough knowledge of
ts affairs;. and no sooner was he called by his
l.tion , and by the high opinion which Ferdi-
and and Isabella entertained of him , to take
,principal share in the adminditration, than he
ifplayed talents for business, which rendered
he fame of his wisdom equal to that of his
mnity. Bold and original in all his plans, his
olitical condud flowed from his real charader,
ad partook both of its virtues and its defects.
*is extensive genius suggested to him schemes,
uaft and magnificent. Conscious of the inte-
trity of his intentions, he purfaed these with
nremitting and undaunted, firmness. Accuf-
0oned. from his early youth to mortify his own
ffions , he fhewed little indulgence towards
iofe of other men.: Taught by his system of

3, Hiftoire de l'adminiftration du Card. Ximen. parMich,.
audier , 4to. i 6 3 . p. I'3.-

D 3

Booa I. religion to check even his mnft, innocent. desires

,i4 ..he was the enemr of every thing to which Mh

.could, affix

- the name of. elegance or. pl'efur.

.though free ,from any. suspicion of cruelty, h
difcoveried in all his commerce with the worl
a severe inflexibility of mind, and austerity
charadler, peculiar to the monaftick profeffion
;ind. which can ,hardly be conceived in a countr
.vhere that is unknown. .

Cardinal Sucu was the man to whom Ferdinand co
Adrian ap,. ..nitted the regency of Castile , and thoug
pointed re-' Ximenes was then near fourscore, and perfedt
gent by
haries. acquainted with the labour and difficulty of th

office, his natural intrepidity of mind-, and :ge
for the public good, prompted him to acceJ
ps it without hesitation. . Adrian of Utrecht
who had been sent into Spain a few month
before the death of Ferdinand , produced fu
powers from the archduke to assume the nanm
and authority of regent upon the demise. of hii
grandfather ; but such was the averfionr of th
Spaniards to the government of a stranger , ant
bo unequal the abilities of the two competito&
that Adrian's claim would at once have bee
rejeAed, if Ximenes himself, from complaifani

imenesthe-to his new master, had not consented to ackno0
sole direc. 'ledge him as regent, and to carry on the gover
Sion of as-

.i3o me Wnt in conjundion with him. By this, ho\

ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely- nominal. BOOK Y.
Ximenes, though he treated him with great de- I 6,
cency , and even refped , retained the whole
power in his own hands ".

THE Cardinal's first care was to observe the His precau-

motions of the Infant Don Ferdinand, whotionsagainit
having been flattered with so near a profped of Don Ser
supreme power, bore the disappointment of his 'ainand
hopes with greater impatience than could have
been expeded of a prince so young. Ximenes,
under pretence of providing more effeftually
for his safety, removed him from Guadalupe,
the place in which he had been educated, to
TIVadrid , where he fixed the residence of the
court. There he was under 'the Cardinal's own
eye, and his condud, with that of his domeftics,
was watched with the utmost attention 3.

THe first intelligence he received from the

Low Countries, gave greater disquiet to the
Cardinal , and convinced him how difficult a
talk it would be to conduct the.: affairs of a
.young Prince, under the influence of counsellors
unacquainted with the laws anid manners of
Spain. No sooner did the account of Ferdi-

3" Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii , p.

I o. fol. Compl.

I~69. 36 Miniana C6ntin. Mariana , ''lib. x. c. z.
Baudier, Hist. de Ximenes, p. I I8.

BooK J. nand's deathh,reach Brussels, than Charles, by

s x6. the advice of his Flemish ministers, resolved toi
charles a assume the title 'of Kin g. By the laws of Spain,
"fumes the
tite of the sole right to the crowns both of Caftile.anc4
king ' of Aragon belonged to Joanna ; and though

her infirmities disqualified ,her from governing,
this incapacity had not been declared by, any
publick a&t of the Cortes in either kingdom ; so9

, that the Spaniards considered this resolution,

not only as a direc violation of their privileges,
but as an unnatural usurpation in a son on the
prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her
present unhappy situation , he manifested a less
delicate regard than her fubjeds had always ex-
pressed ". The Flemish court, however, having
prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor
to address letters to Charles as King of Castile;
the former of whom, it was pretended, had a
right, as head of the church ; and the latter, as
head of the empire, to confer this title; inftruc-
tions were sent to Ximenes , to prevail on the
Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes, though
he had earnestly remonstrated agaiffft the mea-
sure , as no less unpopular than unnecessary,
resolved to exert all his authority and credit in
carrying it into execution , and immediately
assembled such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before

v P. Mart Ep. 568,

them; and when, instead. of complying with BOOK .L
his demands, they began to murmur against xg6,
such an unprecedented encroachment on their
privileges, and to talk high of the rights of
i:Joanna, .and 'their oath of allegiance to her,
Ximenes hastily interposed, and' with' that firm
and decisive tone which was natural-to him-, told Recognized
them, that they 'were not called now to deli- thrugh the
berate, but to obey ; that their sovereign did ximenes,
not apply to them for advice, but expeded sub--
milfion; and ? this day, added he , Charles shall April Ia.
be proclaimed King of Castile in Madrid, and
the reft of the cities will follow its example."
On the spot he gave orders for that purpose 3S;
and notwithstanding the novelty of the pradice,
and the secret difcontents of many persons of
diftinion, Charles's title was universally recog-
nized. In Aragon, where the privileges of the
fubjed were more extensive, and the abilities as
well as authority of the archbishop of Saragossa,
whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, vwere
far inferior to those of Ximenes, the fame obfe-
quioufnefs to the will of Charles did not appear,
nor was he acknowledged there under any other
charader but that of Prince, until his arrival in
Spain '

" Gometius, p. F z , &c. Baudier lift. de Ximens

p. I2i. 39 P. Mart. Ep. S72z,

BooxK I. XIMENES, though poffefied ;only of delegated
I 26. power, which, from his advanced age, he could
His foheines not exped to enjoy long, assumed, together with
for extend- ail
ing the pre. the charader of regent, all the ideas natural to
rogative, a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending

the regal" authority, which he pursued with a
much intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself
had been to reap the advantages resulting from
their fucpefs. The exorbitant privileges of the
Castilian nobles circumscribed the prerogative
of the Prince within very narrow limits. These
the Cardinal considered as so many unjust ex-
tor tions from the crown , and determined to re.
,duce them. Dangerous as the. attempt was,
there were circumstances in his situation which
promised him greater success than any King of
Castile could have expeded. His £trit and
prudent ceconomy of his archiepiscopal revel
nues, furnished him with more ready money,
than the crown could . at any time command;
the fandity of his manners, his charity and mu
nificence, rendered him the idol of the people;
and the nobles themselves, not fufpeding any
danger from him, did not observe his motions
with the fame jealous attention, as they would
have watched those of one of their monarchs.

by deprer- IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the re-
sing th no- gency, 'evera Of the nobles, fancying that the

teins of government -would of consequence be BOOK I,
somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their vas- 1 96.,
fals, and to prosecute, by force of arms, private
quarrels and' pretensions, which the authority of
Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to
relinqzuiTh. But Ximenes, who had taken into
pay a good body of troops, opposed and de-
seated all their designs with unexpeded vigour
and facility; :and though he did not treat the
authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he
forced them to ads of fubmiflfion, extremely
mortifying to the haughty spirit of Castilian
grandees,

BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were con-by forming

fined to individuals, and every ad of rigour a body of

?"0 troops de-

was justified by the appearance of necessity, pending on
founded on the forms of justice, and tempered th crown,
with a mixture of lenity , there was scarcely room
for jealousy or complaint. It was not To with
his next measure, which, by striking at a privi-
lege essential to the nobility, gave a general
alarm to the whole order. By the feudal con-
ftitution.., the military power was lodged in the
hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior
condition were called into the field only as their
vassals, and to follow their banners. *A King
with scanty revenues, and a limited prerogative,
depended on these potent barons in all his ope-

BOOIK L rations. It was with their forces he attacked
x si6, his enerpies, and with them he defended his

own kingdomn. While at the head of troops at-
tached warmly to their own lords, and accustomed.
to obey no other commands, his authority was
precarious, and his effbrts feeble. From this
slate Ximenes resolved to deliver the crown;
and as mercenary standing armies were unknown
under the feudal government, and would have
been odious to a martial and generous people,
he issued a proclamation, commanding every
city in Castile to enroll a certain number of its
burgesses, in order that they might be trained
to the use of arms on Sundays and holidays; he
engaged to provide officers to command .them
at the publick expence; and as an encourage-
rnent to the private men, promised them an ex-
emption from all taxes and impofitiohs. The
frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa,
and the necessity of having some force ready to
oppose them, furnished a plausible pretence for
this innovation. The obje&t really in view was
to secure the King a body of troops independent
of his barons , and which might serve to coun-
erbalance their power40. The nobles were not
ignorant of his intention, and saw how effedually
the fcherne which he had adopted -would ac-
complilh his end; but as a measure which had

v" Miniana, Continuatia Marianma, fol. Hag. 7 33 p. 3

the pious appearance ofrefifting the progress of Boot I.
the infidels was extremely popular, and as any
opposition to it arising from their order alone, [1sx6.
would have been imputed wholly to interested
motives, they endeavoured to excite the cities
themselves to refuse °obedience, and to remon-
ftrate against the proclamation, as inconsistent
with their charters and privileges. In confe-
quence of their inftigations, Burgos, Valladolid,
and several other cities, rose in open mutiny.
Some of the grandees declared themselves their
protedors. Violent remonftrances were pre-
fented to the King. His Flemish counsellors
were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by terror, partly by
intreaty; by force in some instances, and by
forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the
refratory cities to comply ". During his ad-
ministration, he continued to execute his' plan
with vigour, but soon after his death it was en4
tirely dropt.

HIs success in this scheme for reducing the By recatlrng
exorbitant power of the nobility, encouraged him the grants

. of former

to attempt a diminution of their poffeffions, monarchs to
which were no less exorbitant. During the con- the nobility.
tests and disorders inseparable from the feudal
government, the nobles, ever attentive to their

*4 P. Mart. Ep. s556, &c. Gometlus, p. 60o, &c.

3OOK I. own- interest , and taking advantage of the weaI

'n'efs or distress of their monarchs , had feizze
' omelparts of the royal demefnes, obtained grant
of others , and 'having gradually wreffted almhdi
the \whole out of the hands of the Prince , hai
•annexed them to their own estates. The rights
by which most of the grandees held these lainds
were extremely defecive; it was from some fuc
cefsful usurpation, -which the crown had beer
too feeble to dispute, that many derived thei
only title to poffeffion. An enquiry carrie
back to the origin of these encroachments, whid
1were almost co-eval with the feudal system, wa
impradicable; and as it would have ftrippe(
every nobleman in Spain of great part of hi
lands, it must have excited a general re:vo
Such a step was, too bold, even for the enterpri2
ing genius of Ximenes, He confinaed himfei
fto'the reign of Ferdinand; and beginiing witl
the pensions granted during that 'time, refufei
to make any farther payment, because all righ
to them expired with his life. He then calle
to account such as had acquired crown - land
under the administration of that monarch, an
at once resumed whatever he had alienated. Ti
effeds of these revocations extended to manj
persons of high rank ; for though Ferdinan
was a Prince of little generosity, yet he and Ifa
bella having been raised to the throne of Caftil

by a powerful fadion of the nobles, they were
obliged to reward the zeal ,of their adherents
with great liberality, and the royal demefnes
were their only, fund for that purpose. The
addition made to the revenue of the crown by
these revocations, together with his own frugal
ceconomy, enabled Ximenes not only to ,discharge
all the debts which Ferdinand had left., and to
remit considerable sums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to establish
magazines more numerous, and better furnished
with artillery, arms, and warlike stores, than
Spain had ever poffeffed in any former agei:.
The prudent and disinterested application of
these sums, was a full apology to the people for
the rigour with which they were exaded.

- THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated at-
tacks, beg:an ,to think of precautions for the
safety of their order. Many cabals were form-
7'ed, loud complaints were uttered, aand def-
perate resolutions t;iken ; but: before they. pro-
ceeded to extremities, they appointed some of
their numbers to examine the powers in confe-
quence of which the Cardinal exercised ads of
f such high authority. The admiral of Castile,
the duke de Infantado, and the conde de Bene-
vento, grandees of the, first rank, were entruted

-a Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 6oo. BooK I.

ix 16.

The nobles
oppole his
mepn{tpres -

.BooK I. with this commission. Ximenes received then
1x516 with cold civility, and in answer to their dej

mand, produced the testament of Ferdinand by

.which he was appointed1 regent, together with
the ratification, of that deed by Charles, To
both these they objeted.; and he endeavouted
to establish their validity. As the conversation
grew warnm, he led. thei .insensibly towards a

btt without balcony, from which they had a view of a large
ruGcefs. 'body of troops under arms, and of a formidable

train of artillery. "Behold," says he , pointing
to these and raising his voice, "the powers
vchich I have received fromn his Catholick ma-
jefty, With these I govern' Castile; and with
these I will govern it, until the. King your master
and mine takes poffeflior of his kingdom"4," A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them,
and astonished their associates, To take airms
against a man aware of his danger, and prepared
for his defence, was what despair alone would
ditate. All thoughts of a general confederacy:
aga inft the Cardinal's administration were laid
aside; and except from: some flight commotions
excited by the private resentment of' particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile fliffered no:
interruption;

Thwarted IT, was not only from the oppdfition of the
riemihl Spanish nobility that obitacles arose to the exe-
Pinifters.

43 Flech. ii, e55 . Ferreras. His~. viii. 43;.

cution

cution of the Cardinal's schemes; he had a con- Book iL.
ftant struggle to maintain with the Flemish mini- isxi.
fters, who, presuming upon their favour with the
young King, aimed at direding the affairs of
Spain, 'as well as those, of their own country.
Jealous of his great abilities and independent
spirit, they considered Ximenes rather as a rival,
who might circumscribe their power, than as a
minifer, who by his prudence and vigour was
adding to the grandeur and authority of their
maiter. Every complaint against his admini*
ftration was listened to with pleasure by the cour-
tiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary ob-
ftrudions were thrown by their means in the
way of all' his measures; and though they could
not either with decency or safety deprive him of
the office of regent, they endeavoured tp lessen
his autHority by dividing it. They soon dif-
covered that Adrian of Utrecht, already joined
with him in office, had neither genius nor spirit
fufficient to give the least check to his proceed-
ings; and therefore Charles, by their advice, aad di-
added to the commission of regency La Chau, ationalnnnlD
Flemish gentleman, and afterwards Amerftorf,gents ap,
a nobleman of Holland; the former distinguish- loinaeec
ed for his address, the latter for his firmness,
Ximenes, though no stranger to the malevolent
intention of the Flemish courtiers, received these
new associates with all the external marks of dif-

VOL. IL E

BOoK I. tindion due to the office with which they were
Is56*. invested; :but when they came to enter upon

business, he abated nothing of that air of fupe-
riority with which he had treated Adrian, and

ximenesre. frill retained the sole diredion of affairs. The
tains the ,i- Spaniards, more averse, perhaps, than any other
affair, people to the government of strangers, approved'

of all his efforts to preserve his authority. Even
the nobles, influenced by this national passion,
and forgetting their jealousies and difcontents,
chose rather to fee the supreme power in the
hands of one of their countrymen, whom they
feared than in those of foreigners, whom they
Shated,.

His fitccetf- XIMEN.S, though engaged in such great
fil war in . .
Navarre, schemes of-domeftick policy, and embarrassed by

the artifices and intrigues of the Flemish mi'
nifters had the burden of two foreign wars to.
support. The one was in Navarre, invaded by
its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albert. The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and difaffedtion which reigned among
the Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with
a favourable opportunity of recovering his do-
minions. The Cardinal's vigilance, however,
defeated a mreafure so well concerted. As he

, foresaw the danger to which that kingdom might

be exposed , one of his first ads of adminiftra-

tions was to order thither a considerable body of Boor L
troops. While the King was employed with xJI6,
one part of his army in the siege of St. Jean
Pied en Port, Villalva; an officer of great ex-
perience and courage, attacked the other by
surprise, End cut it to pieces. The King in-
ftantly retreated with precipitation, and an end
was put to the war ". But as Navarre was filled
at that time with towns and castles, slightly
fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being
unable to resist an enemy, served only to furnish
him with places of retreat; Ximenes, always
bold and decisive in his measures, ordered every
One of there to be dismantled, except Pampe-
Juna, the fortifications of which he propofed.to6
render very firong. To this uncommon pre-
caution Spain owes the poffeflion of Navarre,
The French, since that period, have often en-
tered, and have as often over-run the openr
country; but while they were exposed to all the
inconveniencies attending an invading army, the
Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the
neighbouring provinces to oppose them; and
the French, being destitute of strong towns to
which they could retire, lhave been obliged to
abandon their conquest with as much rapidity
as they gained it.

S: P. Mart. Ep. 57o0.

DooK I. THE war which he carried on in Africa
1s 6. against the famous adventurer Horuc Barba-
His opera- roffa, who, from a private corsair, raised him-
Africa lets self, by his fingiular valour and address, to be
fortunate. King of Algiers and Tunis, was far from being

equally fuccefsful. The ill condua of the
Spanish general, and the rash valour of his
troop's, presented Barbarossa with an easy viatory.
Many perished in the battle, more in the retreat,
and the remainder returned into Spain covered
with infamy. The magnanimity, however, with
which the Cardinal bore this disgrace, the only
one he experienced during his administration,
added new lustre to his charader "4. Great com.
pofure of temper under a disappointment, wast
not expected from a man so remarkable for the
eagerness and impatience with which he urged
on the execution of all his schemes.

Corruption THIS disaster was soon forgottenh; while the
fh eni- condudtl of the Flemifn court proved the cause
fters,.par of constant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal,
ticulaly of but to the whole Spanish nation. All the great
Chievres. qualities of Chievres, the prime minister and

favourite of the young King, were sullied with
an ignoble and sordid avarice, The acceftion of
his master to the crown of Spain , opened a
new and copious source for the gratification of

"3 Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.

this passion. During the time of Charles's refi- BOOK 1,
dence in Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders i x6,
to offices or to favour resorted thither. They
soon d.iscovered that, without the patronage of
Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing his protection. Vast sums
of money were drawn out of Spain. Every
thing was venal, and disposed of to the higheaf
bidder. After the example* of Chievres, the in-
ferior Flemish ministers engaged in this traffick,
which became as general and avowed, as it was
infamous 4. The Spaniards were filled with
rage when they beheld offices of great import-
ance to the welfare of their country, set to
sale by strangers, unconcerned for its honour or
its happiness. *Ximenes, disinterested in his
whole administration, and a stranger, from his
native grandeur of mind, to the passion of ava-
rice, inveighed with the utmost boldness against
the venality of the Flemings. He represented
to the King in strong terms, the murmurs and
indignation which their behaviour excited among
a free and high-fpirited people, and besought
him to set out without loss of time for Spain,
that, by his presence, he might dissipate the
clouds which were gathering all over the king·
dom '.

*~ Miniana, Contin. 1. i. c. 2.o P. Mart. Ep. 576.

E3

Boo. I. CHARLES was; fully sensible that he had dea
' 1s16. layed too long to take poffeflion of his domi,
Charles per-inions in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however,
i e7s to sod in his way, and detained him in the Low
Ifa Syain- C6untries. The war which the league of Cam-

bray had kindled in Italy, still subsisted; though,
during its cdurfe, the armies of all the parties
engaged in it, had changed their destination and
their obje&cs. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
MViaximilian and Ferdinand had for some years
carried on hostilities against France, their origi-
nal al!y, to the valour of whose troops the con-
federacy had been indebted for all its success.
Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand tranf-
mntted this war to his grandson; and there was
reason to expect that 1VIaximilian, always fond of
new enterprizes, would persuade the young
monarch to enter into it with ardour. But the
Flemings, who had long poffeffed an extensive
commerce, which during the league of Cam-
bray, had grown to a great height upon the
ruins of the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture
with France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern
the true interest of his country, and not warped
on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly
declared for maintaining peace with the French
pation. Francis I. destitute of allies, and soli-
1itqus tqc secure his late conquefs in Italy by a

treaty, listened with joy to the firfl overtures of BooK I.
accommodation. Chievres himself conducted x1 6.
the negociation in the name of Charles. Gouffier
appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each
of them had presided over the education of the
Prince whom he represented. They had both
adopted the fame pacific system; and& were
equally persuaded that the union of the two mo-
narchs was the happiest event for themselves, as
well as for their kingdoms. In such hands the
negociations did not languish. A few days after A peace cosa
opening their conferences at Noyon, they con-c"l"~dwit'

France.

cluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual de- Aug.2s7
fence between the two monarchs; the chief ar-
ticles in which were, that Francis Thould give in
nmarriage to Charles his eldeff daughter, the Prin-
cess Louise, an infant of a year old, and as her
dowry, should make over to him all his claims
and pretensions upon the kingdom of Naples ;
that in consideration of Charles's being already
in poffeffion of Naples, he fhiould , until the ac-
complifhment of the marriage, pay an hundred
thousand crowns a year to the French King;
and the half of that fum :annually, as lon.g as
the Princess had no children; that when- Charles
shall arrive in Spain, the. heirs of the. King of
Navarre may represent to him their right to
that kingdom.; and if it do not give them fa-
tisfacdion, Francis Tfhould be at liberty to affirf

E 4

BOOK I,

The Flemn
ingsaverfe
to Charles's
visit to
Spain.

"' Leonard Recueil des Traitis, tom. ii. 69,

them with all his forces "4. This alliance not
only united Charles and Francis, but obliged
IVlaximilijn, who was unable alone to cope with
-the French and Venetians, to enter into a treaty
with those powers., which put a final period to
the bloody and tedious war that the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a
few years of universal tranquillity, and was in.
debted for that blessing to two Princes, whose
rivalfhip and ambition kept it in perpetual dif.
cord .and agitation during the remainder of their
reigns.

BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a

safe passage into Spain. It was not, however,
the interest of his Flemish ministers, that he
Thould visit that kingdom soon. While he re-
sided in Slanders, the revenues of the Spanish
crown were spent there, and they engrossed,
without any competitors, all the effets of their
monarch's generosity; their country became the
feat of government , and all favours were dif-
penfed by them. Of all these advantages, they
ran. the rifque of feeing themselves deprived,
from the moment that their sovereign entered
Spain. The Spaniards would naturally assume
the diredion of their own affairs; the Low"
Countries would be considered only as a pro-

vince of that mighty monarchy; and they who BOOK R
now distributed the favours of the Prince to isi6.
others, must then be content to receive them
from the hands of strangers. But what Chievres Afraid of
chiefly wished to avoid was, an interview be-
tween the King and Ximenes. On the one
hand, the' wisdom, the integrity, and the mag.
nanimity f that prelate, gave him a wonderful
ascendant 'yver the minds of men; and it was
extremely probable, that these great qualities,
added to the reverence due to his age and office,
would command the refped of a young Prince,
who, capable of noble and generous sentiments
himself, would, in proportion to his admiration
of the Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference
towards persons of another charadter. Or, on
the other hand, if Charles should allow his
Flemish favourites to retain all the influence
over his councils which they at present poffeffed,
it was easy to foresee that the Cardinal would
remonstrate loudly against such an indignity to
the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of
his country with the fame intrepidity and fuc.
cess, that he had asserted the prerogatives of
the crown. For these reasons, all his Flemish
counsellors combined to retard his departure;
and Charles, unfufpicious, from want of expe-
rience, and fond of his native country, fuffered
himself to'be unnecessarily detained in the Ne-

SBoon I, therlands a whole year after signing the treaty
15s7. of Noyon.

Charles em. THE repeated entreaties of Ximenes, the ad.
barkfs so vice of his grandfather Maximilian, and the
Spain. impatient murmurs of his Spanish fubjeds, pre.

vailed on him at last to embark. He was
attended- not only by Chievres, his prime mini.
fier, but by a numerous and splendid train of
the Flemish nobles, fond of beholding the gran.
deur, or of sharing in the bounty of their Prince.

Sept. 13. After a dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa

Viciofa, in the province of Asturias, and was
received with such loud acclamations of joy, as
a new monarch, whose arrival was so ardently
desired, had reason to exped. The Spanish
nobility resorted to their sovereign from all
parts of the kingdom, and displayed a magni-
ficence which the Flemings were unable to
emulate.l7

-is Flemish XIMENES, who considered the presence of the
ninifeur King as the greatest blessing to his dominions,
endeavour
to prevent was advancing towards the coast, as fast as the
an inter- infirm state of his health would permit, in order
view with .
ximenes. to receive him, During his regency, and not-

withstanding his extreme old age, he had abated;
in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his

"7 P. Mart. Ep. 599. 6Qk,

mortifications; and to these he added such la- BOOK I\
borious assiduity in business, as would have 1x ? 7
worn out the mofW youthful and vigorous con-
ftitution. Every day he employed several hours
in devotion; he celebrated mats in person; he
even allotted some space for ffudy. Notwith.
standing there occupations, he regularly\ attended
the council; he received and read all pa'pers
presented to him; he ditated letters and in-
f~ruCions; and took under. his infpedion all
business, civil, ecclesiastical, or military. Every
moment of his time was filled up with some
serious employment. The only amusement in
which he indulged himself by way of relaxation
after business, was to canvass, with a few friars
and divines, some intricate article in fcholaftick
'theology. Wasted by such a course of life, the
infirmities of age daily grew upon him. On
his journey, a violent disorder seized him at Bos
Equillos, attended with uncommon symptoms;
which his followers considered as the effect of
poison "., but could not agree whether the crime
ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemish
courtiers. This accident obliging him to stop
thort, he wrote to Charles, and with his usual Charles's
boldness advised him to dismisS all the strangers ingrtitu" d
in his train, whoe numbers and credit gaeto Xiee
Tn his train, whose numbers and credit gave

N Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3,

BooK I. offence already to the Spaniards, and would er

xI, 7.. long alienate the affeAions of the whole people

At the fame time he earnestly desired to hay
an interview with the King, that he might inforn
him of the state of the nation, and the tempel
of his fubjeAs. To prevent this, not only th(
Flemings, but the Spanish grandees, employed
all their address, and industriously kept Charle
at a distance from Aranda, the place to whid
the Cardinal had removed. Through their fug
geftions, every measure that he recommend'e
was rejeced; the utmost care was taken to
make him feel, and to point out to the whole
nation, that his power was on the decline; eve
in things purely trivial, such a choice was alway
made, as was deemed most disagreeable to him
Ximenes 'did not bear this treatment with hi
usual fortitude of spirit. Conscious of his own
integrity and merit,, he expedted a more gratefu
return from a Prince, to whom he delivered a
kingdom more flourishing than it had been in
any former age, together with authority more
extensive and better established, than the moil
illustrious of his ancestors had ever poffeffed,
He could not, therefore, on many occasions.,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and
complaints. He lamented the fate of his coun.
try, and foretold the calamities which it would
fuffer from the insolence, the rapaciousness, and

gnorance of strangers. While his mind was BooK L
igitate'd by these passions, he received a letter 1517.
From the King , in which, after a few" cold and
Formal expressions of regard, he was allowed to
retire to his diocese; that after a life of such
continued labour, he might end hiS days in
tranfquillity. This message proved fatal to His daeath,
Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is probable,
would not survive disgrace; perhaps his gene-
tous heart could not bear the profpedt of the
misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Which-
soever of these opinions we embrace, certain it
is that he expired a 'few hours after reading the Nov. ?.
letter 9". The variety, the grandeur, and the
success of his schemes, during a regency'of only
twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether his
fagacityin council, his prudence in conduct, or
his boldness in execution, deserve the greatest
praise. His reputation is still high in Spain,
not only for wisdom, but for fandtity; arid he
is the only prime minister mentioned in history,
whom his contemporaries reverenced as a faint

0,

and to whom the people under his government
ascribed the power of working miracles.

SooN after the death of Ximenes, Charles I~ I.

made his publick entry, with great pomp, into cortes held

at Vallado-
lid.

" Marfollier , Vie de Ximen. p. 447. Gonietius, lib, vii,.
p. zo6 , &c. Baudier, Hist. de Ximen. p. zo8.

5' liechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. p. 746.

BooK I. Valladolid, whither hehad summoned the Gorte

as 8. of Castile, Though he assumed on all occasion

the name* of King, that title had never bee
acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniard

, considering Joanna as poffeffed of the sole righ

to the crown, and no example of a fon's havin
enjoyed the title of King during the life of i
parents occurring in their history, the Cortf
discovered all that scrupulous refped for ancieu
forms, and that aversion to innovation, whic
are conspicuous in popular assemblies. T1
presence, however, of their Prince , the addrefi
the artifices, and 'the threats of his ministers

Declare prevailed on them at last to proclaim him King
Charles in conjunndion with his mother, whose narn

they appointed to be placed before that of he
son in all publick ads, But, when they mad
this concession, they declared , that if, at an
future period Joanna should recover the exer
cife of reafoni, the whole royal authority Thoul
return into her hands. At the fame time, they
voted a free gift of fix hundred tho-usand ducats
to be paid in three years, a rum more confider
able than had eve& been granted to any fornm
monarch ".

Dircontent i NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of
of the Cafti- . .
lians, and the Cortes to the will of the King, the most
the causes

flit. st Miniana, Contin. lib. i, c. , P. Mart. Ep, 608.

Sandov. p. 1~2

violent symptoms of diffatisfaaion with his go- Boo IL
vernment began to break out in the kingdom. i$is.
Chievres had 'acquired over the mind of the
young monarch the ascendant not only of a
tutor, but of a parent. Charles seemed to have
no sentiments but those which his minister in.

red. s and scarcely uttered i word but what he
put into his mouth. He was conflantly fur-
founded by- Flemings; no person got access to
him without their permiflion; nor was any ad-
mitted to audience but in their presence. As
he spoke the Spanish language very imperfedly,
his answers were always extremely short, and
often delivered with hesitation. From all there
ircumftances, many of the Spaniards were led
o believe that he was a Prince of a flow and
narrow genius. Some pretended to discover a
rong resemblance between him and his mother,
and began to whisper that his capacity for go-
vernment would never be far superior to-hers;
and though they who had the best opportunity
of judging concerning his character, maintained,
that notwithstanding such unpromising appear-
ances, he poffeffed a large fund of knowledge,
as well as of sagacity 2"; yet all agreed in con.
demning his partiality towards his countrymen,
and his attachment to his favourites as unre~-
fonable and immoderate. Unfortunately son

.s Sandoval, p, 31. P. Mart. Ei, 4 s

3B0oK L Charles, these favourites were unworthy of hi

xjI8. confidence, To' amass wealth seems to hay

been their only aim; and as, they had reason t
fear, that either their mafter's good sense, o
the indignation of the Spaniards, might soo0
abridge their power, they hastened to improv
the present opportuhity, and their avarice wa
the more.rapacious, because they expeded thei
authority to be of no long duration. A
honours, offices, and benefices, were either ei
grossed by the Flemings, or publickly fold b
them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whon
Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had imprn
dently raised to be chancellor of Castile, vie
with each other in all the refinements of extoi
tion and venality. Not only the Spanish hilt
rians, who, from resentment, may be fufpedec
of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, a
Italian, who resided at that time in the coui
of Spain, and who was under no temptation t
deceive the persons to whom his letters ar
addressed ,, give a description which is almol
incredible, of the insatiable and shameless covet
oufnefs. of the Flemings. According to An
gleria's calculation, which he asserts to be ex.
tremely moderate, they remitted into the Lov
'Countries, in the space of ten months, no less
' a fum than a million and one hundred thousand

ducats. ,

ducats. .The nomination of William de Croy, BooK. I.
Chievres' nephew, a young man not of cano 15ss8.
nical age, to the Archbifhoprick of Toledo,
exasperated the Spaniards more than all these
exadions. They considered the elevation of a
fJranger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not 9only as an
injury, but as an insult to the whole nation;
both clergy and laity, the former from interest,
the latter from indignation, joined in exclaim.
ing against it 53.

CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with mhies

his administration, set out for Saragossa, the h°i tef
capital of Aragon, that he might be present inAragon.
the Cortes of that kingdom, On his way thither,
he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom

.

he sent into Germany on the pretence of ,visiting
their grandfather, MVIaximilian, in his old age.
To this prudent; precaution, Charles owed the
preservation of his Spanish dominions. During
the violent commotions which arose there soon
after this period, the Spaniards would infallibly
have offered the crown to a Prince, who was
the. darling of the whole nation ; nor did Ser-
dinand want ambition, or counsellors, that might
have prompted him to accept of the offer. ".

"' Sandoval, 28--xi. P. Mart. Ep. 60o8. 6ir. 61,

614. 622 ,623. 659. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. op. 8.

?" P. Martyr, Ep. 619. FeueraS, viii. 460.

VOL. II, F

Boor I. THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknow
s 18. -ledged Charles as King, nor would they allok

The Arago- the Cortes to be .assembled in his name, but ii
ntraable that of the Juftiza, to whom, during an inter.
than the -regnqm, this privilege belonged ". The oppofi
caftilians' tion Charles :had to firuggle with in the Cortel

of Aragoy , was more violent and obstinate tha
that which he had overcome in Castile; afte
long delays, however, and with much difficulty
he persuaded the members to confer on him th
title of King, in conjundion with his mothei
At the fame time he bound himself by. that so
lemn oath,; which the Aragonefe exadted of theii
King, never to violate any of their rights. 01
liberties, Whei a donative was demanded, thi
rpiembers were fill. more intradable ; mani
months elapsed before they would agree to gran
Charles two hundred thousand ducats, and thi
fum they A:ppropriated so ftridly foi' payin
debts of the crown, which had long been for.
gotten, that a very finmall part of it came into
the King's 'hands. What had happened* in Cat
tile, taught them caution, and determined thei
rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow-citi.
zens, how obsolete soever, than to furnish ftran-
gers the means of enriching themselves with the
spoils of their country '.

" P. Martyr, Ep. 60.5
3" P. Martyr, Ep. 615 -634.

DURING theie proceedings of the Cortes, am- BOOK L
baffadors arrived at Saragossa from Francis L 518.
'and the young King of Navarre, demanding the
feftitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
ofNoyon. But .neither Charles, nor the Cafti-
ian nobles whom he consulted ori this occafiori,
discovered any inclination to part with this ac-
quifition.. A conference held food after at
lVlontpelier, in order to' bring this matter to an
amicable iflue , iwas altogether fruitless; while
the French urged the injustice of the tifurpation,
the Spaniards were attentive only to its im-.
pottance ".

FRONM Aragoni, Charles proceeded to Cata- i119.
lonia, where he wasted as much time, encoun-
tered more, difficulties, and gained less money.
The Flemings were now become so odious in
every province of Spain by their exactions, that
the desire of mortifying them, and of difap-
pointing their avarice, augmented the jeiloufy
with which a free people usually conduit their
deliberations,

THE Caftilians, who had felt mft fetifibly Combitia-

the weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes aion ss le
carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer against the
to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves Flemish j"i"

nifters.

s7 P. Martyr, Ep. 605, 633; 640.

BOOK LI and which rendered them the obje~ s of fcor|
xI 9. among the reft of the Spaniards. Segovia

Toledo, Seville, and several other cities of the
frft rank, ehtered into a confederacy for the de
fence of their rights and privileges; and not
awithftanding the silence of the nobility, who, on~
this occasion , discovered neither the public fpi
rit, nor te resolution which -became their order,
the confederates laid before the King a full viey
of the tRate of the kingdom , and of the mal1
administration of his favourites. The prefer.
'ment of strangers, the exportation of the cur;
rent coin, the increase of taxes, were the griev-
ances of which they chiefly complained; and of
these -they demanded redress with that boldness
which is natural to a free people. There remon-
firances, presented at first at SaragofTa, and re-
newed afterwards at Barcelona, Charles treated
with great neglect. The confederacy, however,
of these cities at this juncture, was the begin.
ning of /that, famous union ainong :the com-
anons of Castile, which not long after threw
the kingdom into such violent convulsions as
ihook the throne, and almost overturned the
constitution s "

SOON .after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he

received the account of an event which inter-

~ P. Martyr, Ep. 63o, Ferreras, viii. 464.

efed him much rmore than the murmurs of the BOOK-I.
Caftilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Cata- 1 19.
lonia. This was the deith of the Emperor Deth of the
kaximilian; an occurrence of fminall importance E omlr.
an itself, for he was a Prince co'ntpicuous neither .anuary 12.
lor his virtues, nor his power, nor his abilities;
but rendered by its consequences more memo-
rable than any that had happened during feve-
ral ages. It broke that profound and unive.r:al
eace which then reigned in the Christian world;
it excited a rivalibip between two Princes, which
hrew all Europe into agitation, and kindled
vars more general, and of longer duration, than
ad hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition
f the .French King, Charles VIII. into Italy,
ad inspired the -uropean princes with new ideas
concernifig the iriportance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the Empire upon some of
the Italian states were numerous; its jurisdiction
over others was extensive; and though the for-
mer had been almost abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of slender abi-
lities and of little influence , it was obvious,
that, in the hands of an Emperor poffeffed of'
power or genius, they would be employed as
engines for stretching his dominion over the

F3

Boeir I.

maximinia
had endea.'
voured to fe-
cure the Im-?
perial crowrn
to his gSa.-
son. greater part of that country. Even Maxim

lian, feeble' and unsteady as his conduct alway
was, had availed himself of the 'infinite preter
fions of the Empire, and had reaped advar
tage from every war and every negociation i
Italy during, his reign. These considerations
added to the dignity of the station, confeffedi
the firj among Christian princes, and to th
rights inherent in the office, which, if exerte
with vigour, were far from being inconfiderabl
rendered the Imperial crown .more than ever a
pbjee of ambition,

NOT long before his death, NMaximilian ha

discovered great solicitude to preserve this di
nity in the Austrian family, and to procure th
King of Spain to be chosen his successor Bs
he himself having never been 'crowned by th
Pope, a ceremony deemed effentia! in that age
was considered only as Emperor elect. ThougI
historians did not attend to that diftindtion, ne
ther the Italian nor .German chancery beffowet
any other title upon him than that of King d!
the Romans; and no example occurring in hi!
tory of any perfon's being chosen a successor t
a King of the Romans, the Germnans, alway
tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to coi
ser upon Charles an offige for which their col

ftitution knew no name, obstinately refused to BOOK L
gratify Maximilian'in that point "s. I5i9.

BY his death, this difficulty was at once re- Charles ana

moved, and Charles openly aspired to that dig.Francis 1.

competitors

nity which his grandfather had attempted, with-for the eit-
out success, to secure for him. At the fame pire.
time, Francis I.. a powerful rival, entered the
lifts against him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illuftri-
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his preten-
fions with sanguine expedtations, and with no
unpromising profped of success. Charles con-Prretenfions
fidered the Imperial crown as belonging to him.o^"fhre
of right, from its long continuance in the Au-
ftrian line; he knew that none of the German
princes poffeffed power or influence enough to
appear as his antagonist; he flattered, himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives
of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a
dignity, which during so many ages had been
deemed peculiar to their own nation; and least
of all, that they would confer this honour uponr
Francis I. the fove'reign of a people whose genius,

'" Guicciardini, lib. 1x . p. I 5. Hist. G6ndr. d'Allemagne,

par P. Barre, tom. viii. part. i. p, I087. P. Heuter. Reri
Auf~r. lib,vii. c. x7. 179. lib. viii. c. 2. p. 183.

F4

tooK I. and laws, and rnanner., differed so widely from
z o, those of the Germans, that it was hardly possible

to establish any cordial union between them; he
trusted not a little to the effect of Maximilian's
negociations, which, though they did not attain
their end, had prepared the minds of the Ger.
mnans for his elevation to the Imperial throne;
but what he relied on as a .chief recommenda.
tion, was the fortunate situation of his heredi.
tary dominions in Germany, which served as a
natural barrier to the I'mpire againlt the en.
croachments of the Turkish power. The con.
quests. the abilities, and the ambition of Sultan
Selim II. had spread over Europe, at that time,
a general ,and well - founded alarm. By his vic-
tories over the MVlamalukes, and the extirpation
of that gallant body of men. he had not only
added Egypt and Syria to his empire,. but had
secured to it such a degree of internal tranquil.
litv, that he was ready to turn against Christen-
dom the whole force of his arms, which nothing
hitherto had been able to refif. The most es-
fedaual expedient for flopping the progress of
this torrent, seemed to be the election of an Eri.
peror, poffeffed of extensive territories in that
country, where its first impression would be felt,
and who, besides, could combat this formidable
enepny with all the forces of a powerful monatr.
chy, and with all the wealth furnished by the

mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low Countries. T'hefe were the arguments
by which Charles publickly supported his claim;
and to men of integrity and reflection, they ap-
peared to be not only plausible, but convincing.
He did not, however, trust the success of his
cause to there alone. Great sums of money were
remitted from Spain; all the refinements and
artifices of negociation were employed; and a
considerable body of troops kept on foot by the
states of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly taken
into his pay. II he venal were gained by pre-
fents; the objections of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; some feeble princes
,were threatened and over-awedf . 1300K I.

65I9:

ON the other hand, Francis supported his or Francis

claim with equal eagerness, and no less confi-
dence of its being well founded. His emissaries
contended that it was now high time to convince
the Princes of the house of Austria that the Impe-
rial crown was elective, and not hereditary; that
other persons might aspire to an honpur which
their arrogance had come to regard as the pro-
perty of their family; that it required a fove-
reign of mature judgment, and of approved abili-
ties, to hold the reins of government in a coun-

° Guic. lib. Ir. I59. Sleidan, Hist. of the Reformat, x4,

truivii Corp. Hist. German, ii. 97I, Not. zo,

BOOK I. try where ,such unknown opinions concerning

I9. " religion had been published, as had thrown the

minds of men into an uncommon agitation,
which threatened the most violent effeds, that
young prince, without experience, and who had
hitherto given no specimens of his genius for
command, was no equal match for Selim, a mo.
narch grown. old in the art of war, and in the
.course of viaory; whereas a King, who in his
early youth had triumphed over the valour
and discipline of the Swiss, till then reckoned
invincible, would be an antagonist not unworthy
the Conqueror of the East; that the fire and
impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the
discipline and itability of the German infantry,
would form an army so irresistible, that, instead
of waiting the approach of the Ottoman forces,
it might carry hostilities into the heart of their
dominions; that the eledion of Charles would
'be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution,
by which the person who holds the crown of
Naples, is excluded from aspiring to the Impe.
rial dignity; that his elevation to that honour
would soon kindle a war in Italy, on account of
his pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, the effeds
of which could not fail of reaching the Empire,
and might prove fatal to it ". But while his

or Guic. lib ;.I , 60o. Sleid. p. I6. Geor. Sabini. de ele&

-?ar.V. Hiftoria apud Scardii, Script. Rer. German, vol, ii. p, 4

ambassadors enlarged upon these and other* to- BOOK I.
picks of the fame kind, in all the courts of i519.
Germany, Francis, sensible of the prejudices en-
tertained against him as a foreigner, unacquaint-
ed with the German language or manners, en,
deavoured to overcome these, and to gain the
favour of the princes by immense gifts, and by
infinite promises. As the expeditious method
of transmitting money, and the decent mode of
conveying a bribe by bills of exchange was then
little known, the French ambassadors travelled
with a train of horses loaded with treasure, an
equipage not very honourable for that Prince,
.by whom they were employed, and infamous for
ho6se to whom they were sent. ".

THE other European princes could not re-viewsand

main indifferent fpedtators of a contest, the deci-ntereft of
sion of which so nearly affeded them. Their otherjates'~
common interest ought naturallyto have formed
a general combination, in order to disappoint
both competitors, and to prevent either of them
from obtaining such a pre-eminence in power
and dignity, as might prove dangerous to the
liberties of Europe. But the ideas with refped
to a proper distribution and balance of power
were so lately introduced into the system of Eu-
ropean policy, that they were not hitherto ob-

'2 MImoires du Marech, de Fleuranges, p. 296.

BooK I. jeds of fufficient attention. The pafions of

¶iz9°. some princes, the want of forefightc in others,

and the fear of giving offence to the candidates
hindered such a salutary union of the powers of
Europe, and rendered them either totally negli-
gent of the publick safety, or kept them from
exerting themselves with vigour in its behalf.

ofthe THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the
$wifs. elevation ,of either of the contending monarchs,

and though they wished to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whose
power was more moderate, seated on the Im-
perial throne, were prompted, however, by their
hatred of the French nation, to give an open pre-
ference to the pretensions of Charles, while they
used their utmost influence to frustrate those of

rancis .

OftheVee THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was
ietians, the interest of their Republick to have both the

rivals set aside; but their jealousy of the house
of Austria, whose ambition and neighbourhood
had been fatal to their grandeur, would not per-
mit them to ad up to their own ideas, and led
them hastily to give the fanaion of their appro-
bation to the claim of the French King.

" Sabinus, p. 6,

IT was equally the interet , and more in the BooK L.
power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent x1g9.
either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dig-°OHenrny
nity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted,
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the steady attention, the accurate
discernment, nor the dispassionate temper which
that delicate function required. On this occa-
sion it mortified his vanity so much, to fee him-
self excluded from that noble competition which
refleced such honour upon the two antagonists,
that he took the resolution of sending an am-
baffador into Germany, and of declaring himself
a candidate for the Imperial throne. The am-
baffador, though loaded with caresses by the
German princes and the Pope's nuncio, informed -
his matter, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry , imputing his disappointment to that
circumstance alone, and soothed with this often-
tatious display, of his own importance, seems tq
have taken no farther part in the matter , either
by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to
promote one of them,

LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his ofL~eo

political abilities, than for his love of the arts,

SdMemoires de Fleuranges, 314. Herbert. Hist of

Henry VIII.

BooiS I. twas the only prince of the age who observed th1i

I9 1n motions of the two contending monarchs with

a prudent attention, or who difcbvered a proper
folicitulide for the publick safety: The imperial
and Papal jurifdidtion interfered in so many
inffiances, the complaints of usurpation were so
lnumerous' on both sides, and the territories of
the church owed their security so little to their
own force, and so much to the weakness of the
powers around them, that nothing was so for
mnidable to the court of Rome as an Emperof
with extensive dominions, or' of entetprizing
genius. Leo trembled at the profped of be-
holding the Imperial crown placed o0i the head
of the King of Spain and of Naples, and the
rnafter of the new world; nor was he less afraid
6f feeing a King of France, who was duke of
Milan and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dig.
niity. He foretold that the eledti6n of either of
them would be fatal to the independence of the
holy fee, to the peace of Italy, and perhaps to
the liberties of Europe. But to oppose them
with any profped of success, required addrefk
and caution in proportion to the greatness of
their power, and their opportunities of taking
revenge. Leo %yas defedtive in neither. He
secretly exhorted the German princes to place
one of their own number on the Imperial throne,
which many of them were capable of filling

with honour. He put them irn mind of the BoOK I,
constitution by which the Kings of Naples were 1519g
for ever excluded from that dignity "'. He
warmly exhorted the French King -to persist in
his claim, riot from any desire that he should
gain his end; but as he foresaw that the Ger-
mans would be more disposed to favour the
King of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself,
when he discovered his own chance of success to
be desperate, would be stimulated by resent-
ment and the spirit of rivalfhip, to concur with
all his interest in raising some third person to
the head of the Empire; or, on the other hand,
if Francis should make unexpected progress, he
did not doubt but that Charles would be in-
duced by firnilar motives to adt the fame part;
and thus, by a prudent attention, the mutual
jealousy of the two rivals might be so dexterouflyf
managed, as to disappoint both. But this
scheme, the only one which a Prince in Leo's
situation could adopt, though concerted with
great wisdom, was executed with little difcre-
tion. The French ambassadors in Germany fed
their master with vain hopes; the Pope's nuncio,
being, gained "by them, altogether forgot the
inftrudions which he had received; and Francis
persevered so long and with such obstinacy, iin

6 Goldafti Conftitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673.

vol. i. 439. /

B1oK I. urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo'
1 xg9. measures abortive ".

The diet SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and
aferbles the views of the different princes, when the
une I 7th. T

diet was opened according to form, at Frankfort.
The- right of chufing an Emperor had long
been yefted in seven great Princes,. distinguished
by the name of Electors, the origin of whose
office, as well as the nature and extent of their
powers, have already been explained. These
wvere, at that time, Albert of Brandenburgh,
archbiihop of NMentz; Herman count de Wied,
archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffen.
klau, archbishop of Treves; Lewis, King of
Bohemia; Lewis, count Palatin of the Rhine;
Frederick, duke of Saxony; and Joachim I.

viewsofrte marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding

Elenors, the artful arguments produced by the ambaffa-

dors of the two Kings in favour of their refpec-
tive masters, and in spite of all their folicitations,
intrigues, and prefeuts, the Ele dors did not
forget that maxim on wvhich the liberty of the
German constitution was thought to be 'founded.
Among the members of the Gerinanick body,
which is a great republick composed of states
almost independent, the first principle of patri-
ptifin is to depress and limit the'power of the

" Guicciar.lib. 13. 6 .

Emperor;

Emperor;. and of this idea so natural under Boo0i L
such a form of government, a German politician 1519,
seldom loses fight. No prince of considerable
power, or extensive dominions, had for some
ages been raised to the Imperial throne. To
this prudent precaution many of the great fami-
lies in Germany owed the splendour and inde-
pendence which they had acquired during that
period. To eled either 'of the contending mo-
narchs, would have been a gross violation of
that salutary, maxim; would have given to the
Empire a master, instead of an head; and wouldc
have reduced themselves from the rank of equals¾
to the condition of fubjeAs;

F u L of these ideas, all the ele6ors turned offer the

their eyes towards Frederick, duke of Saxony, mpenria
a Prince of such eminent virtue and abilities, Frederick
as to be diftiriguilhed by the name of the -Sage, of saxony~
and with one voice they offered him the Im-
perial crown. He was not dazzled with that
object which monarchs so far superior to him
in power courted with such eagerness; and after
deliberating upon the matter a short time, he
rejeced it with a magnanimity and difintereftedivhorejeis
ness, no less singular than admirable. Nothing, it,
he observed, could be more impolitick, than an
obstinate adherence .to a maxim which, though
found and just in many cafes, was not applicable

VoL. IL G

BdoOK .

S1519. to all. In times of tranquillity, Laid he, vwe

with for an Emperor who has not power to
invade our liberties; times of danger demand
one who is able to secure our safety. The
Turkiflh armies, led by a gallant and vitorious
monarch, are now assembling. They are ready:
to pour in upon Germany with a violence wn
known in former ages. New conjundures call
for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre must
be committed to some hand more powerful than
mine, or that of any other German prince. We
pof{efs neither dominions, nor revenues, no0
authority Which =enable us to encounter such a
formidable enemy. Recourse must be had in
this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each
of them can bring 'into the field forces fufficient
for our defence. But as the King of Spain is
of German extradion; as he is a member and
priiTce of the- empire by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather; as his
dominions stretch along that frontier which lies
mort exposed to the enemy; his claim is pre.
ferable, in my opinion, to that of a stranger to
our language, to our blood, and to our country;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on 'him
the Imperial 'crown.

THIs opinion, dicated by such uncommon

generosity, and supported by arguments so plau-

fible, made a deep impression on the Elecors. BooK I.
The King of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of

I x9.

the important service which Frederick had done and refuses
their master, sent him a considerable fum ofany prefen"
money, as the first token of that Prince's grati- Charlests
tude. But he who had greatness of mind to ambafi"a
refuse a crown, difdained to receive a bribe;
and. upon their entreating that, at least, he would
permit them to distribute part of that fum
among his courtiers, he replied: That he could
not prevent them from accepting what ihould
be offered, but whoever took a single florin
ihould be dismissed next morning from his
service 67

67 P. Daniel,-an hiflorian of considerable name, seems to .

call in question the truth of this account of Frederick's be-
haviour inwrefufing the Imperial crown, because it is not men-
tioned by Georgius Sabinus in his History of the election
and coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 6 3. But no great
stress ought to be laid on an omission in a superficial author,
whose treatise, though dignified with the name of History,
contains only such an account of the ceremonial of Charles's
eledti , as is ,usually published in Germany on like occa-
fions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. 2. p. I. The testimony
of Erasmus, lib. 13. epift. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 8. are
express. 'Seckendorf in his Commentarius Hiftoricus & A-
pologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. 21z . has examined this fact
with his usual industry, and has established its truth by the
most undoubted evidence. To these testimonies which he
has collected, I may add the decisive one of cardinal Caje-
tan, the Pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July th,
I~s9. Epiftres aux Princes, &c. recueillies par Rufcelli, tra-
duites par Belforeft. Par. I572. p. 60.

BOOK I. NO prince in Germany could now aspire th

1 19. dignity, which Frederick had declined for rea
further de- sons applicable to them all. It remained t
thele.ra n make a choice between the two great compe
tor.. titors. But besides the prejudice in Charles's

favour arising from his birth, as well as thc
situ-ation of his German dominions, he owed
not a .little to the abilities of the .cardinal de
Gurk-, and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bifhp
-of Liege, two of his ambassadors, wdho had con
-duOed their negociations with more prudence
an.d address than those entruffed by the Frend
.King. The former, who had long been the
xninifter and favourite of Maximilian, was wel
acquainted with the art of managing the Ger
-nans; and the latter having been disappointed
xof a cardinal's hat by Francis, employed all the
inalicious ingenuity with which:, the desire d
revenge inspires an ambitious mind,.in thwartini
the measures of that. monarch. The Spanif
party among the Eletors daily gained groundi
and even the Pope's nuncio, being convinced that
it was vain to make any farther opposition, 4ndea.
voured to acquire some merit with the future
Emperor, by offering voluntarily, in the narnm
of his master, a dispensation to hold the Imperial
crown in conjundion with that of Naples '.

" Freheri Rer. Gerinan. Scriptores , vOl. iii. 72. cur,

Struvii, Argent. 717,. Gianone Hist. of Naples, 2, 498.

ON the twenty eighth of June, five months BOOK .
and tein days after the death of Maximilian, this r 19.
important contest, which had held all Europe They chufe
in 'fufpence, was decided. Six of the Eledors Charles Em-
had already declared for the King of Spain; and
the archbifhfop of Treves, the only firm adhe-
rent to the French interest, having at last joined
his brethren', Charles was by the unanimous
voice of ,the Electoral college raised to the Im-
perial throne ".

B u T though the eledors contented, from
various motives, to promote Charles to that
high station, they discovered at the fame time
great jealousy of his extraordinary power, and
endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, to pro-They are
vide against his encroaching on the privileges~apprehery
of the Germanick body. It had long been the power, ana
custom to demand of every new Emperor a take pre-

. . autions

confirmation of these privileges, and to require ain it.
a promise that he would never violate them in
any instance. While princes, who were formi-
dable neither from extent of territory, nor of-
genius, poffeffed the Imperial throne, a general
and verbal engagement to this purpose was
deemed fufficient security. But under an Em-
peror so powerful as Charles, other precautions

" Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hist. fui Temporis. Edit. Bulklcy,;

lb. i. c. 9,.

Boo I. seemed necessary. A Capitulation or claim
1519. right was formed, in which the privileges and

immunities of the Eleaors, of the princes'of the
Empire, of the cities, and of every other membej
of the Germanick body are enumerated. This
capitulation was immediately signed by Charles'
ambaifadors in the name of their master, and
he himself at his coronation confirmedit in th
rnoft solemn manner. Since that period, th
Eledors have continued to prescribe the famn
conditions to all his successors; and the Capi
tulation or mutual contract between the Em
peror and his fubjecs, is considered in Germany
as a strong barrier against the progress of th
Imperial power, and as the great charter of thei
liberties to which they often appeal 70.

The elec. THE important intelligence .of his eletion
tion notified was conveyed in nine days from'Frankfort to
to Charles. Barcelona, where Charles was still detained b

the obstinacy of the' Catalonian Cortes, whicl
had not hitherto brought to an issue any of thr
affairs which came before it, He received the
account with the joy natural to a young arid
aspiring mind, on an accellion of power and
dignity which raised him so far above the other

7° Pfeffel Abrige de 1'Hift. du Droit Publique d'Alle

magne, '59o. Limnnei Capitulat. Imper. Epiftres des Princes
par Rufcelli, p, 6o.

princes of Europe. Then it was that those vafa BOOK I.
profpeds which allured him during his whole 1x 9
administration began to open, and from this
-era we may date the formation, and are able
to trace the gradual progress of a grand fyfterm
of enterprizing ambition, which renders the
history of his reign so worthy of attention.

A TRIVIA L circumstance first discovered the s effrea

effeAs of this great elevation upon the mind p0 him.
of Charles. In all the publick writs which he
issued as King of Spain, he assumed the title of
M., e/kI and required it from his fubjedts as a
mark of their refped. Before that time, all the
monarchs of Europe were satisfied with the ap-
pellation of Highness, or Grace; but the vanity
of other courts soon- led them to imitate the ex-
ample of the Spanish. The epithet of Majesty
is no longer a mark of pre-eminence. The most
inconsiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it, .and
the arrogance of the greater potentates has in-
vented no higher denomination "'.

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the The spa.

promotion of their King Eo the Imperial throne' 'n ias.

with the fame fatisfadion which he himself felt. with this:
To be deprived of the presence of their fove- eveIt

S1Miniiana, Contin. Mar. p.

1 .. Ferreras, vii.. 475.

.Inmoires Hiift. de 1a Houffaie , tom. i. p.

S ', &c.
G4

BoOx' I. reign, and to be fubjeded to the government

51x9. of a viceroy and his council, a species of admit

niftration often oppreflive, and always disagree,
able, were the immediate and necessary confe.
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood
of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein
the nation had no concern; to behold its trea.
fures wasted in supporting the splendour of a
foreign title; to be plunged in the chaos of
Italian and German politics, were effects of this
event almost as unavoidable. From all these
considerations, they concluded, that nothing
could have happened more pernicious~o the
Spanish nation; and the fortitude and publick
spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of
Castile, prohibited Alphonzo the Wife from
leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the
Imperial crown, were often mentioned with the
highest praise, and pronounced to 'be extremely
Worthy of imitation at this jundcure 7.

BU T Charles, without regarding the senti-

ments or murmurs of his Spanish fubjeds,
accepted of the Imperial dignity which the
count Palatine, at the head of a solemn embassy,

iaiember. offered him in the name of the Eledors; and

declared his intention of setting out soon for
Germany, in order to take poffeffion of it.

' Sandoval, i. p. 3 2. iMiniana, Contin p.

. 4,

This was the more necessary, because, according BboOK T,
to the forms of the German constitution, he Ir.
could not, before the ceremony of a publick
coronation, exercise any ad of jurifdilion or,
authority 7.

THEIR certain'knowledge of this resolution Their dif.

augmented so much the disgust of the Spaniards, content i1i
that a sullen and refractory spirit prevailed ceases,
among persons of all ranks. The Pope having
granted the King the tenths of all ecclesiastical
benefices in Castile to assist him in carrying on
war with greater vigour against the Turks, a
convocation of the clergy unanimously refused
to levy that fum, upon pretence that it ought
never to be exaded but at thole times when
Christendom was adually invaded by the Infi-
dels; and though Leo, in order to support his
authority, laid the kingdom under an interdit,
so little regard was paid to a censure which was
universally deemed unjust, that Charles himself
applied to have it taken off. Thus the Spanish
clergy, betides their merit in opposing the ufur-
pations of the Pope, and disregarding the influ-
ence of the crown, gained the exemption, which
they had claimed ".

" Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. lo08 . 7' P. Martyr. Ep,

462. Ferreras, viii. 473.

IOOK .1. THE commotions which arose in the kingdom
x g19. of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon,
An infur. were more formidable, and produced more dan
reaion in gerous and lasting effets. A seditious monk

having by his sermons excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to
punish certain criminals in a tumultuary man.
ner, the people, pleased with this exercise of
power, and with such a discovery of their own
importance, not only refused to lay down thej
arms, but formed themselves into troops and
companies that they might be regularly trained
to martial exercises. To obtain some security
against the oppression of the grandees was the
motive of this alfociation, and proved a powerful
bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privi-
leges and independence Were more complete in
Valencia than in any other of the Spanish king.
doms, the nobles, being scarcely accountable for
their condutc to any superior, treated the people
not only as vassals but as slaves. They were
alarmed, however, at the progress of this unex-
pedted infurredion, as it might encourage the
people to attempt Thaking off the yoke alto-
gether; but as they could not repress them
without taking arms, it became necessary to

x;2o. have recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his
Its progress. permission to attack them. At the fame time

the people made choice of 'deputies to represent BooI f.
their grievances, and to implore the protection 1 zo.
of their sovereign. Happily for the lattei, they
arrived' at court when Charles was exasperated
to an high degree against the nobility. As he
was eager to visit Germany, where his presence
became every day more necessary, and as his
FJlemilh courtiers were still more impatient to
return into their native country, that they might
carry thither the 1oils which they had amassed
in Castile, it was impossible for him to hold the
Cortes ofl Valencia in person. He had for that
reason empowered the cardinal Adrian to repre-
sent him in that Assembly, and in his name to
receive their o~h of allegiance, to confirm their
privileges with the usual folemnities, and to
demand of them .a free gift. But the Valencian
nobles, who considered this measure as an indig-
nity to their country, which was no less enti-
tled, than his other kingdoms, to the honour
of their fovereign's presence, declared that by
the fundamental laws of the 'conftitution they
could neither acknowledge as King a person who
was absent, nor grant him any subsidy, and
to this declaration they adhered with an haughty
and inflexible 'obftinacy. Charles, piqued by,
their behaviour, decided in favour of the people,
and rashly authorized them to continue in arms.
Their deputies returned in triumph, and wero

L· ooir I-]. received by their fellow-citizens as the deliverers

of their country. The insolence· of the mul-
titude& increasing. with their success, they ex-
pelled all the nobles out of the city, committed
the- government to magistrates of their own
eletion, and entered into an association diftin-
guilhed by the name of Hermandad or Brother.
hood, which proved the .source not only of the
•wildest disorders, but of the most fatal calamiL
ties in that kingdom 7. *

.he Coates MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was
summoned agitated with no less violence. No sooner was
oealiaet in te Emperor's intention to leave Spain made

known, than several cities of the first rank re-
solved to remonstrate against it, an.d to crave
redress once more of those grievances which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully
avoided admitting their deputies to audience;
and as he saw from this circumstance, how diffi-
cult it would be at this jundure to restrain the
mutinous spirit of the greater cities, he fum-
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Com-
poflella, a town in Galicia. His only reason for
calling that assembly, was the hope of obtaining
another donative; for as his treasury had been
exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches
of his minilfers increased, he could not, without.

P P. Martyr, Ep. 6 1. Ferreras, viii. 476. 48~.

some additional aid, appear in Germany with BooR I;
splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To xso.
appoint a meeting of the, Cortes in so remote a
province, anid to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a most dahgerous tendency;
and among people not only jealous of theirlibexr-
ties, but accuffomed to supply the wants of
their sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited
an universal alarm. The magifftrates of Toledo
remonfirated against both thefre measures in a
very high tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid,
who expeded that the Cortes ffiould have been
held in that city, were so enraged that they took
arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles
with his foreign counsellors had not fortunately
made their escape during a violent tempest, they
would have massacred all the Flemings, and
have prevented him from continuing his journey
towards Compoftella.

EVERY City through which they passed, peti-The pro-

tiored against holding a Cortes. in Galicia, a ceedings o

that affemut

point with regard to which Charles was inflex-bly.
ible. But though the utmost influence had been
exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a
choice of representatives favourable to their de-
signs, such ·w1as the temper of the nation, that,
at the opening .of the alfembly, there appeared April .

BOOK I. among many of the members unusual fymptonis

of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppo&
fition to all the measures of the court. No
representatives were sent by Toledo; for the lot.
according to which, by ancient custom, the
eledtion was determined in that. city, hav~ig
fallen upon two persons, devoted to the Flemifif
ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant
them a commission in the ufiual form, and in
their Rfead made choice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compoftella, and
to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes

The airaraf-affembled there. The representatives of Sala.
feaion of manca refused to take the usual oath of fidelity,
the Cafti-
lians in- unless Charles consented to change the place
creases. of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cor,

dova, and several other places, declared the de.
mand of another donative to be unprecedented,
unconstitutional, and unnecessary. All the arts,
however, which influence popular assemblies,
bribes, promises, threats, and even force, were
employed in order to gain members. The no-
bles, soothed by the refpedful assiduity with
which Chiev.res and the other Flemings payed
court to them, or instigated by a mean 'jealoufy
of that spirit of independence which they saw
.rising among the commons, openly favoured
the pretensions of the court, or -at the utmost
did not oppose them; and at last, in contempt

hot only of the sentiments of the nation, but BOOK 1,
of the ancient forms of the constitution, a ma- r

so

iority voted to grant the donative for which the
Emperor had applied '. Together with this
grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a reprefen-
tation of those grievances whereof his people
craved redress; ^but he, having obtained from
them. all ,that he could expect, paid no attention
to: this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer
dangerous to disregard 77.

As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he Charles ap-
disclosed his intention with regard to the regencypoints re-
of Castile during his absence, which he had his absence,
hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal
Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ara-
gon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza;
that-of Valencia on Don Diego de Mendoza
Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter
was universally acceptable; but the advance-
ment of Adrian, though the only Fleming who
had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Caftilians with new hatred
against foreigners; and even the nobles, who
had so tamely fuffered other inroads upon the
constitution, felt the indignity offered to theiri
own order by his promotion, and remonstrated

76 P. Martyr, Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c,
7 Sandoval, 84,

Bobii I. againfb it- as illegal. But Charles's desire (

3 20. visiting Germany, as well as the impatience (

his ministers to leave Spain, were now -To muc
increased, that without regarding the murmui
6f the Caftiliaris, or even taking time to provid
any remedy against an infurredion in Toledo
which at that time threatened, ard afterward

and embatks produced toft formidable effedts he failed fron
for the LowCorogna on the twenty-fecond of May; and b
Countries. setting out so abruptly in quest of a new crown

he endangered a more important one of whicd
he was already in poffeffion 7"

' P. Martyr, Ep. 670. Sandov. 86

THE

HIST OR Y

OFR THIE

. ' .OF T HE *

sirs of Gerany , but rendered hs pre fence in Charles's
th'at country necefTary. The eledors grew im- precence i
patient of so long an interregnum; his heredi-nGermany
tary dominions were disturbed by intestine com-
motions; and the new opinions concerning re·
ligion .made such rapid progress as required the
most serious consideration? But above all, the
motions of the French King drew his attention,
and convinced him that it was necetowary to take
meaiures for his own defence, red ith n es

in cfee

VoL. IL

• ;

VoL. IL H

BooK II. WVHE1N Charles and Francis- entered the lift!
ix 5o. as candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con.

duded -their iivalthip with many -profeflions o

hr{e and regard for ea~lhiother , arid with repeated decla,
progress of . .... . . ..
therivalshiprations, that they wiould not fuffer any tindture
between of enmity to mingle :itself with this honourable
Charles and

... .

Francis i. emulation, "WTe both court the fame miftrefs,"

said Francis., with his usual vivacity , "eac
ought to urge his suit with:' all.the address o(
which he is master; the most fortunate' will pre,
vail, and the other must reft contented '." But
though two young and high - spirited Princes,
and each of them animated with the hope
of success , might be capable of forming such
a generous resolution , it was soon found that
they promised upon a moderation too refined
and disinterested for human nature. The pre.
ference given to Charles in the fight of all Eu:
rope, mortified Francis to the highest degree,
and inspired him wvith all the pafiions natural to
disappointed ambition. To this was owing the
personal jealousy and rivalfhip which subsisted
between the two monarchs during their whole
reign ; and the rancour of these, augmented by
a real opposition of interest , which gave rife to
many unavoidable causes or discord , involved
them in almost perpetual hostilities. Charles
had paid no regard to the principal article in

Guic. lib. i3. p. I99

the treaty of Noyon, by refuting oftener than Booi II
once to do justice to John d'Albert, the exclud- xszo.
ed monarch of iNavarre, whom Francis was
lound in honour , and prompted by interest, to
restore to'his throne. The French King had pre-
tensions to the crown of Naples, of which Ser-
dinand had deprived his predecessor by a nimor
injuftifiable breach of faith. The Emperor
might reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of
the Empire, ,which Francis had seized, and still
kept in poffefion, without having received in-
veftiture. Charles considered the dutchy of Bur-
gundy as the patrimonial domain of his ancestors
wvrefted from' them by. the unjust policy of Louis
XI. and observed with the greatest jealousy the
ftridt conneCtions which Francis had formed with
the duke of Gueldres , the hereditary enemy of
his family.

WHEN the sources gs discord were so many Their de i
and various, peace could be of no long con- braons o
tinuance , even between princes the most ex-the com-
empt from ambition or emulation. But as thel iencement
shock between two fuich mighty antagonists
could not fail of being extremely violent, they
both discovered no small solicitude about its
consequences, and took time not only to colb
led1 and to ponder their own strength, and to
compare it with that of their adversary , but ts

HI~ ^a

iBooi. II. secure the friendship or aifl;Rance of the other

30zo. European powers.

-.I

They nego- THE Pope had equal reafln to dread the two

,atepwli rivals, and saw that he who prevailed , would

become absolute snafter in Italy. ,If it had been
in his power to engage them in hostilities, with.
out rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, no-
thing would have .been more agreeable to him
than to fee them waste each other's strength in
endless guarrels. But this was impoflible. Leo
foresaw, that, on the first rupture between the
two monarchs', the armies of France and Spain
would take the field in the Milanese; andv while
the scene of their operations was so near, and
the fubjed for which they contended so interest.
ing to him, he could not long remain neuter.
He was obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan
of conduct to his political situation. He courted
and soothed the Emperor and King of France
with equal industry and address. Though
warmly solicited by each of them to espouse his
cause , he assumed all the appearances of entire
impartiality , and attempted to conceal his real
sentiments under that profound dissimulation
which seems to have been affeded by most of
the Italian politicians in that age.

with the THE views and interest of the .Venetians were
venetiais. not different from those of the Pope; nor were

they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom-
ing the feat of war, and their own republick
fropl being involved in the-quarrel. But through
all Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high
pretensions to a perfed neutrality, it was visible
that he leaned towards the Emperor, from whom
he ha-both more to fear and more to hope than
from Francis, and it was equally manifest , that
if it became necessary to take a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature,
declare for the King of France. No confider-
able assistance, however, was to. be expeaed
from the Italian states, who were jealous to an
extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and
careful to preserve the balance between them,
nnlefs when they were seduced to violate this
favourite maxim of their policy, by the certain
profped of some great advantage to themselves. Boor. II.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and wish He.ri

of Francis, was employed in order to gain the'y vnI.
King of England, from whom each of them ex.
peded assistance more effecual , and afforded
with less political caution. - Henry VIII. had
ascended the throne of that kingdom in the year
one thousand five hundred and nine, ,with such
circumffances of advantage, as promised a reign The great
of diftinguilhed felicity and splendour. The 'mo
unioun in his perfoi, of the two contending titles of narch.

H

.OOK II. York and Lancaster; the alacrity and emulatiol

i.zo, wiih which both fadions obeyed his command!

'not only enabled him to exert a degree of vigous
and authority in his domestic government whicd
none of his predecessors could have safely affurn
ed; but permitted him to take a share in the
affairs of the continent, from which the atten
tion of the English had long been diverted by
their unhappy divisions. The immense treafurei
which his father had amassed, rendered him th(
inoft wealthy Prince in Europe, The peace
which had subsisted under the cautious admini.
ftration of that monarch, was offufficient length
to recruit the nation after the desolation of the
civil wars, but not so long as to enervate its fpi.
rit; and the English, ashamed of having render,
ed their own country so long a scene of discord
and bloddfhed, were eager to display their va.
lour in fbome foreign war, and to revive the me:
mory of the vidories gained by their ancestors,

Ws chara c-Henry's own temper perfedly suited the state '\f
~"

' his kingdom, and the disposition of his fubjeds.

Ambitious, adive, enterprizing and accdmplifh-
ed in all the martial exercises which in that age
formed a chief part in the ,education of persons
of noble birth, and inspired them with an early
love of war , he longed to engage in adtion,
and to signalize the beginning of his reign by
faome remarkable exploit. Ap opportunity fooi

presented itself ; and the viaory at Guinegate,.
together with the fuccefsful sieges of Terouienne
and Tournay , though of little utility to England,
refleaed great lustre on its monarch, and con-
firmed the idea which foreign princes entertained
of his power and importance. So many con-
curring causes, added to the happy situation of
his own dominions, which secured them from'fo.
reign invasion ; and to the fortunate circum-
stance of his being in poffeffion of Calais, which
served not only as a key t6 France, but opened
an easy passage into the Netherlands, rendered
the King of England the natural. guardian of the
liberties ofEurope, and the arbiter between the-
Emperor and French monarch. Henry him-
self was sensible of this fiigular advantage, and
convinced, that, in order to preserve the balance
even, it was his office to prevent either of the
rivals from acquiring such superiority of power
as might be fatal to the other, or formidable tot
the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute
of the penetration, and still more of the temper;
which such a- delicate fundion required. Influ-
enced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment, by
affetion, he was incapable of forming any regu-
lar and extensive system of policy, or of adhering
to it with steadiness. His meafi.res seldom re-
fulted from attention to the general welfare, or
from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but

H 4, ]BooidL T

I5ZQo,

OOK

, II. were dictated by passions which rendered hiur

i s.- blind to both , and prevented his gaining that

afeendant in the affairs of Europe , or from
reaping such advantages to himself, as a Prince.
of .greater art, though with inferior talents,
might have easily secured.,

And of his ALL the impolitick steps in Henry's adminiftra:,
winifter tion must not, however , be imputed to de,
cardinal

-

woijrey. feds in his own character ; many of them were

owing to the violent 'paffons and insatiable am-
bition of his prime minister and favourite, cardi.
nal Wolsey. This man, from one of the lowefi
ranks in life, had risen to an height of power
and dignity, to which no English fubjed ever
arrived; and governed the haughty , prefump,
tuous, and untradable spirit of Henry. with
absolute authority. Great talents, and of very
different kinds,. fitted him for the two opposite,
flations of minister, and of favourite. His pro-
found judgment , his unwearied industry., his
thorough acquaintance with the fRate of the
kingdom, his extensive knowledge of the views
and interests of foreign courts, qualified him for
that uncontrouled direcion of affairs with which
he was intrufted. The elegance of his manners,
the gaiety of his conversation, his insinuating
address , his love of magnificence, and his pro-
ficiency in those parts of literature of which

Heary was fond, gained him the affedtion. and Boor IL
confidence of the young monarch. Wolsey was 15Z·
fa' ·from employing this vast and almost royal
power, to promote either the true interest of the
nation, or the real grandeur of his master. Ra-
pacious at the fame time, and profuse, he was
insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundless am-
bition, he aspired after new honours with an
eagerness unabated by his former success; and
being rendered presumptuous by his uncommon
,elevation, as well as by the ascendant which he
had gained over a Prince, who scarcely brooked
advice from any other person, he discovered in
his whole demeanour the most overbearing
haughtiness and pride. To these passions he him-
self sacrificed every consideration; and whoever
endeavoured to obtain his favour, or that of
his master, found it necessary to sooth and to
gratify them.

As all the states of Europe fought Henry's The cout

friendship at that time, all courted his minister pai t6
with incredible attention and obfequroufnefs, and FWocyy
strove by presents, by promises, or by flattery,
to work upon his avarice, his ambition , or his
pride \. Francis had, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, employed Bonnivet,

" Fidde's Life of \Nolfey , 166. Rymer's Feedera, i.

718. ,

And:; , CHARLES observed the progress of this union
chares. with the utmost jealousy and concern. His near

affinity to the King of England, gave him some
title to his friendship; and soon after his accef-
sion to the throne of Castile, he had attempted
to ingratiate himself with Wolsey, by fettling
on him a pension of three thousand livres. His

a Herbert's Hist. of Henry VIII.. 3o.. Rymcer, xiii. 624.

and artful courtiers, to gain the haughty prelate,
He himself bestowed on him every mark of re.
sped and confidence. He consulted him with
regard to his most important affairs, and re.
ceived his responses with implicit deference. By
these arts, together with the grant of a large
pension, Francis secured the Cardinal, who'per.
fuaded his master to surrender Tournay to
France, to conclude a treaty of marriage be.
tween his daughter the Princess Mary and thi
Dauphin, and to cbnfent to a personal interview
-with the French King . From that time, the
rnoft familiar intercourse subsisted between the
two courts; Francis, sensible of the great value
of Wolfey's friendship, laboured to secure the
continuance of it by every possible expression of
regard, beftowing on him ini all his letters the
honourable appellations of Father, Tutor, and
Governor.

dlief solicitude at present was to prevent the Blo IR .
intended interview with Francis, the effets of I5sao
which upon two young Princes, whose hearts
were no less susceptible of friendship than their
manners were capable of inspiring it, he extremely
dreaded. But after .many delays, occasioned by
difficuClties about the ceremonial, and by the anxi-
ous precautions of both courts for the safety of
their .refpedive sovereigns, the- time and place
of meeting were at last fixed. Messengers had
been sent to different courts, inviting all comers,
who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt
and tournament, against the two monarchs and
their knights. Both Francis and Henry loved the
splendour of these fpedacles too well, and were
too much delighted with the graceful figure
which they made on such occasions, to forego
the pleasure or glory which they expeded from
such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the Cardinal less fond of displaying his magnifi-
cence in the presence of two courts, and of dif.
covering to the two nations the extent of his
influence over both their monarchs. Charles,
finding it impossible to prevent the interview,
endeavoured to disappoint its effeds, and .to
pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch,
and his minister, by an ad of complaisance fill
more flattering and more uncommon. Having
failed fromi Corunna, as has already been related,

BooK:II. he steered his course diredly towards England,

a.zo," and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his

Charles own safety, landed at Dover. This unexpeted
is Eng visit surprised the nation. -Wolsey, however
Maywh. was well acquainted with the Emperor's

intenn

tion. A negociation, unknown to the historians
of that age, had been carried on between him
and the court of Spain; this visit had been con.
cerfed; and Charles granted the Cardinal, whom
he calls his most dear friend , an additional pen.
sion of seven thousand ducats *. Henry, who
was then at Canterbury, in his way to France,
immediately dispatched Wolsey to Dover, in
order to welcome the Emperor ; and being
highly pleased with an event so soothing to his
vaniity, hastened to receive, with suitable refped,
a guest who had placed in him such unbounded

nfinnuates confidence. Charles, to whom time was pre.
Iaour ~ t"ocious, staid only fdur days in England: But
vrith the during that short space, he had the address not
hng eand only to give Henry favourable imprefifons of his

charader and intentions, but to detach Wolsey
entirely from 'the interest of the French King.
All the grandeur, wealth, and power which the
Cardinal poffeffed, did not satisfy his ambitious
mind, while there was one frep higher to which
an- ecclefiaftick could ascend. The papal dignity
had for some time been the objec? of his wishes,
.and. Francis, as the most effedual method of

9 RSrmer, siii, ~i~4·

securing his friendship, had promised to favour
his pretensions, on the first vacancy, with all
hiis interefk. But as the Emperor's influence in
the college of cardinals was greatly superior to
the French King's, Wolsey grasped eagerly at
an offer which that artful Prince had made him
of exerting it vigorously in his behalf; and al-
lured by this profped, which under the pontifi-
cate of Leo, still in the prime of his life, was a
very distant one, he entered with warmth into
all the Emperor's ichemes. No treaty, however,
was -concluded at that .time between the two
monarchs; but Henry, in return for the honour
which Charles had done him, promised to
visit him in some place tof the Low Countries,
immediately after taking leave of the French
King. Eooi# fiI

I g~o

His interview with that Priince was in anju, ne h

open plain between Guifnes and Ardres, wherenlterview
the two Kings and their attendants displayed I,e, ann
their magnificence with such emulation ,. and Francis.
profuse expence, as procured it the name of the
Field of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry,
parties of gallantry, together with such exercises
and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly
or elegant, rather than serious business, occupied
both courts during eightee. days that they con>

^oo0Q II. tinned together '. Whatever impression the er
Bszo. gaging manners of Francis, or' the liberal and

unfufpicious confidence with which he tfeated
Henry, made .on the mind of that monarch,
was soon effaced by Wolfey's artifices, or by
an interview he had' with the Emperor at Gra7

juty rI. Telines; which was conducted by Charles with

less pomp than that near Guifnes, but with great
ter attention to his political interest.

lenrysV' THIS assiduity with which the two greateP|
ieas of his monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap,
own im- Henry
yortance.

5 The French and English historians describe the pomp

of this interview, and the various fpetacles, with great
.minuteness. One circumfiance mentioned by the marechal
de Fleuranges, who was pre(ent, and which appears fingu
lar in the present age, is commonly omitted. " After the
tournament, " says he, " the Frenich and English wreftlers
made their appearance, and wrestled in presence of the
Kings, and the ladies; and as there were many flout wreti
lers there, it afforded excellent pastime; but as the King
of France had neglefted to bring any wreftlers out of Bre-
tagne, the English gained the prize. - After this, the
Kings of France and England retired to a tent, where they
drank together, and the King of England seizing the King
of France by the collar, said, " My brothier, 1 mufif -refll
tiPith you, " and endeavoured once or twice to trip up .his
heels; but the King of France, who is a dexterous wrestler,
twisted him round, and threw him .on the' earth with pro-
digious violence. The King of England wanted'to reniew
the combat, but was prevented. " YNImoires de Fleuranges,
IX°. Paris, 1753. p. 329,

peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he
held the balance in his hands, and convinced
him of the justness of the motto which he had
chosen, cc That whoever he favoured would
prevail. " In this opinion he was confirmed by
an offer which Charles made of submitting any
difference that might arise between him and
Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing could
have the appearance of greater candour and
moderation, than the choice of a judge who was
reckoned the common friend of both. But as the
Emperor had now attached Wolsey entirely to
his interest, no proposal could be more insidious,
nor, as appeared by the sequel, more fatal to the
French King 6. lBoore ~T~

I j Z0i-

CHARLES , notwithstanding his partial fond-Coronation

ness for the Netherlands, the place of his nati-°bo"hEm-

i peror.

vity, made no long stay there; and after re-
ceiving the homage and congratulations of his
countrymen , hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the
place appointed by the golden bull for the coro-
nation of the Emperor. There, in presence of Oaober 3,
an assembly more numerous and splendid than
had appeared on any former occasion, the crown
of Charlemagne was placed on his head, withk
all the pompous solemnity which the Germans
affect in their publick ceremonies, and which

Herbert , 37.

B6oK II. they. deem essential to the dignity of theii

sizo. Empire 7

sotyman the ALMOST at the fame time, Styrinan the Mitna
Magnificent-iificent, one of the molt accomplished, enter
ascends the
ottoman prizing, and vidtorious of the Turkish Prirdces
throne, a consTant and formidable rival to the Emperor,

ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the peci?
liar glory of that period to produce the most
illufttious monaichs, who have at any one time
appeared in Europe. Leo ,. Charles , Francis,
Henry and Solyman Were each of them poffeffed
of talents which would have rendered any agi
wherein they happened to flourish, conspicuous
But such a constellation of great princes shed
uncommon lustre on the sixteenth century. I
every contest, great power as well as great abili,
ties were set in opposition; the efforts of. valoui
,and condudt 6n one fide , couniterbalanced by
an equal exertion of the fame qualities on the
other, not only occasioned such a variety of
events as renders the hiflory of that period in,
terefting , but fertred to check the exorbitant
progress of any of those princes, and to prevent
their attaining such pre-eminence in power as
would have been fatal to the liberty and hap.
pinefs of mankind.

1 Hartman. lMauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V, ap. Goldaft.

Polit. Imperial, Franc. 6 4. fol. p. 64,

THE first ad of the Emperor's adminifiration Bto0I Iti

was to appoint a Diet of the Empire to be held is o.
at Worms on the sixth of January, one thou-Diet called
sand five hundred and twenty-one. In his cir-t meet at
cular letters to the different princes, he informed
them , that he had called this assembly in order'
to concert with them the mofi properi measures
for checking the progress -of those new and
dangerous opinions, which threatened to disturb
the peace. of Germany, and to overturn the
religion of their ancestors4

CHARaLEs had in view the opinions which hadmer bftti

Retorma.

been propagated by Luther and his disciples tion:
since the year one thousand five hundred and
seventeen. As these led to that happy refor-
mation in religion which rescued one part of
Europe from the papal yoke , mitigated its
rigour in the other, and produced a revolution
in the fentinients of mankind , the greatest as
well as the most beneficial that has happened
since the publication Of Christianity, not only the
events which at first gave birth to such opinions,
but the causes which rendered their progress so
rapid and fuccefsful, deserve to be considered
with minute attention.

To overturn a * fyflem if religious belief

founded on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices.

VOL IL I

BOOK II. supported by power, and defended with no lel

art than industry; to eftablilh in its room do(
trines of the most contrary genius and tendency
and to accomplish all this, not by external vio
lence or the force of arms, are operations whici
historians the least prone to credulity and super
tfition, mufft afciibe to that Divine Providenca
which, with infinite ease, can bring about event!
which tohuman sagacity appear impossible. Thb
interposition of Heaven in favour of the Chriftiar
religion at its first publication, was manifested
by miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered
in confirmation of it: And though' none of the
reformers poffeffed, or pretended to possess.
these supernatural gifts, yet that wonderful peiC
paration of circumstances which disposed the
minds of men for receiving their dodrines, that
singular combination of causes which secured
their success, and enabled men, destitute of power
and of policy, to triumph over those who emg
ployed both against them, may be considered
as no flight proof that the fame hand which
planted the Christian religion, proteded the re,
formed faith, and reared it, from beginnings
,extremely feeble, to an amazing degrte of
strength and maturity.

Fromancon. IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous,
iSderable be- nd from a source very inconsiderable, that all
ginnings,

the mighty effeAs of the Reformatiori flowed. BooK 11.
Leo X. when raised to the papal throne, found

x so.

the revenues of the church exhausted by the vast
projeAts of his two ambitious predecessors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II. His own temper,
naturally liberal and enterprizing rendered him
incapable of. that °severe and patient ceconomy
which the situation of his finances required. On
the contrary, his schemes for aggrandizing the
family of Medici, his love of splendour, his
taste for pleasure, and his magnificence in re-
warding men of genius, involved him daily in
new expences ; in order to provide a fund for
which, he tried every device, that the fertile
invention of priests had fallen upon, to drain the A fate of
credulous multitude. Among others, he had1d ~lge"
recourse to a sale of Indulgences. According tO by Leo X~
the dodtrine of the Romish church, all the good
works of the Saints, over and above those which
were necessary towards their own juftificationri,
are deposited, together with the infinite merits
*of Jesus Christ, in one inexhaustible treasury.
The keys of this were committed to St. Peter
and to his successors the Popes, who may open
it at pleasure, and by transferring a portion of
this superabundant merit to any particular pet-
son, for a fum of money, may convey to him
e'ther the pardon of his own fins, or a release
for any one in whom he is interested, from the

I s

BoOK II, pains of purgatory. Such indulgences, wer
xs5o. first invented in the eleventh century by Urbal

II. as a recompense for thofe' who went in perfoi
upon the meritorious enterprize of conquerint
the Holy Land. They were afterwards granted
to those who hired a soldier for that purpose; and
in process of time were bestowed on such as gave
money for accomplishing any pious work en,
' joined by the Pope ". Julius IL had bestowed
Indulgences on all who contributed towards
building the church of St. Peter at Rome; and
as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and ex.
pensive fabrick, his grant was founded on the
fame pretence ".

So condu&a THE right of promulgating these Indul1
nIasto gie gences in Germany, together with a share in the
fence, profits arising from the sale of them, was granted

to Albert, eledtor of Mentz and archbishop of
Magdeburgh, who, as his chief agent for retail.
ing them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Domi.
nican friar , of licentious morals, but of an
adive spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and
popular eloquence. He, assisted by the monks
of his order, executed the commission with
great zeal and success, but with little discretion
or decency; and though by magnifying excef.

' History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
SPalavic. Hist. Cone. Trident. p. 4.

fively the .benefit of their indulgences ", and BooK II.
by disposing of them at a very low price, they 15so.
carried hn so me time an extensive and lucra-
tive traffick amning the credulous multitude; the
extravagance of their assertions , as well as the
irregularities in their conduct, came at last to

" As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits

which they were supposed to convey, are unknown in pro-
teftant countries, and little understood, at present, in feve-
ral places where the Roman catholick religion is established,
I have, for the information of my readers, translated the
form of absolution used by Tetzel. " May our Lord Jesus
Christ have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits
of his most holy passion. And I by his authority, that of
his blessed apostles Peter and Paul, and of the most holy
Pope, granted and committed to me in'there parts, do ab-
solve thee, first from all ecclesiastical censures in whatever
manner they have been incurred, and then from all thy
fins, transgressions, and excesses, how enormous soever they
may be, even from such as are reserved for the cognizance
of the holy fee , and as far as the keys of the holy church
extend, I remit to you all punishment which you deserve in
purgatory on their account, and I restore you to the holy
sacraments of the church, to the unity of the faithful, and
to thai innocence and purity which you poffeffed at baptism,
so that when you die the gates of punishment shall be shut,
and the gates of the paradise of delight shall be opened,
and if you shall not die at present this grace shall remain
in full force when you are at the point of death. In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghoft." Seckend. Comment, lib. i. p. 14,

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates described

the benefits of Indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing
them, are to extravagant, that they appear to be almost in-

'1 3

BooK II. give general qffence. The princes and nobles
So , were irritated at feeing their vassals drained of

so much wealth, in order to r ifh the trea.
fury of -a profuse pontiff. NVJen o0piety regretted
the delusion of the people, who being taught
to rely for the pardon of their fins on the In
dulgences which they purchased, did not think
it incumbent on them either to abound in faith,
or to pradife holiness. Even the most unthink

credible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of In.
dulgence, his foul may reft secure with refped to its falva.
tion. The fouls confined in purgatory, for whose redemp.
tion Indulgences are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles
in the chest, infiantly escape from that place of torment,
and ascend into heaven. That theI efficacy of Indulgences
vwas so great, that the most heinous fins, even if one should
violate (which was impossible) the YMother of God, would
be remitted and expiated by them, and .the person be freed
both from punifhlment and guilt. That this was the un.
speakable gift of God, in order to reconcile men to him.
self. That the cross er.eced by the preachers of indulgeni
ces , was as efficacious as the cross of Christ itself. Lo!
the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will you
enter ? For twelve-pence you may redeem the foul -of your
father out of purgatory; and are you so ungrateful, that
you will not rescue your parent from torment ? If you had
but one coat, you ought to fitrip yourself instantly, and fell it,
in order to purchase such benefits, &c. These, and many
such extravagant expreflions, are feleded out of Luther's
works by Chemnitius in his Examen Concilii Tridentini,
apud Hermn. Van der Hardt, Hist. Liter. Reform. pars iv.
p. 6. The fame author has published several of Tetzel's
Discourses, which prove that these expreflions wr e neither
fngular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14:

ing were shocked at the scandalous behaviour
of Tetzel and his affbciates, who often fquan-
dered in drunkenness, gaming, and low debau-
chery, those sums which were piously bestowed
in hopes of obtaining eternal happiness ; and
all began to wish that some check were given
to this commerce, no'lefs detrimental to society
than deftrudive to religion,

SucH was the favourable junAure, and so
disposed were the minds of his countrymen to
listen to his discourses, when Martin Luther first
began to call in question the efficacy of Indul-
gences, and to declaim against the vicious lives
and false dodrines of the persons employed in
promulgating ,them. He was a native of Eifleben
in Saxony, and though born of poor parents,
had received a learned education, during the
progress 6f which he gave many indications oi
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. ,As
his mind was naturally susceptible of serious
impressions, and tinAured with somewhat of
that religious melancholy which delights iin the
solitude and devotion of a monaftick life, he
retired into a convent of Augustinian friars, and
without fuffering the intreaties of his parents to
divert him from what he thought his duty to
God, he assumed the habit of that order. There
he acquired great reputation, not only for piety,

14 BOOK II.

First appear.
ance of Lu-
ther, and
his character,

BooI II. but. for his love of knowledge, and unwearied

h ,o. application to study. I-e had been taught the

fchblaftic philosophy and theology which were
then in vogue by very able masters, and wanted
not penetration to comprehend all the niceties
and diftin&ions with which they abound; but
his understanding, naturally found, and superior
to every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted
with these subtile and uninftruAive sciences,
and fought for some more solid foundation of
knowledge and of piety in the holy scriptures.
Having found a copy of the Bible, which lay
negleted in the library of his monastery, he
abandoned all other pursuits, and devoted him.
self to the Rfudy of it, with such eagerness and
assiduity, as astonished the monks, who were
little accustomed to derive their theological
notions from that source. The great progress
which he made in this uncommon course of
study, augmented' so much the fame both of his
fandity and of his learning, that Frederick,
Eledor of Saxony., having founded an university
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his
residence, Luther was chosen first to teach phi-
lofophy, and afterwards theology there, and
discharged both offices in such a manner, that
he was deemed the chief ornament of that
society,

WHILE Luther was at the height of his.repu- BooK II,
tation and authority, Tetzel began to publish x s20.
Indulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittem-He opposes

the sale of

berg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary Inaulgences,
virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on
the credulity of the people. As Saxony was
not more enlightened than the other provinces
of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious fuc-
cess there, It was with the utmost concern,
that Luther beheld the artifices of those who
fold, and the simplicity of those who bought,
Indulgences, The opinions of Thomas Aquinas
and the other fchoolmen, on which the doctrine
of Indulgences was founded, had already loft
much of their authority with him; and the
Scriptures, which he began to confider as the
great standard of theological truth, afforded no
countenance to a pracice, equally subversive
of faith and of morals. His warm and impe-
'tuous temper did not fuffer him long to con-
ceal such important discoveries, or to continue
a silent fpedlator of the delusion of his country-
men. From the pulpit in the great church of
Wittemberg he inveighed bitterly against the
irregularities and vices of the monks who pub-.
lilhed Indulgences; he ventured to examine the
doarines which they taught, and pointed out to
the people the danger of relying for salvation
upon any other means than those appqinted by

BooK II. God in his word. The boldness and novelty of

15Zo. these opinions drew great attention, and being

recommended by the authority of Luther's per.
fonal character, and delivered with a popular
and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep irm.
pression on his hearers. Encouraged by the
favourable reception of his'doarines among the
people, .he wrote to Albert, eledor of Nlentz
and archbishop of Magdeburgh, to whose jurif
diaion that part of Saxony was fubjea , and
remonstrated warmly against the falfe' opinions
as well as wicked lives of the preachers of Indul.
gences; but he found that prelate too deeply
interested in their success to corret their abuses.
His next attempt was to gain the fiffrage of

He publishes men of learning. For this purpose he pub.
his theses lifhed ninety-five theses , containing his senti.
againit
them. ments with regard to Indulgences: These he

proposed, not as points fully established, or of
undoubted certainty, but as fubjeds of inquiry
and disputation ; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them either
in person, or by writing;. to the whole he sub-
joined solemn protefcations of his high refped
for the apoftolick fee, and of his implicit sub-
mniffion to its authority. No opponent appeared
at the time prefixed; the theses spread over
Germany with astonishing rapidity; they were
read with the greatest eagerness; and all ad,

mired the goldnefs of the man who had ventured BooK II,
not only to call in question the plenitude of papal 520o.
power, but to attack the Dominicans, armed
with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority ",

, THE Friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own Supported
order, though addided with no less obfequiouf-by hi own
ness than the other monaftick fraternities to the
papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
these uncommon opinions. Luther had by his
piety and learning acquired extraordinary au-
thority among his brethren; he profeffed the
highest regard for the authority of the Pope;
his profeffions were at that time sincere; and as
a secret enmity, excited by intereff or emula-
tion, subsists among all the monaftick orders in
the Romish church, the Auguftinians were
highly pleased with his invetives against the
Dominicans, and hoped to fee them exposed to
the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was
his sovereign the Eledor of Saxony, the wisest
prince at that time in Germany, diffatisfied with
this obftrudion which Luther threw in the way
of the publication of Indulgences. He secretly
encouraged the attempt, and flattered hirnfelf

" Lutheri Opera, Jene, 1612. vol. i. prafat. 3. p. 2. 66,

Hist. of the Counc. of Trent by F. Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Com.
Apol. p. 1 6.

B0ox II. that this dispute among the Ecclefiafticks them;
s24Z, selves, might give some check to the exa6tions

of the court of Rome, which the secular princes
had long, though without success, been endea.
vouring to oppose.

Many en- Many zealous champions immediately art~e
deavour to defend opinions on which the wealth'and
confute
him. power of the church were founded, againt

Luther's attacks. In opposition to these theses,
Tetzel published counter-thefes at Francfort on
" the Oder; Eccius, a celebrated Divine of Augf.
burgh, endeavoured to refute his notions; and
Frierias, a dominican friar, master of the sacred
palace and Inquifitor-general, wrote against him
with all the virulence 'of a fcholaftick disputant.
But the manner in which they conduted the
controversy , did little service to 'their cause;
Luther attempted to combat Indulgences by
arguments founded in reason , or derived from
scripture; they produced nothing in support of

Sthem but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the con-

clufions of the canon law , and the decrees of
Popes '. The decision of judges so partial and
interested, did not satisfy the people, who began
to call in question the authority even of these
venerable guides, when they found them stand-

" F. Paul, p., 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.

ing in dire&t opposition to the didates of reason, BooK IL
and the determinations of the divine law '~. *

3 Seckend. p. 0o.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to

the first promulgation of Indulgences : I. That Leo be.
0towed a gift of the profits arising from the sale of Indul-
gences in Saxony, arid the adjacent provinces of Germany,
upon his lifter Magdalen, the wife of Francefchetto Cibo,
Guic. lib. 1x. 168. 2. That Arcemboldo, a Genoese ec-
clefiaftick, who had been bred a merchant , and still retained
all the arts of that profeffion, was appointed by her to col-
left the money which should be raised. F. Paul has fol-
lowed. him in both these particulars, and adds, that the
Auguftinians in Saxony had been immemorially employed
in preaching Indulgences; but that Arcemboldo and his
deputies , hoping to gain more b3 committing this trust to
the Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and
that Luther was prompted at first to oppose Tetzel and his
associates, by a desire of taking revenge for this injury of-
fered, to his order. F. Paul, p. 5. Almost all the hiftob
rians since their time, popith as well as protestant, have,
without examination, admitted these assertions to ..be true
upon their authority. But notwithitanding the concurring
testimony of two authors to eminent both for exactness and
veracity, we may observe,

Si That Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical

archives of purpose, could not find this pretended grant in
any of those registers where it must necessarily have been
recorded. Palav. p. '.--2. That the profits arising from
Indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been
granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbiihop of
Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who pub-
lifhed them. Seek. p. 12. Luth. Oper. i. pref. p. I.
Palav. p. 6.--3. That Arcemboldo never had concern in the
publication of Indulgences in Saxony ; his diftridt was

BooK II. MEANWHILE, these novelties in Luther's doc.

1~20. trines, which interested all Germanyi excited
The court little attention and no alarm in the court of
rifRme-at Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined plea.
garded Lu- fures, intent upon great schemes of policy, a
ther.

Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seck. p. 14
Palav. p. 6.--4. That Luther and his adherents nevet
mention this grant of Leo's to his sifter, though a circuni
fiance of which they could hardly have been ignorant, and
which they would have been careful not to fupprefs.--i
The publication of Indulgences in Germany, was not ufu;
ally committed to the Auguftinians. The promulgation
of them at three different - periods under Julius IL was
granted to the Franciscans; the Doniinicans had been em.
ployed in the fame office a short time before the present
period. Palav. p. 46.-6. The promulgation of those In.
tulgences, which first excited Luther's indignation, wai
entrusted to the archbishop of Mentz, in conjunTion" with
the.guardian of the Franciscans; but the latter having de.
lined accepting of that trust, the sole right' became vefied'
in the archbishop. Palav. 6. Seck. 16, I7.--7. Luther
was not instigated by his superiors among the Auguftinianst
to' attack the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate In'
dulgences because they were promulgated- by them; his
opposition to their opinions and vices proceeded from more
laudable motives. Seck. . i i. j 2. Lutheri Opera I.
p.6 4. 6-- 8. A diploma of Indulgences is published by Hernin
Van der Hardt , from which it appears, that the name of
the guardian of the Franciscans is retained together with
that of the archbishop, although the former did not ad.
The limits of the country to which their corlimiflions ex'
tended, viz, the diocefes ofMentz, Magdeburgh, Halber-
ftadt , and the territories of the marquis of Brandenburgh,
are mentioned in that diploma. Hiss. Literaria Reformats
.pars iv.' p. I4;

[Franger to theological controversies, and apt to
Iefpife them, regarded with the utmost indif-
ference the operations of an obscure Friar, who,
in the heart of Germany, carried on a fcholaftick
disputation in a barbarous style. Little did he
apprehend, or Luther himself dream, that the
effets of this quarrel would be so fatal to the
papal fee.' Leo imputed the whole to monafftick
enmity and emulation, and seemed inclined not
to interpose in the contest, but to allow the
Auguftinians and Dominicans to wrangle about
the matter with their usual animosity. Booi IL,~

Ir z o.

THE folicitations, however, of Luther's ad- The rogrers

of Luther's

verfaries, exasperated to an high degree by the opinions.
boldness and severity with which he animad-
Verted on their writings, together with the fur-
prifing progress which his opinions made in
aifferent parts of Germany, routed at last the
attention of the court of Rome, and obliged
Leo to take measures for the security of the
church against an attack that now appeared too
serious to be despised. -For this end, he fum- He is rum.
moned Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty moned to
days, before the auditor of the chamber, ando¢, at
the-fame Prierias who had written against him, July, 15i1.
whom he empowered to examine his dodrines,
and to decide concerning them. He wrote, at
the fame time, to the Elecor of Saxony, be-

Boot II. feeching him not to protedc a man whlofe here

X 5zo. tical and prophane tenets were so shocking to

pious ears; and enjoined the Provincial of the
Auguftinians to check by his authority the raft
ness of an arrogant monk, which brought. dii
grace upon the order of St. Augustine, and gave
offence and disturbance to the whole c,hurch.

Thi Poope FROM the ftramn of there letters , as well as
empowers from the nomination of a judge so prejudice
his legate
to try him and partial as Prierias, Luther easily saw wha
in Germany. sentence he might exped at Rome. He di

covered, for that reason, the utmost solicitude,
to have his cause tried in Germany, and before
a less fufpeded tribunal. The profeffors in the
university of Wittemberg, anxious for the safety
of a man who did so much honour to thei
fdciety,'wrote to the Pope, and after employing
several pretexts to excuse Luther from appear
ing at Rome, iritreated Leo to commit the exa-
rmination of his doatrinies to some persons of
learning' and authority in Germany. The Elec,
tor requested the fame thing of the Pope's legate
at the diet of Augfburgh; and as Luther him,
self, who, at that time , was so far from having
any intention to difctlaim the papal authorityi
that he did not even entertain the smallest sus-
picion concerning its divine original, had written
to Leo a most submissive letter, promising an

unreserved

uinreferved compliance with his will, the Pope BooKt Il
gratified them so far. as to empower his legate j s o
inr Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Dominican,
eminent for fcholaftick learning, and passionately
devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine
the cause.

LTTHER, though he had good reason tO declin Ltutie1 ap-
ajudge chosen among his avowed adversaries, did

p befo^d.

not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan,
and having obtained the Emperor's fafe-coni-
dut, immediately repaired to Augfburgh. The
Cardinal received him with decent refped , and
endeavoured at first to gain upon him by gentle
,treatment: But thinking it beneath the dignity
of his fRation to enter into any formal dispute
with a person of such inferior rank, he required
shim, by virtue of the apoftolick powers with
which he was clothed, to iretrac't the errors which
he had uttered with regard to indulgences, and
*the nature of faith; and to abstain, soir. the
future, from the publication of new and dan-
gerous opinions. Luther, fully persuaded of
the truth of his own tenets, and con.fgmed in
the belief of them by the approbation which
they had met wi-th among, persons conspicuous
both for their learning and piety, was furprized
at" this abrupt mention of a recantation, before
any endeavours were ufed'to convince him thai

VoiL IL K

iOOK. II. he was mistaken. He had flattered himself

xszo. that in a conference concerning ,the points in

dispute, with a prelate of such distinguished
abilities, he would be able to remove many o
those imputations with which the ignorance 61
malice of his antagonists had loaded him; but
the high tone of authority that the Cardin
assumed, extinguished at once all hopes of this
kind, and cut off every profped of advantage

His intrepid from the interview. His native intrepidity of
behaviour, mind, however, did not desert him. He de.

clared, with the utmost firmness, that he could
not, with a safe conscience, renounce opinions
which he believed to be true; nor should any
consideration ever induce him .to do what would
be so base in itself, and so offenfive to God
At the fame time, he continued to express no
less reverence than formerly for the authority
of the apoftolick fee "'; he signified his willing:
ness to submit the whole controversy to certain
universities which he named, and promised
neither to" write nor to preach concerning Indul.
gences for the future , provided his adversaries
were ltewife enjoined to be silent with refped
to them '. All these offers Cajetan disregarded
or rejeaed, and still insisted 6peremptorily on a
simple recantation, threatening him with eccle.
fiaftical censures, and forbidding him to appear

" Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. II rbid. p. I69.

againi in his presence, unless he resolved in, BooK II,
itantly to comply with what he had required.' sXo,
'This haughty and violent manner of proceed-
ing, as well as other circumstances, gave Lu-
ther's friends such strong reasons to fufped, that'
even the Imperial fafe-conduC would not be
'able to protect him from the legate's power and
resentment, that they prevailed on him to with-
draw secretly from Augfburgh, and to return to
his own country. But before his departure,
according to a form of which there had been
some examples, he prepared a solemn appeal, H's apeal,
from the Pope, ill-informed at that time concern- oaober I5,
ing his cause, to the Pope, when he should re-
ceive more full information with refpea to it "

SCAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, is fnr,.

nd at the publication of his appeal, wrote to por.te

the Elector of Saxony, complaining of both ; ofSony.
aid requiring him, as he regarded the peace
of the church. or the authority of its head,
either to fend that seditious monk a prisoner to
Rome, or to banish him out of his territories.
It was not from theological considerations that
Frederick had hitherto countenanced Luther;
he seems to have been much a stranger to con-
troverfies of that kind, and to' have been little

'7 Sleid. Hijft. of Reform, p. ', Seckend, p. 4 . 'Leuth6

Oper.i. 16 3,

BOOK IL interested in them. His protedtion flowed al

I2z , most entirely, as hath been already observed

from political motives, and was afforded with
great secrecy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of'his
books; and though all Germany refounded with
his fame, he had never once admitted him into
his presence '7. 'But upon this demand which
the Cardinal made, it became neceffaty to throw
off somewhat of his former reserve. He had
been at great expence, and had bestowed muc
-attention on founding a new uriiverfity, an objed
of considerable importance to every Germai
prince; and foreseeing how fatal a blow th
removal of Luther would be to its reputation "
he, under various pretexts, and with many pro
sessions of eiteem for the Cardinal , as well 1
of reverence for the Pope, not only declinet
complying with eithe'r of his requeffs , bu
openly discovered great concern for Luther's
safe ty 9.

Motivesof THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in.
the legate's sifted on a simple recantation, gave great offence
condua. to Luther's followers in that age, and hath fincc

been censured as imprudent, by several Popil.
writers. But it Was impossible for the legate to

" Seckend. p. 27. Sleid. Hilt. p. 12. "' Seckend

p. 59. " Sleid Hist. p. Io. Luth. Oper. I. 172.

pa another part. The judges before whom BooK II.
Luther had been required to appear at Rome, xsszo
were so eager to display their zeal agaitpft his
errors, that, without waiting for the expiration
of the fity days allowed him in the citation,
4tey had already condemned him as an here-
tick "". Leo had, in several of his brieves and
letters, stigmatized him as a child of iniquity,
and a man given up to a reprobate" sense. No-
thing less, therefore, than a recantation could
save the honour of the church, whose maxim it
is, never to abandon the smallest point that it
has established, and which is even precluded, by
its pretensions to infallibiity , from having it in.
its power to do so.

i LwTrsR's fitxuation, meanwhile, was such as ruther's

would have filled any other person with the most peilous
.... fituationo
disquieting apprehensions. * He could not ex-
pe&t that a -prince so pruident and cautious as
Frederick, would, on his account, set at defiance
the thunders of the church, and brave. the papal
power, which had crulhed some. of the most
powerful of the German Emperors.' He knew
what veneration was paid, at that time, to eccle-
fiaftical decisions; what terrors ecclesiastical cen-
fures carried along with them, and how eafiiy
these might intimidate and shake a prince, vyho,

o. Luth. Oper, i. I6.1.

K3

:BOOI II, was rather his protedor from policy, than hi

i <o, disciple from convidion. If he should be o0

liged to quit Saxony, he had no profped of am
other asylum, and muff stand exposed to whai
ever punishment the rage or bigotry of hii
enemnies could inflid. Though, sensible of li
danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidit(
or remissness, but continued to vindicate his
own condud and opinions; and to inveigh againf
those of his adversaries with more vehemenci
than ever ",

Be appeals BUT as every step taken by th-e court a
to a geneal Rome, particularly the irregular sentence b

which he had been to precipitately declared
beretick, convinced Luther that Leo would soo
proceed to the most violent measures againl
him, he had recourse to the only expedient in
his power, in order to prevent the effed of the
papal censures. He appealed to a 'general coun,
cil, which he affirmed to be the representative
of the catholick church , and superior in power
to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might
err, as St. Peter, the most perfect of his prede-
* ceffors, had erred".

-ia

w
newm ul IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed
in favour of rash conjeA ures concerning the intentions of the
Indulgences.

"2 Sleid. HiiL. 12. Luth. Oper, i. 179.

"Secken~. p. 59·

Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his
appeal, was issued by the Pope, in which *he
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences,
in terms as extravagant as any of his prede-
ceffors had ventured to use in the darkest ages;
and without applying such palliatives, or men-
tioning such concessions, as the junAure seemed
to call for, he required all Christians to assent
to what he delivered as the dodtrine of the
Catholic church, and fubjeded those who ihould
hold or teach any contrary opinion to" the hean
vieft ecclesiastical censures. BOOK II.

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which Maximili-

they considered as an unjustifiable effort of the1 a's death

of advantage

Pope in order to preserve that rich branch of his to Luther.
revenue which ;arose from Ind'ulgences, pro-
duced little effed. But, among the reft of his
countrymen, such a clear decision of the fove-
reign pontiff against him, and enforced by such
dreadful penalties, must have been attended with
consequences very fatal to his cause; if thefre
had not been prevented in a great measure by
the death of the Emperor Maximilian, whom Jai. 7,
both his principles and his interest prompted to ISI9'
support the authority of the holy fee. In con-
sequence of this event, the vicariat of that part
of Germany which is governed by the Saxon
laws, devolved to the eledor of Saxony; and

K4

PooK II, under the shelter of his friendly adriminiftration
a5zo. Lttther not only enjoyed tranquillity, but hi

opinions were fuffered, during the inter-regnun
which preceded Charles's eledion, to take rool
in diffeient places, and to grow up to some d(e
gree of strength, and firmness. At the fani
time, as the election of an Emperor was a poii
more interesting to Leo than a theological con
troverfy, which he did not uiderfteand, and o
swhich he could not foresee the! consequences, h
vwas so extremely solicitous not to irritate a princ
of such considerable influence in the eledor
college as Frederick, that he discovered a grea
unwillingness to pronounce the sentence of ex
communication against Luther, which his adver
faries continually demanded with the ioft ca
morogts importunitys

. .

Sufp.eafion To these political views of the Pope, as ¢we!
.ingsagaias to his natural averflon frdm severe measures,
Luther was owing the fufpention of any further pro.

ceedings against Luther for eighteen months.
.Perpetual negociations, however, in order to
bring the matter to some amicable issue, werie
carried on during that space. The manner in
which these were conduted having given Lu.ther
many opportunities of observing the corruption
of the court of Rome; its obstinacy in adher
ing to established errors; and its. indifferenca

about truth, however clearly proposed, or BooK II.-
ftrbngly proved, he began to utter some doubts
.with regard to the divine original of the papale eis.
authority. A publick disputation was held upon to call in
this important queffion at Leipfick, between quelion the

. ipapal au-

Luther and Eccius, one of his molt learned and thority.
iformidable antagonists ; but it was as fruitless
and indecisive as such fcholiaftick combats ufu-
ally prove. Both parties boasted of having ob-
tained the vidory ; both were confirmed in their
own opinions; and no progress was made to-
wayds deriding the point in controversy ss

NoR did this spirit of mutiny against the doc- Reorma.

trines and ufurpations of the Romith church zn rnwit.
break out in Saxony alone ; an attack no less
fierce, and occasioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzer-
land. The Franciscans being entrusted with the
promulgation of Indulgences in that country,
exectuted their commiflion with the fame indifcre-
tpon and rapaciousness, which had rendered the
Dominicans so odious in Germany. They pro-
ceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted success
till. they arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius,
a man not inferior to Luther himself in zeal
and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them; and
weing animated with a republican boldness , and /

- Luth. Oper, i. 199.

15z

jtutu
boldi
and 2 o. the will of a Prince imposed on the Germanr re

former, he advanced with more daring and rapid
steps to overturn the whole fabrick' of the elt
blifhed religion"4. The appearance of such d
vigorous auxiliary, and the progress which he
made, was, at first, matter of great joy to Lui
ther. On the other hand, the decrees of the unii
verfities of Cologne and Louvain, which pro.
nounced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded
great cause of triumph to his adversaries.

er's BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired
"efs' fresh vigour from every instance of opposition;

and pushing on his inquiries and attacks from
one doctrine to another, he began to shake the
firmest foundations on which the wealth or
power of the church were established. Leo
came at last ,to be convinced, that all hopes of,
reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; feve.
ral prelates of great wisdom .exclaimed no less
than Luther's personal adversaries against the
Pope's unprecedented lenity,, in permitting an
incorrigible heretick, who during three years had
been endeavouring to subvert every thing fa-
cred and venerable, still to remain within the

, bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal

fee rendered the ioft' vigorous proceedings ne-

s* Sleid. Hiifi. zz. Seckend. 59,

ceffary; the new Emperor , it was hoped, would BOOK Il,
s(upport its authority; nor did it seem probable 5s zo.
that. the Eletor of Saxony would so far forget
his usual caution, as to set himself in opposition
to their united power. *The college of cardinals
was often assembled, in order to prepare the
sentence with' due deliberation, and the ablest
canonifts were consulted how it might be ex-
pressed with unexceptionable formality. 'At last, coumuo
on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five hun-cation pub-
dred and twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church niShed againt
of Rome, was issued. Forty-one propositions,
extraded out of Luther's works, are therein con-
demned as heretical, scandalous, and offenfive
to pious ears ; all persons are forbidden to read
his writings, upon pain of excommunication;
such as had any of them in their custody, are
commanded to commit them to the flames; he
himself, if he did not, within sixty days, pub-
lickly recant his errors, and burn his books, is
pronounced an obstinate heretick ; is excommu-
nicated, and delivered unto Satan for the de-
ftrudion of his flesh; and all secular Princes are
required, under pain of incurring the fame cen-
sure, to seize his person, that he might be pu-
nifhed as his crimes deserved 2.

THE publication of this bull in Germany, ex-The effea
Cited various passions in different places. Lu- of tis in

" Palavic. Z7. Luth. Oper. i. 423.

B.ooK II. ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and
.ixSo. opinions had been crushed at once by such a del

cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminished, read Leo's
anathemas with more indignation than terror.
In some cities, the people violently obftruded
the promulgation of the bull; in others, the
persons who attempted to publish it were insult-
ed, and the bull itself torn in pieces, and trod.-
den under so6t '"

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time
Luther. expeaed, did not'difconcert or intimidate Luther.
N .vq. 17.

• After renewing his appeal to the general coun-
cil, he published remarks upon the bull of ex-
communication; and being now persuaded that
Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuf-
tice in his proceedings against him, he boldly
declared the Pope to be that man of fin, or
Anti-christ, whose appearance is foretold in the
New Testament; he- declaimed against his ty-
ranny and ufurpations with greater violence than
ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes to shake
off such an ignominio.us yoke; and boasted of
his own happ'inefs in being marked out as the
objet of ecclesiastical indignation, because he
had ventured to assert the liberty of mankind.
Nor did he confine his expressions of contempt

2" Seckend. p. I 6.

for the papal power to words alone ; Leo having, BooK Ii
in execution of the bull, appointed Luther's iazo.
books to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of reta-
liation, assembled all the profeffors and students
iih the university of Wittemberg, and with great
pomp, in presence of a.vast multitude of fpeda-
tors, cast the volumes of the canon law, toge-
ther with the bull of excommunication, into. the
flames; and his example was imitated in several
cities of Germany. The manner in which he.
justified this action, was still more offenfive than
the at&ion itself. Having colleAed from the ca-
non law some of the most extravagant propositions
with regard to the plenitude and omnipotence,
of the Pope's power, as well as the fubordina-
tion of all secular jurifdiCion to his authority,
he published these with a commentary, pointing
out the impiety of such tenets, and their evident
tendency to subvert all civil government ".

SUCH was the progress which Luther had state of the

Reforma-

made, and such the itate of his party, when tion we
Charles arrived in Germany. No secular Prince Charles ar4
had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions ; no ,rmadyi
change in the established forms of worship had
been introduced; and no encroachments had
been made upon the poffeffions or jurifdiAion of
the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to

L7 utk.. Oper. ii. ;x6.

*~Boo~: ITI.

15Z0. adion; and the controversy, though conducted

with great heat and passion on both sides, was still!
carried on with its proper weapons, with theses,
difputations, ,and replies, A deep impression,
however, was made upon the minds of the people;
their reverence for ancient institutions and doc-
trines was shaken; and the materials were al,
ready scattered which kindled into the combuf-
tion that soon spread over all Germany. Stu-
dents crowded from" every province of the Empire
to Wittemberg; and under Luther himself; Me-
landhon, Carloftadius, and other masters, then
reckoned eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on
their return, they propagated among their coun-
trymen, who listened to them with that fond at-
tention, which truth, when accompanied with
novelty, naturally commands28.

ReAfletions DURIWC the course of these tranfailons, the
condu of court of Rome, though under the direaion of
the court of one of its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its
Rome. schemes with that profound sagacity, nor exe-

cuted them with that steady perfeveraice, which
had long rendered it the most perfed model of
political wisdom to "the refi of Europe. When
Luther began to declaim against Indulgences,
two different methods of treating him lay before
the Pope; by adopting one of which the attempt,

a Seckend. 59.

it is probable, might have been crushed, and by BOOK II.
the other it might have been rendered innocent. s52o,
If Luther's first departure from the doArines of
the church had instantly drawnr upon him the
weight of its oenfures, the dread of these might
have restrained the EleCtor of Saxony from pro-
tecting him, might have deterred the people from
listening to his discourses, or even might have

•

overawed Luther himself; and his name, like
that of many good men before his time, would
now have been known to the world only for his
honest but ill-timed effort to correCt the cor-
ruptions of the Romish church.' On the *other
hand, if the Pope had early testified some dif-
pleasure with the vices and excesses of the friars
who had been employed in publishing Indul-
gences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the difputants on
both sides to be silent; if he had been careful
not to rifque the credit of the church by defin.
ing articles which had hitherto been left unde-
termined, Luther would, probably, have ftopt
short at his first discoveries: He would not have
been forced in felf-defence to venture upon new
ground, and the whole controversy might poffi-
bly have died away insensibly; or being confined
entirely to-the schools, might have been carried
on with as little detriment to the peace and unity

'~OOK Iif.

15~20b

and upiia SUCH a series of errors in the meaSures of A
f Luter. court, seldom chargeable with mistaking its own

true interest, is not more astonishing thain the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condud.
Though a perfect firanger to the maxims of
' humani prudence , and incapable, from the im-
petuofity of his temper, of obserVing them, he
was led naturally by the method in which he
made his discoveries, to carry on his operations
in a manner which contributed more to their fUic-
cess, than if every step he 'took had been pre-
.fcribed by the miof artful policy. At the time

when

of the tRomifh church, as that .which the. Frari,
cifcans mnaintain with the Dominicans, concerni
ing the immaculate conception, or that betwee.i
the Jansenists- and Jefuiits concerning the opei
rations of grace. But Leo, by flucuating be.
tween these opposite systems, arid by embracing1
them alternately, defeated the effets of both;
3By an' improper exertion of authority, Luther
was exasperated, .but not reffrained. By a mif.
taken exercise of lenity, time was given for his
opinions to spread , but no progress made to.
wiards reconciling him to the church; and even
the sentence of excommunication, which at ano-
ther juncure might have been decisive, was de-
layed so long, that it became at last fearcely ait
objet of terror.

when .he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he was
far from intending that :reformation which he
afterwards effeded ; -and.. would

. have trembled

with horror at the thoughts of what at last
he glo~ried in accomplishing, The knowledge
of truth was not poured into his mind, all at
9Gce,,by any special revelation, he acquired it
y: industry and. meditation , and his progress, of
cpnfeqfuence, was gradual. The d6drines of
Popery are so closely conneded, that the expos-
ing of one error conducted him naturally to the
detedio.in of others; and all the parts of that arti-
ficial. fabrick were so linked together, that. the
pulling down of one loosened 'the foundatioin
of the reft, and rendered it more easy to over-
turn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets
concerning Indulgences, he was obliged, to in-
quire into, the true cause of our justification and
acceptance with God. The knowledge of that,,
difdovered to him by degrees the inutility of
pilgrimages and penances ; the vanity of rely-
ing on the intercession of faints; the impiety of
.wiOhipping them; the abuses of auricular, con-
fenio.n; and the imaginary existence of purga-
tqry.. 'The detedion of so many errors, led him
of.eourfe to confider the charader.pof the clergy
.ho taught them; and their exorbitant wealth,
fevere' ipjulcftioa of celibacy , together with
tle intolerable rigour of monaftick vows, appeared

VOL, II. L BOIOK II.

i po.

BooitII to hiii dtie great sources of their corruptibln

i o. Fromh thince: it was but o lne tep to call in quef

tion the diine original of the papal power,
which authorized and supported such a fyfthe
of errbrs. As the uniiavoid'able refiilt d'f tlnt
whole, he disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope;
the decisions of fchoolmen , or any' othbei hrimiia
atuthbrity , and appealed to the word of God d:a
the only standard of theological truth. Toih
gradual proagrefs Luther owed his success. 'His
hearers \vere 'not Thocked at first bjy any pfopo6
fition too oreptgnan.t to their ancient prejudicesd
or too remote from eftabliflhed opinions. Thy
wvere' coiaduted insensibly fromonrie doe(rine to
ianother Their faith and conviction were able
'to keep pace with his 'difcoveries. To the fantii
cause was owing the inattention, and even indiif
ferences ·with which Leo viewed' Luther's first
proceedings, A dired of violent attack upon
the authority of the church, would at once have
drawn upon Luther: the whole weight 'oft its
vengeaince; but as this was far from his thoughts,;
as he continued long to profess great refpeatcfdi
the IPope, and made repeated offers of fiubnit
fioni to his ie6ifions , there seemed [to be n0
reason for 'apprehending that he would prove
the author of any desperate revolt; and he was
kfuffered to proceed flep by step, in undermnp
ing 'the 'conftitution of the church , until thi

feriedy applied at last came too late to produce BOOK IL
any effed, r- o.

, BUT whateverl advantages Luther's cause de- An inquiry
frived either from the milfakes of his adversaries, ito the
oi from his own goo.: cbndua , the sudden prd- which coi-
grefs' and firm eftablihment of his dodriinestributedto

the progreft

'inuft ot be ascribed to these alone: The fame of the Re-
;cBrruptions in the church of Rome which het fomation.
condemned , had been attacked long before his
appearance. The famre opinions which he now
propagated j had been published in different
places, and were supported by the fame argu-
mernts. Waldus in the twelfth century , Wick.
liffiri the fourteenth, and Huss il the fifteenth ,
had inveighed against the errtors of Popery with
'great boldness , and confuted theri with more
ingenuity and learning than could have been
expected in those illiterate ages in which they
flourilhed. But all these premature attempts
towards a reformation proved abortive. Such
feeble lights , incapable of dispelling the dark.
nrits which then covered the church, ~were s6on
>extinguifhed : and though the dodtines oft.iefe
pious men produced some effeds , and left fiome
traces in the coutntries where they taught, ~tey
Wre neither extensive nor considerable. Many
powerful causes contributed to facilitate Lu-
ther's progress, -which either did not exiftb,. oQ

La

Boo10 II. did not operate' with full force in their days.

15 Zo. and at the critical and mature juncture when

he appeared, circumstances of every kind con.
curred in rendering each step that he took fuc.
cefsfuL

The song THE long and scandalous schism which di.
t:hiem in vided the church , during the latter part of the
th e f0 :u r.

• /

..... .

teehth cen.fourteenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth
tury. centuries, had a great effed in diminishing the

veneration with which the world had been ac-
cuftomed to view the papal dignity. Two or
three contending Pontiffs roaming about Europ;e
at a time; fawning on the Princes whom they
9wanted to gain.; squeezing the countries which'
acknowledged their authority ; excommunica^
ting their rivals, and cursing those who adhered
to them, discredited their pretensions to infal-
libility, and exposed both .their persons and their
office to contempt. The laity , to whom all
parties appealed , came to learn that some right
of private judgment belonged to them, and ac-
quired the exercise of it so far as to chufe,.
among these infallible guides, whom they would,
please to, follow. The proceedings of the coun-e
cils of Constance and Basil , spread this dif-
refpecdt for the Romish fee flill -wider, and by.
their bold exertion of authority in deposing and
eleding Popes, taught the world that there wash

in the church a jurifdiaion superior even to the BOOK It
papal power, which they had long believed to xs2o.
be supreme.

THE wound given on' that occasion to theThe pondi-

papal authority was scarcely healed up , whenficates of
the pontificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. V. and of
both able princes , but detestable ecclefiaftiks, Julius m,
raised new" scandal in Christendom. The pro-
fligate morals of the former in private life; the
fraud., the injustice, and cruelty of his publick
administration, place him on a level with those
tyrants, whose deeds are the greatest reproach
to human.nature. The latter, though a stranger
to the odious passions which prompted his pre-
deceffor to. commit so many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a restless and: ungo-
vernable ambition ,. which scorned· all confidera-
tions of gratitude, of decency , or of'-jufticeK,
when :they obftruaed the execution of hi-s
schemes. .It was hardly possible , to be firmly
persuaded that the infallible knowledge of a
religion , whole chief precepts are purity and
humility , was deposited in the breasts of the
impious Alexander , or the overbearing Julius.
The opinion of th'ofe who exalted the authority
of a council above that of the Pope , spread
wonderfully under their pontificates..-: And as ,.
the Emperor and French Kings, w-ho were alter-

L 3

BooK II nately engaged in hostilities with those a&ive

is20o. Pontiffs ,permitted and even encouraged their

fubjeas to expo4se their vices with all the vido
lence of inveAive , and all the petulance of ridi,
cile,. men's ears being accustomed to these, were
not shocked with the bold or ludicrous difg
courses of Luther "and his followers concerning
the papal dignity.

rhieiwmo- NoR were such excesses confined to the head
ai lives of of the church alone. Many of the dignified
the clergy; clergy 9 secular as well as regular , being the
, younger sons of noble families, who had affumea

the ecclesiastical charader for no other rea.son
but that they found in the church flations of
great dignity and affluence , were. accufoomed
totally to negled the duties of their office, and
indulged themselves without reserve in all the
vices to which great wealth and .idleness natu,
rally give birth. Though the -inferior clergy
were prevented by their poverty from imitating
the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet grass
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them
as contemptible as the other were odious as. The

~ The corrupt state of the church prior to the Reforma-

tion, is acknowledged by an author, who was blqth abun-
dantly able to judge concerning this matter ,. and who was
not overforward to confess it. i- For some years (says
Bellanrmine) ,.efore the Lutheran and Calvinificih herefies

severe and unnatural law of celibacy, towhich
both were equally fubjeb, occasioned such irre-.
gularities, that in several parts of Europe the
(oncubinage of priests was not only permitted,
but enjoined. The employiung of a remedy so
contrary, to the genius of the Christian religion,
is the strongest proof that the crimes it was
intended, to prevent were both numerous and
flagrant. Long before the sixteenth century,
many authors of great name and. authority give
such descriptions of the- dissolute morals of the
elergy, as seem almost incredible in the present
age -". The voluptuous lives of ecclefiaiticks

were published, there was. not (as contemporary .authors-
testify) any severity in ecclesiastical judicatories,, any difci-,
pline with regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred lite-
rature, any reverence for divine things, there was not almost
any religion remaining. " Bellarminus Concio ,xvixi.. Oper.
tom. vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617, apud Gerdefii, Hist,
Evan.: Renovati, vol. i. p. 2 9.

30 Centum Gravamina Nationis German, in Fafciculo,

Rer. expetend. & fugiendarum,, per Ortuinum Gratium,
vol. i. 361. See innumerable passages to the fame pur-
pose irn the appendix, or second vohlme, published by Edw.
Brown. See also Herm. Van der Hardt. Hist. Lit, Reform.
pars, iii. and the vast colledions. of Walchius in his four
volumes of Monumenta medii aevi, Gotting. 17 7.,

The authors. I have quoted enumerate the vices. of.the-

clergy. When they ventured upon actions' manifestly cri-
minal, 'we may coidlude that' they would be less scrupulous
with refped to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly
their neglect of the decent conduct fuinable to their pro-

L4 BooxR IL

I5~~OQe

B)t 'II. oceafioned great scandal, not' only because thel;
i$2,o manners were inconsistent with their sacred 'cha.

rat5er 'but the laity being accufftomed to fed
feveral' of them raised from 'the lowest stations
to the greatest affluence ,. did not shew the famel
indulgence to their excesses , as to those of per-;
sons poffeffed of hereditary wealth or grandeur,;,
and viewing their condition with more envy,;
they censured their crimes with greater severity.s
Nothing, therefore , could be more acceptabhe'id
to Luther's hearers , than the violence with
which he exclaimed against the immoralities of:
churchmen , and every person in his audience·
could, fi-om his own observation , confirm the
truth of his invedives.

session, .seems to have given great offence. In order to iLt
lustrate this, I shall transcribe one passage, because it. is
taken not from any author whose profeffed purpose it was.
to describe the improper conduct of the clergy; and .who (
from prejudice or artifice, may be supposed to aggravate
the charge against them. The Emperor Charles IV. in a-
letter to the archbishop of Mentz, A. D, I 3 9 , exhorting
him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thus expresses
himself: " De Chrifti patrimnonio, .ludos, haftiludia & tor-,
pieamenta exercent;, habitum militaremn cum pretextis aureis.
& argenteis geftant, & calceos militares; comain & barbanm
nutriunt, & nihi, quod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiafticum
fpectat, oftendunt. 1\ilitaribus fe dnntaxitt & fecularibus
adibus, vit a &n moribus, in fuia falutis difpenditum, & ge-
nerale populi fcandalum, immifcent. " Codex. Diploma-
ticus Ainedo|orum, per Val.

! trd, Gudenum, 4to. vol. iii,

P. 438. /

'-THE scandal of these crimes was greatly in- BooK Ii
created by the facility with which such as corn- 125o;
nmitted them obtained pardon. In all the Eu_-The aci"ty
ropean kingdoms -, the impotence of the civil t whicho.
inagiftrate , under forms of government ex-ralities were
tremely irregular and turbulent, made it necef-padQa"1ed
fary to - relax the rigour of justice, and upon
payment of a certain fine or composition pre-
fcribed by law, judges were accustomed to remit
farther punishment, even of the most atrocious
crimes. The court of Rome, always attentive
to the means of augmenting its revenues, imi-
tated this' pratice, and by a preposterous ac-
commodation of it to religious concerns, granted
its pardons to such transgressors as gave a iurn
of money in order to purchase them. As the
idea of a composition for crimes was then fami-
liar, this strange traffick was so far from theck-
ing mankind, that it soon became general; and
in order to prevent any imposition in carrying
it on, the officers of the Roman chancery pub-
lifhed a book, containing the precise fum to be
exaded for the pardon of every particular fin.
A deacon guilty of murder was absolved for
twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot might affaf-
finate for three hundred livres. Any ecclefiaftick
might violate his vows of chastity even with
the most aggravating circumstances , for the
third part of that fum. Even such Thocking

BooK II crimes, as, occur seldom in human life, and

305o, perhaps exist only in the impure imagination of

a cafaiift, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular arnd perfed mode of dif.
penfirig justice came to ,be introduced into civil
cotirts, the pradtice of paying a composition for
crimes went gradually into .disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concern.
ing religion and morality , the conditions on
which the court of Rome bestowed its pardons
appeared impious, and were considered as one
great source of ecclesiastical corruption "'.

The exori. THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy
taweatth might have been tolerated, perhaps, with great,
caiwch; er indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and

power had not enabled them, at the fame time,
to oppress all other orders of men. It is the
genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pom-
pous or grand , to set no bounds to its liberality
towards persons whom it esteems sacred and to
think its expressions of regard defedive unless
it hath raised them to the height of wealth
and authority. Hence flowed the extensive
revenues and jurifdi-dion poffeffed by the church
in every country of Europe, and which were

3' Fafcicul..Rer. expet. & fug. I. ; . J. G. Schelhornii
Amonit. Literar. Francof. 172' , vol. ii. 369.Dition. de
Bayle, Artic. Banck & Tuppius. Taxa Cancellar. Romanxe,
Edit. Franqof. 165 I. paffinm

become intolerable to the laity from whose un- BooK II.
discerning bounty they were at first derived, ir2o.

THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical op-particularly

.refion had fallen with such peculiar weight oni'nGerma"ny
the Germans , as rendered them, though natu-
rally exempt from levity, and tenacious of their
ancient customs, more inclinable -than any people
in Europe to listen to those who called on them
to assert their liberty. During the long contests
between the Popes and Emperors concerning
the right of investiture, and the wars which
these occasioned, most of the considerable Ger-
man ecclefiafticks joined the papal fadion; and
w'hile engaged in rebellion against the head of
the Empire, they seized the Imperial revenues,
and usurped the Imperial jurifdicion within
their own diocefes. Upon the re- establishment
of tranquillity , they still retained these ufurpa-
tions, as if by the length of an unjust poireflion
they had acquired a legal right to them. The
Emperors, too feeble to wrefi them out of their
hands, were obliged to grant the clergy fiefs of
those vast territories, and they enjoyed all the
immunities as well as honours which belonged to
feudal barons. By means of these, many bishops
and abbots in Germany were not o'nly eccleg
fiafticks, but princes, and their charader and

BooIK II. manners partook more of the licence," too fre.

x50o. quent among the latter, thari of the san&ity

which became the former 3.

Where the -. THE unsettled state of government in Geti
clergy usurp. many, and the frequent wars to which that
ed a great
part of the country was exposed, contributed in another
property. manner towards aggrandizing ecclefiafticks,

The only property, during those times of3 anar.
-chy , which enjoyed feeurity from the opprfflion
of the great, or the ravages of war, was thai
which belonged to the church. This was owing,
not only to the great reverence for the sacred
charadaer prevalent in those ages, but to a super.
ftitious dread of the sentence of excommunica-
tion, which the clergy were ready to pronounce
against all who invaded their poffeffions. Many
observing this, made a surrender. of their lands
to ecclefiafticks, and consenting to hold them in
fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a dei
gree of safety, which without this device they
-were unable to procure. By such an increase
of the number of their vassals, the power of
ecclefiafticks received a real and permanent aug.
mnentation ; and as lands, held in fee by the
limited tenures common in those ages, often re-
turned to the persons on whom the fief depend-

'" F; Paul. History of Ecclefiaft. Benefices, p. 107.

ed, considerable additions were made in this Boox II,
way to the property of the clergy '. 15o0.

THE solicitude of' the "clergy in providing forThe vast
ihe safety of their own persons, was still greaterP, l m .
than that which they displayed in securing their eccefac.
poffeffions ;' and their efforts to attain it were ticks'
[(ill more fuccefsful. As they were consecrated
to the priestly office with much outward folem-
nity; were difinguifhed. from the reft of man.
kind by a peculiar garb and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges
which do not belong to. other Christians, they
naturally became the objets of excessive vene-
ration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they
were regarded as beings of a superior species to
the profane laity, whom it would be impious to
try by the fame laws, or to fubje& to the fame.
punishments. This exemption from civil jurif-
didion , granted, at first to ecclefiafticks, as a
mark of refped, they foot? claimed as a point
of right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is asserted, not only .in the decrees of
Popes and councils, but was cbnfirmed in the
most ample form by many of the greatest Em-
perors ". As long as the clerical charader re.

j F. Paul, Hist. of Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers,
Etat de la France, torn. i. 69. Lond. 1737-

I Goldaiti Conititut, Imnper.ial. Francof. 673. vol. ii,

92. io7.

ooKI irnaifned, "the peffoit of an ecclefiaftick was facted
-:z5a and unless he wiere degraded fromri his Offied

the unhallowed hand of the civil judge durst
iiot t6iich himi Biutt 'as the power 'of degra,
datiiobn was lodged iii the rpiritual courts, ti
difficulty and expence of obtaining such a ifeh
tence, too often secured absolute impurity .t
offenders. MIany affiumed the clerical charaCe
for no other reason, than that it might screen
thiemi from the ppniihment which their .adtions
deserved " The German nobles complained
loudly, that these anointed malefadcfrs , as they
call them j', seldom fuffered capitally, even: so
the mist atrocious crirnes; and their indepen.
dence on the civil magistrate .is often mentionei
ih thei remonftrances of the diets, as a privilegi
equially perniciousr to society, and to the morail
of' the" clergy.

Theit en. WHILE the clergyi asserted the privileges 6
croach- their own order with so much zeal, they mriadt
nIent Oll
the juriaic-continual encroachments upon those of the laity>
tion of the All causes relative to matrimony, to teflaments,
laity. to Ufry, to legitimacy of birth, as well as thobf

which concerned ecclesiastical revenues , werbe
thought to b'e so connedted with religion, that
they could be tried only in the spiritual courts,

3 Rymer's Foedera, vol. xiiiL sa 3 Centumi Gra.

vain. § )1. -

Not? satisfie.d with this ample jurifdidion, which
extended, to one half. of;i the fubjets which give
rife to' litigation among men, the clergy, with
wonderful industry, and by a thousand inven-
tionhs: endeavoured to draw all other causes into
their own courts 37. As they had engrbffed the
Iwhole learning known in the dark ages, the
spiritual judges were commonly so far superior
in knowledge and abilities to those employed in
the secular :courts, that the people at first fa-
youred any stretch that was made to bring their
affairs under the cognizance of a judicature, on
the decisions of which' they could rely with
more perfet confidence. Thus the interest of
the church, and the inclination of the people,
concurring to elude the jurifdidion of the lay-
inagiftrate, soon reduced it almost to nothing 38
.By means of this, vast power accrued to eccle-
fiafticks,5 and no inconsiderable addition was
made to their revenue by the sums paid in those
ages to filch as administered justice. iGooi I

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts The aread.
enforced their sentences, added great weight and L t
terror to their jurifdidion. The censure of ex- cenures,
communication was infrituted originally for pre-
serving the purity of the church; that obstinate

"7 Giannone Hist. of Naples, book xix. § t3

3" Centum Gravam. § 9. j6. 64

fBoox II offenders, whose impious :teitets or profane livde

-wvere:la reproach to: Christianity, might be ::cut
off from: the fociety.of the faithful: This :ecc,
fiafticks did not scruple to convert into an engine
sori promoting their own power, and inflided
it- on the: most frivolous occasions. Whoevei
despised any of their decifiorns even: concerning
civil imatters., immediately incurred 'this dreiadfu
censur.e,: which not only excluded them froni
all the, privileges of a Christian, but deprived
them of theiir rights as men and citizens,3 ; and
the dread. of this rendered even the most fierce
and turbilerit spirits obsequious to the authority
of the. church.

The devices NOR did the clergy neglect the proper me
of eccifa- thods of preservin.g the wealth and ·iower which
ticks to fe-
cure their they had. acquired with such industry and ad.
ufurpations. dress.- The poffeffions of the church, being

Coinfecrated to God, werei declared to be unalien.
able; so that the funds, of .a faocie.ty, which was

I daily gaining, and could never lose, grew to

be imrhenfe. In :Germany , it was comptited
that .the.-ecclefiafticks had got into their hands
more than one half of the national property ".
In other countries, the proportion varied; but
the ihare belonging to the church was .every-
where prodigious. These vast poffeffions were

s'- Centum Gravam. § 34.. +OCefltum Gravam. ~ 8

not

not fubje& to the burdens imposed on the lands BOOK IL
of the laity; The German clergy were exempted ixso;
by law from all taxes "; and if, on any extra-
ordiriary emergence, ecclefiafticks were pleased
to grant some aid towards supplying the publick
exigencies, this was considered as a free gift
flowing from their own generosity, which the
civil magistrate had no title to demand, far less
to exact. In consequence of this strange sole-
cifm in government, the laity in Germany had
the mortification to find themselves loaded with
exceflive impofitioris, because such as poffeffed
the greatest property were freed from any obli-
gation to support, or to defend the state;

GRIEVOUs, however, as the exorbitant wealth The Ger.
and numerous privileges of the clerical orderma~n ccle
were to the other members of the Germanick moiy so-
body, they would have reckoned it some miti- reigersa
gation of the evil, if these had been poffeffed
only by ecclefiafticks residing among themselves,
who would have been less apt to make an im-
proper use of their riches, or to exercise their
right with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops
of Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest
that ever human ambition suggested-, of being
supreme and infallible heads of the Christian
church; they, by their profound policy and

, Centum Gravam. §28. Goldafti Conft. Imper. ii. 79;

io8. Pfeffel, Hist. du Droit Publ, 35 o. 3 74.

VOL. IL 1i1

'Booxr II.

i ~2o. unwearied perseverance , by their address in

availing themselves of every circumstance which?
occurred, by taking advantage of the fuperfti-.
tion of some Princes, of the necessities of others,
and of the credulity of the people, at length
established their pretensions, in opposition both
to the interest and common sense of mankind.
Germany was the country which these eccle-
fiaftical sovereigns governed with most absolute
authority. They excomrmunicated and deposed
some of its most illustrious Emperors, and ex-
cited their fubjeds, their ministers, and even
their children, to take arms against them. Amidst
these contests, the Popes continually extended
their own immunities, spoiling the secular Prin-
ces gradually of their most valuable prero-
gatives , and the German church felt all the
rigour of that oppression which flows from sub-
jection to foreign dominion, and foreign ex-
adions.

Nominatea THE right of conferring benefices, which the
by the ope.'Popes usurped during that period of confusion,

was an acquisition of great importance, and
exalted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins
of the temporal. The Emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in poffeffion
of this right, which served to increase both their
authority and 'their revenue. <But by wresting

it out of their hands, the Popes were enabled BOOK IL.
to fill the' Empire with their own creatures; x~,o.
they accustomed a great body of every prince's
fubjets to depend;not upon him, but upon the
Roman fee; they bestowed upon strangers the
richest benefices in every country, and drained
their wealth to supply the luxury of a. foreign
court. Even the patience of the most super-
fritious ages mutinied under such oppression;
and so loud and frequent were the complaints
and murmurs of the Germans, that the Popes,
afraid of irritating them too far, consented, cons
trary to their usual pracice, to abate somewhat
of their pretensions, and to 'reft satisfied with
the right of nomination to such benefices as
happened to fall vacant during fix months in
'the year, leaving the disposal of the remainder
to the princes and other legal patrons 4

BUT the court of Rome easily found expe-TThe expe.
dients for eluding an agreement which put such dlents for

retraining

restraints on its power. 1 he pradice of refer- this power
Sving certain benefices in every country to theof the Popes
Pope's immediate nomination, which had been
long known, and often complained of, was ex-
tended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the
benefices poffeffed by Cardinals, or any of the

a F. Paul, H-Iit. of Eccles. Benef. 204. Gold. Conftig,

Imper. i. 408.

BOOK II. numerous officers in the Roman court; those
1520. held by persons who happened to die at Rome,

or within forty miles of that city on their journey
to. or 'from it; those whichbecame vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in
the number of reserved benefices; Julius II. and
Leo, firetching the matter to the utmost, often
collated to benefices wher'e the right of referva-
tion had not been declared, on pretence of hav.
ing mentally reserved this privilege to themn.
selves. The right of reservation, however, even
with this extension , had certain limits, as it
could be exercised only where the benefice was
actually vacant; and therefore, in order to ren.
der the exertion of papal power -unbounded,
expedlative graces, or mandates nominating a
person to succeed to a benefice upon the first
vacancy that should happen, were brought into
use. By means of these, Germany was filled
with persons depending on the court of Rome,
from which they received such reversionary
grants; princes were defrauded, in a great de-
gree, of their prerogatives; the rights of lay-
patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered almost
entirely vain '

43 Centum Gravamn. §. 2n. Fafi~ic. Rer. Expet; &c. &c. 4.

Gold. Conft. Imper. i. 391. 404, 40o, F. Paul, Hist. of
Epcl. Benef. x 67. I-99

THE manner in which these extraordinary BooK II.
powers were exercised, rendered them still more

I 20.

odious and intolerable. The avarice and ex- enality of
tortion of the court of Rome, were become ex- the curt of
ceffive almost to a proverb. The sale of bene- Rome.
fices was so notorious, that no pains were taken
to conceal, or to disguise it. Companies of
merchants openly purchased the benefices of
different diftrids in Germany from the Pope's
ministers, and retailed them at an advanced
price "4. Pious men beheld with deep regret
these fimoniacal tranfaaions, so unworthy the
ministers of' a christian church ; while politi-
cians complained of the loss ful~ained. by the
exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious
traffick.

THE sums, indeed, which the court of Rome It drained

drew by its fRated and legal impositions from all otherou,,.

tries of their

the countries acknowledging its authority, were wealth.
so considerable, that it is not strange that
Princes, as well as their fubjeas, murmured at
the smallest addition made to them by unnecef-
fary or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical person,
upon his admifflion to his benefice, paid annats,
or one year's rent of his living, to the Pope;
and as that tax was exaded with great rigour,
its amount was prodigious. To. this mut be
added, the frequent demands made by the Popes

Fafcic.Rer. Expet. i. 3 59..

Sooqi II. of free gifts from the clergy, together with the

Sszo, extraordinary levies -of tenths upon ecclefiafitcal

benefices, on pretence of expeditions againif the
Turks, seldom intended, or carried into execu.
tion; and from the whole, the vast proportion
ps the revenues of the church, which flowed con.
.tinually to Rome, may be estimated,

The united SUCH were the dissolute manners, the exor-
effea of all bitant wealth , the vast power and privileges of
these causes, the clergy before the Reformation; such the op.

preffive rigour of that.dominion which the Popes
had established over the christian world,; and
such the . sentiments concerning them, that pre.
vailed in Germany, at the beginning. of the fix.
teenth century. Nor has this sketch been copied
from the controversial writers of that age, who,
in the heat of disputation, may be fufpeded of
having exaggerated the errors, or of having mif-
represented the condud of that church which they
laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more au-
thentic evidence, upon the memorials and re-
monstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them.
Diffatisfadion must have risen to a great height
among the people, when these grave assemblies
expressed themselves, with such acrimony; and if
they demanded the abolition of those enormities
wit.h so much vehemence, the people, we may be

affired, uttered their sentiments and desires in BOOK 11.
bolder and more virulent language. .I2 zo.

To men thus prepared for shaking off the Men pre-

yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty of ared to em.ra

y brace Lu-

success. As they had long felt its weight, and ther's o1pi'
had born it with impatience, they listened with "io"'s
joy to the first proposal for procuring deliver-
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his dodrines met with, and the
rapidity with which they spread over all the pro-
vinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity andand to toie.

rate hls d(e?

fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence in reas.
asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance as
well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him , which, in ages of greater
moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defeds in the characer of that reformer, did not
appear excessive to his contemporaries, whose
minds were strongly agitated by those interesting
controversies which he carried on, and who had
themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny,
and seen the corruptions in the church- against
which he exclaimed.

NOR were they offended at that gross fcur-

rility with which his polemical writings are
filled, or at the low buffoonery which he some-
times introduced into his gravers discourses. No
dispute was managed in those rude times with-
out a large portion ,of the former; and the latter

M 4

poot II. was common, even on the most solemn oe,
ysBo. cations, and in treating, the most sacred fubjeds.,

So far were either of these from doing hurt to
his cause, that invective and ridicule had some
effed, as well as more laudable arguments, in
exposing the errors of popery, and in determin-
ing mankind to abandon them.

The effeas BESIDE all these causes of Luther's rapid
of the in- progress, arising from the nature of his enter-
rintiog of prize, and the juncure at which he undertook
the progress it, he reaped advantage from some foreign and
of the Re- adventitious circumstances, the beneficial influ-
formation.

ence of which none of his forerunners in the fame
course had enjoyed. Among these may be rece
koned the invention of the art of printing,:
about half a century before his time. By this
fortunate discovery, the facility of' acquiring and
ps propagating knowledge was wonderfully in-
creased, and Luther's books which muff other-
wife have made their way slowly and with un.
certainty into distant countries, spread at once
all over Europe. Nor were they read only by
the rich and the learned, who alone had access
to books before that invention; they got into
the hands of the people, who, upon this appeal
to them as judges, ventured to examine and to
rejet many dpotrines, which they had formerly
been required to believe, pyithout being taught
to understand them.

THE revival of learning at the fame period, BoorK II
was a circumstance extremely friendly to the ,.a.Q
Reformation. The study of the ancient GreekAnd of the
and Roman authors, and the discovery of that learning.
liberal and found knowledge which they con-
tain, routed the human mind from the profound
lethargy in which it, had been funk during feve-
ral centuries. Mankind seem, at that period, to
have recovered the powers of inquiring and of
thinking, faculties of which they had long loft
the use; and fond of the acquisition, they exer-
cifed them with great boldness upon all fubjeas.
They were not now afraid of entering an un-
common path, or of embracing a new opinion.
Novelty appears rather to have been a recom-
mendation of a. doarine ; and instead of being
startled when the daring hand of Luther drew
aside, or tore the veil which covered established
errors , th, genius of the age applauded and
aided the attempt. Luther, though a stranger
to elegance in taste or composition, zealously
promoted the cultivation of ancient literature;
and sensible of its being necessary, in studying
the scriptures , he himself had acquired confi-
derable knowledge both in the Hebrew and
Greek tongues. Melandthon, and fpme other
of his disciples, were eminent proficients in the
polite Arts; and as the fame\ barbarous monks
who oppofedj the introduetion of learning into

I ~ 0~. against Luther's opinions, and declared the god

reception of the latter to be the effed of tt
progress which the former had made, the cau(
of learning and of the Reformation came to b
considered as closely conneded, and, in ever
country, had the fame friends.and the fame eni
mnies. This enabled the reformers to carry 0
the con~test at first with great superiority. Eru
dition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity o
composition, even wit and raillery, were wholl
on their fide, and triumphed with ease over illi
terate xmonks, whole rude arguments, expreffd
in a perplexed and barbarous style, were foun
infufficient for the defence of a system, the.ei
rors of which, all the art and ingenuity of itj
later and more learned advocates have not been
able, to palliate.

Luther aid" THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revi
ed by per- Val of learning excited in Europe, was so favou.
ons :itwiablet the'Reformation, that Luther was aidei
his ruccefs. in his progress, and mankind were prepared tl

embrace his dodrines, by persons who did no
wish success to his undertaking. The greate
part of the ingenious men who applied to th
study of ancient literature, towards the close C
the fifteenth century, and the beginning of th
sixteenth, though they had no intention, an

perhaps no wish, to overturn the established BooK IL
fyfiem of religion, had discovered the absurdity x szo;
of many tenets and pradices authorized by the
church, and perceived the futility of those argu-
ments, by which illiterate monks endeavoured
to defend them. Their contempt of these advo.-
cates for the received errors, led them frequently
to expose the opinions which they supported,
and to ridicule their ignorance with great free-
dom and severity. By this, men were prepared
for the more serious attacks made upon them
by Luther , and their reverence both for the
doarines and persons against whom he inveighed,
was considerably abated. This was particularly
the cafe in Germany. When the first attempts
were made to revive a taste for ancient learning
in that country, the Ecclefiafticks there, who
were frill more ignorant than their brethren on
the other fide of the Alps, set themselves to
oppose its progress with more adive zeal; and
the patrons- of the new fitudies, in return,
attacked them ,with greater violence. In the
'writings of Reuchlin , Hutten , and the other
revivers of learning in Germany, the corruptions
of the church of Rome are censured with an
acrimony of style, little inferior to that of Luther
himself 4.

" Gerdefius, Hist. Evang. Renov. vol. i. p. I41. 157.

Seckend. lib. i. p. 10o 3. Van der HIlrdt, Hist. Literar. Re
form. pars ii.

BOOiK II. FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent
aio. ftritures of Erasmus. upon the errors of the
articularly church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices
Erasmus. .

of the clergy. His reputation .and authority were
so high in Europe at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with
such universal admiration, that the effead of these
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circunr.
itances which cotntributed moflt considerably
towards Luther's success. Erasmus, having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of ecclesiastical literature , applied
himself more to theological inquiries than any
of the revivers of learning in that age. His
acute judgment and vaif erudition enabled him
to discover many errors, both in the doarine
and worship of the Romih church. Some of
these he confuted with great solidity of reason-
ing, and force of eloquence. Others he treated
as objects of ridicule, and turned against them
that irresistible torrent of popular and satirical
wit, of which he had the command. There was
scarcely any opinion or pradice of the Romif:
- church which Luther endeavoured to reform, but
what had .been previously animadverted upon by
Erasmus, and had afforded him fubjed either of
censure or of raillery. When Luther first began
his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to
applaud his condut; he courted the frien'dlip
of several of his disciples and patrons, and con-

demned the behaviour and spirit of his adverfa- BooK IL,
ries '. He concurred openly with him in inveigh- 1z5o,
ing against the fchool-divines, as the teachers of
a system equally unedifying and obscure. He
joined him in endeavouring to turn the attention
of men to the study of the holy scriptures, as the
only standard of religious truth ".

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented
Erasmus from holding the fame course with
Luther. The natural timidity of his temper; his
want of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a man to assume the charadter of a reform-
er 4"; his excessive deference for persons in high
station; his dread of losing the pensions and
other emoluments, which their liberality had
conferred upon him; his extreme love of peace,
and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and by

4* Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 96.
4 Van dert Hardt, Hiftor. Literar. Reform. pars. i. Gerdef.

iHift. Evang. Renov. i. 147.

"4 Erasmus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this :

" Luther, " says he, " has given us many a wholesome
do0t&ine, and many a good counrfel. I wish he had not deA
seated the effect of .them by intolerable faults. But if he
had written every thing in the most unexceptionable mari.
ner, I had no inclination to die for the fake of truth.
Every man hath not the courage requisite to make a mar-
tyr; and I armi afraid, that if I were put to the trial, I
should imitate St, Peter. " Epift. Erafii in Jortln's Life of
Erafm. vol. L 7 3-

~B~oo~r- IT.

j ~ z o.. gentle methods ; all concurred in determininj

him not only to repress and to moderate tl
zeal, with which he had once been animat,
against the errors ofthe church 49; but to affuq
the character of a mediator between Luther am
his opponents. But though Erasmus soon bega
to censure Luther as, too daring and impetuous
and was at last prevailed upon to write again
him, he must, nevertheless, be considered as hi
forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon tl
church. He first scattered the feeds which Luthe
cherished and brought to maturity. His raillery a'
oblique censures prepared the way for Luther
invetives and more dired attacks. In this ligi
Erasmus appeared to the zealous defenders of t|
Romish church in 'his, own times ". In this li g
he must be considered by every person converfa
.in the history of that period. *

IN this long enumeration of the circumstance

which combined in favouring the progress o
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the refiftanc
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering int(
any discussion of the theological dodrines ao
popery, and have not attempted to shew ho0
repugnant they are to the spirit of Chriftianitjy

" Jortin's Life of Erasmus , vol. i. p. 2 8.
ZO Van der Hardt, Hilf. Literar. Reform. pars i..p. z.

hd how destitute of any foundation in reason,

in the word of God, or in the pratice of the
primitive church, leaving those topicks entirely
;o ecclesiastical historians, to whose province they
peculiarly belong. But when we add the effect of
;hefe religious considerations to the influence of
political causes, it is obvious that the united
operation of both on the human mind, must
have' been sudden and irresistible. Though, to
Luther's contemporaries , who were too near
perhaps to the scene, or too deeply interested in
t, to trace causes with accuracy, or to examine
them with coolness, the rapidity with which
his opinions spread, appeared to be so unaccount-
ble, that some of themn impited it to a certain
ncommon and malignant position of the stars,
which scattered the. spirit of giddiness and inno-
vation over the world ~ , it is evident, that
he success of the Reformation was the natural
effet of many powerful causes prepared by pecu-
liar providence, and happily conspiring to that
end. This attempt to investigate these causes,
and to throw light on an event so singular and
important, will not, perhaps, be deemed an
unnecessary digression. -- I return from it to
the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worms conduded its delibera-
tions with that flow formality peculiar to such

-5 Jovii Hiftoria, Lut. 1I 53. foL p. x.34. BOOK IL-

i s ,o.

Proceedings
of the Diet
at Worms.

I 21.

Bboot ITL assemblies. Much time was spent in establishing
1.i1. fbme regulations with regard to the internal

police of the Empire. The jurifdicion. of the
imperial chamber was confirmed, and the forms
of its proceeding rendered more fixed and
regular. A council of regen'cy was appointed
, to assist Ferdinand in the government of the
Empire during his brother's absence; which,
. from the extent of the Emperors dominions,

as well as the multiplicity of his affairs, was an
event that might be frequently expeded ?2. The
fRate of religion was then taken irito confider-

*The Empe. ation. There were not wanting some plausible
or's views reasons which might have induced Charles to
to Luhter have declared himself the protedtor of Luther's

cause, or at least to have connived at its pro.
grefs. If he had poffeffed hb other dorminions
but those which belonged to him in Gerrhmay,
Sand no other crown beftides the Imperial, he
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a
man, who asserted so boldly the privileges and
immunities for which the Empire had firuggled
so long with the Popes. But the vast and da.i-
gerous schemes which Francis I. Was forming
against Charles, made it necessary fpr him to
regulate his conduct by views mote extensive
than those which Would have ftited a Gerrian

$' Pont. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. e. Ilr p. 19.

Pfeffel, Abrdge Chrdnol. p. 59g: prince;

prince; and it being of the utmost importance BOOK I1
to secure the Pope's friendship, this determined Ix i,
him to treat Luther with great severity, as the
most effecual method of soothing Leo into a
concurrence with his measures. His eagerness
to accomplish this, rendered him not unwilling
to gratify the papal legates in Germany, who
anfifted that, without any delay or formal deli-
beration, the diet ought to condemn a man
whom the Pope had already excommunicated
as an incorrigible heretick. Such an abrupt
manner of proceeding, however, being deemed
unprecedented and unjust by the members of
the diet, they made a point of Luther's appear-He is ,m.
ing in person, and declaring whether he adhered ,one, to
or not to those opinions, which had drawn upon
him the censures of the church 5. Not only
the Emperor, but all the princes, through whose
territories he had tto pass, granted him a safe-
conduct; and Charles wrote to him at the fame rIarch e,
time, requiring his immediate attendance on the
diet, and renewing his promises of protedion
from any injury or violence ?+. Luther did not
hesitate one moment about yielding obedience,
and set out for Worms, attended by the herald
who had brought the Emperor's letter and safe-
condu&t While on his journey, many of his ,
friends, whom the fate of Huss, under similar

3 P. Mart. Ep. 7Z2. ?" Luth. Oper. ii. 4 ti

VoL. I. N

BooK IL. circumstances, and notwithitanding the fame

i-S2I. security of an Imperial fafe-conduat, filled with

His un- solicitude, advised and intreated him not to ruflh
fiite wantonly into the midst of danger. But Lu-

ther, superior to such terrors, silenced them
with -this reply, " I am lawfully called, " said
he , " to appear in that city, and thither will I
go in the name of the Lord , though as many
devils as there are tiles on the houses, were
there combined against me S. "

iis recep- THE reception which he met with at Worms,
tion at was £uch as he might have reckoned a full

reward of all his labours, if vanity and the love
of applause had been the principles by which
he ,was influenced. Greater crowds assembled
to behold him, than had appeared at the Em-
peror's publick .entry ; his apartments were daily
filled with princes and personages of the highest
rank '", and he was treated with all the refpecd
paid to those who possess the power of direding
the ,underlfanding and ientiments of other men;
an homage more sincere, as well as more flat-
tering , than any which pre-eminence in birth
or condition can command. At his appearance

The man- PP
ner of his before the diet, he behaved with great decency,
appearance. and with equal firmness. He readily acknow-

Luth. Oper. ii. 412.

' Seckend. 1x 56. Luth. Oper. ii. 414.

ledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony iri BboK .II;
his controversial writings, but refused to retraa ti 1521
his. opinions unless he were convinced of their
falsehood; or to consent to their being tried by
any other rule than the word. of Gd. When
neither threats nor entreaties could prevail; on
him to depart from this resolution ,. some of the
ecclefiafticks proposed to imitate the example;
of the council of Constance 3 and by phnifhing-
the- author of this pestilent heresy, who was
now in their power, to deliver the churchi.at
once from such an evil. But the members of
the diet refufting to expose the German integrity
to fresh reproach by a second violation of pub-
lick faith; and Charles being no less unwilling
to bring a stain upon the beginning of his admi-
niftration by such an ignominious adiion, Lu-
ther was permitted to depart in safety s7. A April 6.
few days after he left the city, a severe edida a

iit

was ptiblifbed in the Emperor's name , and by. .
authority of the diet, depriving him, as an ob-
ftinate and exeommunicated criminal j of all the
privileges which he enjoyed as a fubjea of the&
Empire , forbidding any prince to harbohi or;
protec him; at7d requiring all .to concur in feiz-
ing his person as fooii as the term specified in his
fafe-conduat was expired "'8

' F. Paul, Hist. ofCounc. p.

I . Seckend. 60.

" Gold. Gonft. Imperial. ii. 408;

BOrO:II. BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable
ii.. effect, the execution of it being prevented,
He is seized partly by the multiplicity of occupations which
an conceal- th commotions in Spain, together with the
ed at Wart- i
burgb. wars in Italy i and the Low Countries , created

to she -Emperor; and partly by a prudent pre-
caution employed by the Eledtor of Saxony;
Luther's faithful 'patron. As Luther,- on his
return from Worms, was passing near Alten-
stein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in
masks rushed suddenly out of a wood, where
the Eledor had appointed t'hem to lie in wait
for him ; and surrounding his company, carried
him, after, dismissing all his attendants , to WVart-
burgh , a strong castle not far distant. There:
the Eledor ordered him to be supplied with
every thing necessary or agreeable, but the place
of his retreat was. carefullya concealed, until
the fury of the present florm agai.nst him begani
to abate, upon a change in the political fitua-..
tion of Europe. In this solitude, where he re-
mained nine months , and which he frequentlyi
called his Patmos, after the name of that island
to which the apostle John was banished, he
exerted his usual vigour and induffry in defence
of his dodrines, or in confutation of his adver-
faries, publifling several treatises, which revived
the spirit of his followrs, afftonifhed to a great

degree, and difheartened at the sudden difap- BooK IL
pearance of their leader. I5 z

IaURING his confinement, his opinions con- Progress of

tinued to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant his opini-
in almost every city of Saxony. At this time,onsS
the Auguftinians of Wittemberg, with the ap-
probation of the university, and the connivance
of the Eledtor, ventured upon the first step
towards an alteration in the established forms of
publick worship, by abolishing the celebration
of private masses, and by giving the cup as well
as the bread to the laity, in administering the fa-
crament of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVERt consolation the courage and flc- Decree of
cess of his disciples-, or the progress of his docthe univer-

in hi own

cr iifity of Paris

trines in his own country, afforded Luther in his condemning
retreat, he. there received information of twO.them.
events, which considerably damped his joy, as
they seemed to lay insuperable obstacles in the
way of propagating his principles in the two
most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-
lifhed by the uqiverfity of Paris, the most
ancient, and at that time, the most refpedable
of the learned societies in Europe. The other Henry vi.
was, the answer written to his book concerning wrtes

the abyloh captivity by ry VII again.ofthem.

the Babylopimh captivity by Henry VIII. of them.

N 3

BQoo II. England. That young monarch, having been

Szsai educated under the eye of a suspicious father,

who, in order to prevent his attecnding to bufi.
ness,. kept ^him occupied in the study of litera.
ture , still retained a greater love of tearning,
and fironger habits of application to it, than
are common among princes of so adive a dif-
position,, and such violeht patfions. Being amrn
bitious .of ac.quiring glory ps every kind, as welt
as zealously attached to the Romish church, and
Pighly exasperated against Luther, who had
treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author,
with great contempt, Henry did not think it
enough to exert his royal authority in opposing
the opinions of the reformer, but resolved like.
wife to combat them with fcholaftick weapons.
With this view he published his treatise oi the
Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten afc
present, as books of controversy always are,
wlven the occasion that produced them is past,
is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acute,
ness, and was represented by the flatte.ry of his
courtiers to be a work of such wonderful science
apd learning, as exalted him no less above other
authors in merit, than he was distinguished
among them by his rank, The Pope, ,to whom
it was presented with the greatest formaJity in
full confiflory, spoke of it in such terms,, as if'
it had' been didated by immediate *inspiration;

and as a teftimnony of the gratitude of the church BooK II.
for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him the x sz'i
title of Defender of the Faith, an appellation
which Henry soon forfeited in the' opimnon of
those from whom. he derived it, and which is
frill retained by his successors, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftintiori'.
Luther, who was not overawed either by the Luther's
authority of the University, or the dignity of ~,Pl top
-the Monarch, soon published his animadverfions
on both in a style no less vehement and severe,
than he would have used in confuting his
meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness,
inst.ead of thocking his contemporaries, was
considered by them as a new proof of his un-
daunted spirit. A controversy managed by dif-
putants so illustrious, drew more general atten-
tion; and such was the contagion of the spirit
of innovation, diffufed through Europe in that
age, and so powerful the evidence which accom-
panied the doctrines of the reformers on their
first publication, that, in spite both of the, civil
and ecclesiastical powers combined against them,
they daily gained converts both in France and
in England.

How 'defirous soever the Emperor might be stante oaf

to put a stop to Luther's progress, he was often fairs be-

N4

SOOK II, obliged , during the diet at Worms, to turn his

a2I,. thoughts to matters still more interesting, and
tween which demanded more immediate attention. A.
Charles and
Pranis. war was ready to break out between him and

Francis in Navarre, in the Low Countries, and"
in Italy; and it required either great address t6;
avert the danger, or timely and wife precautions!
to- resist it. Every circumstance, at that junc-
ture, inclined Charles to prefer the former mea-
sure. Spair was torn with intestine commo-
tions. In Italy, he had not hitherto secured
the afliftance of any one ally. In the Lowy,7
Countries, his fubjets trembled at the thoughts
of a rupture with France, the fatal effects of
which on their commerce they had often expe-.
rienced. From these considerations , as well as
from the solicitude of Chievres, during his whole
administration, to maintain peace between the
two monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's back-
wardhefs to commence hostilities. But Francis
and his ministers did not breathe the fame
pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord
could not long subsist, where interest, emula-
tion, and ambition conspired to dissolve it; and
he poffeffed several advantages which flattered
Bim with the hopes of surprising his rival, and
of overpowering him before he could put him-
self in a posture of defence. The French
King's dominions, from their compact situation,

from their fubjedion to the royalauthority, from BooK ITL
the genius of the people, fond of war, and iszx.
attached to their sovereign by every tie of duty
and affedion, were more capable of a great or
sudden effort, than the larger but disunited ter-
[ ritories of the Emperor, in one part of which
the people were in arms against his ministers,
and in all his prerogative was more limited than
that of his rival,

'JTHE only princes, in whose power it was to HenriVII.
have kept down, or to have extinguished thisf""er
flame on its first appearance, either negleAed to
exert themselves, or were acive in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he affeted
to assume the name of mediator, and both par-
ties made frequent appeals to him, had laid
aside the impartiality which suited that character.
Wolsey, by his artifices, had estranged him so
entirely from the French King, that he secretly
fomented the discord which he ought to have
composed, and waiied only for some decent
pretext to join his arms to the Emperor's ".

LEo's endeavours to excite discord between Leo hefi-
the Emperor and Francis were more avowed, tates be-

tween the

and had greater influence. Not only his duty, rivals.
as .the common father of Christendom, but his

' Herbert, Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, ar 8

r iZ . Pope to as as the guardian of the publick trai

quillity, and to avoid any measure. that 'migit
overturn the system, which after much blood,
shed, and riany negociations, was now efta
blifhed in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who inftanti
discerned the propriety of this condud , had
formed a scheme upon Charles's promotion to
the Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the
umpire between the rivals , by soothing them
alternately, while he entered into no close con
federacy with either; and a Pontiff less ani
bitious and enterprizing , might have saved Eu-
rope from many calamities by adhering to this
plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, wh6 was
fill in the prime of life, longed passionately to
diftinguiih his pontificate by forne splendid
agion. He was impatient to wash away the
infamy of having loft Parma and Placentia, the
acquisition of which refleded so much lustre on
the administration of his predecessor Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians
in that age, the dominion which the Tranfal-
pine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman art
brgance, denominated them, the barbarous na.
tions, had attained in Italy. He flattered himself,
that after assisting the one monarch to strip the
other of his poffeffions in that country, -.he
night find means of driving out the vidor in.

his turn, and a'cquire the glory of restoring BooK II.
Italy to the liberty and happiness which it ene x s21.
joyed before the invaflon of Charles VIII:. when
every state was governed by its native princes,
or its own laws, and unacquainted with a foQ
reign yoke. Extravagant and chimerical as this
project may seem, it was the favourite objet
of almost every Italian eminent for genius or
enterprize during great part of the sixteenth
century. They vainly hoped, that by superior
(kill in the artifices and refinements of negocia-
tion, they should be able to baffle* the efforts
of. nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but
much more powerful and warlike. So alluring
was the profpeft of this to Leo, that notwith-
standing the gentleness of his disposition, and
his fondness for the pleasures of a refined and
luxurious ease, he hastened to disturb the peace
of Europe, and to plunge himself in a danger-
ots war, with an impetuosity scarcely inferior
to that of the turbulent and martial Julius ".

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe
which of the monarchs he would take for his "
confederate against the other. Both of them
courted his friendship ; he wavered for some
time between them, and at first concluded an
alliance with Francis. The obj:e& of this treaty

'" Guic. lib. xiv. p. 173'..

BooIK 1. was the conqueft.of Naples, which the confed.

Ss5i. rates agreed to divide between them. The Pope;

it is probable, flattered himself, that the brif]
and acive spirit of Francis , seconded by thi
fame qualities in his fubjeds, would get the start
of the flow and wary councils of the Emper6i
and that they might over-run with ease this 'd
-tached portion of his dominions, ill provided
for defence, and always the prey of every in;
vader. But whether the French King, by dif|
covering too openly his suspicions of Leo's firn
cerity, difippomted these hopes ; whether the
treaty was only an artifice of the Pope's, to cover
the more serious negociations which he was car-
rying on with Charles; whether. he was en.
ticed by the prospeCt of reaping greater advan
tages from an union with that prince; or whe|
ther he was soothed by the zeal which Charles
had manifested for the honour of the church ini

Concludes a condemning Luther; certain it is, that he soon
treaty with deserted his new ally, and made overtures of
charles. friepdfhip, though with great secrecy, to the

Emperor "<. Don John Manuel, the fame maii

" who had been the favourite of Philip, and whole

address had disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes,
having been. delivered, upon the death of that
monarch, from the prison to which her had been
confined, was now the Imperial ambassador at

' Guic. lib. xiv. p, i7 . Mem. de Bellay, Par. 7 3, p. Z4.

Rome, and fully capable of improving this fa- BOOK 1I.
vourable disposition in the Pope to his mafter's iz52i
idvantage ".- To him the conduc of this nego-
;iation was entirely committed; and being care-
fully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion
from a war with France would have prompted
him to retard or defeat it, an' alliance between
the Pope and Emperor was quickly conclu- May s.
ded ". The chief articles in this treaty, which
proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in
Italy, were, that the Pope and Emperor should
join their forces to expel the French 6ut of the
Milanese, the poffeffion of which should be
granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Lu.dovico
the Moor, who had resided at Trent since the
time his brother Maximilian had been difpof-
sessed of his dominions by the French King;
that Parma and Placentia should be restored to
the church; that the Emperor should assist the
Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual
tribute paid by the kingdom of Naples to the
Holy See should be increased; that the Emperor
should take the family of Medici under his pro-
tedion; that he should grant to the Cardinal of
that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon
the archbifhoprick of Toledo; and fettle lands

Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89. 63 Guic. 1. xiv.

I181g, Mm. de Bellay, p. 24. Du Mont, Corps Dipiom.
tom. iv. suppl. p. 96. I

Booi II. in the kingdom of Naples to the fame Vahu
is21. upon Alexander the natural son of Lorenzo 'd

Medici.'

Death of TilHE tranfading an affair of filch momen
Chiev" without his participation, appeared to Chievres
ror's favout so decisive a proof of his having loft the. afce.
rite-and dant which he had hitherto maintained over th
minister . mind of- his pupil, that his chagrin on this at

-count, added to the melancholy with which h
was overwhelmed on taking a view of the nmaiy
and unavoidable calamities attending a war
against France, is said to have ih'ortened his
days 6'. But though this, perhaps, may be only
the conjeAure of hifftorians, fond of attributihg
every thing that befalls illustrious personages t
extraordinary causes, and of ascribing even theii
diseases and death to the effed of political pai
Iions, which are more apt to disturb the tenjoyment
than to abridge the period 6f life, it is certail
that his death, at this critical jundure, extinguished
all hopes of avoiding a rupture with France '!
This event, too, delivered Charles from a mini
fier, to whose authority he had been accufornmed
from his infancy to fbmniit with such. implicit
deference, as checked and depressed his geniu^i
and retained him in a state of pupilage, unbe:

'4 Belcarii Comment; de reb. Gallic, 48 3
" P. Heuter. Rer. Auffriac. lib. viii. c. x I p. x 97

coming his years as well as his rank; but this BOOKi II.
restraint being removed, the native powers of x5I1,
his mind were permitted to unfold themselves,
and he began to display such great talents, both
in council and in execution , as exceeded the
hopes of his contemporaries "", and command
the admiration of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were pre, commence-

paring, in consequence of ,their secret alliance, ment of

h' oftilities

to attack Milan, hostilities commenced in ano-ii Navarre.
ther quarter. The children of John d'Albert,
King of Navarre, having often demanded the
restitution of their hereditary dominions, in terms
of the treaty of Noyon, and Charles having as
often eluded their requests upon very frivolous
pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized by
that treaty to assist the exiled family. The
junture appeared extremely favourable for such
an enterprize. Charles was at a distance from
that part of his dominions; the troops usually
stationed there, had been called away to quell
the commotions in Spain; the Spanish male-
contents warmly solicited him to invade Na-
varre "', in which a considerable fadtion was
ready to declare for the descendants of their ancient
monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much as
possible, giving offence to the Emperor, or

6' P. Mart. Ep. 7.3 .

3 P. Mart. EP. 721,

MBOOK II. King of England, Francis dire&ed fdrces to h

Sz i. levied, and the war to be carried on, not in hi

own name, but in-that of Henry d'Albert. Tb
condut of 'thefe troops was committed to An
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young noblema
whom Lis near alliance to the unfortunate Kin
whose battles he was to fight, and what was iti
more powerful, the interest of his sifter, madani
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress

Progrers ofrecommended to that important trust , for whic
the French. he had neither talents nor experience. But

there was no army in the field to oppose hin
he became master, in a few days, of the whol
kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with an
obftrudion but from the citadel of Pampeluni
The additional works to this fortress, begun bh
Ximenes, were still unfinished; nor would it!
flight resistance have deserved notice,- if Ignafii
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During
the progress of a lingering cure, Loyola hap
pened to have no other amusement than whal
he found in reading the livres of the faints:
The effed of this on his rmind, naturally enthu
fiaftic, but ambitious and daring, was to infpir'
him with such a desire of emulating the glory
of these fabulous worthies of the Romish church,
as led him into the wildest and most extravagant
adventures, which terminated at last in inflitutt
ing the society of Jesuits, the most political and

best

best regulated of all the tnonafiisk-: orders, and BooK IL
from which mankind have, derived more advan- ix ix,
tages, and received greater hurt, 'than from any
oqher of these religious fraternities4 .

t-;, upon the redudiori of tPampeiuna, L Ef--They ente
,parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre Cafi1e
cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom
of Navarre might still have remained annexed,
to the crown of.France, in reality-, as well as in
title. But, pushed on by youthful ardour, and
encouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be
dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the
confines of Navarre, and to lay liege to Lo-
grogno, a fmail town iii Castile. This ioufed
the Caftilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid
progress of his arms wit~h great unconcern; and
the difThnfions in *that kingdom being almoflt
cgmpofed, both parties exerted themselves with
emulation in defence of their country; the one,
that.it might efface the memory of past mifcon-
duit by its present zeal; the, other, that it might
add to the merit of .having subdued the Empe-
rpor's rebellious fubjeds, that of repulsing his
foreign enemies. The fuddet advance of their
troops,, together vwith the gallant defence made
1?y tthe inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the
IF'rench

, general to abandon his rash enterprize.

The .Spanish army, which increased every day,
harassing him during his retreat, he, instead of

VoL. IL 0

BOOK II. taking fhelter~iander the cannon of Pampeldunaqi

1s 21 . or waitinfg the arrival of fn 'e troops which "were
They are niarehing to jin him, attacked the Spaniards,
aadivn though far superior to him in number, witlh
out of a .great& impetuosity, buit with so little condudt;
,,r:. -.hIat his forces were totally routed, he himself:

together with- :his principal officers, was takenj
' pifoner, and Spain recovered poffefiion of Na
varre in frill fibrter time than the French had
spent in the 'conqueft of it8".

•

Hofoilities "WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify lii
bg"" in invasion of Navarre, by carrying it on in the
Countries. ramne of Henry D' Albert, he had recourse to ai

artifice much of 'the fame kind, in attackihg an
other part of the Emperor's territories. Roberi
de la Mark, lord of the tmnall but independenh
territory of Bouillon, situated on the fronitiei
of Luxemburgh and Chanipagne, having abaiJ
droned Charles's' service on account of an eni
croachment which the Aulick council had made
on his jurifdidion, and having thrown himself
upon, France for proteftion, was easily perfuaded'
in the heat of his resentment, to fend a herald tq'
Worms, and to declare war against the Emperor
in form. Such extravagant insolence in a petty:
. prince furprized Charles, and appeared to himi

a certain proof of his having received promises
of powerful' support from the French Kinrg

*" MAIem. de B3elay , p. zi. P. Mart. Ep. 7z6.

Tfile jtfriefs of this- cofielufion foori"'became. Bo.oK It
evident. Robert entered Luxemburgh with "i2 z
trobps levied in France, by the King's conni-
vanee, though seemingly in contradiction to his
oiders, L and after ravaging the open country,
laii siege tor Vireton, Of this Charles eo-m
plained loudly, as a dite.t violation of the peace
fibfifting between the two crowns, and funrr-
miioned Henry VIIL in terms 6f the treaty con-
cluded a&lLoidbn , in the year one thousand five
hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms againift
Francis as the first aggressor. Francis pretended
that he was not answerable for Robert's condut,

,

tvhofe army fought under his own standards,
an:d in his own quarrel; and affirmed, that, cori-
trary to an express prohibition, he had seduced
some fubjeds of France into his service; but.
Henry paid so little regard to this evasion, that-
the French King, rather than irritate a prince
whom he still hoped to gairn, commanded De la-
Mark to disband his troops ".

STrH Emrperor, mean 'whle- Waa~ affembliiig
ian army to chastise Robert's insolence. Twenty
thouifand .men, under the count of Naffaut, in,
vaded his little territories, and in a few days
became masters 'of every-place in them but Sedan4
After making him feel so sensibly the- weight of

" Mem. de Bellay, pd az , &c. Mri.. de Fleuranges, p,

I335, &c.

BO3oK JI.

Siege of
jMezieres
'by the In-
perialifts.

70 Oeuvres de Brantome, tom. vi. 1I4.

his mafter's indignation, Nassau advanced to,
wards the frontiers of France; and Charles
knowing that he might presume so far on Henry's
partiality in his favour, as not to be over-awed
by- the fame fears which had restrained Francis,
o.rdered his general to besiege Moufon. The
cowardice of the garrison having obliged the go.
vernor to surrender almost without resistance,
Nassau invested IVIezieres, a place at that timn
of.no .considerable strength, but so advantage
oufly situated, that by getting poffeflion of i,
the" Imperial army might have penetrated into
the heart of Champagne, in which there wv
hardly any other town 'capable of obftruCing its
progress. Happily for France, its. monarch,
sensible of the importance of this fortress, and
of, the danger to which it was expo.sed, comi
mitted, the defence of it to the chevalier Bayard,
distinguished among .his contemporaries by the
appellation of The Knight without fear, and with,
out reproach i, This man, whose prowess in comr
bat, whose punCtilious honour and formal gal.
lantry,- bear a nearer refembiance, than any thing
recorded in history, to the charater' ascribed to
the ;heroes of chivalry, poffeffed all the talents
which form a great general. These he had
many occasions of exerting in the defence of
JM1ezieres; partly by his val6ur, partly by his
conduCt, he protraCted the siege to a great length,

and in the end obliged the Imperialists to raise BooK IL.
it, with infamy and loss ". Francis, at the head is z.
of a numerous army, soon retook Moufon, and raifd.
entering the Low Countries, made several, con-
quests of small importance. In the neighbour-
hood of Valenciennes, through an excess of cau-
tion, an error with which he cannot be often
charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off
the whole Imperial army" ; and what was still
of more consequence, he disgusted the constable of.
Bourbon, by giving the command of the van to
the duke D' Alenqon, though this pQft of honour
belonged to Bourbon., as a, prerogative of hi.s
office.

DURING these operations in the field, a con- AuguPi.

grefs was held at Calais under the mediation ofc"ngrefs a
Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to der t m1n
an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the diation of
mediator had corresponded in any degree to his England1
profeffions, it could hardly have fail-ed of pro-
ducing some good effecd. Henry committed the
sole management of the negociation, with. unli-
mited powers, to Wolsey; and this choice alone
was ftufficient to have rendered it abortive. That
prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the
great obje&E of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the Emperor's

7. Menm. de Bellay, p. 2 < ,'

&c.

° "2 P. Mart. Ep. 747.. e Mi. de Be;11, 39.

0-.

BooK II. interest, was so little able to conceal his par,

sz1, tiality,, thajt, if Francis had pot,,been well ac

quanted with his .haughty and vind iive te
per, he would have declined his mediation,
1Pduch time was spent in inquiring who had be.
gun hostilities, which Wolsey affeAed. to repre
sent as the principal point; and by throwing
the blame of that on Francis, he hoped to justify1
'by the treaty of London, any alliance into whicdi

without any his. malter ifhould enter with Charles,. 'The coC
fe". ditions on which hostilities might be terminated,

came next to be considere~d; but with 'regard
to. these, the Emperor's proposals were such as
discovered either that he was utterly averse to
peace, or that he knew Wolsey would approve
of whatever terms ihould be offered in his name.
He demanded the restitution of the dutchy of
Burgundy, a province,, the poffefIion of which
would have given him access into the heart of
the kingdom; and required a discharge of the
homage duet to the crown of France for the
counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of
his ancestors had. ever refused, and which he
had bound himself by the treaty of Noyon, to
renew. These terms, to which an high-fpirited
Prince would scarcely have listened , after the
disasters of the mos unfortunate. war, Francis
rejeced with great disdain; and Charles shew-
ing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and moderate propositions of. the French

monarch, that he should restore Navarre to its BoorK .,
lawful Prince, and withdraw his troops from xszt:
the siege of Tournay, the congress broke up
without any other effed than that which attends
unfuccefsful negociations, the exasperating of
the parties, whom it was intended to reconcile7".

DURING the continuance of the congress, League
Wolsey, on pretence that the Emperor himfelfa b,.
would be more willing to make reasonable con-tween the
ceffions than his ministers, made an excursion Emperor

'and Henry

to Bruges, to meet that monarch. ' He wasvml.
received by Charles, who knew his vanity, with
as much refpeA and magnificence as if he had
been King of England. But instead of advan-
cing the treaty of peace by this interview,
Wolsey, in his mafter's name, concluded a
league with the Emperor against Francis ; ia
which it was stipulated, that Charles should in-
vade France on the fide of Spain, and Henry
in Picardy, each with ain army of forty thousand
men; and that, in order to strengthen their
union, Charles should espouse the Princess Mlary,
Henry's only child, and the apparent heir of his
dominions '. Henry produced no better rea-
sons for this measure, equally unjust and impo-
litick, than the article in the treaty of London,

" P. Mart. Ep. 73 9. Herbert.
7" Rymer, Foeder. xiiL Herbert.,

BooK II. by which he pretended that he' was bound te
srS,^. take arms againift the French King as the first

aggressor; and the injury which he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the Duke
of Albany, the head of a fa6tion in Scotland,
which oppofed' his interest, to return into that
kingdom. He was influenced, however, by
other considerations. The advantages which
accrued to his fubjeds from maintaining an
exad neutrality, or the honour that resulted to
himself from ading as the arbiter between the
contending- Princes, appeared to his youthful
imagination so inconsiderable, when compared
with the glory which Charles and Francis reaped
from leading armies or conquering provinces,
that he determined to remain no longer in a
state of inadivity. Having once taken this re-
solution, his inducements to prefer an alliance
with Charles were obvious. He had no claim
Supon any part of that Prince's dominions, most
of which were so situated, that he could not
attack them without great difficulty, and dif-
advantage; whereas several maritime provinces
of France had been long in the hands of the
Englifh'monarchs, whose pretensions, even to
the crown of that kingdom, were not as yet
altogether forgotten; and the poffeffion of Ca-
hais not only gave him easy access into some of
these provinces, but in cafe of any 4ifafter, as-

forded him a secure retreat. While Charles BooK II.
attacked France upon one frontier, Henry flat- 1 xz.
tered himself that he would find little resistance
on the other , and that the glory of' re-annexing
to the crown of England the ancient inheritance
of its monarchs on the continent , was reserved
for his reign. Wolsey artfully encouraged these

i

vain hopes, which led his master into such mea-
lures as were most subservient to his own secret
schemes ; and the English , whose hereditary
animosity against the French was apt to rekindle
on every occasion , did not disapprove of the

"

martial spirit of their sovereign,

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope Hoifities
nd Emperor produced great effects in Italy, in talr.
and rendered Lombardy the chief theatre of
war. There was, at that time, such contrariety
between the charader of the French and Ita?
lians, that - the latter submitted to the govern?
pnent of the former with greater impatience,
than they expressed under the dominion of other
foreigners. The phlegm of the Germans and
grav~y of the Spaniards , faited their jealous
temper and ceremonious manners better than
the French gaiety , too prone to gallantry , and
too little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII,
however, by the equity and gentleness of his
administration , and by granting the M1ilanese

N

Joor II. more extensive privileges than those they had
.-alr5, enjoyed under their native princes, had over.

come, in a great measure, their prejudices, and
reconciled them to the French government
Francis, on .recovering that dutchy, did not
imitate the example of his predecessor. ThougF
too generous himself to oppress his people, his
boundless confidence in his favourites, and hit
negligence in examining into the .condut o
those whom he entrusted with power, embold
ened them to venture upon many aas o

The Mila.oppreflfion. The government of Milan

v

"te airh committed by him to Odet de Foix , Mare
the French chal de Lautrec, another brother of MVadamn
govern. de Chateau- Briand , an officer of great expe

rience and reputation, but haughty, imperious
rapacious , and incapable either of listening to
advice , or of bearing contradiction. His info
lence and exa&ions totally alienated the affec-
tions of the lMlilanefe from France, drove many
of the considerable citizens into banishment,
and forced others to retire for their own safety
Among the last was Jerome Morone., vice-
chancellor of Milan, a man whose gen for
intrigue and enterprize distinguished him in an
S age and country, where violent fadions, as well
as frequent revolutions , affording great scope
for such talents , produced or called them forth
in great abundance. He repaired to Francis

,Sforza, whoflebrother Maximilian he had be- Boor IL
trgyed ; and fulfpeting the Pope's intention of IxsZi.
attacking the Milajnefe, although his treaty with
the Emperor was. not yet made' publick, he
'proppfed to Lepo., in name of Sforza , a scheme
ifor furprizing several places in that dutchy by
pmeans, of the exiles , who , from hatred to the
'French , and from attachment .to their former
masters , were ready for any desperate enter-
grize. Leo not only encouraged the, attempt,

,1 advanced a considerable fum towards the

execution of it ; and when through unforeseen
accidents it failed of success in every part , he
allowed the exiles, who had assembled in a body,
to retire to Reggio, which belonged at that time
to the church. The MIarechal de Foix , who
commanded at Milan in absence of his brother
Lautrec, who was then in France, tempted with June a4
the hopes of catching .at once as in a snare, all
the avowed enemies of his matter's government
in that country, ventured to march into the
ecclesiastical territories , and to invefl Reggio.
But the vigilance and good conduct of Guic-
ciardini the hifforian , governor of that place,
obliged the French general to abandon the en-
terprize -with disgrace '.. Leo, on receiving this The Pope
intelligence, with which he was highly pleased, declares

Sagainist

as it furnidhed him a decent pretext for a rup-Franci.

?$ Guaic.. lib, xiv. iS . M~tm. d~ lDellav, p. 38, &c,'

'33 QoE. II.

I 521. ture with France, immediately affembled't

consistory of Cardinals. After complaining b
terly of the hostile intentions of the FreitI
King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal, sI
the church, of which he had given a recei
proof by his .proceedings against Luther -,1H
declared that he was constrained in self- defer
and as the only expedient for the security l
the ecclesiastical state , to join his arms to tli
of that Prince. For this purpose, he now pr
tended to conclude a treaty with Don Job
Manuel, although it had really been figni
some months before this time; and he pui
lickly excommunicated De Foix, as ari impidu
invader of St. Peter's patrimony.:

war in the LEO had already begun preparations for ,i
Miianiefer by taking into pay a considerable body i

Swiss ; but the Imperial troops advanced si
slowly from Naples and Germany, that it was
the middle of autumn before the army took th
field under the command of Prosper Colonna,
the most eminent of the Italian generals, whose
extreme caution , the effect of long experience
in the art of war, was opposed with great prb
priety to the impetuosity of the French. Ir
the mean time, De Foix dispatched couriei
after courier to inform the King of the dangei
which was approaching. Francis, whose force

were either employed in the Low Countries, o01,
assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who
did not exped Lo sudden an attack in that
!quarter, sent ambassadors to his allies the Swiss
|to procure from them the immediate levy of an
Sadditional body: of troops; and commanded
iLautrec' to repair forthwith to his government.
iThat general, who. was well acquainted with
the great neglea of aconomy in the adminiftra-
tion of the King's finances, and who knew how
much the troops in the Milanese had already
tfuffered from the want of their pay, refused to
ifet out, unless the fum of three hundred thou-
ifand crowns was immediately put into his hands.
[But the- King, Louise of Savoy , his mother,
and, Semblancy , the superintendent of finances,
having promised, even with an oath , that on.
his arrival at Milan he should find remittances
for the fum which he demanded; upon the
faith of this , he departed. Unhappily for
France , Louise, a woman deceitful, vindidive,
rapacious , and capable of sacrificing any thing
t9 the gratification of her passions, but who had.
acquired an absolute ascendant over her son by
her maternal tenderness , her care of his edu-
cation, and her great abilities, was resolved not
to perform this promise. Lautrec having in-
curred her ·difp!eafure by his haughtiness in
negleding to pay court to her , and by the froee BOOKi ItI

X 5 I.

o6ok Ii. ddm with -whih ihe had talked concerning f'i6
i n of hfieradventUttes in gallantiry, she, in ordeb

deptive htiffi:of the h6nour which he might h||
gained by' a' :ficc fsftl defence 6-f the MIVlnal6P
seized the three hundred thtiofarid crowns'i
tined for that frvice ,. and det'aified themi -fiort
own use. '

Progrers of "E AUTRIEC'; iowitihftanding this cruel dii4|
the inpeb piihtment, fotind means to

a iffemble a cdnfi

rialifts. der able army ; though far inferior in pumber d

that of the confederates. He adopted tihe p"l
of" defence ifoft suitable to his- situation, avoil
iin &a pitched' battle with tlie greatest care
while he harassed the enemy' continually vwiti
his light troops, beat up their quarters, intgfi
-' Ce&ted their doivoyps ,' and covered or reliev~i

every place which they attempted to attack. By
thils prudent conduct , he not only retarded thie
prbgrefs, but would have soon wearied out the
Pope , who had hitherto defrayed almost tlie
whole expence of the war , as the Emperor

*hose revenues in Spain were dissipated durin4i
tih commotions in that country , and-who-was
obliged to ftp'port a numerous army in thl
Netherlands, cduld not make any considerable
riemittances into Italy, But ana unforeseen 'icci
Aent disconcerted all his measures, and oeca9
fioned a fatal reverse in the French affairs. A

[ody of twelve thousand Swiss served in Lau- BooK IT
ec's army under the banners of the republick, aix.i
ith which France was in alliance. By a law,
ilefs political than humane, established among
hel cantons , their troops were not hired out
,yppublick authority to both the contending par-
i es in any ward This law, the love of gain
ad sometimes eluded , and private persons had
en allowed to enlist in what service they
leafed, though not under the publick banners,
rut under those of their officers. The Cardinal
f Sion, who flill preserved his interest among
lis Sountrymen, and his enmity to France, hav-
ig prevailed on them to permit a levy of this
:ind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of.
he confederates. The cantons, when they saw
b many of their countrymen marching under
ioftile standards, and ready to destroy each other;
)ecame so sensible of the infamy to which they
.ould be exposed, as well as the loTs they might
ruffer, that they dispatched couriers , command-
ing their people to leave both armies , and to
return forthwith into their own country. "The
Cardinal of Sion , however, had the address, by
zorrupting the messengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent it from being delivered
o the Swiss in the service of the confederates;
but being intimated in due form, to those in
the French army, they, fatigued with the length
of the campaign, and murmuring for want of

DBgOOK II.. pay ; infeantly 'yielded obedience , in spite (
as2.. Lautrec's remonftrances and intreaties.

AETEtR the desertion of a body which fdrn

the. strength of his army ., Lautrec durft\i
longer face the confederates. He r~etiredt
wards Milan, encamped on the banks of tb
Adda , and placed his chief hopes of safety i
preventing the' enemy from passing the river
an expedient for defending a country so preca
rious, that there are few examples of its beii
employed with success against any .general

eaCese experience or abilities, Accordingly Coloien
Milan. nqtwithftanding Lautrec's vigilance and adivit

passed the Adda with little loss , and oblig
him to shut himself up: within the walls,!
lV1ilan, which the confederates were prepari
to besiege when an unkrown person , who neye
afterwards appeared either to boast of this fe
vice, or to claim a reward for it came from.tl
city and acquainted Morone , that if the arm
would advance that night , the Ghibelline o
Imperial fadtion would put them in poffeffior
of one of the gates. Colonna, though no frieni
to rash. enterprizes, allowed the marquis, d
Pescara to advance with the Spanish infantry
and he himself followed with the reft .of hi
troops. About the beginning of night, Pefcar
arriving ,at the Roman gate in the suburbs

furprized

fui'ptized the soldiers whom he found .theire; B1IO. I1.
those posted in the fortifications adjoining to 1X2z.
it, immediately fled; the marquis, feiziig the
works which they abandoned, and pushing for-
ward incessantly, though with no less caution
than vigour, became malter of -the city with
little bloodshed, and almost without resistance $
the viAors being as much aftoriifhed as the van-
quilhed at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautt'ec retired piecipitately towards the Vene-
tian territories with the remais of his flatteied
irmy; the cities of the Milanese, following the
Fate of the capital, surrendered to the confede-
rates ; Parma and Placentia were united to the
ecelefiaftical state, and of all their conquests in
Lombardy, only the town of Cremona, the
castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable forts
remained in the hands of the French 7.

Leo i-eceived the accounts of this rapid fuC-Death of
cefion of prosperous events with such transports Leo x.
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French historians) a flight fever, which being
negleded, occasioned his death on the second
of December, while he was still of a vigorous
ige, and at the height of his glory. By this

" Guic. 1. xiv. 196 , &c. M:Jm. de Bellay, 42, &c. Ga-

leacii Capella de reb. gest. pro reftitut. Fran. Sfortife
Comment. ap. Scardiurn, vol. ii. x8o, &c..

VOL. II.

77 Guic. 1. xiv. Z14.

.I. racy was broken , and its operations suspended.

The Cardinals of Sion and Medici left the
army that they might be present in. the con.
claye; the Swiss .were recalled by their fupe.
riorsi;; some other mercenaries disbanded for
want of pay; and only the Spaniards, and a
few Germans in the Emperor's service, remained
to defend the IVilanefe. But Lautrec, destitute
both ,of men and of money, was unable to im-
prove this favourable opportunity in the manner
which he would have wished. The vigilance
of VIorone, and -the good condua of Colonna,
disappointed his feeble attempts on the Mila-
pefe. Guicciardini, by his address and valour,
repulsed a bolder and more dangerous attack
which he ihade on Parma77.

Adrian GREAT discord prevailed in the conclave,
leaeed which followed upon Leo's death, and all
Pope. . .

the arts natural to men grown old in in-
trigue, when contending for a prize so valu-
able, were pradifed. Wolfey's name, notwith-
standing all the Emperor's magnificent promises
to favour his pretensions, of which that prelate
did not fail to remind him, was hardly men-
tioned in the conclave. Julio Cardinal de IIMe-
dici , Leo's niephew, who was more eminent than

15

any other member of the sacred college for his Boor I.
abilities, his wealth, and his experience in tranf- x2.
ading great affairs, had already secured fifteen
voices, a number fufficient, according to the
forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own eledion.
All the old cardinals combined againif him,
without being united in favour of any other
person. While these fadions were endeavour-
ing to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each
other, NMedici and his adherents voted one
morning at the scrutiny, which according to
form was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian
of Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain
in the Emperor's name. This they did merely
to protradt time. But the adverse party in-
ftantly closing with them, to their own amaze.
ment and that of all Europe , a stranger to Italy,
unknown to the persons who gave their fuffrages
in his favour, and unacquainted with the man-
ners of the people, or the interest of the state,
the government of which they conferred upon
him, was unanimously raised to the papal throne, January,

9

at a jundure so delicate and critical, as would
have demanded all the sagacity and experience
of one of the most able prelates in the sacred,
college. The Cardinals themselves, unable to
give a reason for this strange choice, on account
of which , as they marched in procession from

P s

BooK II. the conclave, they were loaded with insults and

i522. curses by the Roman people, ascribed it to an

immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may
be imputed with greater certainty to the influ-
ence of Don John Manuel, the Imperial amn
baffador, who by 'his address and intrigues faci-
litated the eleAion of a person devoted to his
mafter's service, from gratitude, from interest,
and from i'hclination 7,

War r, - BESIDE the influence which Charles acquired
,iewed in by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on
e.a" his administration. To belfow on his preceptor

such a noble recompense, and to place on the
papal throne a creature whom he had raised,
were ats of unc.ommon magnificence and power.
Francis observed , with the sensibility of a rival,
the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and
resolved to exert himself with fresh vigour, in
order to wrest from him his late conquests in
Italy. The Swiss, that they might make some
*reparation to the French King, for having with-
drawn their troops from his army so unfeafon-
ably, as to occasion the loss of the .Milanese,
permitted him to levy ten thousand men in the
republick. Together with this reinforcement,

7" Herm. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman. in

Analeft. de Hadr. p. 5~ . Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p.
144, &c.

Lautrec received from the King a small ium of
money, which enabled him once more to take
the field, and after seizing by furprize, or force,
several places in the Milanese, to advance within
a few miles of the capital. The confederate
army was in no. condition to obftrut his pro-
grefs; for though the inhabitants of Milan, by
the artifices of IV orone, and by the popular de-
clamations of a monk whom he employed, were
inflamed with such enthufiaftick zeal against the
French government, that they consented to
raise extraordinary contributions, Colonna must
soon have abandoned the advantageous camp
wbh.ich he had chosen at Bicocca, and have dif-
miffed his troops for want of pay, if the Swiss
in the French service had nopt once more extri'
cated him out of his difficulies. BooiK 11.

i5ZZ.

THE insolence or caprice of that people The French

were often, no less fatal to their friends, thandefeated in

. *the battle of

their valour and discipline were formidable to icoca.
their enemies. Having now served some months
without pay, of which they complained loudly,
a fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but MVdlrone, whose
vigilant, eye nothing escaped, ported a body of
troops in their way , so that the party which es-
corted the money durst not advance. On receiv-
ing intelligence of this , the Swiss loft all patience,

P 3

BooR II. and officers as well as soldiers crowding around

S2Zz. Lautrec, threatened with one voice instantly to

retire, if he did not either advance the pay
which was due, or promise to lead them next
morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remon,
firate against these demands, representing to
them the impossibility of the former, and the
rashness of the latter, which must be attended
with certain deftrudion, as the enemy occupied
a camp naturally of great strength, and which
by art they had rendered almost inaccessible,
SI he Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that
their valour was capable of surmounting every
obstacle, renewed their demand with greater
fierceness, offering themselves to form the van.
guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec
unable to overcome their obitinacy, complied
with their request, hoping, perhaps, that some
of those unforeseen accidents which so often
,determine the fate of battles, might crown this
rash enterprize with undeserved success ; and
convinced that the effeds of a defeat could not
be more fatal than those which would certainly
follow upon the retreat of a body which corn-

May. posed one half of his army. Next morning the

Swiss were early in the field, and marched with
the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply
intrenched on every fide, surrounded with artil-
lery, and prepared to receive them. As they

advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade Boor II.
with great firmness, and without waiting for 522.
their own artillery, rufhfed impetuously upon
the intrenchments. But after incredible efforts.
of valour, which were seconded with great spirit
by the French, having loft their bravest officers
and best soldiers, and finding that they could
make no impression on the enemy's works, they
founded a retreat; leaving the field of battle,
however, like men repulsed, but no.t vanquished,
in close array, and without receiving any mo-
leftation from the enemy.

NEXT day, such as survived set out for their -ive o.t

own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being of the Mi-
able to make any farther resistance, retired intolane"e.
France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,
and a few other places; all which, except the
citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to
surrender.

GENOA, however, and its territories, remain-Lore Genoa.

ing fubjet to France, still gave Francis confi-
derable footing in Italy, and made it easy for
him to execute any scheme for the recovery of
the Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enter-
prizing by continual success, and excited by the.
folicitations of the fadion of the Adorni, the
hereditary enemies of the Fregofi, who under

P 4.

BOO I

I.4 the protecion of France poffeffed the chief

authority in Genoa,, determined to attempt the
redufion of that d.tate; and accomplished it
with amazing, facili.y. He became master of
Genoa by an accident as unexpeced as that
which had given him. poffeffion of Ililan; and
almost without opposition or bloodshed; the
power of the Adoroi and the authority of the
1Emperor were established in Genoa ".

Henry vIt. SUCH a cruel fuccefion of 'misfortunes affeced
,declareswar Francis with deep concern, which was not 4
.agai little augmented by the unexpeded arrival of
.lay 59. an Engli4t herald, who, in the name of his

sovereign, declared war in form against France.
This step was taken in consequence of the treaty
which Wolsey had concluded with the Fmperor
at Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept
secret Francis, though he had reason to be
furprized with this denunciation, after having
been at fuchs pains to sooth Henry and to gain
his minister, -received the herald with great
composure and dignity s8; and without abandon-
ing any of the schemes which he was forming
against the Emperor, began vigorous prepara-
tions for resisting this new enemy. His trea-
fury, however, being exhausted by the efforts

"' Joyii Vit'a Ferdin. IDavali, p, 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 23.
O" Journal de Louise de Savoie, p. 199.

which he had already made, as'well as by the
sums he expended on his pleasures, he had re-
course to extraordinary-expedients for supplying
it. Several new offices were created, and exposed
to sale ; the royal demefnes were alienated;
unusual taxes were imposed; and the tomb of
St. Martin was stripped of a rail of massive silver,
with which Louis XL. in one of his fits of devo-
tion had encircled it. By means of these expe-
dients he was enabled to levy a considerable
army, and to put the' frontier- towns in a good
posture of defence. Boox IL22

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less soli- Charles
citous to draw as much advantage as poffiblefi E"n
from the accession of such a powerful ally; and
the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this
time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where
his presence was extremely necessary, he visited
the court of England in his way to that coun-
try. He proposed by this interview not only
to strengthen the bonds of friendship which
united him with Henry, and to excite him to
push the war against France with vigour, but
hoped to remove any disgust or resentment that
Wolsey might have conceived on account of the
cruel disappointment which he had met with in
the late conclave. His success exceeded his
most .sanguine expectations; and by his artful

Boort IL address , during a residence of fix weeks i
l-zz. England, he gained not only the King and the

minister, but the nation- itself. Henry, whol
vanity was sensibly flattered by such a visit, a
well as by the studied refpedt with which th
Emperor treated him on every occasion, entered
warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal
foreseeing from Adrian's age and infirmities,
sudden vacancy in the papal fee, dissembled

0

forgot his resentment; and as Charles, beside
augmenting the pensions which he had alread
*fettled on him, renewed his promise of favour
ing his pretensions to the papacy, with all hi
interest, he endeavoured to merit the former
and to secure the accomplishment of the latter
by fresh services. The nation, sharing in the glor
of its monarch, and pleased with the confidenc
which the Emperor placed in the English, b
creating the earl of Surrey his high - admiral,
discovered no less inclination to commence hofi
lities than Henry himself.

TheEnglish IN order to give Charles, before he left Eng.
invade land , a proof of this general ardour , Surrey
France, failed with such forces as were ready, and ra,

vaged the coasts of Normandy. He then made
a descent on Bretagne, where he plundered and
burnt Morlaix , and some other places of les
consequence. After these flight excursions, at

tended with greater dishonour than damage to BOOK IL
France, he repaired to Calais, and took the xI22.
command of the principal army, consisting of
sixteen thousand men; with which, having joined
the Flemish troops under the count de Buren, he
advanced into Picardy, The army which Fran-
cis had assembled, was far inferior in number
to these united bodies, But during the long wai'S with little
between the two nations, the French had dif-fuces."
covered the proper method of defending their
country against the English. They had been
taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched
battle with the utmost care, and to endeavour,
by throwing garrisons into every place capable
0of resistance, by watching all the enemy's mo-
tions, by intercepting their convoys, attacking
their advanced posts, and harassing them con-
tinually with their numerous cavalry, to ruin
them with the length of the war, or to beat them
by piece-meal. This plan the duke of Vendome,
the French general in Picardy, pursued with no.
!efs prudence than success; and not only pre-
vented Surrey from taking any town ds impor-
tance, but obliged him to retire with his army
greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provisions,
and by the loss which it had sustained in 'feveral
unfuccefsful skirmishes.

BooK.I :I THUS .ended the second campaign in a war

t!

152z. most general that. hitherto had. been kindled,

SEurope; and though Francis, by his mother's iA
timed resentment, ,by the disgusting insolence/
his. general, and the caprice .of .the mercenaj
.troops which he employed, had loft his coiquefJ
in Italy, yet all the powers combined againfthit
had not been able to make any impreflion on.
hereditary dominions; and wherever. they eithto
intended or attempted an attack, 'he was we
prepared to receiv.e them, . 4ar

Soliman's WHILE the Christian princes were, thus \va(
conquest of ing each other's strength, Solyman the Magni r
Shodes. cent entered Hungary with a numerous army I

and investing Belgrade, which was deemed th
chief barrier of that kingdom againit the TurkiA
arms, so.on forced it to surrender. Encourage
by this success, he turned his ' vitoorious am
against the island of Rhodes, the feat, at tha
time, of the knights of St. John of Jerufale

,

This small state he attacked with such a numef
ous army , as the lords of Asia have been
accustomed in every age to bring into the field
Two hundred thousand men, and a fleet oP
four hundred fail appeared against a town de.
fended by a garrison. consisting of five thousand
soldiers, and fix hundred knights, under the
command of Villiers de L'ifle Adam , the

grand .master, whose wisdom and valour ren- BOOK II.
idered him worthy of that station at such a i5 -s
Edangerous junc.ure. No sooner did he begin to
[ufpet the destination of Solyman's vast arma- I
Iients, than he dispatched messengers to all the
Christian courts, imploring their aid against the
common enemy.. But though every prince in
that age acknowledged Rhodes to .be the great
bulwark of Christendom in the east, and trusted
to the gallantry of its knights as the best
security against the progress of the Ottoman
arms ; though Adrian, with a zeal which
became the head and father of the church ,
exhorted the .contending powers to forget their
private quarrels, and by uniting their arms, to
prevent the infidels from destroying a society
which did honour to the Christian name; yet so
violent and. implacable was the animosity of
both parties, that, regardless of the danger to
which they exposed all Europe, and unmoved
by the intreaties of the grand master, or the
admonitions of the Pope, they fuffered Soly-
man to carry on his operations against Rhodes
without disturbance. The grand master, after
incredible efforts of courage, of patience, and of
military conduct during a siege of fix months;
after sustaining many affatilts, and disputing
every post with amazing obstinacy, was obliged
at last to yield to numbers, and having obtained

BOOK I1. asn honourable capitulation from the Sultan, vwho

s2zz. admired and refpeded his virtue, he surrendered

the town , which was reduced to a heap of
rubbish, and destitute of every resource " . Char.
1es and Francis, ashamed of having occasioned
£ such a loss to Christendom by their ambitious
conefts , endeavoured to throw the blame of
it on each other, while all Europe, with great.
er justice , imputed it equally to both. The
Emperor, by way of reparation, granted the
knights of St. John the small island of Malta, in
which they fixed their residence, retaining,
though with less power and splendour, their
ancient spirit, and implacable enmity to te
lifidels.

" Fontanus de Bello Rhodico ap. Scard. Script. Rer,

German. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. Hilt. d'Allenm. tom. viii
S7.

# BOOK III.

• THE

HISTORY

OF THE

REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IlL

CHARLEs, having had the fatisfation of feeing oBK I1¥
hostilities begun between France and England, iZ22.
took leave 4of Henry, and arrived in Spain on civil war
the seventeenth of June. He found that country in catile.
just beginning to recover order and strength
after the miseries of a civil war, to which it
had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the xife and progress of which, as it
was but little connedted with the other events
which happened in Europe, hath been reserved
to this place.

-Boor III. No sooner was it known that the Cc tes as

1az2. fembled in Galicia had voted the Emperor a
Infurreaion free gift., withdut obtainiihg the redreis of any
of Toledo. /. .

one grievance, than it excited universal indigna

Matr, Io. tion. The citizens of Toledo, who confidere(

themselves, on account of the great privileges
which they enjoyed, as guardians of the libertie
of the Castilian commons, finding that no regar
was paid to the remonftrances of their deputies
against that unconstitutional grant, took arxs
with tumultuary violence, and seizing the gate
of the city which "were fortified, attacked th
al-cazar, or caftlie, which they foor obliged th
governor to surrender. Emboldened by this sic-
cess, they deprived of all authority every person
whom they fufpeted of any attachment to tk
court, established a popular form of government,
composed of deputies from the several paifhles
.in the city, and levied troops in their own de,
fence. The chief leader of the people in these
insurrections was don John de Padilla, the eldest
son of the commendador of Castile, a young
nobleman of a generous temper, of undaunted
courage, and poffeffed., of the talents as well as
of the ambition which, in times of civil discord,
raise men to power and eminence '.

" Sandov. p. 77.

THE

The resentment .of the citizens of Segovia Booi tII,
produced effeAs still more fatal. Tordefillas, Is22.
one of their representatives in the late Cortes, of Segovia
had voted for the donative; 'and being a bold
and haughty man ^ventured, up6n his return , to
call together his fellow- citizens in the great
church, that he might give them, according to
custom, an account of) his conduat in that as-
fembly. But the multitude, unable to bear his
insolence, in attempting to justify what they
thought inexcusable, burst open the gates of the
church with the utmost fury, and seizing the
unhappy Tordefillas, dragged him through the
streets, with a thousand curses and insults, to-
wards the place of publick execution. In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in procession
with the holy sacrament, in order to appease their
rage. In vain did the monks of those niona-
i teries by which they passed , conjure them on
their knees to spare his life, or at least to allow
him time to confers, and to receive absolution
of his fins. Without lifiening to the didates
either of humanity or religion, they cried out,
" That the hangman alone could absolve such
a traitor to his country; " they hurried hinm
alorig with greater violence; and preceiving that
he had expired under their hands, they hung
him up with his 'head downwards on the coni-

VOL. IL . Q

1300K III.

I 5ZZ.o mon gibbet ". The fame spirit seized the inha;

bitants of Burgos, Zamora,, and several other
cities; and though their representatives , taking
warning from the fate of Tordefillas, had beei
so wife as to save themselves .1r a timely flight,
they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to
the ground, and their effeAs consumed with fire;
and such was the horror which the people had
conceived against them as betrayers of the pub.
lick liberty , that not one in those licentious mul-
titudes would touch any thing, however va.
luable, which had belonged to them '.

Meaqures of ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had
Adrian, in scarcely fixed the feat of his government at Valla-
odTr to

P "'dolid , when he was alarmed with an account of

Jnes, these infurredions. He immediately assembled
Is0'. the council to deliberate concerning the proper

method of suppressing them. The counsellors
differed in opinion; some insisting that it was
necessary to check this audacious spirit in its in-
fancy by a severe execution of juffice; others
advising to treat with lenity a people who had
some reason to be incensed, and not to drive them
beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-timed
rigour. The sentiments of the former being
warmly supported by the archbishop of Granada,

P. Martyr. Ep. 671.

* Sandov. 10o3. P. Mart. Ep. 674,

president of the council, a person of great au- Boot IIL
thority, but cholerick and impetuous were ap- - 52.
pioved of by Adrian , whose zeal to support his
inafter's authority hurried him into a measure,
to 'which; from his natural caution and timidity ,
he would otherwise have been averse. He com-
manded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges,
to repair instantly to Segovia, which had set the
first example of mutiny, and to proceed agaiihft
the delinquents according to law; and left the
people should be so outrageous as to resist his
authority, a considerable body of troops was
appointed to attend him. The Segovians, fore-His troops
feeing what they might exped from a judge so re~1eaf: aS

Segovia

well known for his aulfere and unforgiving tem-
per, took arms with one consent, and having
mustered twelve thousand men, shut their gates
against him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult,
denounced them rebels and outlaws; and his
troops seizing all the avenues to the town,
hoped that it would soon be obliged to surrender
for. want of provisions, The inhabitants, how-
ever, defended themselves with vigour, and hav-
ing received a considerable reinforcement from
Toledo, under the command of Padilla, attacked
Ronquillo, and forced him to retire, with the
loss of his baggage and military chest 4.

' Sancdov. x I. P, Mart. Ep; 679. Miniana, Contin.

BooK III. UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca,

I..zz:. :whom .the Emperor had appointed commander
and at Me-.in chief of the forces in Castile , to :assemble an
dina del
Campo. army, and to besiege Segovia in form. But the

inha.bitants of Medina del Campo., where Cardi.
nal Ximenes had established a vast magazine of
military stores, would not fuffer, him to draw
from it a train of battering canon, or-to destroy
their countrymen with those arms which had
been prepared against the enemies of the king.
dom. Fonseca, .who could not execute his orders
without artillery., determined to .seize the maga.
zine by force; and the citizens Rtandi-ng on their

sug. .Ir. defence., *he assaulted the town with great brisk.

ness: But his troops were so warmly received,
that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire
'to some of the houses, in hopes that the citizens
would abandon the walls, in order to save their
families and effeas. Instead of that, the expedient
to which he had recourse served only to increase
their fury, and he was rep'u'lfed with great in-
famy, while the flames spreading from street to
street, .reduced to alhes aimoft the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in
Spain, and the great mart for the manufadures
of Segovia, and several other cities. As the
warehouses were then filled with goods for the
approaching fair, the loss was immense, and was
felt universally. This, added to the impression

which such a cruel adion made on a people long
unaccuftomed' to the horrors of civil war, en-
raged the Caftilians almost to madness. Fonseca
became the objec of general indignation, and
was branded with the name of incendiary, and
enemy to his country. Even the citizens of
Valladolid, whom the presence of the cardinal
had hitherto restrai-ned, declared that they could
no longer remain inadive fpedators of the fuffer-
ings of their countrymen. Taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt
Fonfeca's house to the ground, eleced new -ma-
giftrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls, with
as much diligence as if an enemy had been
ready to attack them. Bo~oR Ill.

15· ·2~2'

THE Cardinal, though virtuous and disinter- Adrian di.f-
efted, and capable of governing the kingdom b"an hiss
with honour in times of tranquillity, poffeffedt
neither the courage nor sagacity necessary at such
a dangerous jundure. Finding himself unable
to check these outrages committed under his
own eye, he attempted to appease the people,
by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded' his
orders, and had by his rash condud offended
him, as .much as he had injured them. This
condescension, the effed of irresolution and ti-
midity, rendered the malecontents bolder and

. 3

BoK 11II. more insolent; and the Cardinal having soon

{53^, after recalled Fonseca, and dismissed his troops,

which he could no longer afford to pay, as the
treasury, drained by the rapaciousness of the
Flemilh ministers, had received no supply from
the great" cities,,: which were all in arms, the
people were left at full liberty to ad without
controul, and scarcely any shadow of power re,
mained in his hancs,

The views NOR were the proceedings of the commons
and ,,rete the effeds merely of popular and tumultuary
commons ofragei they aimed at obtaining redress of their
8tIiIe, political grievances, and an establishment of

publick liberty on a secure basis, objeds worthy
of all the zeal which they discovered in cone
tending for them. The feudal government in
Spain was at that time in a tflate more favour.
able to liberty than in any other of the great
Europeas. kingdoms. This was owing chiefly,
to the number? of great cities in that country,
a. circumstance I have already taken notice of,
and which contributed more than any other to
mitigate the rigour of the feudal institutions, and
to introduce a more liberal and equal form of
government. The inhabitants of every city
formed a great corporation, with valuable immu-
nities and privileges;, they were delivered from
it Rate of fubjedion and valra!age; they were

admitted to a considerable share .in the legifla-
ture; they. acquired the arts of industry, with-
out which cities cannot subsist; they accumu-
lated wealth, by. engaging in commerce; and
being free and independent themselves, were the
guardians of the publick freedom and indepen-
dence. The genius of the internal government
eltablifhed in cities, which even in countries
where defpotick power prevails most, is democra-
tical and republican, rendered the idea of liberty
familiar and dear to them. Their representatives
in the Cortes were accustomed, with equal spirit,
to check the encroachments of the King, and the
oppression of the nobles. They endeavoured to
extend the privileges of their own order; they
laboured to lhake off the remaining incum-
brances with which the feudal tyranny had bur-
dened them; and conscious of being one of the
most considerable orders in the. state, were; am-
bitious of becoming the most powerful. BfOOrK III..

1j22.

THE present juncure appeared favourable for Their con.
pushing any new claim. Their sovereign was federacy by
absent from his dominions; by the ill-condu a

tne no1a wl

of his ministers he had loft the esteem and affec- Juta
tion of his fubjeds; the people exafpserated by
many injuries had taken arms, though without
concert, almost by general consent; they were
animated with rage capable of carrying them to.

Q4

BOOK III. the most violent extremes; the royal treasury

rX 22. was exhausted; the' kingdom destitute of troops;

and the government committed to a stranger, o'df
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and detei.
mined to improve these circumstances, was to
eftablifih ome form of uniori or association among
the malecontents, that they might at with
greater regularity, and pursue one common end;
and as 'the different cities had been prompted
to take' arms by the fame motives, and were
accuffomed to confider themselves as a diftindt:
body from the reft of the fubjeds, they did not
find this difficult. A general convention was
appointed to be held at Avila. Deputies, ap-
peared there in name of almost all the cities en.
titled to have representatives iri the Cortes. They
all bound themselves by fdlemn oath, to live and
die in the service of the King, and in defence of
the privileges of their order; and assuming the

£ name of the holy Junta or association, proceeded

to deliberate concerning the state of the nation,
and the proper method of redressing its griev-

They dir- ances. The first that naturally presented itself,
claim A- was the nomination of a foreign'er to be regent;
(rian's ,-

,.

tbority. this they declared with one voice to be a vio-

lation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved. to fend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him inr their name to

lay aside all the ensigns of his office, and to ab- Booi III,
ilain for the future from the exercise of a jurif-

x s2.

idiAion which they had pronounced illegal ?.

WgLE they were preparing to execute this bold Get pof-
refolion, Padilla accomplished an enterprize of Queion
the greatest advantage to the cause. After reliev- Joanna.
ing Segovia, he, marched suddenly to Tordefillas, Aug' 9"*
the place where the unhappy Queen Joanna
had resided since the death of her husband, and
being favoured by the inhabitants, was admitted
into the town, and became master of her person,
for the security of which Adrian had negledted
|to take proper precautions ". Padilla waited
immediately upon the Queen, and accosting her
with that profound. refped , which she- exaded
from the few persons whom she deigned to ad-
mit into her presence, acquainted her at large
with the miserable condition of her Castilian
fubjeas under the government of her son, who
being destitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with such
rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in de-
fence of the liberties of their country. The
Queen, as if fhle had been awakened out of a
lethargy, expressed great astonishment at what
he said, and told him, that as she had never
heard, till that moment, of the death of her

s P. Mart. Ep. 691. .

¥ Vita dell'Imper. Carl. V.

dall Als. UUloa. Yen. I 509. p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. I 7

BOOKi III father, or known the fufferings of her people,

ss.z. no blame could be imputed to her, but that no\v

she would. take care to provide a fufficient re,
rnedy; and in the mean time, added flie, let it
be your concern to do what is necessary for the
publick welfare. Padilla, too eager in for pg a
conclusion agreeable to his wishes, mistook this
lucid interval of reason for a perfect return of that
faculty; and acquainting the Junta with what
had happened, advised them to remove to Tor.
defillas, and to hold their meetings in that place.
This was instantly done; but though Joanna
received very graciously an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon her the government
of the kingdom, and in token of her compl
ance, admitted all the deputies to kiss her hand;
though the was present at a tournament held on
that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with
both these ceremonies, which were conduAed
with great magnificence in order to please her,
the soon relapsed into her former melancholy
and sullenness, and could never be brought, by
any arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary towards the dispatch ofbufinefs .

Carry on go- THE Junta concealing as much as pofflible
vernmenthis last circumstance, carried on, all their deli-
her name,

" Sando.v. 164.. P. Mart. Ep, 685, 686,

berations in her name; and as the Caftilians, BOOK I!E
who idolized the memory of Isabella, retained 52z.
a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no
sooner was it known .that she had consented to
assume the reins of government, than the people
Sexpreffed the most universal and immoderate
jpy; and believing her recovery to be compleat,
lafcribed it to a miraculous interposition of heaven,
fin order to rescue their country from the oppref-
sion of foreigners. The Junta, conscious of the and deprive
reputation and power which they had acquiredAdrian of

all power.

by seeming to act under the royal authority, were
nolonger satisfied with requiring Adrian to resign
the office of regent; they detached Padilla to
Valladolid with a considerable body of troops,
prdering him to seize such members of the coun-
cil as were still in that city, to conduct them to
Tordefillas, and to bring away the seals of the
kingdom , the publick archives, and treasury-
books. Padilla, whb was received by the citi-
zens as the deliverer of his country,' executed
his conimiffion with great exadnefs; permitting
Adrian, however, still to reside in Valladolid,
though only as a. private. person, and without
any shadow of power s.

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of The Empe-
.these tranfadions were transmitted while he wasro alarmed.
still in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-

Sandov. i74, P. Mart. Ep. 79 1.

Boor IIT. dence and that of his miniffers, in having de

Szz. fpifed too long the murmurs and remonstrance

of the Caftilians. He beheld, with deep con
cern, a kingdom, the most valuable of any

1

poffeffed, and in .which lay the strength an
sinews of his power, just ready to disown hi
authority, and on the point of being plungedil
all the miseries of civil war. But though h
presence might have averted this calamity, I
could not, at that time, visit Spain without en
dangering the Imperial crown, and allowing th
French King full leisure to execute his ambi

His mea- tious schemes. The only point now to be de
fures with berated upon, was whether he should attemr
the male- to gain the malecontents by indulgence and co0
contents. ceffions, or prepare direAly to suppress them by

force; and he resolved to make trial of the foi
mer, while, at the fame time, if that should fai
of success, he prepared for the latter. For thi
purpose, he issued circular letters to all th
cities of Castile, exhorting them in most gentl
terms, and with assurances of full pardon, t
lay down their arms; he promised such citic
as had continued faithful, not to exad from then
the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and o
fered the fame favour to such as returned t
their duty; he engaged that no office thould I
conferred for the. future upon any but natix
SCaftilians. On the other hand, he wrote to ti
nobles, exciting them .to appear with vigour

defence of their .own rights, and those of the BOOK III
crown, against the exorbitant claims of the corn- 22.
Vnons; he appointed the high admiral, Don
Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable of
Caflile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of
great abilities as well as influence, regents of the
kingdom in conjundion with Adrian; and he
gave them full power and inftrudions, if the
obstinacy of the malecontents should render it
necessary, to vindicate, the royal authority by
orce of arms 9

THESE concessions, which, at the time of his The large
leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the re'mon"
people, came now too late to produce any effeA. the Junta
The Junta, relying on the unanimity with iwhich concerning
the nation submitted to their authority, elated their griev
with the success which hitherto had accompanied
all their undertakings, and feeing no military
force colleded to defeat or obftrud their de-
signs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed for
some time in preparing a remonstrance, contain-
ing a large enumeration not only of the griev-
iances, of which they craved redress, but of such
new regulations as they thought necessary for
the security of their liberties. This remon-
ftrance, which is divided into many articles re-

P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. I88.

conflitution was composed, as well as to tli
various departments in the administration o
government, furnishes us with more authenti!
evidence concerning the intentions of the Junt
than can be drawn from the testimony of ti
later Spanish hifftorians, who lived in times whi
it became fashionable and even necessary
represent the condudt of the mnalecontents in tl
Worf light, and as flowing from the worst no
tives. After a long preamble concerning di
various calamities under which the nation groan
ed, and the errors and corruption in goveyr
ment to which these were to be imputed, thei
take notice of the exemplary patience wherewit
the people had endured them, until felf-prt
servation, and the duty which they owed ti
their country, had obliged them to assemble, M
order to provide in a legal manner for their ow
safety, and that of the confritution: For thi
purpose, they demanded .that the King woul
be pleased to return to his Spanish dominions
and reside there, as all their former monarch
had done; that .he would not marry but wit
consent of the Cortes; that if he should b
obliged at any time to leave the kingdom,
Ih all not be lawful to appoint any foreigner to
regent; that the present nomination of Cardina
Adrian to that office shall instantly be declared

void; that he would not, at his return, bring Boo l ItI
along with him any Flemings or other strangers;

- si r

that no foreign troops shall, on any pretence
whatever, be introduced into the kingdom;
that none but natives ihall be capable of hold-
ing any office or benefice either in church: or
state; that no foreigner flall be naturalized;
that free quarters shall not be granted to fol-
diers, nor to the members of the King's house-
hold, for any longer time than fix days, and that
6nly when the court is in a progress ; that all the
taxes shall be reduced to the fame state they
were in at the death of Queen Isabella; that
all alienations of the royal demefnes or revenues
fmnce that Queen's death shall be resumed; that
all new offices created since that period shall be
abolished; that the subsidy granted by the late
Cortes in Galicia thall not be exaded; that in
all future Cortes each city shall fend one repre-
fentative of the clergy, one of the gentry, and.
one of the commons, each to be eleded by his
own order; that the crown shall not influence
or direct any city with regard to the choie of
its repiefentatives ; that no member of the
Cortes shall receive an office or pension from
the King, either for himself or for any of his
family, under pain of death, and confiscation of
his goods; that each city or community shall
pay a competent salary to its reprefontatives foR

oBQo III. his maintenance during his attendance on th,
A5:21Z. Cortes-; that the Cortes shall assemble once in

three years at least, .whether summoned by the
King or not , and shall then enquire into the
observation of the articles now agreed upon
and deliberate concerning publick affairs; that
' the rewards which have- been given or promised

to any of the members of the Cortes in .Galicia,
Thall be revoked; that no gold, silver, or
jewels, shall, upon pain of death, be sent out
of the kingdom; that judges shall have fixed
salaries assigned them, and shall not receive any
Thare of the fines and forfeitures of persons
condemned by them; that no grant of the
goods of persons accused shall be valid, if given
before sentence was pronounced against them
;that all privileges which the nobles have at any
time obtained, to the prejudice of the commons,
£hall be revoked; that the government of cities
or towns ihall not be put into the hands of no
.blemen; that the poffeffions of the nobility
Thall be fubjed to all publick taxes in the fame
manner as those of the commons; that an inr
quiry be made into the conduc of such as have
been entrusted with the management of the
royal, patrimony since 'the accession of Ferdi-
. nand; and if the King do not within thirty
days appoint persons properly qualified for. that
service ,

. it. shall be .lawful for the Cortes to

nominate them; that Indulgences shall not be

preached

preached or dispersed in- the kingdom until the BoorK IIL.
cause of publiflhingthem be examined and ap- xiz2.
proved ,of by the Cortes:;. that all the money
arising from the sale of Indulgences, ihall be
faithfully ,employed in carrying on war against
the Infidels; that such prelates as do not. reside

,:

in their diocefes fix months in the year, Ihail'
forfeit their revenues .during the time they are , , .
.absent; that the ecclesiastical judges an their
officers flall, not exact greater fees ,than those ,
which are paid in the secular courts; that the
present archbishop of Toledo being a foreigner,
be compelled to resign that dignity, which shall
be conferred upon a Castilian; that the King
.Thall ratify and hold as good service done to
him and to the kingdom-, all the proceedings of.
the Junta, and pardon any irregularities which
the cities may have committed from an excels
of zeal in a good cause: That he shall promise
and swear in the most solemn manner to observe
all th'efe articles, and on no occasion attempt
either to elude, or to repeal thenm; and that he
ihall pever solicit the Pope or any other prelate
to grant him a dispensation or absolution from
this oath and promise zo.

SUGH were the chief articles presented by of libftyi

the Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal in-which it

breathe;d,

°" Sandov. 206. P.. Nart. Ep. 686.
VoL. II. R

i 22 were originally the fame, the genius of those

goverhments which 'rofe from them bore a
ftroibg refembl'ance to each other, and the regu.
latibons whicH:the -Gaftilians attempted' to efta,
bllti on 'this bccafion, differ little from those
which other nations have laboured to procure in
thei pi-ruggles -with their monarchs for liberty.
Th egrievances complained of, and the reme,
dies proposed by" the English commons in their
contests with the 'princes of the house of Stuart
particularly refemb!e those upon which the Junta
now insisted. But the principles of liberty seen
to have been better underfltood at this period,
by the Carfilians , than by any other people
in Europe; they had acquired more liberal
ideas with refpe & to their own rights and
privileges ; they had formed more bold and
generous sentiments concerning government;
and discovered an extent of political knowledge
to which the Englilh themselves did not attain
until more than a century afterwards.

IT, is not improbable, however', that the spirit

of reformation among the Caftilians, hitherto
urireftrained by authority, and emboldened by
success, became too impetuous, and prompted
the Junta 'to propose innovations which, by
alarming the other members of the constitution;

proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, vrho, BOOK III.
iftead of obftrtding, hkd favoured or con- 20sa.
hived at their proceedings, while they confined
their demands of redress to such grievances as
had been occasioned by the King's want of
experience, and by the imprudence and rapa-
cioufnefs of his foreign minifteis , weie filled Irritates t
with indignation when they began to touch the nobles.
privileges of their order, and plainly saw that
the measures of the commons tended no less to
break the power of the aristocracy l than to
limit the prerogatives of the crown. The resent-
ment which th-ey had conceived on account of
Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated conk
fiderably upon the Emperor's raising the cond
stable and admiral' to joint power with him in
that office; and as their pride and dignity were
less hurt by fuffering the Prince to possess ail
extensive prerogative, than by admitting the
high pretensions of the people, they determined
to give their sovereign the assistance which he
had demanded of them, and began to assemble
their vassals for that purpose.

THE Junta, meanwhile , expeted with im1- The depw-

patience the Emperor's answer to their remonties ofthe
ftrance, which they had appointed some of their i, present
number to present. The memberS entrusted their remon-
with this commission set out immediately for O

" o.

x ~z. certain intelligence from court, that they could

not venture to appear there without endanger.
ing their lives, they ftopt short in their journey,
and acquainted the Junta of the information
which had been given them'". This excited
such violent passions as transported . the whole
party beyond all bounds of prudence, or of
moderation. That a Castilian King should deny
his fubjeAs access into his presence, or refuse to
listen to their humble petitions, was. represented
as an ad of tyranny so unprecedented and in-
tolerable, that nothing now remained -but with
arms in their hands to drive away that ravenous
band of foreigners which encompassed the throne,
who after having devoured the wealth of the
kingdom, found it neceffary' to prevent the cries
of an injured people from reaching the ears,9f
their sovereign. Many insisted warmly on ap-
proving a motion which had formerly been
made, for

' depriving ,Charles, during the life

of his mother, of the regal titles and authority,

violent pro;which had been too ralhly conferred upon him
politions of

... . -'

the Junta. from a false supposition of her total inability for

government. Some proposed to provide a pro-
per person to assist her in the administration of
publick affairs, by marrying the Queen to the
SPrince of Calabria, the heir of the Aragonef

XX Sandov. 143..

" * .

7

'Kings, of Naples , who had been detained in BooK 1I
priifon'ifin,ce the time that Ferdinand had dif- i c.
poffeffed his a eftors of their * crown. All
'agred that, as the hopes of obtaining redress
and'feGurity merely by prefentinga their requests
to- their sovereign, had kept them too long in a
t'ate:; bs inadCion , and prevented them from
taking advantage of the unanimity with which
ti.e .sation declared in their favour, it was now
'!rieffary to colled their whole force, and to
exert themselves with vigour, in. opposing this
f' tal combination of the King and nobles against
'their liberties 1.

. '

-,,

.' THEY soon took the field with twenty thou-rTake the
..sand men. Violent disputes arose concerning field.
.the command of this army. Padilla, the dar-
ling of the people and soldiers, was the only
.person, whom they thought worthy of this ho-
'nour. .Btit Don Pedro de Giron, the edeft son
'..'of the Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman
of,the first 'order, having lately joined the com.
mions out of private resentment against the Em-
peror, the: refpe.l due to his birth, together
pirith a secret desire of disappointing Padilla, of
'.wi6fe popularity many members of the Junta
la'd bec6ome jealous , procured him the office oveml~er
.of: general; though he soon gave them a fatal,3.

P

.

' §art. E.p. 68

` ~- R [-1.

Booi III. proof that he poffeffed neither the experience;

5S2. the abilities, nor. the steadiness which that iln

portarit station required,

The regents THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofedc
and nobles as the place of rendezvous for their troops,

which, though far inferior to those of the cor.
mnons in number, excelled them greatly in dif-
cipline and in valour. They had drawn a con.
fiderable body of regular and veteran infantry
out of Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed
the chief strength of their army, 'confifted mostly
of gentlemen accustomed to the military life,
and animated with the martial spirit peculiar to
their order in that age. The infantry of the
Junta was formed entirely of citizens and mechay
nicks, little acquainted with the use of arms.
The small body of cavalry whlich they had been
able to raise, was compeofed of persons of ignpble
birth, and perse fitrangers to the service into
which they entered. The charadter of the gene,
rals differed no less than that of their troops.
The royalists were commanded by the Conde
de Haro , the conftable's eldest son, an officer
of great experienre , and of distinguished abi·
lities.

Tmhprudence GIRON marched with his army directly to
and in f,,c- Riofco !n andc seizing the, villages and passes
e1 :s o f t l-

"

w *"

• " .. .

......

around it, hoped that the royalists would be, BOOK III.
obliged either to surrender for want of provi- I1 22.
fions, or to fight with disadvantage before allsge"nera of
their troops were assembled. But he had not
the abilities, nor his troops the patience and-
discipline necessary for the execution of such a
scheme. The Conde de Haro found little diffi-
culty in conducting a considerable reinforce-
ment through all his posts into the town; and
Giron despairing of being able to reduce it,.
advanced suddenly to Villa-panda, a place be-
longing to the Constable, in which the enemy
had their chief magazine of provisions. By
this ill-judged motion, he left Tordefillas open
.to the royalists, whom the Conde de Haro led
thither in the night, with the utmost secrecy December s.
and dispatch; and attacking the town, in which
'Giron had left no other garrison than a regi-
mnent of priests raised by the bishop of Zamor-a,
he, by break of day,. forced his way into i:t.after
a desperate resistance , became master of the
Queen's person, took prisoners many members
of the Junta, and recovered the great fealB, with
the other ensigns; of gove.rnment.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the re-.
putation and authority which they derived from.
seeming to ad by the Queen's commands; such~
of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or
undetermined in their choice., now joined. tbhe

R 4

S0ooK. III. regents with all' their forces; and an universal

5zz2*. consternation seized the partizans of the corn.

mons. This was much increased by the fufpi.
cions they began to entertain of Giron, whom
Sthey loudly aecufed of having betrayed Torde.
fillas to the enemy; and though that charge
feerns to have been destitute of foundation, t.$d
success of the royalists being owing to Giron'&
ill condud. 'rather,than to his treachery, he so
entirely loft credit with his party , that he

. . resigned his commifflion, and retired to one .d

his carftes . !

.

'The.Junta SUCH members of .the Jun-ta as had escaped
adhere,to the enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Vali
.fytm. "dolid; and as it would have required long tiime

to supply the places of those who were mpri

, foners by a new eledcion, they made choice

among themselves of a small number of persons,
to whom they committed the supreme diredion
of affairs. Their army, which grew stronger
every day by the arrival of troops from. different

' . : 'parts of the kingdom, marched likewise to Val.

. - .ladolid ; and Padilla being appointed com-

mander in chief,. the spirits, of the soldiery re-

- .vived, anid the'whole party forgetting the late

misfortune, continued to. express the fame ardent

. "-.: ,.:eal for' the liberties of their country, and the

,," ;* "

' ' Miscellaneous Trads by Dr. Mich., Geddes, vol. i. 278.

fame implacable animosity against their oppref- BOOK 1I11
fors. 122z.

WHAT they stood most in need of, was mo-Their ex-

ney to pay t!heir troops. A great part of: the pedients for
current coin had been carried out of the king- mran
dom by the Flemings; the Rated taxes levied
in times of peace were inconsiderable; commerce
of every kind being interrupted by the war,
the fum. -which they yielded decreased daily;
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the peo-
ple by burdening them with new impositions,
to which, in that age, they were little accuf-
tomed. But from this. difficulty they were ex-
tricated by Donna Maria Pacheco , Padilla's
wife, a woman of noble birth, of great abilities,,
of boundless ambition, and animated with the
most ardent zeal in support of the cause of the
Junta. She, with a boldness superior to those
superstitious fears which often influence her sex,
proposed to seize all ':the rich and magnificent
ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but left
that action, by its appearance of impiety, might
offend the people, the and her retinue marched
to the church in solemn procession, 'in mourn-
ing habits , with tears in their eyes, beating
their breasts, and falling on their knees, im-
plored the pardon of the :faints whose shrines
ihe was about to violate. By this artifice, which,

3BOo III,

LoSe time in
negociations
with the
nobility. screened her from the imputation of facrifege;

and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal
for a good cause had constrained her, though
with reludance, to venture upon this adion, the
procured a considerable supply of money for the
Junta "'. The regents, no less at a loss how to
maintain their troops, the revenues of the crown
having either been dissipated by the Flemings,
or seized by the commons, were obliged to take
the Queen's jewels, together with the plate
belonging to the nobility, and apply them to
that purpose; and when those failed, they ob.
tained a small fum by way of loan from the King
of Portugal ".

THE nobility discovered great unwillingnefi

to proceed to extremities with the Junta. They
were animated with no ' less hatred than' the
commons against the Flemings; they approved
much of several articles in the remonstrance;
they thought the iuncture favourable, not only
for redressing pall grievances, but for rendering
the constitution more perfect and secure by new
regulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders of which the legislature was composed,
wasted each other's strength by mutual hostilities,
the Frown would rife to power on the ruin or

X+ Sandov. 3o8. Di61. de. Bayle, Art. Pacilla.
"F P, Mart. Ep. 7'8,

weakness of both, and encroach no less on the
independence of the nobles, than on the privi-
leges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the
regents made to the Junta, and the continual
negociations they carried on during the progress
of their military operations. Nor were the terms
which they offered unreasonable; for on con-
dition that the Junta would pass from a few
articles most subversive of the royal authority,
or inconsistent with the rights of the nobility,
they engaged to procure the Emperor's consent
to their other demands, which, if he, through
the influence of evil counsellors., should refuse,
several of the nobles promised to join with them
in order to extort it ", Such divisions, however,
prevailed among the members of the Junta , as
prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging
with prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that mean jealousy and distrust of each other ,
which rivalfhip in commerce or in grandeur is
apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence
and promises, had prevailed on the inhabitants
of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other
noblemen had Ihaken the fidelity of ,ome of the
lesser cities; no person had arisen among the
commons of such superior abilities or elevation

P6 f. Mart. Ep, 69<, 715- Gcddes's Trads, i, 261. 1300r ilL~

Boon III. of mind, as, to acquire the direCion of their

xSz. affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man' of

popular qualities, but difirufted for that reiafon
by those of highest, rank who adhered to the
Junta; the conduct of Giron led the people to
view with suspicion -every person of noble birth
who joined their party; so that the ftrongelt
anarks of irresolution, mutual distrust, and .me.
diocrity of genius, appeared in all their pro<
ceedings at this time. After many consultations
held concerning the terms proposed by the re.
gents, they fuffered themselves to be so carried
away by resentment against the nobility, that
rejeCting all thoughts of accommodation, they
threatened to strip them of the crown-lands,
which they or their ancestors had usurped ,- and
to re-annex these to the royal domain. Upon
this preposterous scheme, which would at., once
have annihilated all the liberties for which they
had been struggling, by rendering the Kings of
Castile absolute and independent on their sub.
jeAs, they were so intent, that they now ex.
claimed with less vehemence against the exac
tions of the foreign ministers, than against the
.immense power and wealth of the nobles, an(
seemed to hope that they might make peac(
with. Charles , by offering to enrich him wit!
their spoils.

THE success which Padilla had met with in BooK III.
several small, encounters, .and ih reducing some 1 22.
inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate theElated with

their fiaccefs

members of the Junta into this measure, filling in ome
them with such confidence in the valour of their maii ren-
troops; -that they hoped for an easy viaory over o"nters.
the royalists. Padilla, that his army might not
reniaininadcive, while flushed with good fortune,
laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of greater
strength and importance than any that he had
hitherto attacked, and which was defended by
a fufficient garrison; and though the besieged
made a desperate resistance, and the admiral
attempted to relieve them, he took theotown byM arch 3,
storm, and gave it up to be plundered by his Ia'r-
soldiers. If he had marched instantly with his
victorious army to Tordefillas, the head quarters
of the royalists, he could hardly have failed of
making an effectual impression on their troops,
furprized at the briflknefs of his operations, and
far from being of fufficient strength to give him
battle. But the fickleness and imprudence of the
Junta prevented his taking this step. Incapable, Imprudence
like all popular associations, either of carrying ftheir con
on war, or of making peace, they listened again
to overtures of accommodation, and even agreed
to a short suspension of arms. This negociation
terminated in nothing; but while it was carrying
on, many of Padilla's soldiers, unacquainted

BoOK IIL with the restraints of discipline, went off wvith

x si, the booty which they had got at Torrelobaton

and others, wearied out by the unusual length
of the campaign, deserted 7. The constable too
had leisure to assemble his forces at Burgos;
and to prepare every thing for marching; -and as
soon as the truce expired, he effeded. a junction
with the Conde de Haro, in spite of all Padilla's
efforts to prevent it. They advanced immediately
towards Torrelobaton, and Padilla finding thB
number of his troops so diminished that he drtrf
not risk a battle, attempted to retreat to Toio,
-which if he could have accomplished, the inva,
fionr of Navarre at that junCure by the French,
and the necessity which the regents must have

The nobles been under of detaching men to that kingdom,
attack the might have saved him from danger. But Hard,
amy of the sensible how fatal would be the consequences of
April -3. fuffering him to escape, marched with such

rapidity at the head of his cavalry,. that he
came up with him near Villalar, and without
waiting for his infantry, advanced to the attack.
Padilla's army, fatigued and difheartened by thefr
precipitant retreat, which they could not diftin,
guifh from a flight, happened at that time to be
passing over a ploughed field, on which such a
violent rain- had fallen, that the soldiers funk al.
Inolt to the knees at every step, and remained

Z7 Sandov. 336.

exposed to the fire of some field-pieces which the BOOK IIli
royalists had brought' along with them. All these

x 22z.

circumstances so disconcerted and intimidated
raw soldiers, that without facing the enemy, or
making any resistance, they fled ini the utmost anad def
confusion. Padilla exerted himself with extraor-it.
dinary courage and a6tivity in order to rally
them, though in vain; fear rendering them deaf
both to his threats and intreaties: Upon which,
finding matters irretrievable, and resolving not
to survive the disgrace of that day, and the ruin
of his party, he ruffed into the thickest of the
enemy; but. being wounded and dismounted, he
was taken prisoner. His principal officers shared
the fame fate; the common soldiers were al-
lowed to depart unhurt, the nobles being too
generous to kill men who threw down their

18

arms .

THE resentment of his enemies did not fuffer
Padilla to linger long in expedation of what
ihould befall him. Next day he was condemned
to lose his head, though without any regular
trial, the notoriety of the crime being supposed
fufficient to supersede the formality of a legal

" Sandov. 34 , &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin.
p. 26. Epitome de la Vida y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V.
por D. Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuni'ga. 4to. MIadr. 6z27.
p. 19.

Boors IIL process. He was led instantly to execution, to

irz.. g'ether with Don John Bravo, and Don Franci
raadiU, NI aldonada, the former commander of the.Sego
their gene-,. .
ral, pt to vians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca

1th'. ,~.adilla viewed the approach of death with call

but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo, hi
fellow - fufferer , expreffed' some indignation a
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked
him, by observing, C That yefferday was th
time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen
this day to die with the meekness of Chriftianis
Being permitted to write to his wife and to tb
community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and vir
tuous tenderness, and the latter with the exul
tation natural to one who considered himself a
a martyr for the liberties of his country "'. Afte

S

. .this,:

") The strain of these letters is to eloquent and high-fpi.

rited, that I have translated them for the entertainment of
my. readers..

The Letter of Don John Padilla to his JWife.

SE OR RA,
<t IF your grief did not afflict me more than my o0Vd

death, I should deem myself perfedtly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers±.
mark of distinguishing favour upon that person, for who0'
he appoints a death such as mine, which, though lamented
by many, is nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would
require more time than Inow have, to write any thing tlat

this, he submitted quietly to;his fate. Mo`a of lio0aIlLi
the. Sp~anish -historians ; acctuftom.ed to ideasv-o f - 52.
government, and of regal poe; r, very diffatreit -.'
from thofer upon which he adtcdA' have , b.eeii so
eager to testify -their difapprobatiorr of the: ci-ife
in which he was engaged 'that they have .;neg
leded , or have been afraid to do juftiee to his.
virtues ; and by blackening hisr memory , have
endeavoured to deprive him of. that pity , which
is seldom denied to illustrious fudfferers,

.

could afford you consolation: that iny enemies will rot ,
grant me, nor do I with to delay the tec~eption of that ci-owii
which I hope to enjoy. You may bewail .your own loss,
but not my death, which; being so honourable, ought not
to be lamented by any; My foul, foi nothing else is left
to me, I bequeath to you. You will "receive it, as:.the
thing in this world which you valued tnoft I do not write
to my father Pedro Lopez, because I dare not; for though
I have shewn myself to be his son in daring to lose my life3
I have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not
attempt .to fay any thing more, that I may not tire the
executioner, who waits for me, and that I may not excite
a suspicion, that, in order to prolong my life. I lengthen
out my letter. My servant Sofia, an eye-witness, and to.
whom I have communicated my most secret thoughts, will
inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I reft@
expedting the instrument of your grief, and of my deliver-
ance."

His letter to the City of Toledo.

'" To thee, the crown of Spain, and the light of the whole

world, free from the time of 'the mighty Goths: to thee,
who by shedding the blood of strangers, as well as thy owri

VoL. IL S

t'.III;. TtEi viaori a.tY Villalar proved as decisive as

1 2i.: ifta;ss.corpleat.;-Vall:aMdolid., th-e most zealous
Riin of ahe 6ofallthe- affocit~4decities , opened its gates in.
party. nrediately t,"theba '..querors; and being treated

Withagreat cleric;y :'by the regents, Medina del
Gampo, Segov-ia ,arid many.0other towns fqllowed
its.i example." This:fididenf dissolution of a con.
federacy , formed inotf. upon Pight disgusts ., or
tipoh trifling imoiives; ,' into which' the wiole
body of the people -had entered,' and which had
been allowed time to acquire some degree of

blood; haft. recovered'liberty for thyself, and thy neighbour.
ing cities; Thy: legitimdte: son Juan de Padilla gives infor,
mation, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient vidtorie
are' to be refreshed.: If fate hath not permitted my adtions
toi? eb placed :imong :your fuccefsful and celebrated exploits
the fault hath ibeen -in my ill fortune, not in my good will,
This I-requeft of'thee as of a mother, to accept, since Goi
hath,:given me nothing :more to lose for thy fake, than tha
wyhich I am now to relinquish. I am more solicitous abou
thy .good opinion than about my own life. The thifting
o- ofrtune, whic)h never stands frill, are many. But this"
fe-e with infinite consolation, that I, the least of thy cliih
dren, fuffer death for thee; and that thou haft nurfed:"
thy breasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongi
Many tongues will relate the manner of my death, of whic
I. am still ignorant, though I know it to be near. My en
will testify what was my desire. My foul I recommend i
thee as to the- patroness of Christianity. Of my body I fa
.nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, 'f
at this very moment I feel the knife at my throat wvi
greater dread of thy displeasure, than apprehension of n'
'own pain." Sandov. Hilt. vol. i. p. 478.

prder and consistence by eftabliflhing a regular Bi6jt Iit
plan of government, is the strongest proof of 1xz
the inability of its leaders , or of some secret
discord reigning among its members. Though
part of the army by Which they had been £ub.
dued, was obliged, a few days after the battle a
to march towards Navarre , in otder to check
the progress of the French in that kingdom, no-
thing could prevail on the dejeced commons of
Castile to take arms again, and to embrace fucih
a favourable opportunity of acquiring those
rights and privileges for which they had ap padiiiats
peared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone, wire defed
ianimated by Donia Maria Pacheco , Padilla's Toledn wit
'idow, who, instead of bewailing her husband i
with a womanish sorrow j prepared to revenge'his
death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of
which lie had fuffered , must be excepted. Re-
fpedt for her sex , or admiration of her couragd
arid abilities, as well as 'fympathy with her mif-
fortunes, and veneration for the meriory of her
b;ufband, secured her the fame ascendant over
the people which he had poffeffed. The 'pru-
dence and vigour with which ihe adted, justified
that confidence they iaced in her. She wrote
to the French' generat rn Navarre , ericouraginig
him to invade Castile. by the offer of powerfuii
assistance. She endeavoured by her letters and
Imiffaries to revive the spirit and hopes of otihef

l, *·

** S

B OK !II. cities. She raised soldiers, and exated a great

fum from the clergy belonging to the cathedral,.
to defray the expence of keeping them on foot".
She :employed every artifice that could interest
or inflame the populace. For this purpose fthe
ordered crucifixes to be used by her troops in-
stead of colours , as if they had been at awar
with infidels, and enemies of religion ; she
marched through the streets of Toledo with her
son, a.young child, clad in deep mourning seated
on a mule, having a standard carried before
him, representing the manner of his father's exe-
cution "2 By all these means the kept the minds
of the people in such perpetual agitation as
prevented, their paflions from subsiding., and ren-
dered them insensible of the dangers to which
they were exposed, by standing albne in oppo-
fition to the royal authority. 'While the army
was employed in Navarre , , the. Regents were:
unable to attempt the reduction of Toledo by
force: and all their endeavours either to dimi-
nifh 'Dornna Maria's credit with the people , or
to- gain her by large promises, and the folici-
tations of her ,brother the Marquis de Mondeiar,.
proved ineffectua. Upon. the expulfiori of the,
French out. of Navarre ,S. art of the army re-
turned into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even
this made, no; impression on the intrepid and
obstinate .courage of Donna Maria. She de-

" P. Mart. Ep. 727. 3X Sandov. 37 .

fended the'town with vigour, her troops beat BooR IIi.
the Royalists in several sallies , and no progress is z2
was made towards reducing the place, until the
clergy, whom she had highly offended by invad-
ing their property , ceased to support her. As
Loon as they received information of the death
of 'William de Croy archbishop of Toledo,
whose poffeffion of that fee was their chief griev-
ance, and that the Emperor had named a Cafti-
lian to succeed him, they openly turned against
her , and persuaded the people that she had ac-
quired such influence over them by the force
of enchantments, that she was assisted by a fa-
miliar demon which attended her in the form
of a Negro-maid , and that by its suggestions
the regulated every part of her conducd". The
credulous multitude whom their impatience of a
long blockade , and despair of obtaining fuc-
cours either from the cities formerly in confe-
deracy with them, or from the French, rendered
desirous of peace, took arms against her , and
driving her out of the city, surrendered it to oaober26.
the Royalists. She retired to the citadel, which
she defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and when reduced to the last extreni-
ties, the made her escape in disguise, and fled to Feb. 0o,,
Portugal , where she had many relations ". 2i -"

" P. Mart. Ep. 727.
I " Sandov. 375. P. Mart, Ep. 7 4. Ferrer. viii. 563.

$S3

3ook III. UPON her flight , the citadel surrendered.
is 22. Tranquillity was re-established in Castile; and
Fatal effeas this bold attempt of the commons, like all un.
o this civil ccefsful infurredions , contributed to confirm

and extend the power of the crown, which it
was intended to moderate and abridge. The
Cortes still continued to make a part of the Caf.
tilian constitution , and were summoned to meet
nwhenever the King stood in need of money ;
but instead of examining and redressing publick
grievances, before they proceeded to grant any
supply, the more courtly custom of voting a
donative in the first place was introduced, and
the Sovereign having obtained all that he wanted,
never allowed them to enter into any inquiry,
or to a-ttempt any reformation injurious to his
authority. The privileges which the cities had
enjoyed were gradually circumscribed or abao
hifhed ; their commerce began from this period
to decline; and becoming ]efs wealthy and less
populous , they loft that power and influence
whlich they had acquired in the Cortes.

The pro, WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities
grers of the of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn
$nfurree- i frl voet
tions 1a- by intestine commotions still more violent. The
mncia. association which had been formed in the city ol

Valencia in. the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty, and which was distinguished

by the name of the Germanada , continued to .BOOK III.
subsist after the Emperor's departure from Spain. I.j2s.
The members of it , upon pretext of defending
the c9asts against the descents of the Corfairs of
Barbary, and under fandion of that permission,
which Charles had rashly granted them, refused
to lay down their arms. But as the grievances,
which the Valencians aimed at redressing, pro-
ceeded from the arrogance and exadions of the
nobility , rather than from any unwarrantable
exercise of the royal prerogative , their resent-
ment turned chiefly against the former. As
soon as they-were allowed the use of arms, and
became conscious of their own strength , they
grew impatient to take vengeance of their op--
preffors. They drove the nobles out of most
of the cities , plundered their houses, wasted
their lands, and assaulted their castles. They
then proceeded to eled thirteen persons , one
from each company- of tradesmen established in
Valencia, and committed the administration of
government to them , under pretext that they
would reform the laws, establish one uniform
mode of dispensing justice without partiality,
or .regard' to the diftindion of ranks , and thus
restore men to some degree of their

j original

equality.

STHE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-
defence, Hostilities 'began , and were carried

S4

pooR:':III.. :or with all the rancour with which resentment

a s~a .at oppression intpired the one party, and the

idea of insulted dignity animated the other. As
:;no person of xhonourable birth', or of liberal
education, jdined the Germanada, the councils
i a well as troops of the confederacy were con.
duked by low mechanicks, who acquired the
confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by
:the;tiercenefs of their zeal, and the extravagance
Abf..th.eir proceedings. Amon'g such. mern , the
laws introduced in civilized nations, in order to
restrain or moderate the violence of war, were
-unknown or despised ; and they committed the
wildest ads of cruelty and outrage.

The Emperor occupied with fuppreffiig the

infurreaion in Caflile, which more immediately
threatened the fubhverfion of' his power and pre,
rogative - was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia , and left the nobility
of that kingdbm to tight their- own battles,
His viceroy, the Conde de Melito, had the
supreme command of the forces vwhich the nobles
raised among their vassals. The Germanada
carried on the war during the years one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty and 'twenty-one,
with a more persevering courage , than could
have been expeded from a body fb tumultuary,
under the conduct of such leaders. They de.

seated the nobility in several adions, which,
though not considerable, were extremely sharp.
They repulsed them in their attempts to reduce
different towns. But the nobles, by their fupe-
ri6r fki(l in war, and at the head of troops
modre aecuftomed to service, gained the advan-
tage in nioft of the rencounters. At length,
they were joined by a body of Castilian cavalry,
which the regents dispatched towards Valencia,
soon after their victory over Padilla at Villalar,
and by their affillance they acquired such fupe.
riority , that they entirely broke and ruined the
Germanada. The leaders of the party were
put to death, almost without any formality of
legal trial, and fuffered such cruel punishments,
as the sense of recent injuries prompted the
nobles to infliA. The government -of Valencia
was re- established in its ancient form ". BOOK III.

1 5 aZ.

IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame Appearan-
spirit of difaffeCtion and mutiny, which reigned cesi o i.i
in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to ap-Aragon,
pear; but by the prudent conduct of the viceroy,
Don John de- Lanufa, they were so far com-
posed, as to prevent their breaking out into any
open infurre&ion. But in the island of Ma-

24 Argenfola Annales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. Ig8.
Sayas Annales de Aragon, cap. 5. i2. &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib,
xxxiii. & xxxiv. paffini. Ferrer. Hist. d'Efpagne, viii. 9 42.
564. &c,

Bgior III. jorca, annexed to the crown of Aragon, the

I 2z2. fame causes which had* excited the commotions
Formidable in Valencia, produced effeds no less violeni
infurreftion
in Majorca. The people, impatient of the hardships whici

they endured under the rigid jurifdi&ion of the

Miarch19, nobility, took arms in a tumultuary mannxer
xwT. deposed their viceroy; drove him out of the

island ; and massacred every gentleman wlh
was so unfortunate as to fall into their hands
TlFe obfinacy with which the people of Ma,
jorca persisted in their rebellion , was equa
to the rage with which they began it. Many
and vigorous efforts were requisite in order t
reduce them to obedience ; and tranquillity
was re - established in every part of Spain b'
fore they could be brought to submit to thei
sovereign '.

eanues WHILE the spirit of difaffeaion was so genera
wvhich pre-.
vented the among the Spaniards, and so many causes conm
union of the curred in precipitating them into such violen

1iCalecoR.
tent~.lo measures, in order to obtain the redress of their

grievances, it may appear strange, that the
malecontents in, the different kingdoms should
have carried on their operations without any
>mutual concert, or even any intercourse with

3? Argenfola Annales de Aragon, c. II . Ferrer. Hist. viii

;42. Sayas Annales de Aragon, cap. 7. I1. 14. 76, 81. Fert
reras Hilt. d'Efpagner viii. 979, &c. 60p.

ach other.' By uniting their councils and BooK III
arfns, they might have aded both with greater is2a.
force, and with more effec. The appearance
.ofa national confederacy would have rendered
it no less refpedable among the people than
formidable to the crown; and the Emperor,
pnable to resist such a combination, mulf have
copplied'with any terms which the members of
i thought fit to preferibe. Many things, how-
ever, prevented the Spaniards from forming
tlemfelves into one body, and pursuing com-
mon measures. The people of the different
ingdoms in Spain, though they were become
iei fubjeas of the. fame sovereign, retained, in
Iful force, their national antipathy to each other.
she remembrarnce of their ancient rivallhip and
ioftilities was still recent, and the sense of reci-
Irocal injuries so entire, as to be incompatible
with their adting in confidence and concert.
Each nation chose rather to depend on its own
efforts, and to maintain the struggle alone, than
to implore the aid of neighbours, whom they
distrusted and hated. .At the fame time, the
forms of government in the several kingdoms
of Spain were so different, and the grievances
of which they complained, as well as the altera-
'tions and amendments which they attempted to
introduce, so various, that it was not easy to
king them to unite. in any conmomn plan. To

BooK II. this disunion Charles was indebted for the r

i5 zz.. servation of his Spanish crowns; and while e;

of the kingdoms followed separate measures,
of them were obliged at last to conform to
will of their sovereign.

The Empe- THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain fil
ror's pru- his fubjeds who had been in arms againift
dent and ge-
nerous be- with deep apprehensions; from which he f&
haviour to- delivered them by an ad of clemency, no
ll0tne1 prudent than generous. After a rebellion
tents. general, scarcely twenty persons, among so mi

criminals obnoxious to the law, had bU
punished capitally in Castile. Though ftronl
solicited by his council, Charles refused to fl

oa. 8s. any more blood by the hands of the exe

tioner; and published a general pardon,
tending to all crimes committed since the ca
rnencement of the infurredions, from wh
only .fourscore were excepted. Even these
seems to have named, rather with an intent
to intimidate others, than from any inclinat
to seize them; for when an officious cour
offered to inform him where one of the ro
considerable, among them was concealed,
avoided it by a good-natured pleasantry; " G<
says he, "I have now no reason to be afraid
_that man, but he has some cause to keep a
distance from me, and you would be het
employed in telling him that I am here, than

cquainting me with the place of his retreat .
Sthis appearance of magnanimity , as well as
Shis care to avoid every thing which had
iifgtfted' the 'Caftilians during his former refi-
lence among them; by his address in assuming
heir manners, in speaking their language, and
n complying with all their humours and cut-
oms, he acquired an ascendant over them which
ardly any of their native monarchs had ever
tained, and brought them to support him in
II his enterprizes with a zeal and valour to
thich he owed much of his success and gran-

u 27
eur . BooIK II.

1522.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian sets
tdrian set out for Italy to take poffeffiion of his out for

.Rome, and

ie dignity. But though the Roman people his in re.
Inged extremely for his arrival, they couldception

, on his first appearance, conceal their fur-
rze and disappointment. After being accuf-
o0ned to the princely magnificence of Julius,
nd the elegant splendour of Leo, they beheld
dijth contempt an old man of an humble deport-
ent, of austere manners, an enemy to pomp,
Lftitute of taste in the arts, .and unadorned with
ny of the external accomplishments which the

16 Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del Emper. Carlos pOr Don
uan. Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, p. 30o.

SUlloa Vita di. Carlo V. p. 85.

Doar 'IIL

J5izZ vulgar exped in those raised to eminent flatiojns?

Nor did his political views and. maxims feei
less strange and aftonifhling to the pontifica
ministers. He acknowledged and bewailed ti
corruptions which abounded in the church,
wvell as in the court of Rome, and prepared t
reform both; he discovered no intention I
aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled ]
kretaining such territories as some of his pr
deceffors had acquired by violence or fraud
rather than by any legal title, and for thb
reason he invested Francesco Maria de Rova
anew' in the dutchy of Urbino, of which 1P
had 'ftripped him, and surrendered to the Duk
of Ferrara several places wrested from him
the church '. To men little habituated to i
princes regulate their conduct by the maxim
of morality and the principles of justice, thi]
actions of the new Pope appeared inconteftabl
*proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adrian
who was a perfedt firanger to the comple
and intricate system of, Italian politicks, an
who could place no confidence in persons whdc
subtle refinements in business suited so ill wvit
his natural simplicity and candour, being ofte
embarrassed and irresolute in his deliberations,

• Guic. 1. xv./ 8, Jovii Vita Adriani, ix 7. Bellefor

Epitr, des Princ. 84. ?. Guic. lib. xv. 240o

the opinion of his incapacity, daily increased, BooK III.
until both his person and government became isz2,
objects of ridicule among his fubjeds 30.

ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, He endea.

endeavoured to assume the impartiality whichVours to re-
became the common father of Chrifteridom, and in Euripe.
laboured to reconcile the contending princes,
that they might unite in a league against Soly-
man, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered him
more formidable than ever to Europe "'. But
|this was an undertaking far beyond his abilities.
To examine such a variety of pretensions, to
adjust such a number of interfering interests, to
extinguish the passions which ambition , emu-
lation, and mutual injuries had kindled, to
bing so many hostile powers to pursue the fame
scheme with unanimity and vigour, required
aiot only iuprightnefs of intention, but a great
superiority both of understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of

peace than the Pope. The Imperial army under
Colonna was still kept on foot, but as the Em-
peror's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in
the Low Countries, were either exhausted, or

t3 Jov. Vita Adr. ix8. P. Mart. Ep. 774. Rufcelli Let-
tres des Prinic. vol. i. 87. 96. ox.

I1 Bellefor. Epitr. pA 86.

BooK III.

IS 22. applied to some other purpose, it depended

entirely for pay and subsistence on the Italians,
A great part of it was quartered in the eccd,
fiaftical state, and monthly contributions were
levied upon the Florentines, the IVlilanefe, the
Genoese, and Lucchefe by the viceroy of.Na
pies; and. though all exclaimed against fuel
oppression, and were impatient to be delivered
from it, the dread of worse consequences from
the rage of the army, or the resentment of th
Emperor, obliged them to submit 3.

A new So much regard , however, was paid to th
league Pope's exhortations , and to a bull which he
against the'.
French issued, requiring all Christian princes to confen
King. to .a truce for three years, that the Imperial, th

French, and Englilh ambassadors at Rome were
empowered to treat of that 'matter; but whil
they wasted their time in fruitless negociations,
their masters !continued their preparations for
war. The Venetians,. who had hitherto adhered
with great firmness to their alliance with Francis,
being now convinced that his affairs in Italy
were in a desperate situation, entered into a
league against him with the Emperor; to which

June s,. Adrian , at the instigation of his countryman

and friend Charles' de Lannoy, viceroy of Na.
ples, who persuaded him that the only obstacles

-" Guic. 1. xv. 238.

to peace arpfe from the ambition of the French Book Iil,
King, soon after acceded. The other Italian i523.
states followed their example; and Francis was
left, without a tingle ally, to resist the efforts
of so many enemies, -whose armies threatened,
and whose territories encompassed, his dominions
on every fide "3

'THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it Francis9s
was thought, would have 'obliged Francis to vigorous
keep wholly on the defensive, or at least have oppofitiod
prevented his entertaining any thoughts oft" i.
marching into Italy. But it was the character
of that Prince, too apt to become remiss, and
even negligent on ordinary occasions, to rouse
at the approach of danger, and not only to
encounter it with spirit and intrepidity, qualities
Which never forsook him, but to provide against
it with diligence and industry. Before his ene-
mies were ready to execute any of their fchemeg,
Francis had assembled a numerous army. His
authority over his own fubjeAs was far greater
than that which Charles or Henriry poffeffed over
theirs. They depended on thejr diets, their
cortes, and their parliaments for money, which
was usually granted them in small sums , very
slowly, and with much reludance. The taxes

33 Guic. 1. xv. 241. 24E8
, VOL. II T

Booi III. he could impose were more considerable, and

Ss 3. levied with greater dispatch; so that on this, as

well as on other occasions, his army was in the
field while they were devising ways and means
for raising theirs. Sensible of this advantage,
Francis hoped to disconcert all the Emperor's
schemes, by marching in person into the Mila.
nefe; and this bold measure, the more formida.
ble because unexpeted , could scarcely have
failed ,of producing that effec. The vanguard

snfeeaea of his army had already reached Lyons, and he
rpon the himself was hastening after it with the second di.
difovery Ofvifion of his troops, when the discovery of a,
the confta- .s
,le Bour- domeftick conspiracy which threatened the ruin;
bon's con- of the kingdom, obliged him to stop Ihort, and
fpiracy.

, to alter his measures.

His chai.c-
ter. TuE author of this dangerous plot was Charles,

Duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose
noble birth, vast fortune, and high office, raised
him to be the most powerful fubje in France,
as his great talents, equally suited to the field
or the council, and his signal services to the.
crown, rendered him the molft illustrious and
deserving. The near resemblance between the
King and him in many of their qualities, both
being fond of war, and ambitious to excelin
manly exercises, as well as their equality in age,
and their proximity of blood, ought naturally
to have secured him a considerable ihare in that

IVlonarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the BooK III.
ging's mother, had contra.ed a violent aver- Ij23.
sion to the house of Bourbon, for no better The causes

of his dif-

reason than because Anne of Bretagne, the affetion.
Q(uleen of Louis the Twel h, with whom the
lived in perpetual enmity, dtifcovered a peculiar
attachment to that branch of the royal family;
and the had taught her son,. who was too sus-
ceptible of any impression which the gave him,
to view all the cbnftable's adions with a mean
and unbecoming jealousy. His distinguished
merit at the battle of IMarignano had not been
fufficiently rewarded; he had been recalled
from the government of IVlilan upon very frivo-
bous pretences, and had met with a cold recep-
tion, which his prudent conduct in that difficult
iation did not deserve; the payment of his
pensions had been suspended without any good
cause; and during the campaign of one thdii-
land five hundred and twenty-one, the King, as
has already been related, had affronted him inr
presence of the whole army, by giving the com-
mand of the van to the Duke of Alencon. The
constable, at sirs, bore these indignities with
greater moderation than could have been ex-
peted from an high-fpirited Prince , conscious
of what was due to his rank, and to his services.
Such a multiplicity of injuries, however,, ex-

T

BooK III. haufted his patience; and inspiring him wvit

xs53. thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, an

began to hold a secret correspondence with sot
of the Emperor's ministers.

ABOUT' that time the Dutchess of Bourbo

happened to die without, leaving any childre
Louise, of a disposition no less amorous th
vindidive, and still futceptible of the tende
passions at the age of forty-fix, began to vi
the Constable, a Prince as amiable as he

v

accomplished, with other eyes; and notwit
flanding the great disparity of their years, ft
formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbo
who might have expeced every thing to whic
ana ambitious mind can aspire, from the dotij
fondness of a woman who governed her fonan
the kingdom, being incapable either of imitatin
the Queen in her sudden transition from hatr
to love , or of dissembling so meanly, as to pi
tend affedion for one who had persecuted hi
so long with unprovoked malice, not only rt
jeaed the 'match, .but embittered his refufal'.
some severe raillery on Louife's person and ch
rader. She finding herself not only contemned
but insulted, her disappointed love turned int
hatred, and since the could not marry, the rt
solved to ruin Bourbon,

FOR this purpose she consulted with the chan- Boor III,
cellor Du Prat, a man, who, by a base profti- 1523.
tution of great talents and of superior skill in
his profeffion, had risen to that high office.
By his advice a law-suit was commenced against
the Constable, for the whole estate belonging to
the house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed
iln the King's name, as having fallen to the
crown; part in that of Louise, as the nearest
heir in blood of the deceased Dutchess. Both
these claims were equally defitute of any foun-
dation in justice; but Louise, by her folicita-
tions and authority, and Du Prat, by employ-
ing all the artifices and chicanery of law, pre-
Wailed on the judges to order the estate to be
sequestered. This unjust decision drove the Con-His secret
fable to. deffiair, and to measures which despair negociations
alone could 'have didated. He renewed his in-~mperthe
rtrigues in the Imperial court , and flattering
himself that the injuries which he had fuffered
would justify his having recourse to any means
in order to obtain revenge, he offered to transfer
his allegiance from his natural sovereign to the
Emperor, and to assist him in the conquest of
France. Charles, as well as the King of Eng-
land, to whom the secret. was communicated '",
expeding prodigious advantages from his revolt,
were ready to receive him with open arms, and
spared neither promises nor allurements which

1Rymer's Feeder. xiii. 794.

T3

Boo III.

X23. might help to confirm him in his resolution,

The Emperor olfered him in marriage his sifter
Eleanor, the widow of the King of Portugai
with a vast portion. He was included as a ,prin.
cipal in the treaty between Charles and Henry,
The couhties of Provence and Dauphine were
to be fettled on him, with the title of King.
The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the Fle.n,
ings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thousand
Germans, levied at their common charge , were
to penetrate into Burgundy, and to adt in con.
cert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise fix
thousand men among his friends and vaffalsij
the heart of the kingdom. The execution:
this deep-laid and dangerous plot was fufpendd.
until the King flould cross the Alps with the
only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced' in his march fdo
that purpose, France stood on the brink of de.
ftrudcion, 3.

difoovered. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conduded with the most pro-
fourid secrecy , and communicated only to a
few chosen confidents , could not altogether
escape the observation of the reft of the Con-

" Thuani Hist. lib. i. c. Io. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. libk

yiii. c. I8. p. 207.

flable's numerous retainers, rendered more in- BOOK lit.
quifitive by finding that they were diltrufted. I523.-
Two of these gave the King some intimation of
a mysterious correspondence between their master
and the Count de Rceux, a Flemifhl nobleman
of great confidence with the Emperor. Francis,
who could not bring himself to fufped that the
first Prince of the blood would be so base as to
betray the kinigdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins,- where the Constable was
in bed, feigning indisposition, that he might not
be obliged to accompany the King into Italy,
and acquainted -him of the intelligence which *
hie had received.. Bourbon, with great solemnity,
:and the most imposing affedation of ingenuity
}nd candour, asserted his own innocence; and
as his health, he said, was now more confirmed,
he promised to join the army within a few days.
Francis, open and candid himfeif, and too apt
to be deceived by the appearance of those vir-
tues in others , gave such credit to what he said,
that he refused to arrest him, although advised
to take that precaution by his wisest counsellors,
and as if the danger had been over, he con-
tinued his march towards Lyons. The Con- September.
stable set out soon after, seemingly with an in-
tention to follow him; but turning suddenly to !ies to
the left he crossed the Rhone , and after infinite t"!y'
fatigues and perils, escaped all the parties which

r T4

.OOK III. the King, sensible too late of his credulity, sent

z,3.;, out to intercept him , and reached Italy. in

safety 3'

S:FRA.NCIS took every pofimble precaution to
pr~rent the bad effects of the irreparable error

lhich he had committed. He put garrisons

in 'll the places of strength in the Conftable's
territories. He seized all the genrtlemen whom
he could fufped: of being his associates; and
as he had not hitherto discovered the whole
extent of the confpirator's schemes, nor knew
how far the infedion had spread among his sub.
jeds, he was afraid that his absence might en-
courage them to make some desperate attempt;
and for that reason relinquished his intention of
leading his army in person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on

the Mlilanefe; but appointed admiral Bonnivet
to take the supreme command in his stead, and
to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this
preferment to his abilities as a general; for of
all the talents requisite to form a great com-
mander, he poffeffed only personal courage, the
lowest and the most common. But he was the

" Me4m. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de

Jla France, p. 48

French in-
va(e the
ly1ilanefe.

rioft accomplished gentleman in the French BOOK III.
court, of agreeable manners, an insinuating ad- T5 ,,
dress, and a sprightly conversation; and Francis,
who lived in great familiarity with his courtiers,
was so charmed with these qualities., that he hoc
noured him, on all occasions, with the most par,
tial and distinguishing marks of his favour. IHe
was, besides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon;
and as the King hardly knew whom to trust at
that junAure, he thought the chief command
could be lodged nowhere so safely as in his
hands,

COLONNA, who was intrufted with the de-Their ill
fence of the NMilanefe, his own conquest, was inco"nda4
no condition to

l efift such a formidable army,

He was destitute of money fufficient to pay his
troops, which were reduced to a finall number by
sickness or desertion, and had, for that reason,
been obliged to negled every precaution- necef-
fary for the security of the country. The only
plan which he formed was to defend the passage
of the river Tefino against the French; and as
if he had forgotten how easily he himself had
disconcerted a similar scheme formed byLautrec,
he promised with great confidence on its being
effectual. But in spite of all his caution, it fuc-
ceeded no better with him than with Lautrec.
B13nnive. passed the river without loss, at a ford

3oo0K III. which had been negleCed, and the Itnperialifts
TsS3. retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town

as so6n as the French ihould appear before it.
By an unaccountable negligence, which Guic.
ciardini imputes to infatuationd", Bonnivet did
riot advance for three or four days, and loft the
opportunity with which his good fortune pre.
fented him. The citizens recovered from their
, consternation; Colonna, still active at the age
of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity to France
was indefatigable, were employed night and day
in repairing the fortifications, in amassing provi.
fions, in collecding troops from every quarter;
and by the time the French approached, had
put the city in a condition to stand the siege.
Bonnivet, after fbome fruitless, attempts on the
town, which harassed his own troops more than
the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of
the season , to retire into winter- quarters.

leath or DuRING there tranfadtions, Pope Adrian died;
Adrian vi. an event so much to the fatisfadion of the

Roman people, whose hatred or contempt of
him augmented every day, that the night after
his decease, they adorned the door of his chief
phyfician's house with garlands, adding -this in,
feription, TO THE DELIVERER OF
HIS CO UNTR Y 7. The Cardinal de Medici
instantly renewed his pretensions to the papal

* ? Guic. lib. xv. 2 4. 3" Jovii Vit. Adr. xz7.

dignity,, and entered the conclave with high ex- BOOK III
pedtations on his own part, and a general opi- is53.
nion of the people that they would be fuccefsful.
But though supported by the Imperial fadion,
poffeffed of great personal interest, and capable
of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign, in those assemblies, the obstinacy
and intrigues of his rivals protraded the con-
clave to the unusual length of fifty days. The EleIion of
address and perseverance of the Cardinal at last cleme"n
surmounted every 'obifacle. He was raised to Nov. 2s.
the head of the church, and assumed the go-
vernment of it by the name of Clement VII.
The choice was universally approved of. High
expedations were conceived of a Pope, whose
great talents, and long experience in business,
seemed to qualify him no less for defending the
spiritual interests of the Ehurch, exposed to im-
minent danger by the progress of Luther's opi-
nions, than for conducing its political opera-
tions with the prudence requisite at such a diffi-
cult jundure ; and who , besides these advan-
tages, rendered the ecclesiastical state more
refpedable, by having in his hands the govern-
ment of Florence, together with the wealth of
the family of Medici ".

CARDINAL 'WOLSEY, not difheartened by the Wolrey dit-
disappointment of his ambitious views at the aPt(A:

,

" Guic. 1. xv. z63.

Booi III. former eledion, had entertained'more sanguine
r123. hopes of success on this occasion. Henry wiote
with resent- to the Emperor, reminding him of his engage.
ment. ments to second the pretensions of his- minister.

Wolsey befcirred shimfelf with adivity suitable
to the importance of the prize for which he
contended, and inftruded his agents at Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order td
gain his end. But Charles had either anmifed
him with vain hopes which he' never intended
to gratify, or he judged it impolitick to oppose
a candidate who had such a profped of succeed-
ing as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durit
not venture to provoke the people of. Rome,
while their indignation against Adrian's memory
was still freih , by placing another Ultra-mon.
tane in the papal throne. Wolsey, after all his
expeaations and endeavours, had the morti-
fication to fee a Pope eleded, of such an age,
and of so vigorous a constitution , that he could
not comfort himself much with the chance of
surviving him. This second proof fully con-
vinced Wolsey of the Emperor's insincerity, and
it excited in him all the resentment which an
haughty mind feels on being at once difap-
pointed and deceived ; and though Clement en-
deavoured to soothe his vitglitive nature by
granting him a commifion to be legate in Eng-
land during life, with such ample powers as
vested in him almost the whole papal jurifdic-

.tion in that kingdom, the injury he. had received
entirely dissolved the tie which had united him
to Charles, and from that moment he meditated
revenge. It was' necessary, however, to conceal
his intention from his master, and to suspend
the execution of it, until, by a dexterous im-
provement of the incidents which might occur,
he should be able gradually to alienate the King's
affections from the Emperor. For this reason,
he was so far from exprefling any uneasiness on
account of the repulse which he had met with,
that he abounded on' every occasion, private as
well as publick, in declarations of his high fatis-
fa6ion with Clement's promotion39. BOOK III.

1x23.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilledHenry's

with great sincerity whatever he was bound to operatos"

in Franceo

perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he' could have wished. His
thoughtless profusion, and total negled of oeco-
nomy, reduced him often to great straits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
ried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Instead of
armies suddenly assembled, which under diftin&
chieftains followed their Prince into the field
for a short space, and fcrved at their own cost,
troops were now levied at great charge, and

9" Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 294, &c. Herbert,

15a 3.

Sept. ao. impatience on both sides to bring every quarrel

to the issue of a battle, which commonly de.
cided the fate of open. and defenceleis countries
and allowed the barons, together with their vas:
fals, to return to their ordinary occupations;
towns were fortified with great att, atid defended
.with much obstinacy; :wa', from a very simple,
became a very- intricate science; and campaigns
grew of course to be more tedious, and less
decisive. The expence which these alterations
in the military system necessarily created, ap-
peared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccuft
tomed to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence
proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious
spirit of the English parliaments in that age,
"which Henry, with all his authoiity, was seldom
able to overcome. The commons, having te,
fused at this time to grant him the supplies whichit
he demanded, he had recourse to the ample and
almost unlimited prerogative which the Kings
of England then poffeffed. and by a violent
and unusual exertion of it, raised the money h.
wanted. This, however, wasted to much time,
that it was late in the season before his army,
under the Duke of Suffolk, could take the field;
Being joined by a considerable body of Flemingsi
Suffolk marched into Picardy, and Francis, from
his extravagant eagerness to recover the PIVIilta"

nefe, having left that frontier almost unguarded, BooK IIL
he penetrated as far as the banks of the river xb 23*
Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with consternation. But the arrival of
fomne troops detached by the King, who was frill
at Lyons; the adtive gallantry of the French
officers, who allowed the allies no respite night
or day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with scarcity of provisions, compelled
.Suffolk'to retire i and La Tremouille, who dom- November,
manded in those parts, had the glory of having,
with an handful of men, checked the progress

,

of a formidable army, and of driving them with .
ignominy out of the French territories ".

THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and And tiofe

. of the Ger.

Guienne were not more fortunate,, though in mans and
both these provinces Francis was equally ill-pre- Spaniards.
pared to resist them. The conduc and valour
of his generals supplied his want of foresight;
the Germans who made an irruption into one
of these provinces, and the Spaniards who
attacked the other, were repulsed with great
disgrace.

THUS ended the year 1523, during which End of the
Frarcis's good fortune and success had been camnp'ig'
such as gave all Europe an high id.ea of his
power and resources. He had discovered and

I Herbert. M~m. de Bellay,' 73. &-

,BooK~ III. difooncerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author

is 23. of which he had driven into exile, almost without

an attendant; he had rendered abortive all the
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him ; he had proteced his d'ominions
when attacked on three different sides; and
though his army in the Milanese had not made
such progress as might have been expeded from
its superiority to the enemy in number, he had
recovered and still kept poffeflion of one half of
that dutchy.

1524. THE ensuing year opened with events more
Sentiments disastrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by
Popte nthe cowardice or treachery .of its governor. In
Februarys~. Italy, the allies resolved on an early and vigo-

rous effort in order to difpoffefs Bonnivet of
that part of the Milanese which lies beyond the
Tefino. Clement, who, under the pontificates
of Leo and Adrian, had discovered an impla-
cable enmity to France, began now to view the
power which the Emperor was daily acquiring
in Italy, with so much jealousy, that he refused
to accede, as his predecessors had done ; to the
league against Francis, and forgetting private
passions and animofities, laboured with the zeal
vwhich became his charader, to 'bring about a
reconciliation among the contending parties;
But all his endeavours 'were ineffedual; a nu-
xnerous army, to whiich each of the allies fur-

nilhed

:nifhed their contingent of troops, was affemrnled BOOR III.
iat lMilan by the beginning of March. Lannoy, I24.
'viceroy of Naples, took the command of itImperi't1 army ready
-upon Colonna's death, though tlh chief direc- to take the
tion of military operations was committed to fied early,
Bburbon, and the marquis de Pescara ; -the
latter, the ablest and most enterprising. of' the
Imperial generals;* the former inspired by his
resentment with new adivity and ,invention, and
,acquainted so , thoroughly with the charaders
of the French commanders, the genius of their
troops, and the strength as .Wel .as weakness of
their armies, as to be of infinite feivice to the
party which he .had joined. But all these ad-
yantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raise money fufficient for executing
the various and extensive plans ~bhich he had
:ormed. When his troops were commanded- to Retardel by
zmarch, they, mutinied againffl their leaders, de-a mutiny of
manding the pay which was due to them for the troops
some months; and disregarding both the me·
naces and in treaties of their officers, threatened
'tq pillage the city of ililan, if they did not\irni
ftantly receive fatisfadion. Out of this difficul-
ty the generals of the allies were extricated, by
MVlorone, .who prevailing on his countrymen,
over whom his influence was .prodigious, to ad-
Vance the fum that was requisite, the army took
the field - .

' Guic. 1. x~. 267. Capella, I90.
VOL. II. U

Bor II ILB._ ONNIVET was destitute of troops to oppose
' 1524. this army, and still more of the talents which
The French could render him an equal match for its leaders,
obliged to
abandon the After vanroT movements and encounters, de-
Milae.fe. feribed with great accuracy by the contemporary

historians, a detail of which, at this distance 'of
time, would be equally uninteresting and uii.
inftriaive, he was -forced to abandon the strong
*camp in which he had intrenched himself at
:Biagraffa. Soon after, partly by his own mif.
conducd, partly by the activity of the enemy,
who harassed and ruined his army by continual
skirmishes, while they carefully declined a battle
which he often . offered them; and partly by
the caprice of 6000 Swiss, who refused to joi"
his army, though within a day's march of it; hI
;was reduced to the neceflity of attempting 'g
retreat into France through the valley of Aoaf
Just as he arrived -on the banks of the SeiTh,
and began to pass that river, Bourbon and PefB
cara appeared with the va'nguard of the alliesi
and attacked his rear with great fury. At the
beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exert
ing himself with much valour, was wounded
so. dangerously as obliged him to quit the field.;
and the conduct of the rear was committed to
the chevalier Bayard, . who, though so much 'a
stranger to the arts of a court that he never rose
to the chief command, was always called, iti

ti.es of teal danget, to the postS of greateff Bo~K IIi
difficilty arid importance; He- put himself at 15iz4.
the .head of the men at arms, and animating
them by his presence and example to sustain
the whole shock of the enemy's troops, he
gained time for the reft of his countryrieri t6
nake good their ietreat; But in this ferviceb eath of the
he:received a wound which he imriediately per~etav, era
;:·. 1avani, andt
ceived to be mortal, and being unable to bon-n;i of the
tinue any longer on hori'eback, hd oidered onerench
of liis attendants to place him under' a i'ee, with pm.
is: face tbwaids the enemy; then fi.ig his
yes on the guard of his 'wvord, Wvhic!h he held
iijp instead of a cross, he addressed his prayers
to God, arid in thbi pifture; which bedtime his
characer both as a soldier and as a Chrifrian,
lie calmly waited the approach of death: Botir
b8iw, who led the foretnoft ObF the enethy's
tfoops, found him in this fituatiori; and ex
pressed regret and pity at the fight. Ci Pity hot

rie,' " cried the high-fpirited chevalier I

i did

"ias a man of honour ought, in the difciharge

f
:my, duty: They indeed are bbje&r bs

"tpity, who fight .agaihft ttheir, kiin, their
"couitry, and their oath." Th in maruis de'
Pescara, passing foori aftei, mnaifiefted his admi;
ration of Bayard's virtues, as Wiell as his foiorrow
for his fate, with the generobiiy bs a gallant
enemy; and finding that he could riot be red

' *iJ ^

BooK, III. moved, with safety from ,that spot, ordered a

1254. tent, to. be -pitched there, and appointed'proper

persons to attend him. He died, notwith:
Randingg .their care,- as his ancestors for several
generations had done, in the field of battle.
Pescara ordered his' body to be embalmed, and
sent to his relations; and ?such was the refped
* paid .to, milita.ry merit in that age, that the
: Duke of Syoy- commanded; it to be receivpd
w. ith royatLhonours in all the cities of his domi.
nions; ai- Dauphin6, Bay-ard's native country,
the pe3p3e of; all ranks came out in a folerun
procefeio .,to meet it 4.

BONNIVET led back the hattered remains :f

his army into France; and in one ihort calh-
paign, Francis was ftiripped of all he had pof.
sessed in Italy, and left without pne ally in that
country.

Progress of WHILE the war, kindled .by the emulation of
the refor- Charles ,and Francis, spread over so many coun-
mation in
-Germany. tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound

tranquillity, extremely, favourable to the refpr.
mation, which continued to make progress
daily. During Luther's confinement in "hi
retreat at Warburgh, Carloftadius, one, of lhi

"4 Bellefor. Epitr. p. 7 ;. Mem. de- Bellay, 7-. .0euv

"de Brant. tom. vi. 1o8, &c. Pafquier Recherches, p. 952

disciples,- animated with the fame zeal, but pof- BooK III.
sessed, of less priudence and& moderation than his 1x s4.
niafter; began to' propagate wild and dangerou's
opihions, chiefly arhoing the lower people. En-
couraged by his exhortations, they rose ii fe-
v~iall villages of Sa.xony, broke into the churches
with: tumultuary violence, and threw down and
deftr6yed the images with which they were
a0irnied. These irregular and outrageous pro-
ceediigs 'were so repugnant to all the Eledtor's
cautiious maxims, that, if they had not received
a:timely check, they could hardly have failed
of alielnating from the reformers a prince, no
lefs~-jealous of his own authority', than afraid
fdifgiing offence to the Emperor, arid other
latrons" of the ancient opinions. Luther, fen-
fible 6f the dai.ger, immediately quitted his
retreat, without waiting for Frederick's peir
miiffitn-, and returned to Wittemberg. Happily March 6,
f6r the rdeformation, the veneration . for his i-.
p~rfon: and' authority were still so "great, that his
appearance alone suppressed that spirit of extra-
vagance which began to seize his :party. Ca'-
ldiftadius and his fanatical followers struck dumb'
byj his rebukes;' declared that they heard' .tl14
vOice of an angel; -not of a ma-n 43, ' -'

S e Slid. Hi. .i:. $Sckenoe. 19

.

. " :

UJ 3,

BOOK HNI BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun

5.24 to tranfla te tije le into, the German tongue,
Iuther pn undertaking of no less difficulty than im.
'Bible. portance, of wbhich he was extremely fond, and

h so- which he was well . qualified: He had.a

compnetent knowledge in the original languagesi
a.thorough acquaintance with the style a-'d senti
xnents of the inspired writers ; and though .his
compofitiqns in Latin were rude and barbarous.

e ,vbe was, reckoned a great, master of -he purity
ps his mother tongue, and could express him~e!
wvi'th al. t. the.elegance of which it is capable,
By his o'wn assiduous application, together with
the assistance qs Melancthon and several oth.er:s
his difcip!es, he finihed part of the New 'Tefta

'

ne:nt in theb year 1522, and ;he publication of
it proved more fatal to the church of Romri
than that of al his own works. It ,was read
with wonderful avidity and attention by persons
ps every rank, I hey were astonished "at dif
covering how contrary the precepts of the
Author of our religion are, to the inventions of
those priests whp pretended to be his vicege.
rents.; 'and baving now in their hand the rule
of:faith, they thought themselves qualihed, by
applying it, to judge of the established opinionsi
and to pronounce when they were conformable
.o the standard, or when they departed fromr it.

The great advantages arising from Luther's BooK III.
,translation of the Bible, encouraged th.e advo- 1524.
tates for reformation, in the other countries .of
Europe, to imitate his example, and to publikfh
versions of the Scriptures in their refpeaive
languages.

-ABOUT this time,. Nuremberg, Francfort, Several
Hamburgh, and several other cities in Germany citiesbo.
of the first rank i openly embraced the reformed rites of the
religion, and by the authority of their magi- opish

S. "7

..

'? church.

Strates abolished the mass, and the: other super-
ftitious rites of popery ". The Eledtor of
iBrandenburgh, the.- Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh, and Prince of Anhalt, -became
iavowed patrons of Luther's opinions, and coun-
tenanced the preaching of them among their
fubjecs,.

THE court of Rome beheld this growing de-Meafures
fetion with great concern; and Adrian's first employed
care, after his arrival in Italy, had been to de- oby Arder to
liberate with the Cardinals, concerning .the check tRe
proper means of putting a stop to it. This prhgrfor f
Pope was profoundly skilled in scholastic the.o-mation.
logy, and having been early taken notice of on
that account, he still retained such an excessive
admiration of the science to which he owed his

44 Seckend. 41. Chytrai Contin. Krantzii, 203.

U U4

EoI'rnlH.: r.epu-tation and success -in life, that he considered.

xi 4. Lu:ther's inveti-ves against the fchoolmen, par.

ticularly Thoma.s Aquinas, as little less thani
baafphemy. All -the tenets of- that dodor ap.
peal-ed to him iso clear and irrefragable, that h&e
supposed every person who called in question-
or contradided them, to be either blinded by
ignorance, or, to beading in ioppofition to the.
convidion of his own mind: Of course ;'

i:

S. Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible with'
":regard to points :of dodrine than Adrian; he
not only maintained them as Leo had done,
because, they were ancient, or because it was
dangerous. Ifor ' the-: church to allow of innova;
tions, but he adhered to them with the zeal o0

a

. theologian ,, and - with the tenaciousness of at

disputant. At the fame time his own mannerst
being extremely simple, and uninfedced withf
any of the vices which teigned in the court of;
.Rome., he was as sensible of its c~orruptions aso
the.reformers themselves, and viewed them with
no. less indignation. The brief which he ad.
drelTed to the diet of the Empire assembled at

Nov.emb.r, Nuremberg, and the inftrucions he gave Che-

;2s2z regato, the nuncio whom "he sent thither, were

framed agreeably to these views. On the one
hand, he condemned Luther's opinions with
more asperity and rancour of expression than
Leo had ever used; he severely censured the

princes of Germany for fuffering him to .spread BOOK Il,:
hlis pernicious .tenets, by their negleting to xs52z4.
eedcute the ;edidt of the diet at Worms,. and-

diqdlred them , .if Luther did not instantly re-

trat his errors, to destroy him with fire as a
gafigrened and incurable member, in like man-
nerr as Dathan and Abiram had been cut off by
Iofes, Ananias and Sapphira. by the apostles,
andi John Huss. and Jerome of Prague by their
ancestors .- On; the other hand , he, with great
ca;ndour , and in the most- explicit terms , ac-
knowledged the 'corruptions. of the Roman court
tp:be the fouirce from which had flowed most of
the>;ievils the church now, felt or dreaded ;: he
promised to exert all his authority towards re-
forming these abuses , with as much dispatch
as.the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
would admit; and he requested. of them to give
him their advice with regard to. the most effec-
tual means of suppressing that new heresy -which
had sprung up among' them' ".

.THI members of the Diet ; after praising the Diet of Nu-
Pope's -pious and laudable intentions, excused remerg

S' . ,' propose a

themselves for not executing the edict of MWorm.s, general
by, alleging that the prodigious increase, ,fcouncil as

S' ' the proper

Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to. remedy.

4 Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 342,
f Ibid, p. 345,

BoK :III. the. court of Rome among their other fubjeas
15.z4, on account of its innumerable exadions , ren.

dered such an attempt not only danger9us , but
impossible, They. affirmed that the grievances
of Germany, .which did not arise from imaginary
injuries, but from: impositions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them which they intended to lay
before him, called now for some new and effica.
cious remedy; and in their opinion, the only
remedy adequate to the.difeafe, or which afforded
them- any hopes of feeing the church reflored- td
soundness and vigour , was a General Council,
Such a council, 'therefore , they advised him',
after obtaining the Emperor's consent, to affem.
ble without delay , in one of the great cities of
Germany, that all who had a 'right to be present
might deliberate with freedom , and propose
their opinions. with such boldness , as the dan.
gerous situation. of religion at this junture
required ".

Artiices of; THE nuncio-, -more artful than his master, and
the nuncio better acquainted with the political views and
to elue it. interests of the . Roman Court , was startled at

the proposition of a couincil; and easily foresaw
how dangerous: such an assembly might prove
at a time when many openly denied the papal

4? Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. p. 346.

authority :,, and the reverence and submission Boort IIL
yielded to it visibly declined among all. For i-s2·
that reaf.n he employed his utmost address, in
,order to prevail on the members of the Diet to
proceed themselves with greater severity againfb
the Lutheran heresy , and to- relinquish their
proposal concerning a general council. to be
ield irn Germany. They, perceiving the nuncio
to be more fDlipitous about the interests of the-
Iprnaq: court., than the 'tranquillity of the Em-
:pire, pr purity- of the church , remained in-
flexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue
of their grievances to be presented to the Pope'.
The nuncio, that he might not be the bearer
hs a remonstrance so disagreeable to his court,
deft Nuremberg abruptly , without taking leave .
o: the Diet' ".

THE fectlar Princes accordingly , fbr the The met

p present a lift

ecclefiaflicks, although they" gave no oppofitio on,rf

a hun-

did not think it decent to join with them, drew dredl griev-
up the lifif( so famous in the German annals) ancpe. to the
of an hundred grievances,, which the Empire
imputed to the iniquitodus dominion of the papal'
fee. This lift contained grievances much of
the fame nature with that prepared tinder the
reign of IVIMaximilian. It: would be tedious to
enumerate ea'ch of them; they complained of

SFafcic. Rer, Expet. & Fugiend. 349, 4' Ibid. 376

Bopo III. the Tums :exaded for di fpenfation s. , abfolutions;

ZW4. aind indulgences ; of the expence -arising fromi

the law- suits carried, to Rome; of the iniu-
merablel abuses ocoafioned :by reservations , comrn
niendams , and :annates ; of the exemption fro'n
civil jurifdidion which the clergy had obtained;
of; the, arts by which they brought~ all' secular
causes under the cognizance, of the ecdlfiaftical
judges; of the indecent and profligate"- lives
which not a. few. of. the' elergy led :, and "of
various other particulars ,: many of which have,
already,. beeni mentioned among the circum-
stances which contributed to the favourable
reception:, or to the quick progress of .Luther's
dotrines. In the end they concluded , that if
the: holy -fee did not speedily deliver them fronmi
those intolerable burdens , they hadi det·ermirine
to endure them no longer , -and would employ
the power and authority with Iwhiieh -God had
intruifted them ,. in order ,to procure -relief -0.!--,

The reers' I~NSTEAD of such s.everities against Luther and
of the l)iet, his followers as the nuncio had recommended,
March 6

1523. the recess or edit, of. the Diet contained only a

genelal injunction, to all ranks of men to wait'
"wi:th., patience for the

i determinations of the

council | which was to be assembled ,; and in the.
mean time not to publ-ish 'any ne.w opinions

5O Fafcic. Rer. Expe. & .Fugiend. 3 3i4.

contrary to the established doArines of the Booi III.
'church ; together with an admonition to all 15 24.
preachers to abstain from matters of controversy

.

in their discourses to the people, and to confine
themselves to the plain and inftrudive: truths of
religion .

THE reformers derived great advantage from This diet of
the tranfadions of this diet, as they afforded reat benefit

to the Re-

them the fullest and most authentick evidence formation.
that gross corruptions prevailed in the court of
Rome, and that the Empire was loaded by the
clergy with, insupportable burdens. With re-
gard to the former, they had now the testimony
of the Pope himself , that the'-. invedives and
accusations were not malicious or ill -founded.
As to the latter, the representatives of the Ger-
manick body , in an assembly where the patrons
of the new opinions were far from being the
most numerous or powerful , had pointed out
as the chief grievances of the Empire, those
very pradices of the Romish church against
which Luther and his disciples were accuftoimed
to declaim. Accordingly , in all their contro-
verfial writings after this period , they often
appealed, to Adrian's declaration , and to the
hundred grievances, in confirmation of what-
ever they advanced concerning the dissolute

s' Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 348.

1Bool III. mariners , or insatiable ambition and rapaeiouf.

s1524 ness of the papalp court*'

,adesk At Rome, ~ian s ciondu6

, Was considered

toiidua as a proof O :the .nmoft childish simplicity and
censured at * . i
Rome, imprudence. IVMen trained up amidst the arti.

fices and corruptions of the papal court, and
accustomed to judge of ations not by what
w'<.as just, but by what was useful, were aft6.
nifhed at a Pontiff, who, departing, from the
wife maxims of his predecefTors , acknowledged
disorders which he Ought to have concealed;
arid forgetting his own dignity, alked advice o0
those, to whom he was entitled to prescribe. By
such an excess of"impolitick finicerity , they werei
afrfaid that , instead of reclaiming , he would
terider the enemies of the church more pre.
sumptuous, anid instead of extinguishing heresy,
would weaken the foundations of the papal
power , or flop the chief sources from which
wejilth flowed into the church ". For this reafori
they industriously opposed all his fchemres of
reformation, and by throwing objections and
difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or
to defeat the execution of them. Adrian , ama-
zed on the one hand, at the obftinaoy of the
Lutherans, difguffted on the other , with the
manners and maxims 6f the Italians, and findihg

?i F. Paul. Hiflt of Counc. p. 28: Pallavic. Hilft; s8

himself unable to correct either the one or the. BooK III,
other, often lamented his own situation , and I524,
often looked back with pleasure on that period
of his life when he was only dean of Louvain,
a more hunible but happier. station , in which
little was expected from him., and there was rno-
thing to frustrate his good intentions "*

CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian clements
as much in the arts of government , as he was mea"res a-

.. gainft Lu-

inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness ther, and
of intention. He was animated not only withhis dread of
the aversion which all Popes naturally bear tolo~nei
a'council, but having gained his own eledion
by means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an
assembly that might ,fubjed it to a scrutiny
which it could not stand. He determined,
therefore, by every possible means to elude the
demands of the Germans , both with refped to
the calling of a council , and reforming abuses
in the papal court , which the rashness and ins
capacity of his predecessor had brought upon
him. For this purpose, he made choice of car-
dinal Campeggio , an artful man, often entrusted
by the Popes witli negociations of importance,
as his nuncio to the diet of the Empire affl~m-
bled again at Nuremberg.

" Jovii Vit. Adx. p. x ..

BOOK III. CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of

1 24. :what had passed in the last meeting, exhorted
February. the diet in a long discourse , to execute the edi8
The negoci.
ationsof his of Worms with vigour , a.s the only effedual
inuncio in aineans of fuppreffinrg Luther's dodrines. The
atNremt diet, in return, desired to know the Pope's in.
berg, tentions concerning the council , and the redress

of the hundred grievances. The former, the
nuncio en'deavoured to elude by general and
unnmeaning declarations of the Pope's resolution
to piurfue such measures as would be for the
greatest good of the church. With regard to
the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did
not reach Rome till: after Adrian's death , and
of consequence had not been regularly laid
4before the present Pope , Campeggio took ad.
vantage, of this circumstance to decline making
any definitive answer to them in Clement's
name ; though, at the fame time, he observed
that their catalogue of grievances contained
many particulars extremely indecent and un.
dutiful, and that the publishin.g it by their own
authority was highly difrefpeCful to the Roman
fee., In the -end,,, he renewed his demand of
their proceeding with vigour against Luther
* and his adherents. But though an Ambassador

from the Emperor, who was at that time very

attendea solicitous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded
with little the nuncio, with many profeffions of his mafter's

zeal

zeal for the honour and dignity of the papal
fee, the recess of the Diet was conceived in terms
of almost the fame import with the former,
without enjoining any additional i'everity against
Luther and his party ".

BEFORE he left Gerdmany, Campeggio',. in
order to amuse and soothe the people, published
certain articles for the amendment of some dif-
orders and abuses which prevailed among the
inferior clergy; but this partial reformation,
which fell so far short of the 'expectations of the
Lutherans, and of the demands of the Diet,
gave no fatisfadion, and produced little effet,
The nuncio, with a cautious hand, tenderly
lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed a
deeper blow, and by firiking at the root wilhed
to exterminate the evil ".

" Seckend. 8 6. Sleid, HIlft. 66. " Seckend. 292,

Vor~t II.x BooK IIL

A124.
April l8.

x

r ··~t

.rr .r

,Y

o

a

R r·

# BOOK IV.

THE

HISTORY

, OF THE

REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV1

HrHE expulsion of the Ftrench both out of BooK IV.

the iMilanefe , and the republick of Genoa, I24.
was considered, by the; Italians as the conclufiorvi'ews of
.of the war between Charles and Francis and a sates with
they began immediately to be apprehensive 6frefpea to

. Charles and

the Emperor, when they law no p'ower remain- Francis.
ing in Italy capable either to controul or oppose
him, they longed' ardently for the re-establish-
ment of peace.. Having procured the reftora-
tion of Sforza to his paternal dominions, which
had. been their chief motive for entering irito a
confederacy. with Charles, they plainly discovered

X 2

BOOK IV.

x124. their intention to contribute no longer towards

increasing the Emperor's superiority over his
rival, which was already the object of their jea.
lousy. The Pope especially, whose natural
timidity increased his suspicions of Charles's de.
signs, endeavoured by his remonftrances to in.
spire him with moderation, and incline him to
peace.

Char1~s re. BUT the Emperor, intoxicated with success;
solves to in- and urged on by his own ambition, no less than
vade France.by Bourbon's, desire of revenge, contemned Cle.

ment's admonlitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he least dreaded an attack, he was least
prepared to resist it. His most experienced
ministers dissuaded him from 'undertaking Tfuch
an enterprize with a feeble army, and an ex.
haufted treasury: But he relied so much on
having' obtained the concurrence of the King of
England, and on the hopes which Boutbon,
with the confidence and credulity natural to
exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume.
rous body of his partisans as soon as the mrpe.
rial troops should enter France, that he persisted
obstinately in the measure. Henry undertook
to furnish an hundred thousand ducats towards
defraying the expence of the expedition during

the first month, and had it in his choice either BO.oK IV.
to continue the payment of that fum monthly, x S4.
or to invade Picardy before the end of July with
a powerful army. The Emperor engaged to
attack Guienne at the fame time with a con-
fiderable body of men; and if these enterprizes
proved fuccefsful, they agreed, that Bourbon,
besides the territories which he had loft, ihould
be put in poffeffion of Provence, with the title
of King, and should do homage to Henry as
the lawful King of France, for his new domi-
nions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant project, the invasion of Provence
was the only one which was executed. For al-
though Bourbon , with a scrupulous delicacy,
altogether unexpeded after the part which he
had aded, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby
absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree
abate. The army he employed for that purpose
amounted only to eighteen thousand men; the
supreme command of which was given to the
Marquis de Pescara, with inftruAions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
operations. Pescara passed the Alps without The Impe.
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to riafts enter
MIVarfeilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Agut 3o.

X3

BoOx IV. march towards Lyons, in the neighbourhood ol

Siz4 which city his territories were situated, and where

of courfehis 'influence was most extensive: -But
the Emperor was so desirous to get poffeffion of
a port, which would, at all times, fecure' him
easy access into France, that byr his authority he
over-ruled the Conftable's opinion, and diredted
Pescara to make the redudtion ,0f Marseilles his
chief objeca

Prudent FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to
rneafurs of prevent this attempt', took the most proper pre-

cautions to defeat' it. He laid waste the adja,
cent country, in order to render it more .difficult
for the enemy to subsist their army; he razed
the suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifica.
tions, and threw into it a numerous garrison
under the command of brave and experienced
officers. To these, nine thousand of the citi-
zens, whom their dread of the Spanish yoke in.
spired with contempt of danger, joined them-
selves; by their united courage and industry,
all the efforts of Pefcara's military skill, and of
Bourbon's adivity and revenge, were rendered
abortive. Francis, meanwhile, had leisure to
assemble a powerful army under the walls of
Avignon, and no sooner began to advance to-
wards Marseilles, than the Imperial troops, ex-
bhaufed by the fatigues of a siege which had

? Guic. 1. xv. z2 , &c, Menr. de Bellay, p.' 80o.

lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and al- BOOKI IV.
mnoft destitute of provisions, retired with preci- 1 524.
pitation towards Italy .: Imperiaiits

' forced to

retreat,

IF, during these operations of the army m Sept.,s9.
Provence, either Charles or Henry had' attacked
France in the manner which theyr had projeced,
that kingdom. must have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the Emperor found
that the extent of his revenues was not adequate
to the greatness of his power, or the -ardour of
his ambition, and the want of money obliged
him, though with much reludance, to circum-
feribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted. Henry, disgusted at Bourbon's refusing
to recognize his right to the crown of France;
alarmed at the motions of the Scots, whom the
felicitations of the French King had persuaded
to march towards the borders of England; and
no longer incited by his minister, who was be-
come extremely cool with regard to all the Em-
peror's interest, took no measures to support an
enterprize , of which, as of all new undertakings,
he had been at first excessively fond !'

IF the King of: France had been satisfied with Franciq elat-
having delivered his fubjeAs from this formi

0.

ei wih his

Guic. I. xv. 277. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 97.
3 Fiides's Life of Wolsey. Append. N°. 70, 71, 72.

X4

BonoK IV, dable invasion, if he had thought it enough to

524 , Thew a.ll Europe the facility with which the in,

ternal strength of his dominions enabled him to
resist the imprefion of a foreign enemy, even
w, hen seconded by the abilities and powerful es,
forts of a rebellious fubjed~, the campaign, not;
withstanding the loss of the nVlilanefe, would have
been far from ending ingloriously, But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enter,
prizing rather than considerate; and too apt to
be elated with success; was fond of every under,
taking that seemed bold and adventurous, Such
an undertaking, the situation of his affairs, at

Rerolves to that jundcure, naturally presented to his viewi
invade the He had under his command one of the most

powerful and best appointed armies France had
ever brought into the field, which he could not
think of disbanding without having employed
it in any service. The Imperial troops had been
obliged to retire almost ruined by hard duty,
and dilheartened with ill success; the IVlilanefe
had been left altogether without defence; it was
not impossible to reach that country before Pes-
cara, with his thattered forces, could arrive there;
or if fear ihould add speed to their retreat, they
were in no condition to make head against his
fresh and numerous troops; and Milan would
now, as in former instances, submit without re-

(stance to a bold invader. These confidera- BooIK IV.
tions, which were not destitute of plausibility, s.4.
appeared to his sanguine temper to be of the
utmost weight. In vain did his wifelt ministers
and generals represent to him the danger of
taking the field at a season so far advanced, with
an army composed chiefly of Swiss and Germans,
to whose caprices he would be fubjea in all his
operations, and on whose fidelity his safety muff
1bfolqtely depend. In vain did Louise of Savoy
Idvance by hasty journies towards Provence,
that she might exert all her authority in diffuad-
ing her son from such a rash enterprize. Francis
lifregarded the remonftrances of his fubjeds; and
that he might save himself the pain of an interview
with his mother, whose counsels he had deter-
mined to reject, he began his march before her
arrival; appointing her, however, by way of atone- Appoints
ment for that neglec, to be regent of the king- hi- mother

. . . regent dur,

dom during his absence. Bonnivet, by his per-ing his

ad b

fuafions , contributed not a little to confirm rence.
Francis in this resolution. That, favourite, who
strongly resembled his master in all the defecive
parts of his charader, was led, by his natural im-
petuofity, warmly to approve of such an enter-
prize; and being· prompted betides by his im-
patience to revisit a Milanese lady, of whom he
had been deeply enamoured during his late expe-
dition, he is said, by his flattering descriptions of

Boor IV. her beauty and accomplishments, to have inspired

xs24. Francis, who, was extremely susceptible of fudc

paflions:, with an equal defir& of feeing her

.

Operations THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis;
in the Mi. and as their success depended on dispatch, they
"ner. advanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara,

who had been obliged to take a longer and nore
difficult route by Monaco and Final, was soon
informed of their intention; and being fenfibl
that nothing but the presence of his troops could
save the Milanese, marched with such rapidity,
that he reached Alva on the fame day -that tih
French army arrived at Varcelli. Francis ,in
ftructed by Bonnivet's error in the. former cam
paign, advanced diredly towards Milan, wheir
the unexpected approach of an enemy so power.
ful, occasioned such consternation and disorder,
that although Pescara entered the city with for
of his best troops, he found that the defence o
it could not be undertaken with any probability
of success; and having thrown a garrison into
the citadel, retired through one gate, while the
French were admitted at another \.

,Emba.a- THESE brisk motions of the French monarch
fin state odi'fconce-rted all the schemes of defence which
the Inspe-
rialifts.

* Oeuv. de Brant. torn. vi, 25 .

I Mim. de Bellay, p. 8I. Guic,. 1. xv. 2 7 8

the Imperialists had formed. Never indeed, BooKi IV,
did generals attempt to oppose a formidable in- 1524.
vafion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles poffeffed - dominions more ex-
tensive than, any other Prince in Europe, and
had, at this. time, no other army but that which
was employedc in Lombardy, which did not
amount to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative
in all his different states was so limited, and his
fubjeas, without whose consent he could raise no
taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden
themselves with new or extraordinary impositions,
that even this small body of troops was in want
|of pay , of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. Inr such a situation , it required 'all
the wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pe.s
cara, and the implacable resentment of Bourbon,
to preserve them from sinking .under despair,
and to inspire them with resolution to attempt,
or sagacity to discover, what was essential to
their safety. To the efforts of their genius, and
the ativity of their zeal, the Emperor was more
indebted for the preservation of his Italianr do-
minions than to his own power. Lannoy, by
mortgaging the revenues of Naples, procured
some money, which was immediately applied to,
wards providing the army with whatever was
most nefelfary '. Pescara, beloved and almola

Guic. 1. xv. z 28

Booiz IV.

15Z4.nq

Francis be.- FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the E
Oieges Pavia, peror's generals time to derive advantage -fro

all these operations. Initead .of pursuing th
enemy, who retired to Lodi on the Adda, a
untenable post, which Pescara had resolved t
abandon on his approach, he, in complianct
with the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrar
to that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavi
on the Tefino ; a town, indeed, of great import
ance, the polTeffion of which would have opened
to him all the fertile country lying on the banks
of that river. But the fortifications of the place

" Jovii Vit. Davali, lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. i. 621

Ulloa Vita di .Carlo V. p. 94., &c. Vida, del Emper
Carlos V. por Vera y Zuniga, p.- 36.

£ MTm. de Bellay, p. 8;.

adored by the Spanilf troops, exhorted them th
thew the world, by their engaging to serve the
Emperor, in that dangerous exigency, withou
making any immediate demand of pay, that they
were animated with sentiments of honour ver
different from those of mercenary soldiers; to
which proposition, that gallant body of men,
with an unexampled generosity, gave their con
sent '. Bourbon having raised a confiderabli
fum, by pawning his jewels, set out for Germany
where his influence was great, that by his p!
fence he might hasten the levying of troops foc
the Imperial service '.

*were strong; it was dangerous to undertake a
difficult siege, at so late a season; and the Im-
perial generals, sensible of its consequence, had
thrown into the town a garrison composed of fix
thousand veterans, under the command of An-
tonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank ; of
great.experience; of a patient, but enterprizing
courage; fertile in resources; ambitious of dif-
tinguifhing himself; and capable, for that rea-
son, as well as from his having been long ac-
cuftomed both to obey and to command, of sus-
fering or performing any thing in order to pro-
cure success. BooK IV'

x 524.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obftinacyHis vigo.
equal to the rashness with which he had under- rous efforts.
taken it. During three mbnths, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that
could, be effeAed by the valour of his troops,
was attempted in order to reduce the place;
while Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftrud
his operations, were obliged to remain in such
an ignominious state of inadion, that a Pafqui-
nade was published at Rome, offering a reward
to any person who could find the Imperial army,
loft in the month of Odober in the mountains
between France and Lombardy, and which had
not been heard of since that time '.

' Sandon. i. 6o8.,

ooK IV. LEYVA, . well acquainted with, the difficultie

~ 24-. under which his acuntrymen laboured, and thl
The town impossibility of their facing, in the field, fuc
gant.l a powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia

placed his only hopes of safety in:his own vigilanc
and valour.; The efforts of both were extraor
dinary , and in proportion to the importance o
the place, with the defence of which he was en
trusted. He interrupted the approaches of tit
French by frequent and furious sallies. Behin
the breaches made by their artillery, he erede
new works,. which appeared to he scarcely i.
ferior in strength to the original fortificatio0s
He repulsed the besiegers in all their afaults;
and by'his own example, brought not only. t
garrison, but ithe. inhabitants, to bear the nAl
intolerable fatigues, "and to encounter the greate
dangers ,without murmuring. The rigour o
the season conspired with his endeavours in..i
tarding the progress of the French. Francis
attempting to become master of the town, by
diverting the course of the Tefino, which is iti
defence on one fide, a sudden inundation of the
river destroyed, in one day, the labour of many
weeks, and swept away all the mounds whic
his army had raised with infinite toil, as well a
at great expence

,

" Guic. 1. xv. 280. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 9S.

, NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the Booi IV.
beffiegers, and the glory, which Leyva acquired 2Z4.
by his gallant defence, it was not doubted but The Pope
that the' town would at last be obliged to fur- concludes a

o treaty of

render. The Pope, who already confider d the neutrality.
French arms as superior in Italy, became im-
patient to disengage himself from his connec-
tion .with the Emperor, of whose designs he
was extremely jealous, and to enter into terms
of friendship with Francis. As Clement's timid
Ind cautious teinper rendered him incapable .of
following the bold plan which Leo had formed,
rs delivering Italy from the yoke of bot.h the
rivals, he returned to the .more obvious and
pradticable scheme of employing the power of
the one to balance and to restrain that of the
Dther.. For this reafop., .he did not dissemble his
atisfadion at feeing the French King recover
Milan, as he hoped that the dread of such a
neighbour would be some check upon the Em-
peror's ambition, which. no power in Italy was
now able to controul. ,He laboured hard to
bring about a peace that would secure Francis
in poffeffion of his new conquests ; and as Charles,
swho was always inflexible in the prosecution of
his schemes, rejeaed the proposition with disdain,
and with bitter exclamations against .the Pope,
by whose persuasions, while Cardinal de Me-
dici, he had been induced to invade the Mila-
nefe, Clement immediately concluded a treaty

Bboo IV. of neutgalityawith the King of France, in whic

1sz4. the republick of Florence was included ".

Francis FRANCIS having, by this tranfadtion, deprive
invades the· Binperor of his two most powerful allies
Naples. and at the fame time having secured a paffag

for his own troops through their territories,
formed a scheme of attacking the kingdom o
Naples, hoping either to over-run that country
which was left altogether without defence,
that at least such an lunexpeded invasion wovi
oblige the viceroy to recall part of the Imperim
army out of the Milanese. For this purpose i
ordered fix thousand men to march under tli
command of John Stuart duke of Albany. Bu
Pescara foreseeing that the effed of this diverfi
would depend entirely upon the operations |
the armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannofy
disregard Albany's motions "', and to bend li
whole force against the King himself; so tli
Francis not only weakened his army very untea
fonably by this great detachment, but incurre
the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerica
and extravagant projeas.

Eforts of BY this time the garrison of Pavia was tc
Petcara and duced to extremity; their ammunition and pro
Bourbon. visions began to fail; the Germans, of who~

a" Guic. 1. xv. 282. 285. " Guic. 1. xv. 285.

Lt Was chiefly composed, having received no
pay for seven months ", threatened, to deliver
the town into the eriemy's hands, arid couild
hardly be restrained from mutiny by all Leyva's
address and authority, The Imperial generals,
ho were no strangers to his situation, saw the
heceffity of marching without loss of time to
his relief. This they had now in their powetr
"TWelve thousand Germans, Whom the zeal and
ativity of Bourbon taught to move With un-
ufuial rapidity , had entered Lombardy under
his command, and rendered the Imperial army
nearly equal to that of the French , greatly
diminished by the absence of the body under
Albany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege,
and the rigour of the season. But the more
their troops increased in number, the more fen-
sibly did they feel the distress arifirg from want
bs money. Far from having 'funds for paying a
powerfiul army. they had scarcely what was
fufficient for defrayins the charges of conducting
their artillery, and of carrying their ammunition
and provisions. The abilities of the geneirals
however, fuppiied every defeci. By their own
example, as well as by magnificent promises
in name of the Emperor, they prevailed on0 the
troops of all the different nations which corn-
posed their army, to take the field without pay;

/

'a tGold. Polit. Imperial. 87,
V.OL IL Y BOOK IV.

ISa4o

£ooi~~ IV.

I5(i.~ they engaged to lead them direAcly towards the

enemy; and flattered them with the certain pro.
speCt of vidory, which would at once enrich
them with such royal spoils as would be an ample
reward for all their services. The soldiers, fenfi.
ble that, by quitting the army, they would
forfeit the vast arrears due to them, and eager
to get poffeffion of the promised treasures, de.
rnanded a battle with, all the impatience of
adventurers who fight only for plunder ".

They march THE Imperial generals, without fuffering thi
o ,Frtt: k ardour of their troops to cool, advanced im.
February 3. mediately towards the French camp. On the firc

intelligence of their approach, Francis called:a
council of war, to deliberate what course h,
ought to take. All his officers of greatest ex
perience were unanimous in advising him tn
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy
-who courted it from despair. The leaders of
the Imperialists, they observed, would either
be obliged in a few weeks to disband an army,
which they were unable to pay, and which they
kept together only by the hope of pillage, or
the soldiers enraged at, the non-performance of
the promises to which they. had trusted , would
rife in some furious mutiny which would allow

' Eryci Peuteani Hist. Cifalpina ap. Gravii Thef. An.

tiquit. Ital. iii. p. 1170. 11 79.

them to think of nothing but theitr own safety: BooK IV.
That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some Isza.
fIrong post, and waiting in fafety' the arrival
of fresh troops from France and Switzerland,
might, before the end of spring, :take poffeffion
of all the Milanese, without danger, or blood-
thed.

" But in opposition to them, Bonnivet,

whose destiny it was to. give counsels fatal to
France during the whole campaign, represented
the ignominy that it would. reflet& on their fove-
reign, if he should abandon a siege which he'
had prosecuted so long, or turn his back before
an enemy to whom he was still superior in num-
ber; and insisted on the necessity of fighting the
Imperialists rather than relinquish an undertaking,
on the success of which the King's future fame
depended. Unfortunately, Francis's notions of'
honour were delicate to an excess that bordered
on what was romantick. Having often said that
he would take Pavia, or perish in the attempt,
he thought himself bound not to depart from that
resolution; and rather than expose himself to the
fligh test imputation, be chose to forego all the
advantages which were the certain consequences
of a retreat, and determined to wait for tle Im-
perialifts before the walls of Pavia ".

'. Guic. 1. xv. 29 x.

Y

I52~.
JBattle of
Pavias~
1Bebr. iZ4. strongly intrenched., that notwithstanding the

powerful motives'- which urged them on, they1
hesitated :long before they ventured to attack
them; but .at .last the necessities of the besieged,,
and the murmurs of their o\Wn soldiers, obliged'
them .to put eve'ry thing to hazard. Never did.
armies engage::wyith greater ardour!, or with an
h1jgh.er opinion of the importance of the battle
which' they;: were# going to fight; never were
trotops more t-.ongly. animated with emulation,
niational antipathy, mutual resentment, and all
the paflions which inspire obstinate bravery. On
the one hand., a gallant young Monarch, fe
conded by a generous nobility, and followed byi
fubjeds to whose natural impetuosity,, indignation:
at the oppoftion which they had encounteredl
added new force , .contended for vidory and
lhonour. On the other fide, troops more comr
pletely disciplined , and conduded by generals
of greater abilities, fought from neceflity, with
courage heightened by despair. The Imperialists
however, were unable to resist the first efforts of
the French valour, and their firmest battalions
began to give way. But the fortune of the day
was quickly. changed. The Swiss in the service:.
of France, unmindful of the reputation of theirt
country for fidelity and martial glory, aban-;

doned their post in a cowardly manner. Leyva, BOOK IV.
with his garrison, sallied out and attacked the siz .
rear of the French , during the heat oF the
adios, with such fury as threw it into confusion;
and Pescara falling on their cavalry, with the
Imperial horse, among whom he had prudently
intermingled a considerable number of Spanish
foot, armed ,with the heavy muskets then in
use, broke this formidable body by an unufualThe French
method of attack , against which they were army routed.
wholly unprovided. The rout became universal;
and resistance ceased in almost every part, but
where the King was in person , who fought
now, not for fame or victory , but for safety.
Though wounded-in several places, and thrown
from his horse , which was killed under him,
Francis defended himself on foot with an he-
roick courage. Many of his bravest officers
gathering round him, and endeavouring to save
his life at the expence of their own , fell at
his feet. Among there was Bonnivet, the author
of this great calamity, who alone died unla-
niented. ,Tie King exhausted with fatigue, and
fearcely capable of farther resistance , was left
almost alone, exposed to the fury of some
Spanish soldiers, atrangers to his rank, and en-
raged at his obstinacy. At that moment came
up Pomperant , a French gentleman, who had
entered together with Bourbon into the Em-

Y ^

BOOK IV, peror's service, and. placing himself by the fid(

xs25, of the, Monarch againif whom he had rebelled,

assisted in proteding him from the violence ol
the soldiers; at the fame time beseeching himn to
surrender to Bourbon, who was not far distant,
Imminent as the danger was which now fur.
rounded Francis, he rejeAed with indignation
the thoughts of an adion which would have
afforded such matter of triumph to his traiterous
fubjets; and calling for Lannoy, who happened

Francis likewise to be near at hand, gave up his sword
taken pri- to him; which he, kneeling to kiss the King's
foner. hand , received with profound refped ; and

taking his own sword from his fide, presented
it to him, saying: That it did not become so
great a Monarch to - remain disarmed in th
presence of one of the Emperor's fubjeds s.;

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one

0

the most fatal France had ever seen. Amnon
these were many noblemen of the highest dif
tinAion , who chose rather, to perish than' to
turn their backs with dishonour. Nbt few werf
taken' prisoners, of whom the most illustrious
was Henry D'Albert, the unfortunate king o

' Guic. 1, xv. 392. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 35 . Mel

de Bellay, p. 90. Sandov. Hist i. 638, &c. P. Mart. t-p
. 0o. 8 1 o. Rufcelli Lettere de' Principi, ii. p. 70, Ull
Vita di Carlo V. p. 98.

Navarre. A small body of the rear-guard made BOOK IV.
its escape under the command of the. Duke of rszs.
Alenfon; the feeble garrison of Milan, on the
first news of the defeat, retired ,without being
pursued, by another road; and in two weeks
after the battle, not a Frenchman remained, in
Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all
the outward marks of honour due to his rank
and charaCter, guarded him wi.th the utmost
attention. He was solicitous, not only to pre-
vent any possibility of his escaping, but afraid
that his own troops might seize his person, and
detain it as the best security for the payment
of their arrears. In order to provide against
both these dangers, he conduaed Francis, the
day after the battle , to the strong castle of
Pizzichitone near Cremona, committing him to
the cuatody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general
of the Spanish infantry, an officer of great bra-
very and of ftrilt honour, but remarkable for
that severe and scrupulous vigilance which such
:a trust required.

FRANCIS , who formed a judgment of the

Emperor's dispositions by his own,, was ex-
tremely desirous that Charles should be informed
of his situation , fondly hoping that, from his
generosity or sympathy, he should obtain fp'eedy

Y4

- BopoK IV. relief. The Imperial generals were no less imnip

1549 tient to give their sovereign an early account

of the decisive viAory which they had gained
and to receive his inf}rutions with regard to
their future condud. As the most certain and
expeditious method of conveying intelligence to
Spain, at that season of the year, was by land,
Irancis gave the Commendador Pennalofa, who
was charged with Lannoy's dispatches, a paffpot
to travel through France.

Effes ,of CHARLES received the account of this figna
this viatory and unexpedted success that had crowned his
UPo,, arms, with a moderation, which, if it -had been
34.aFc io. real, would have done him more honour than

the greatest vidory. Without uttering one word
expressive of exultation, or of intemperate joy
he retired immediately into his chapel , and
having ,pent an hour in offering up his thanks
givings to heaven , returned to the presence.
chamber, which hy that time was filled with
grandees and foreign ambassadors, assembled ill
order to congratulate him. He accepted of
their compliments with a modest deportment;
he lamented the misfortune of the captive King,
as a striking example of the fad reverse 0f
fortune, to which the most powerful Monarchs
are fubjed; he forbad any publick rejoicings, as
indecent in a war carried on among Christians,

reserving them until he should obtain a vitory BOOK IV'V
equally illustrious over the Infidels; and seemed 1s25,
to take pleasure in the advantage which he had
Iained, only as it would prove the occasion of
restoring peace to Chriftendomn .

CHARLES, however, had already begun to The
form fchernes in his own mind, which little rchemes h~
fauited such external appearances. Ambition , fom.
not generosity, was the ruling passion in his
mind; and the vidory at Pavia. opened such
new and unbounded profpe6ls of gratifying it,
as allured him with irresistible force: But it
being no easy matter to execute the vast designs
:which he meditated, he thought it necessary,
while proper measures were taking for that
purpose, to affed the greatest moderation, hop-
ing under' that veil to conceal his real, inten_
tions from the other Princes of Europe.

MEANWHILE France was filled with confter- The general
pation. The King himfelf' had early tranf- conaterna-
mitted an account of the rout at Pavia, in ati°^
letter to his- mother, delivered by Pennalofa,
which contained only these words, " Madam, all
is loft, except our honour." The officers who
made their escape, when they arrived from Italy,
brought such a rmelancholy detail of particulars

j" Sandov. Hist. i 641. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. p o,

BOOK IV. as made all ranks of men sensibly feel the great.

xrzg. ness and extent of the calamity. France, with.

out its sovereign, without money in her treasury,
without an army, without generals to command
it, and encompassed on all sides by a viAorious
and adive enemy, seemed to be on the very

The px.o brink of defitrudion. But on that occasion the
dent ofn- great abilities of Louise the regent saved the
Regent. kingdom, which the violence of her passions had

more than once exposed to the grea.tefP danger.
Instead of giving herself up to such lamenta.
tions as were natural to a woman so remarkable

e. for her maternal tenderness, the discovered all

the foresight, and exerted all the adivity of a
consummate politician. She assembled the no.
bles at Lyons, and animated them by her ex.
ample, no less than by her words, with such zeal
in defence of their country, as its present fitua.
tion required. She colleded the remains of the
aimy which had served in Italy, ranfomed the
prisoners, paid their arrears, and put them in a
condition to take the field. She levied new
troops, provided for the security of the fron-
tiers, and raised sums fufficient for defraying
these extraordinary expences. Her chief care,
however, was to appease the resentment, or tc
gain 'the frienrdfhip of the King of England'
and from that quarter, the first ray of comfori
broke in upon the French affairs.

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances Boon IV.
with Charles or Francis, seldom followed any i525.
regular or concerted plan of policy, but wa Effeas of
influenced chiefly by the caprice of temporaryt Paviai ryon
paflions, such occurrences often happened as Henry vxI.
recalled his attention towards that equal balance
of power which it was necessary to keep be-
tween the two contending potentates, the pre-
servation of which he always boasted to be his
peculiar office. He had expeded that his union
with the Emperor might afford him an oppor-
tunity of recovering some part of those territories
in France which had belonged to his ancestors,
and for the fake of such an acquisition he did
not scruple to give his assistance towards raising
Charles to a considerable pre-eminence above
Francis. He had never dreamt, however, of
any event so decisive and so fatal as the victory
at Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken,
.but to' have annihilated the power of one of
the rivals ; so that the profpeCl of the sudden
and entire revolution which this would occasion
in the political system , filled him with the' most
disquieting apprehensions. He law all Europe
in danger of being over-run by an ambitious
Prince, to whose power there now remained no
counterpoise; and though he himself might at
firff be admitted, in quality of an ally, to some
share in the spoils of the captive monarch, i$

J5as5. ner of making the· partition, as well as his

security for keeping poffeffion of what should
be allotted him, he must ,absolutely depend upon
the will of a confederate, to whose forces his
own bore no proportion. He was sensible that
if Charles were permitted to add -any confider.
able part of France to the vast dominions of
which he was already master, his neighbourhood
would be much more formidable to England
than that of the ancient French Kings; while,'
at the fame time, the proper balance on th
continent, to which England owed both its
safety and importance, would be entirely loft;
Concern for the situation of the unhappy mor
narch' co-operated with these political confiderl
ations; his gallant behavioui in the battle of
Pavia had excited an high degree of admiration,
which never fails of augmenting sympathy; and
Henry, naturally susceptible of generous senti.
ments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer
of a vanquished enemy from a slate of captivity.:
The passions of the Englifh' minister seconded
the inclinations of the Monarch. Wolsey, who
had not forgotten the disappointment .of his
hopes in two successive conclaves, which he im-
puted chiefly to the Emperor, thought this a
,proper opportunity of taking revenge; and
LotuiQfe, courting the friendship of England with

ruch flattering submissions as were no less agree-
able to the King than to the Cardinal, Henry
gave her secret assurances that he would not
lend his aid towards oppressing France, in its
present helpless state, and obliged her to pro-
mise that she would not consent to dismember
the kingdom even in order to procure her fon's
liberty ". Booie IV.I

I~5z~.

BUT as Henry's connections with the Em-
peror made it necessary to at irt such a manner,
as to save appearances, he ordered publick re-
joicings to be made in his dominions for the
success of the Imperial arms ; and as if he had
been eager to seize the present opportunity of
ruining the French monarchy, he sent ambafla-
dors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles
upon his viAory; to put him in mind, that he,
s his ally, engaged in one common cause, was
entitled to partake in the fruits of it; and to
require that, in- compliance with the terms of
their confederacy, he would invade Guienne
|with a powerful army, in order to give him pof-
felfion of that province. At the fame time , he
offered to fend the Princess Mary into Spain or
the Low Countries, that the might be educated
under the Emperor's diredion, until the conclu-
fton of the marriage agreed on between them;

" Mtm. de Bellay, 94. Guic. 1. xvi. 318. Herbert.

BOOK IV., and in return for that mark of his confidence

SSzjs. he insisted that Francis should be delivered to

him, in consequence of that article in the treaty
of Bruges, whereby each of the contradini
parties was bound to surrender all ufurpers e:
him whose rights they had invaded. It ws
impossible that Henry could expect that the
Emperor would listen to these extravagant dC
mands, which it was neither his interest, nor i,
his power to grant. They appear evidently |o
have been made with no other intention thb
to furnish him with a decent pretext for enter
ing into such engagements with France as ti
juncture required I".

On the Ita- IT was among the Italian states, however, tli
lian powers. the vidory at Pavia occasioned the greatest alari

and terror. That balance of power on whid
they relied for their security, and which it had
been the constant obje& of all their negociations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed il
a moment. They were exposed by their fitua
tion to feel the first effects of the uncontrould
authority which Charles had acquired. They
observed many symptoms of a boundless am
bition in that young Prince, and were fenfiblh
that, as Emperor, or King of Naples, he could
either form dangerous pretensions upon each q

1' Herbert, p. 64.

their territories, or invade them with great
advantage. They deliberated, therefore, with
much .tolicitude concerning the means of raising
such a force as might obftrudt his progress20.
Biut their consultations, conduded .with little
union, and executed with less vigour, had no
effed. Clement, instead of pursuing the mea-
fures which he had concerted with the Venetians
for securing the liberty of Italy, was so intimi-
dated by Lannoy's threats, or overcome by his
promises, that he entered into a separate treaty,
binding himself to advance a considerable fum
in return for certain emoluments which he was
to receive. The money was jnftantly paid;
p(harles -afterwards refused to ratify the treaty ;
and the Pope remained exposed at once to in-
famy and to ridicule; to the former, because
he had deserted the publick cause for his private
interest; to the latter, because he had been a
loser by that unworthy ation"t. BooK IV.

April I.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might Mutiny i,
be which was employed in order to defraud thethe Impe-

.> rial army.

Pope of this fum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to

'" Guic. 1. xvi. 300. Rufcelli Lettere de' Princ. ii. 74.

l6, &c. Thuani Hist. lib. i. c. II. *1 Guic. lib. xvi.
3o0. Mauroceni Hiftor. Venet. ap. Iftorici delle cofe
Ienez. V. 131. 136.

Bood IV. extricate himself out of art imminent dangh

15^, .Soon after the defeat of the French army, th

German troops, which had defended PaPia Wit
such meritorious courage and perseverance
growing insolent upon the fame that they ha
acquired, and impatient of relying any longe
on fruitless promises with which they had 'bee
so often amused, rendered themselves niafi
of the town, with a resolution to keep poffelfli
of it as a security for the payment of their at
rears; and the reft of the army difcoveredl
much stronger inclination to assist, than to puni
the mutineers. By dividing among them t1
money exaded from the Pope, Lannoy quiedt
the tumultuous Germans'; but though this afid
lied their present demands, he had so little pi
sped of being able to pay them or his othi
forces regularly for the future, and was undi
such continual apprehenfiorns of their seizing t
person of the captive King, that, not long asti
he was obliged to difmiifs all the Germans ad
Italians in the Imperial service 2. Thus, from
a circumstance that' now appears very fingulai
but arising naturally from the constitution 0
most European governments in the fixteehnt
century, while Charles was suspecTed by all his
neighbours of aiming at universal monarchy,
and while he was really forming vast projedi

pt Guic. 1. xvi. p. 3oz, of

bs this kind, his revenues were so limited, that BOOK IV,
he could not keep on foot his vidorious army, x 5 z
though it did not exceed twenty-four thousand
men.

DuRING there tranfadlions, Charles,, whofeThe Eipne-

pretensions to moderation and disinterestedness ror's delibes

P ration.l con*

were loon forgotten, deliberated, with the utmost cerning the
solicitude, how he might derive the greatest ad- mnet r of

". '

" improving

vantages from the misfortune of his adversary. his ipviao
Some of his counsellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that be.carme a'
Vidorious Prince, and instead of taking advan-
tage of his situation to imp6fe rigorous con-
ditions, to dismiss him on such equal terms as
would bind him for ever to his .interest by the
ties of gratitude and affeAion, more forcible as
well as more permanent than any which could.
be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary
fiipulations. Such an exertion of generosity is
not, perhaps, to be expeded in the condut of
political affairs, and it was far too refined for
that Prince to whom it was proposed. The
mqre obvious, but less splendid, scheme of en
deavouring to make the utmost of Francis's ca
lamity, had a greater number in the council to
recommend it, and suited better with the Emr
peror's genius. But though Charles adopted
this plan, he did not execute it in a proper

VOL. IL Z

JLooK IV. manner. Instead of making one great effort to

5is5. penetrate into France with all the forces of Spain

and the Low Countries; instead of crushing the,
Italian states before they recovered from the
confterna'tion which the success of his arms had
occasioned , he -had recourse to the artifices of
intrigue and negociation. This proceeded partly
from necessity , partly from the natural difpo-
fition of his mind,. The situation of his sinan-
ces, at that time, rendered it extremely difficult
to carry on any extraordinary armament;' and
he himself having never appeared at the head
of his armies, the command of which he had
hitherto committed to his generals, was averse
to bold and martial counsels, and trusted more
to the arts with which he was acquainted, He
laid, betides, too much stress upon the vidory of
'Pavia, as if by that event the strength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exhausted, and,
the kingdom itself, no less than the person of its

- Monarch, had been fdibjedted to his power.

"The rigo- F-ULL of this opinion, he determined to set the
rous terms highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having
te orais. -ord-ered the Count de Roeux to visit the captive

King in his name-, he inftrulted him to propose
the following articles, as the conditions on which
he would grant him his liberty: That he thould
restore Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose
ancestors it had been unjustly wrefte.4; that he

should surrender Provence and Dauphind, that Boo00 IV.
they might be ereaed into an independent ass?
kingdom for the Constable Bourbon; that he
should make full fatisfadion to the King of
England for all his claims, and finally renounce
the pretensions of France to Naples, Milan, of
any other territory in Italy. When Francis,
who had hitherto flattered himself that he should
be treated by the Emperor with the generosity
becoming one great Prince towards another,
heard these rigorous conditions, he was so tranf-
ported with indignation, that drawing his dagger
hastily, he cried, out: "It were better that a
King should die thus.'" Alafcon, alarmed ,at
his vehemence, laid hold on his hand; but
though he soon recovered greater compofudhe
.still declared, in the most solemn manner, that he
would rather remain a prisoner during life, than
purchase liberty by such ignominious conceffions2o

THIS moitifying discovery of the Emperor's i ranici ear-

intentions, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin spriainer
and impatience under his confinement, and must
have driven him to absolute despair, if he had
not laid hold of the only thing which could still
administer any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself that the conditions which Roeux had
proposed, did not flow originally from Charles
himself, but were dictated by the rigorous pot

"3 Mem. de Bellay, 94. Ferreras Hist ix. 4i0

Z a.

BoorK IV. licy of his ·Spanish souncil, and that therefore he

1j.-. pmight hope, in one personal interview with him,

to do more towards hastening his own deliver.
ance, than could be effeded by long negocia-
tions passing through the subordinate hands of
Ihis ministers. Relying on this supposition, which
proceeded from too favourable an opinion of
the Emperor's charadter, he offered to visit him
in Spain, -and was willing to be carried thither
as a fpedacle to that haughty nation. Lannoy

. emplryed all his address to confirm him in these

fentimnents; and concerted with him in fecre(.
the manner of ex'ecu-ting this resolution. Francis
was so eager on a scheme which seemed to open
some profped of liberty, that he furniihed the
gallies necefthry for the voyage, Charles being
at that time unable to set any fleet to sea. ,The
viceroy without communicati-ng his intentions
either td Bourbon.or Pescara, conduded his pri.
foner towards Genoa, under pretence of tranf-
porting him by sea to Naples; though soon after
they set fail, he ordered the pilots to steer di-
redly for Spain ; but the wind happening to
carry them near the French coast, the unfortu-
nate monarch had a full profped of .his own
dominions, towards which he cast many a'for-
rowful and desiring look. They landed, how-
ever, in a few days at Barcelona, .and soon after
Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command,

ag'0ut 2s4, i.n the Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the

vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him with as much Booi IV,
circumfpeAion as ever ". ss.

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Ma- Henry VIII

drid, and when he began to be sensible of his concldes a

treaty with

having relied without foundation on the Empe- france, in
ror's generosity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty order to pro,
with the regent of France, which afforded him ea'.his ra
some hope of' liberty from another quarter.
Henry's extravagant demands had been received
at Madrid with that .neglet which they deserved,
and which he probably expeded. Charles, in-
,toxicated with prosperity, no longer courted him
inr that refpedtful and submissive ~nanner which
pleased his haughty temper. Wolsey, no less
haughty than his master, was highly irritated at
the Emperor's discontinuing his wonted caresses
and profeffions of friendship to himself. 'Thefe
flight offences, added to the weighty confider-
ations formerly mentioned, induced. Henry to
enter into a defenfirve alliance with Louise , in
which all the differences between him and her
son were adjusted; at the fame ,time he engaged
that he would employ his bes offices in order to
procure the deliverance of his new ally from a
ftite of captivity "a.

+ Meim. de Bellay, 9<. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. lib,

xvi. 323, 2 Herbert; Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 33 7

So0K IV, WHILE the open defeaion of such a powerful

i2z, ' confederate affeded Charles with deep concern,
poron.'s a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy,
intrigues w1ich threatened him with consequences still
overturn the mrore fatal. The restless and intriguing genius

TEmperor'~ Of Morone, chancellor of Milan, ga.ve rife to
power iz.
taoly. this. His revenge had been 'amply gratified by

the expulsion of the French out of Italy, and
his vanity no less soothed by the re-establish.
fmlent of Sforza, to whose interest he had at-
tached himself in the dutcby of Milan. The
delays, however, and evasions of the Imperia.
court in granting Sforza the investiture of hi
new - acquired territories, had long alarmed Mo:
rone; 5these were repeated so often, and with
such apparent artifice, as became a full proof to
his suspicious niind, that the Emperor intended
to ftfip his master of that rich country which hq
had conquered in his name, Though Charles,
in order to quiet the Pope and Venetians, no
less jealous of his designs than Morone, gave
Sforza, at last, the inveffiture which had been
so long deifired; the charter was clogged with
so many refervatioibs, and fubjeted him to such
grievous-burdens, as rendered the Duke of Milan
a dependent on the Emperor, rather than a vas-
Tal of the Empire, and afforded him hardly any
other security for his poffeffions, than the good
pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such an az

ceflion of power as would have accrued from Booi IV.
the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of aish.
Naples, was considered by 'Morone as fatal to
the liberties of Italy, no less than to his own
power and importance. Full of this idea, .he
began to revolve in his mind the possibility of
rescuing Italy from the yoke of foreigners, the
darling scheme, as has been already observed,
of the Italian politicians in that age, and which it
was the great objet of their ambition to accom-
plifh. If to the glory of having been the chief
instrument of driving the French out of Milan,
Jhe could add that of delivering Naples from the
dominion of the Spaniards, he thought that no-
thing would be wanting to complete his fame.
His fertile genius soon suggested to him a projet
for that purpose; a difficult, indeed, and daring
one, but fhr that very reason more agreeable to
his bold and enterprising temper.

BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged His egocii.

ht Lannoy's carrying the French King into Spain tio'S with
without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two Monarchs might in his ab-
fence, conclude some treaty in which his interdRs
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrids'
in order to guard againif that danger. The
latter, on whom the command of the army now
devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but,
in every company, he gave vent to his indigna-

Z4

.3OOK IV tion against the viceroy, in expreffiens full of

SaZ, rancour and contempt; he accused him, in a let.

ter to the Emperor, of cowardice in the time of
danger, and of insolence after a vidory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no.
thing either by his valour or his condud; nor
did he abflain from bitter complaints againPt
the Emperor himself, who had not discovered,
as he -imagined, a fufficient sense of his merit,
nor bestowed any adequate reward on his ser.
vices. It was on this disgust of Pescara, that
IViorone founded his whole fyftein. He knew
the boundless ambition of his nature, the vaflt
extent of his abilities in peace as well as war;
and the intrepidity of his mind, capable alike of
undertaking and of executing the most defpe;
rate designs. The cantonment of the Spanish
troops on, the frontier of the IVlilanefe, gave oc-
cation to many interviews between him andl VIo-
rene, in which the latter took care frequently
to turn the conversation to the tranfadions sub.
sequent to the battle of Pavia, a fubjet upon
which the marquis always entered willingly, and
with paflion; and Morone observing his resent-
ment to be uniformly violent, artfully pointed
out :and aggravated every circumstance that
could increase its fury. He painted, in the
strongest colours, the Emperor's want of dif-
cernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring

Lannoy to him, and in allowing that prefump- BooK IV.
tuous Fleming to dispose of the captive King, xs
without consulting the man to whose bravery
and wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory
of having him in his power. Having warmed
him by such discourses, he then began to infi-
nuate, that now was the time to be avenged for
these insults, and to acquire immortal renown
as the deliverer of his country from the oppref-
sion of strangers; that the fRates of Italy, weary
of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of
barbarians, were' at last ready to combine in
order to vindicate their own independence; that
their eyes were fixed on him as the only leader-
whose genius and good fortune could ensure the
happy success of that noble enterprize; that the
attempt was no less pradicable than glorious, it
being in his power so to disperse the Spanish in-
fantry, the only body of the Emperor's troops
in Italy , through the villages of the Milanese,
that, in one night, they might be defiroyed by
the people, who, having fuffered much from
their exadions and insolence, would gl'adly un-
dertake this service; that he might then, with-
out opposition, take poffeffion of the throne of
Naples, the station destined for him; and a re-
ward not unworthy the restorer of liberty to
Italy; that the Pope, of whom that kingdom
Beld, and whose predecessors had disposed of it

BOOK IV. on many former occasions, would willingly grant

S1z25, him the right of investiture; that the Venetians,

the Florentines, the Duke of Milan, to whom he
had communicated the scheme, together with the
French, would be the guarantees of his right;
that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the
government of one of their countrymen, whom
they loved and admired, to that odious domit'
nion of firangers, to which they had been so
long fubjeaed; anda that the Emperor, afto0
nifhed at a blow so unexpe&ed, would find that
he had neither troops nor money to resist such
a powerful confederacy ".

Betrayed
and taken
prisoner by
Pefbcra. PESCARA, ama'ld at the boldness and extent

of the scheme, listened attentively to IViorone,
but with the countenance of a man loft in pro1
found: and anxious thought. On the one handi
the infamy of betraying his sovereign under
whom he bore such high command, deterred
him from the attempt; on the other, the pro.
sped of obtaining a crown allured him to ven.
ture upon it. After continuing a short space
in suspense, the least commendable motives, as
is usual 'after such deliberations, prevailed, and
ambition triumphed over honour. In order,

6= Guic. 1. xvt. 3 2 . Jovii. Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.

de .Brantome, iv. 17 i. Rufcelli Lettere de' Princ. ii. 9"
Thuani Hist. lib. i. c, nI. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. it'
SC. 3. p. o07.,

however, to throw a colour of decency on his BOOK .IV-
conduc , he insisted ,that some learned cafuifts

x ~ .,

Thould give their opinion, a Whether it was.
lawful for a fubje& to take arms against his im-
mediate sovereign , in obedience to the Lord
Paramount of whom the kingdom itself was
held. " Such a resolution of the cafe, as he ex-
peded, was soon obtained from the divines and
civilians both of Rome and IVIilan; the nego-
ciation went forward; and m e'afures seemed to
be taking with great spirit for the speedy exe-
cution of the design.

DURING this interval, Pescara, either shocked
at the treachery of the adion that he was going
to commit, or despairing of its success, began to
entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage-
ments which he had come under. The indifpo-
fition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed this resolution, and deter-
mined himn to make known the whole conspiracy
to the Emperor, deeming it more prudent to
exped the. dutchy 6f Milan from him as the
reward of this discovery, than to aim at a king-
dom to be purchased by a series of crimes.
This resolution, however, proved the source of
a&ions hardly less criminal and ignominious.
The Emperor, who had already received full
idformation concerning the' conspiracy froi,

D$oR LiV, other hands, seemed to be highly pleased with

Pefcara's fidelity, and commanded' him to con.
tinue his intrigues for some time with the Pope
and Sforza, both that he might discover their
intentions more fully, and be able to convijC
them of the crime with greater certainty. Pes.
cara, conscious of guilt, as well as fenfible.how
suspicious his long silence must have appeared
at Madrid, durst not decline that dishonourable
office; and, to his eternal disgrace,, was obliged
to ad the meanest oIall parts, that of seducing
with a purpose to betray.. Considering the abi.
lities of the persons with whom he had to deal,
the part was fearcely less difficult, than base;
but he aded it with such address, as to deceive
even the penetrating eye of Morone,., who relpy
ing with full confidence on his sincerity, visited
him at Novara, in order to put the last hand to
their machinations. Pescara received him in
an apartment where Antonio, de Leyva was
placed behind the tapestry, that he might over,
hear and bear witness to their conversation; as
WVIorone was about to take leave, that officer
suddenly appeared, and to his aftoniifhment
arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name.
He was conducted to the castle of Pavia; and
Pescara, who had so lately been his accomplice,
had now the assurance to interrogate him as: his
judge. At the fame time, the f.mperor de-
clated Sforza to have forfeited all right to the

dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in a con- BOOK IV.
fpiracy against the sovereign of whom he held; n5s

.

pescara, by his command, seized on every place
in the NI ilanefe, except the castles of Cremona
and Milan, which, the unfortunate Duke attempt-
ing to defend, were closely blockaded by the
Imperial troops ".

BUT though this unfuccefsful conspiracy, in- The rigo.
stead of stripping the Emperor of what herons treat-
already poffeffed in Italy, contributed to extend lrancis in
his dominions in that country, it fhewed him thespain.
necessity of coming to some agreement with the
French King, unless he would draw on himself
a confederacy of all Europe, which the progress
of his arms, and his ambition, now as undisguised
as it was boundless, filled with general alarm.
He had not hitherto treated Francis with the
generosity which that monarch expedted, and
hardly with the decency due to his station. In-
stead of displaying the sentiments becoming a
great Prince, he seems to have .adied with the
mercenary art of a corsair, who, by the rigorous
usage of his prisoners, endeavours to draw from
them an high price for their ransom. The cap-
tive King was confined in an old castle, under a
keeper whose formal austerity of manners. ren-
dered his vigilance still more difguftful. He was

' Guic. I, x. 329. Jovii Htifi 3 9. Capella, lib. v.

B, 200.

BOOK IV.

2-Erdangers
his life. allowed no exercise but that of riding on a rnmul

surrounded with armed guards on horfebacki
Charles, on pretence of its being necessary to
attend the Cortes assembled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and fuffered several
weeks to elapse without visiting Francis, though
he solicited an interview with the most preflin
and fubmiflive importunity. So many indig
nities made a deep impression on an high-fpirited
Prince ; he began to lose all relish for his ufuai
amusements ; his natural gaiety of temper foi.
sook him ; and after .languishing for some time,
he was seized with a dangerous fever, during
the violence of which he complained conftantlj
of the unexpected and unprincely rigour wit
which he had been treated, often exclaimihng
that now the Emperor would have the fti
facion of his dying a prisoner in his hand(s
without having once deigned to fee his faa,
The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, anid
informed the Emperor that they saw no hope of
his recovery, unless he were gratified with regard
to that point on which he seemed to be so strongly
bent. Chatrles, solicitous to preserve a life,
with which all his profpeds of farther advantage
from the vitory of Pavia must have terminated,
immediately consulted his ministers concerning
the course to be taken. In vain did the chan-
cellor Gattinara, the most able among thew,

rprefent '.to him the indecency of his visiting BooKr 1I.
Francis, if he did not intend to set him at 1525.
liberty immediately upon equal terms; in vain
did he .point out the infamy to which he would
be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition
should prevail on him to give the captive Mo-
narch this mark of attention and sympathy , for
which humanity and gerierofity had pleaded so
long without effed. The Emperor, less de-
licate, or less solicitous about reputation than
his miinifter, set out for Madrid to visit his pri- sept. 28.
foner. The interview was short; Francis beingoS ei Elpe-
too weak to bear a long conversation, Charles him.
accosted him in terms full of affeaion and re-
fted, and gave him such promises of fieedy
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have refleAed the greatest honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source, Francis
grasped at thlrn with the eagerness natural in
hiss situation; and cheered with this gleam of
hope, began to revive from that moment, re-
covering rapidly his wonted health a'.

HE had soon the mortification to find, that The confia-
his confidence in the Emperor was not better ble Bourbon

arrives at

founded than formerly. Charles returned in-Madriad.
ftantly to Toledo; all negociations were carried

" Guic. l, xvi. 339. Sandov. Hiflt. i. 66g.

Bo0Km IV. on by his minister ; and Francis was. kept I

ixyz. as ftridt custody as ever. A new indignity,

and that very galling, was added to all th6fe
he had already fuffered. Bourbon arriving ii
Spain about this time, Charles, who had so
long refused to visit the King, received his re,
bellious fubjeat with the most studied refpetd

6rov. 's. He met him without the gates of Toledo, em.

braced him with the greatest affedion, and pla.
cing him on his left hand, conduded him to
his apartment. These marks of honour to him,
were so many insults to the unfortunate M0Vo
narch; which he felt in a very sensible manner.
It afforded him some consolation, however, to
obferive, that the sentiments of the Spaniards
differed widely from those of their fovrereign.
That generous people detested Bourbon's crime,
Notwithstanding his great talents and impor.
tant services, they shunned all intercourse with
him, to such a degree, that Charles having de.
fired the marquis de Villena to permit Bour.
bon to reside in his palace while the court re.
mained in Toledo, he politely replied, "That
he could not refuse gratifying the Emperor in
that request; " but added with a Castilian dig-
nity of mind, that he must not be furprized
if the moment the Constable departed , he Thould
burn to the ground a house, which, having been

polluted

polluted !by the presence of a traitor, became BOOK IV,
an unfit habitation for a man of honour "2 *

1 2a

CHARLES himself, nevertheless, seemed to Appointed

have it much at heart to reward Bourbon's ser. general of

the Impe-

vices in a signal manner. But as he insisted, in fia armrm
the first place, on the accomplifhmtent of the in Itay.
'Emperor's promise of giving him in marriage
his sifter Eleanora, Queen dowager of Por-
tugal, the honour of which alliance had been
one of his chief inducements to rebel against:
his lawful sovereign; as Francis, in order to
prevent such adangerous union, had offered,
before he left Italy, to marry that Princess.;
and as Eleanora herself discovered an inclination
rather to match with a powerful Monarch, than
with his exiled fubjea; all these interfering
circumstances created great embarrassment to
Charles, and left him hardly, any hope of extri-
cating himself with decency. But the death
of Pescara, who, at the age of thirty-fix, left
behind him the reputation of being one of the
greatest generals and ablest politicians of that,
century, happened opportunely at this jundure
for his relief. By that event, the command of
the army in Italy became vacant, and Charles,
always fertile in ,resources, persuaded Bourbon,
who was in no condition to dispute his will, to

' Guic. 1. xvi. 33 ·

VOL. 1I, A a

'.ooQK IV, accept the office of general in chief there, to;

J125. gether with a grant of the dutchy of IMilan

1orfeited :by Sforza, and in return for these to
relinquiflh all hopes of marrying the Queen of
Portugal 30

negocia- TiHE- chief obitacle that flood: in the way of
Stious for Franis's liberty was the Emperor's continuing
procuring
rrancis'es to insist so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur-
ie'rty. .gtndy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis

Soften declared -tbat he would never content to

dismember his state; and that even if he
f thould so far forget the duties of a MIVonarch as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental
laws of the kingdom would prevent its taking
effect. On his part he was willing to make an
absolute cession to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy and the Low Countries; he
promised to restore Bourbon all his lands which
had been confiscated; he renewed his proposal
of marrying the Emperor's sifter, -the Queen
dowager of Portugal and engaged to pay a
great funm by way of ransom for his own person.
But all mutual effeem and confidence between
the two .monarchs were now entirely loft; there
appeared on the one hand, a rapacious ambition
labouring to avail itself of every favourable cir.
cumflance; on the other, suspicion and resent-

SSanLdov. HilL. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 249.

ment, standing perpetually on their guard; so BooK IV.
that the profpedt of bringing their negociations x sa:.
to an issue, seemed to be far distant. The
Dutchess of Alengon, the French King's sifter,
whom. Charles permitted to visit her brother in
his confinement, employed all her address, in
order to procure his lib'erty on more reasonable
terms. Henry of England interposed his goqd Francis in
offices to the fame purpose; but both with so efpair re-
little success, that Francis in despair took fud- reign his
denly the resolution of resigning his crown with crown.
all its rights and prerogatives to his son the
Dauphin, determining rather to end his days in
prison, than to purchase his freedom by con-
ceffions unworthy of a King. The deed for
this purpose he signed with legal formality at
Madrid, empowering his fifler to carry it into
France, that it might be registered in all the
parliaments of the kingdom; and at the fame
time intimating his intention to the Emperor,
he desired him to name the place of his confine-
ment, and to assign him a proper number of
attendants during the remainder of 'his days. "

THIS resolution of the French King had charles
great effed; Charles began to be sensible, that la"mred
.by pushing rigour to excess, he might defeat
his own measures, and instead of the vast ad.

' This paper is published in Melmoires Hiftoriques, &c,

par M. I'Abbe Raynal, tomr. ii. p. I 1.

Aa a

BboK IV. vantages' which he, hoped .to draw from ranfonm.

a3,~. ing a powerful Mllonarch, he might at last find

in his .hands a Prince without dominions or
revenues. .About the .fame time, one of the
King of Navarre's domefties happened by an
extraordinary: exertio'n of fidelity, courage,. and
address , to procure his master. -an opportunity
*. f escaping from the prison in which he had
been confined ever since the battle of Pavia,
*This convinced the Emperor, that the,monf
vigilant attention ;of his officers might be eluded
by the ingenuity or boldness of Francis, or his
attendants, and one unlucky hour might de-
prive him of all the :advantages which he had
been so solicitous to obtain. By these confi.
derations, .he was induced to abate -somewhat
of his ,former demands. On the other hand,
Francis's impatience .under Confinement daily
increased; and having received certain intel.
Jigence of a powerful league forming against his
rival in Italy, he grew more compliant with
regard to concessions, trusting, that, if he.could
once obtain* his liberty, he would soon be in a
condition to resume whatever he had yielded.

a126. .As these were the views and sentiments of
Treaty ofthe two Monarchs, the treaty which procured
Madrid. -

Francis his liberty was signed at Madrid on the
fourteenth of January, one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-fix. The article with regard

to Burgundy, which had hitherto :created the BooKr IV.
greatest difficulty, was comprormifed, Francis i z6.
engaging to restore that dutchy' withall its de-
pendencies in full sovereignty to: the .Emperor;
and Charles confenting' that this restitution should
not be made until the King was set at liberty:
'In. order to feture the performaince 'of this, as
well- as the other conditions in the treaty, Francis
agreed that at the fame instant he' himself was
released, he would deliver as hostages to the
Emperor, his eldest son the Dauphin, his second
son the Duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by
Charles. The other articles swelled to a great
number, and though not of such importance,
were extremely rigorous. Among these the
rnoft remarkable were, that Francis should re-
nounce all his pretensions in Italy; that he
thould disclaim any title which he had to the
sovereignty of Slanders and Artois'; that within
fix weeks after his release, he should restore to
Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods,
'moveable and immoveable, and make them full
reparation for the damages which they had sus-
tained by the confiscation of them; that he
should use his interest with Henry D' Albert to
relinquish his pretensions to the crown of Na-
varre, and fihould not for the future assist him
in any attempt to recover it; that there fhoutld

A a

.

BooK IV.

3526, be eftabliflied between the Emperor and Francis

a league of perpetual friendship and confe.
deracy, with: a promise of mutual assistance in
every cafe of necefity. That in corroboration
of this union, Francis should marry the Emn
peror's sifter, the Queen Dowager of Portugal;
that Francis -.should cause all the articles of this
treaty to be ratified by the States, and registered
in the parliaments of his kingdom; that upon
the Emperor's:.: receiving this ratification, the
hostages should be Let at liberty; but in their
place, the Duke of Angoulnme, the King's third
son, should be delivered to. Charles, that in
order to manifest, as well as to strengthen the
amity between the two Monarchs, he might be
educated at the Imperial court; and that it
Francis did not, within the time limited, fulfil
the stipulations in the treaty, 'he should promise,
upon his honour and oath, to return into Spain,
and to surrender himself again a: prisoner to the
Emperor ".

Sentiments By this treaty, Charles flattered himself that'
i, ta~r alhe had not only effeAtually humbled his rival,
to it. but that he had taken such precautions as would

for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest

" Recueil des Trait. torn, ii, i I2. Ulloa Vita di Carlo

V. p. I2o, &C,

politicians formed concerning it, was very: dif- RBooi TIV.
ferent; they could not persuade themselves that i62.6
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, ..would exe-
cute articles against which he ha:d struggled. fe
long, and to which even amidfl the horrors
of captivity he had consented with such *reluc-
tance. Ambition and resentment, they .knew,
would conspire in promptiag him. to, violate -the
hard conditions -to which he had. been con-
fbrained to. fubmitai nor would arguments anId
casuistry be xanting to represent that which was
so manifestly advantageous, to be necessary and
just. If one .part of Francis's condu¶~ had been
known, at that time, this opinion might have
been founded, not in conjed.ure, but in cer-
tainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, Francis
he assembled such of his counsellors as were recret1y p'o"
then in 1Vfadrid, and having exaded from them the vaiaity
a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a long enu- ofit.
re-ration in their presence of the dilhonourable
arts, as well as unprincely rigour, which the
Emperor had employed in order to ensnare or
intimidate him. For that reason, he took a
formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his
.consent to ,the treaty thould be considered as an
involuntary deed, and be deemed null and
void ". By this disingenuous artifice, for which
even the treatment that h~e had met with was

" Recueil des Trait. ton, ii. p. 107.

Aa4

EBooI IV. no apology, Francis -endeavoured, to, satisfy his

ir~s6.. honour, and conscience in signing the treaty,;

arid to provide at the fame time a pretext ont
:which -to break it,

GREAT, meanwhile, were the outward demon

ftrations of love and confidence between the
two "Monarchs; they appeared often together
in public; they frequently had long conferences
in private; they travelled in the fame litter, and:
joined in the fame amusements. o But amidst
these signs of peace and friendship, the Emperor
still harbouted suspicion in his mind. Though:
the ceremonies of the marriage between -Francis
and the Queen of Portugal were performed&
Loon after the conclusion of the treaty,. Charles
would not permit him to consummate it until;
the return of the ratification from France. Even
then Francis was not allowed to be at full-
liberty; 5his guards were frill continued; though
caressed as a brother-in-law, he was still watched.
like a prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive
observers, that an union, in the very beginning
of which. there might be discerned such fymp-
toms of jealousy and diftrift., could not be-
-cordial, or of long continuance ",

atified in ABQUT a month after the signing of the
France. treaty, the Regent's ratification of it was brought

39 GU i. xvi. 3r3V

from France; and that wife Princess, prefer- BooiT 'T
ring, on this occasion, the publick good to do- i526.
ineftick affedtion,"'informed her son, that, instead
of the twelve noblemen named in the treaty;
the' had sent the Diuke of. Orleans along with
his brother the Dauphin to thde frontier, as -the
kingdom could fuffer- nothing by the absence
of'a rchild, butt must be left almost: incapable of
defence, if deprived of "its ablest statesmen, and
mos, experienced generals, whom Charles had
artfully .included in his nomination. At last Francis ret
Francis took 'leave of the Emperor, whose sus- at iberty.
picio'n of the King's sincerity increasing , as the
time of putting it to the proof approached, he
endeavoured to' bind him still faster by exading
new promises., whicih, after those he had already
made, the French monarch was not. flow to
grant. He set out from Madrid, a place which
the remembrance of ..many affliting . circum-
stanc.es rendeied peculiarly odious to him , with
the joy. natural on such, an -occasion, and began
the long-wifhed-for journey towards his own
dominions. He 'was efcorted': by a body of
horse under the command of Alarcon, who, as
the King drew. near. the frontiers of France,
guarded him with more scrupulous exadnefs
than ever. When he arrived at the river An-
daye, which separates the two kingdoms, .Lau-
tree appeared on the opposite bank with a

Boor IV. guard of horse equal in number to Alarcon'l

iz26. An empty bark was moored in the middle of

the stream,; the attendants- drew, up in order on
the opposite banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy
. with eight gentlemen put off from the Spanifih,
and Lauttrec. with- the iime- number from thie
French fide of the river; the former had the
King in his boat; the latter, the Dauiphin and
Duke of Orleans; they met in the empty vefflel;
the exchange was made in a moment: francis,
after a short embrace to his children, leaped
into Lautrec's boat, and reached the French
Thore. He mounted that instant a Turkilh
horse, waved his hand over his head, and with
a joyful voice crying'aloud several times, "Iam
yet a King,, "galloped full speed 'to St. John
de Luz, 'and from thence to Bayonne. This
event, no less impatiently-.defired by the French
nation than by their monarch, 'happened on the
eighteenth of JMarch, a year. ind- twenty tao
days after the fatal battle of Pavia. 3.

Tie Empe- SooN after the Emperor had taken leave of
ror's mar- Francis, and permitted him to be in :his journey
raage with
Ifchena of towards his own dominions , e let out for
Portugal. .Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage with

Jfabella, the daughter of Emanuel , the late
King of Portugal, and the filter of John JII.
who had succeeded him in the throne of that

'j S·ando~ ~~it. i, a3~, Guic. i. ~vi. 3~5·

kingdom. Isabella was a Princess of uncom- BooR IVP
mon beauty and accomplishments; and as the 1s26.
Cortes both in Castile and Aragon had warmly
solicited their sovereign to marry, the choice of
a wife so nearly allied to the royal blood of
both kingdoms , was extremely acceptable to
his fubjeAs. The Portuguese, fond of this new
connedion with the first Monarch in Christen-
dom, granted him an extraordinary dowry with
Isabella, amounting to nine hundred thousand
crowns, a Tum, which, from the situation of
his ^affairs at that jundcure, was of no small con-
sequence to the Emperor. The marriage was March rs.
celebrated with that fplenddur and gaiety, whichl
became a great and youthful Prince. Charles
lived with Isabella in perfe&t harmony,, and
Lreated her on all occasions with, much diftinc-
tion and regard ".

DURING these tranfadions, Charles could Affairs of

hardly gives any attention to the affairs of Ger- Gerinany"
many, though it was torn in pieces by commo-
tions, which threatened the most dangerous coi-
sequences. By the feudal inflitutions , which
still subsisted almost unimpaired in the Empire,
the property of lands was vested in the Princes
and free-barons. Their vassals held of them by Grievances

3" Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. Io6. Belcarius Com. Rer.

Gallic, p. 565. Spalatinus ap, Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. ii,
1081,

Boor IV. the ftridteft and most limited tenures; while

1 x6. the great body of the people was kept in a
of the pea. state but little removed from absolute servitude.

nts. In some places of Germany, people of the lowea

class \were so entirely in the power of their
masters, as 'to :be fubje&a to personal and do.
reftick slavery, the most rigorous form of that
wretched state. In other provinces, patticularly
in B.ohemia. and Lusatia, the peasants were
bound to: re'main on the lands to which they
belonged,. ahd mniking part of the estate, were
transferred licke any other property from oine
hafnd to another. Even in Suabia, and the
countries on the banks of the Rhine, where their
cd6ndition was most tolerable, the peasants not
only paid the full rent of their 'farms to the
landlord; but if they chose either to change the
place of their abode, or to follow a new pro-
fefion, they were obliged to purchase this pri-
vilege at a 'ceitain price. Besides this, all grants
of lands to 'peafants expired at -their death,
without descending to their pofferity. Upon
that event, the'landlord had ai ight to the befit
of their cattle , as well as of their furniture;
and their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal:'of
the grant, were obliged to pay large sums by
way of fine. These exadions, though grievous,
were born with patience, because they were cuf-
tomary and ancient: But when the progress of
elegance and luxury, as well as the changes in'

troduced into the art of war, came to increase BOOKI IV.
the expence. of government, and made it necef- x52 .
fary, for Princes to levy occasional or stated
taxes on their fubjets, such impositions being
newt, appeared intolerable; and in Germany,
these duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine,
and other necessaries of life, affeded the com-
mon people in the most sensible manner. The
addition of such a load to their former burdens,
drove them to despair. It was to the valour
inspired by resentment against impositions of
this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of
their liberty in the fourteenth century. The
fame cause had excited the peasants in several
other provinces of Germany to rebel against
their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth
and beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and
though these infurredions were not attended
with like success, they could not, however, be
quelled without much difficulty and bloodshed 7.

BY these checks, the spirit of the peasants Their inrur
was overawed rather than subdued; and their reaion i

Suabia.

grievances multiplying continually , they ran to
arms, this year, with the most frantick rage.
Their first appearance was near Ulm in Suabia.
The peasants in the adjacent country flocked to
their standard with the ardour and impatience

"7 Seckend. lib. ii. p. 2. 6.

BOOK IV. naturl to men, who having groaned long under

5a6. oppression, beheld at last some profpeC of de.

liverance ; and the contagion spreading froni
province to province, reached almost every pari
of Germany. Wherever they came, they plunl
dered the monasteries; wasted the lands of theit
•superiors; razed their castles, and .massacred
without mercy all persons of noble birth who
were so unhappy as to fall into their hands".
Having intimidated their .oppressors, as they
imagined, by the violence of these proceedings,
they began to cohfider what would be the most
proper and effeAual. method of securing them.
selves for the future from their tyrannical ex-
actions. With this view, they drew up and
published a memorial, containing all their de-
mands, and declared, that while arms were in
their hands, they would either persuade or oblige
the nobles to give them full fatisfadion with
regard to these. The chief articles were, thai
they might have liberty to chufe their own pas.
tors; that they might be freed from the pay-
ment of all tythes except those of corn; that
they might no longer be considered as the slaves
or bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty
of hunting and fishing might be common; that
the gr'eat forests might! not be regarded as pri-

"8 Petr. Crinitus de Bello Ruftic'ano, ap. Freher. Script.

Rer. Germ. Argent. 1717. vol. iii. p. 243. /

vate property, but be; open for the use of all; BooK IV.
that they might be delivered from the unusual ISz6.
burden of taxes under which they laboured;
that the administration of justice might be ren-
dered less rigorous and more impartial; that
the encroachments of the nobles upon meadows-
and commons might be restrained 39.

MANY of these demands were extremely rea- Quned.
fonable; and being urged by such formidable
numbers, might have met with some redress.
But those vast unwieldy bodies, assembled in
different places, had neither union, nor conduec,
nor vigour. Being led by persons of the lowest
rank, without skill in war, or knowledge of
what was necessary for accomplilhing their de-
signs; all their exploits were Hiftinguifhed only
by a brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose
this, the princes and nobles of Suabia and the
Lower Rhine raised their vaffals,' and attack-
ing some of the mutineers with open force, and
others by furprize,. cut to pieces or di'fperfed
all who infested those provinces; so that the
peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their affo-
ciates in the field, were obliged to return to
their habitations with less hope than ever of
relief from their grievances "0.

3 Sleid. Hist. p. 90. * Seckend. lib. ii. p. Io. Peti.
Gnodalius de Rufticmanoum Tumults ipl Germania., ap.
Scard. Script. vol, ii. ip. 3jr, c.

BooK IV. THESE .commotions happened at first in pro.

15 26. vyinces of Germany - where Luther's opinions had
'heir in- made little progress; and. being excited wholly
furreaions o t
in Thurin. by political causes, .had no. conneAion with the
gia. disputed points in, religion. ,; But the frenzy

reaching at last those countrie,s in which the Re.
formation was established, derived new strength
from circumstances peculiar to them, and rose
to a still greater pitch of extravagance. Th&
Reformation, wherever it was receiyed, increased
that bold yad innovating spirit to which it owed
its birth. Men who had the. courage to over.

o turn -a system supported by every thing which

can command refpedt or reverence, were not to
be overawed by any authority, how greater
venerable soever. After having been accuf.
.tomed to confider themselves as judges of the
,molf important dodrines in religion, to examine
these freely, and to rejeat, without fcrupie, what
appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for
them to turn the fame. daring and .inquisitive
eye towards government, .and to think of redi-
fying whatever disorders or imperfeAions were
discovered there. As.religious abuses had been
reformed in several places without, the permit
sion of the magifirate, it was an easy transition
to attempt the redress of p.olitical grievances in
the fame manner.

No

No sooner, then 9 did the spirit of revolt break Boos IV\
out in Thuringia, a province fubjea to the ixa6;
Eletor of Saxony , the inhabitants of which More for
were rnmofy c6nverts to Lutheranifm than itiablg
aifumed a new and more dangerous form. Tho-
liias Muncer, one of Luther's disciples, having
deablifhed himfeif in that country, had acquired
a wonderful ascendant over the minds of the
people. tie propagated anmong them the wildest
and most enthufiaftick riotions, but such as tended
manifestly to inspire them with boldness, and
lead them to feditiori. Lutheri he told them
had done more hurt than service to religion.
He had, indeed, rescued the church fiom the Their fa~
yoke of P'opery, but his doarines encouraged, ti'cl fiti*;
and his life set an example of the titmoaf licen
tioutnefs of manners. In order ti avoid tvice,
says he , inen must praaife perpettial mortifi-
catiiri. They muift put ori a grave countheance,
speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious
in their whole deportment; Such as prepare their
hearts in this manner , may expe6t that the
Supreme IBeing will dire&t all their steps, and
by some visible sign difcover' his Will to them;
if that illumination be at any time withheld,
we may expostulate with the Almighty, who
deals with us to harshly, and remind him of his
promises. This expostulation 'and anger Will be
highly acceptable to God, and will at Iaft prevail

VOL. II B b

BOOK IV. on himn to guide us with the fame unerring hand

r526. which conduded the patriarchs of old. Let us

beware, ·however, -of offending him by our
arrogance; but as all men are equal in his eye,
let them return to that condition of equality in
which he formed them, and having all things in
common, let them live together like brethren,
without any marks 'of subordination or pre-
eminence ".

EXTRAVAGANT as there tenets were, they

flattered so many passions in the human heart,
as to make a deep impreflion. To aim at no-
thing more than abridging the power of the
nobility, was now considered as a trifling and
partial reformation, not worth the contending
for ; it was proposed to level every diftindion
among mankind, and by abolishing property, to
reduce them to their natural slate of equality,
in which all should receive their subsistence from
one common stock. Muncer assured them, that
the defign'was approved of by heaven, and that
the Almighty had in a dream ascertained him
of its success. The peasants set about the exe-
cution of it, not only with the rage which ani-
mated those of their order in other parts of Ger-
many, but with the ardour which enthufiafin
inspires. They deposed the magifftrates in alJ the

"' Seckend. lib. i;, p.

I . Sleid.' Hilt. p. 83,

cities of which they were masters; seized the
lands of the nobles, and obliged such of them
as they got into their hands, to put on the dress
commonly Worn by peasants, and instead of their
former titles, to be satisfied with the appellatidh
given to people in the lowest class of life. Vast
numbers engaged in this wild undertaking; but
ViMuncer, their, leader and their prophet, was
destitute of the 0abilities necessary for conduding
it. He had all the extravagance, but not the
courage, which enthusiasts usually *possess. It was
with difficulty he could be persuaded to take the
field; and though he soon drew together eight
thotifand men, he fuffered himself to be fut-
rounded by a body of cavalry under the -com-
inand of the Eledor of Saxony,; the Landgrave
of Hesse, and Dtike of Brunswick. These Princes,
unwilling to shed the blood of their deitided
fubjeds, lent a young nobleman to their camp,
with the offer of a general pardon, if they woiuld
immediately lay down their arms, and deliveir
up the authors of the sedition. Mtuncer, alarmed
at this, began to harangue his followers with
his usual vehermenrce , exhorting them not to
trift these deceitful promises of their oppressors,
nor to desert the cause of God

6 and of Chriftiari

liberty. 30oo0 IV

S5 se

BUT' the sense of preferit danger mtaking ~iPearants

deeper impression on the peasants than his elo;defeated.

Bb z

BooK IV. quence, confufion' and terror were visible in

ix 26. every. face, 'hen a raihbow ,- which was the em.

blem that the, mutineers had painted on their
colours, happening to appear in the clouds,
-M\tuncer, with admirable presence of mind. laid
hiold of that incident, and suddenly raiing his
eyes and hands towards heaven, " Behold,"
cries he , with an elevated voice, " the sign
3,, which God has given. There is the pledge
,, -of. your safety, and a token that the wicked,
., shall be destroyed. " The fanatical multitude
set up inflantly a great shout, as if victory had
'been certain; and passing in a moment from one
.extreme to another, massacred the unfortunate
nobleman who had come with the offer of par.
don, and :demanded to be led towards the
enemy. The Princes enraged at this thocking
violation of the laws of war, advanced with no

May ry. less impetuOsity, and began the attack; but the

behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not
such .as might have been expeced either from
their ferocity or confidence of success; an un-
disciplined rabble was no equal match for well-
trained troops; above five thousand were slain
in the field, almost without making resistance;
the reft. fled, and among the foremost Muncer
their general. He was taken next .day, and being
condemned to such punishments as his crimes
had deserved, he fuffered them with a poor and

daflardly spirit. His death put an end to the Booi IV.
infurredions of the peasants which had filled Ger-' 1~26.
many with such terror 4" ; but the enthufiaftick
notions Whih "he "had scattered were not extir-
pated, arid pirodiiced, not long after, effects more
memorable, as well as more extravagant, -

DURING these commotions, Luther aded ithLuther's
exemplary prudence and moderation; like a com- rod'erate

. . and prudent

mon parent, f6licitous about the welfare of both condna.
parties, without fTparing the faults or errors of
either. On the one hand, he addressed a monitorjy
discourse to the nobles, exhdtting them. to treat
their dependefits with greater humaanity and in-
dulgence. On the other, he severely cenfired'
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advising them
iot to murmur at hardships ihfeparable from their
condition,. nob to seek for redress :by any but
legal means

.",

, LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine:His mas
a Boria, a'nun of a noble family, who, h avingriage.
thrown off the iveil:, had fled from the cloister,
happened this yeai, and was far from meeting'
with the fame approbation. Even his most de-
voted followers thought this step indecent; at a
time when his country was involved in so many

42 Sleid. Hist. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodaliusn

Tumult. Ruftican. i 5.

. Sleid. H-lift. p. 87.

Bb3

BooI(. IV. calamities; ,while his enemies nevxer mentioned

it with any .softer ,appellation .than, that of in,
cef~uous .or prpfange, Luther hir!felf was sensible
of the impreffiopn which it had ,made toQ his difad,
vapntage; but beip.g satisfied

, x'itl,his pown con,

dud, he bo~re tbhec.enfure of his.,friends, and the
reproaches of his adversaries., with his ufua!
0Fortitude 4".

STrHIS year the Reformation loft its. first pro,
vedtor, ,Frederick, Eledor ps Saxony; but the
blow, was -the; less sensibly felt, as he was fuc,

Say, 4. ceeded by his brothers John , a more avowed and

zealous-, though: less able patrQo :of Luther and
is dpdrnes, ...

Prussia, ANOTHER event happened about the fame,
wrested time,. which,-as it occasioned a~confiderable change
from the

... . "

..

Teuto.ick in the state of Germany, muff be traced back
grder, to its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades

.poffeffed all .Europe during the ,twelfth and thir,
teenth centuries , several orders , of r religious
knighthood were founded iri. defence of the
Christian faith against Heathens . and Infidels,
Among these the ;Teutonick order in Germany
was one of the molt, illustrious, .the, knights of
which distinguished themselves , greatly in all
the wild enterprizes carried on in the Holy

"* Secklend. lib. ii. p, x ^

Land. Being driven at last from their settlements Booi IV.'
in the east, they were obliged to return to 1526.
their native country. Their zeal and valour
were too impetuous to reniain long inacaive.
They invaded , on very flight pretences, the
province of Prussia, the inhabitants of which
were frill idolaters; and having completed the
conquest of it about the middle of the thirteenth
century, held it many years as a fief depending
on the crown of, Poland., Fierce contests arose
during this p,eriod; between the grand masters
of the order, and the Kings of Poland; the
former struggling for independence , while the
latter asserted their right of sovereignty with
great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the house
of Brandenburgh, who was eleaed grand master
jI the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, main-
tained a long war with Sigismund, King of
Poland; but having become an early convert to-
Luther's doctrines, this gradually leffcned his zeal
fpr the interests of his fraternity, so that he took
the opportunity of the confusions in the Empire,
and the absence of the Emperor, to conclude al
treaty with Sigismund , greatly to his private.
emoluhpent. By it, that part of- Prussia whichi-
belon d to the T;e:utonick order, was ereded
into a"epcular and hereditary dutchy, and the
inveftiture'op it granted to; Albert,. who, in

'Bb 4

BOOK IV. return, bound himself to do homage for it to

iz6., the Kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately

after this, he made publick profeffion of the
reformed religion, and married a Princess of
Denmark. The Teutonick knights exclaimed
so loudly against the treachery of their grahi
master, that he was put under the "ban of the
Empire ; but he still kept poffeffion of the
province which he had usurped, and transmits-
ted it to his posterity. In process of time this
rich inheritance fell to the eledoral branch of
the family, all dependence on the crown 6f
Poland was shaken off, and the Margraves'6f
Brandenburgh, having assumed the title of Kings
of Prussia , have not only risen to an equt.i
lity with the first Princes in Germany, but
take their rank among the great Monarchs qi
Europe s.

Sirft mea, UPON the return of the French King to his
fures of tJie dominions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe
i cupqn were fixed upon him, that, by observing his first
his return motions, they might form a judgment concerrni
p Frnc ing his subsequent condud. They were not.

held long in suspense, Francis , as soon as he
arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King of Eng-
land , thanking him for his zealous and affec-

" Sleid. Hiit. p. 98. Pfeffel Abrige de I'hift. du Droit

Publ. p. 6oj, &c,

tionate interposition in his favour, to which he
acknowledged that he owed the recovery of his
liberty. Next day the Emperor's ambassadors
demanded audience, and, in their mafter's name
required him to ifl~ie such orders as were necef.
fary for carrying the treaty of Madrid into
immediate and full execution; he coldly an-
fwered, that though for his own part he deter-
mined 'religioufly to- perform all that he had
promised, the treaty contained so many atticles
relative not2 to himself alone , but affeding the
interests of the French monarchy, that he could
not take any farther step without consulting the
States of his kingdom , and that some time
would be necessary in order to reconcile their
iinds to the hard conditions which he had
consented to ratify b. This reply was ;considered
as no obscure, discovery of his being refolved'
to 'elude the treaty and the compliment paid
to Henry, appeared a very proper step towards
securing the assistance of that Monarch in the
war with the Emperor, to which such a refo-
Slution would certainlyl give rife. ,Thefre circum-
frances, added to the' explicit declarations which
Francis made in secret to the afibaffadors from
several of the Italian powers, efully satisfied
them that their ponjeAures with regard to his
condudt had been just, and that instead of inl- BooK IV.

ISa<.

t" Mnm. de Bellay, p. 97.

,oor- IVF. tehnding: to -,execute an unr afoiabl.e treaty, ,g

i2~< was. eager to seize the first opportunity of.. re

veringig those injuries which had compelled hiM
to feign an approbation of it. Even the doubts,
and: fears, and scruples -yhich: used, on otlier
occasions ,, to hold Clement :in a state of uncer.
tainty, were diflipated ;by Francis's seeming im,
?patience to break through all, his engagements
with the Emperor. The ftuation ,. indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time .,.d; id not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was2 still besieged
by the Imperialists in the caftl. of lMilan. Thjat
feeble Prince, deprived now of .MVorone's advjig
and unprovided with every thing necessary. fe
defence, found ,means to inform. Clementtand
the- Venetians;.,that he muff soon surrender ,ji
' they did -not come to his relief.. The, Imp~ril
troops, as they had, received no .pay since ith
battle of Pavia, lived at di(cretion in the Maila
nefe, levy.ing s£uch exorbitant: , contributions in
that dutchy. , ,as anmounted, if we may rely;on
' Guicciardini's calculation, .to no less a fum than
five thoufand'du.cats a day:4,; nor was. it toQbe

*

, doubted, but .that the soldiers, as soon as the

eaftle should. submit , would ;chufe to leave a
ruined countryi which hardly afforded them sub.
fiftence, that they might take poffeffion of more
comfortablei, quarters .in the fertile and uen-

f7 Guic. 1. xvii. 360o

touched territories of the Pope and Venetians. BOOKt I.
The assistance of the, French King ways the only " r.56.
thing which could eiither save Sf6rza, or enable
them to proted their own dominions from the
insults of the Imperial troops,

FOR these reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, A league
and Duke of Milan, were equally impatient toformed

with Fran , , oagainft the

come to an agreement with Francis, who, onE mperor.
his part, was no less desirous of acquiring such
a considerable acceffllion both of strength and
reputation as such a confederacy would bring
along with it. The chief objects of this alli-
ance, which was concluded at Cognac on the
twenty-fecond of May , though kept secret for
some time, were to. oblige the Emperor to set
at liberty the French King's sons , tipon pay-
ment of a reasonable ransom; and to re-establish
Sforza in the quiet poffeffion of the Mlilanefe.
If Charles ihould refuse either of these , the
contrading parties bound themselves to bring
into the field an army of thirty-five thousand
men, with which, after driving the Spaniards
out of the Milanese , they would attack the
kingdom of Naples. The King of England
was declared ProteA6r of this league, which
they dignified with the name of Holy , because
the Pope was at the head of it; and in order
to allure Henry more effedually, a principality
it the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thousand

BKoK IV. ducats yearly _revenue , was to be fettled on

i.'6,. him; and lands to the value of ten thousand

ducats on. Wo.1oifey his favourite".

The Pope No sooner was this league -concluded , than:
absolves Clement, by the plenitude of his papal power,
fromr his absolved Francis from- the oath which he had
oath to. ob taken .to. observe the treaty of Madrid ".' This
feryve the
treaty of right, how pernicious soever in its effeds, and
Madrid. deftruAive of that integrity which is the -basis

of all tranfadcions among men , was the natural
consequence of the powers which the Popes
arrogated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ
upon earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended
prerogative , they had often dispensed with
obligations which were held sacred , the interest
of some men, and the credulity of others led
them to imagine that the decisions of a fove.
reign pontiff authorized or justified adions. which
would, otherwise, have been criminal and im-
pious,

TheEmpe- MEANWHILE the discovery of Francis's in-
roralarmed, tention to elude the treaty of Madrid , filled the

Emperor with a variety of disquieting thoughts.
He had treated an unfortunate prince with the
most ungenerous rigour; he had displayed an

4, P. IIeuter. Rer. Aultr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217.. Recueil

des Trait. ii.-.24, "' Goldaft. Polit. Imperial.
p. Iooz. Pallav. Hist. p./ 70.

insatiable ambition in all his negociations with BQorK IV.
his prisoner : He knew what censures the former i526.
had drawn upon him , 'and what apprehensions
the latter had excited in every court of Europe;
nor h;ad he reaped from the measures which. he
pursued , any of those advantages which :poli-
ticians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal conduc , and a compensation for
the severest reproaches, Francis was now out
of his hands, and not one of all the mighty
consequences which he had expeded from the
treaty that set him at liberty, was likely to take
place. His rashness in relying so far on his
own juIgment as to trust to the sincerity of the
French King, in opposition to the sentiments of
his w.isest ministers, was now apparent; and he
easily c'onjeAured, that the fame confederacy,
the dread of which had induced him to set
Francis at liberty , would now be formed against
him with that gallant and incensed MVlonarch
at its head. Self-condemnation and shame, on
account of what was past, with anxious appre-
henfions concerning what might happen, were
the necessary result of these refleAions on his
own, condut and situation. Charles, however,
was naturally firm and inflexible in all his mea-
fures. To have receded suddenly from any
article in the treaty of Madrid, would have been
a plain confeffion of imprudence, and a palpable

BooK IV. symptom of fear ; he determined therefore,

Ssz6. that it was most suitable to his dignity , to insist,

.whatever might be the consequences, on the
firiCt execution of the treaty , and particularl
not to accept of any thing which mfght b,
offered as an equivalent for the restitution oil
Burgundy ".

Requires IN consequence of this' resolution , he agp
Francis to pointed Lannoy and Alarcon to repair, as his
perform
what he had ambassadors,, to the court of France, and for.
stipulated. rnally to summon the King either to execute the

treaty with the sincerity that became him, or to,
return , acqording to his oath, a prisoner to
Madrid. Instead of giving them an immediate
answer , Francis admitted the deputies of the
Rates of Burgundy to an audience in their pre.i
fence. They humbly reprefefited to him , that!
he had exceeded the powers vested in a King of
France -when he consented to alienate their
country from the crown, the domains of which
he was bound by his coronation oath to preserve
entire and unimpaired. Francis , in return,
thanked them for their attachment to his crown~,
and intreated them , though very faintly , to
remember the obligations which he -lay under
to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor.
The deputies assuming an higher tone, declared

Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

that they would not obey commands which they BOOK IV.
considered as illegal ; and if he thould aban'don r~6.
them to the enemies of France, they had re-
solved to defend themselves to .the best of their
power, with 'a firm purpose rather to perish than
submit to a foreigh dominion. Upon which
Fiancis turning towards the Imperial ambaffa.His anfww.
dors represented to them the impossibility of
performing what he had undertaken, and offered,
in lieu of Burgundy , to pay the Emperor two
millions of crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon,
who easily perceived that the scene to which
they had been witnesses, was concerted between
the King and his fubjedcs in order to impose
upon them, signified to him their mailer's fixed
resolution not to depart in the smallest point
from the terms of the treaty, and withdrew s.
Before they left the kingdom , they had the
mortification to hear the holy league against
the Emperor published with great solemnity, June n.

CHARLES no Tooner received an account Of The Empe-
this confederacy than he exclaimed in the most ror's pre.

parations

pblick mannei, and in the harshest terms, againt for war.
Francis , as a Prince void of faith , and of
honour. He complained no less of Clement,
whom he solicited in vain to abandon his new

" Belcar. Copment. de Reb. Gal. 73, Mem. de Bel-

BooK IV. allies; he .accused him. of ingratitude; he taxed

S5z6. him with an ambition unbecoming his ckh

raaer .j he threatened him not only with' all thi
vengeance which the power of an Eiperor ca,
inflii, but by appealing to a general council,
called up, before him all the terrors arising from
the authority of those assemblies so formidable

\ to the papal fee. It was neceffary', however,

.to oppose something else than reproaches and
threats to the powerful combination formne
against him ; and the Emperor, prompted byfo
many passions, did notfail to exert himself with
unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies not
only of men, but of money, which was fill
more needed, into Italy,

Eeeble ope. ON the other hand, the efforts of the confede
rations of rates bore no proportion to that animosity again1
erates. " the Emperor with which they seemed to enter into

the holy league. Francis, it was thought would
have infused spirit and vigour into the whole body.
He had his loft honour to repair, many injuries
to .revenge , and the station among the Princes
of Europe from which he had fallen to recdver,
From all these powerful incitements , added to
the natural impetuosity of his temper , a w(a
more fierce and bloody than any that he had
hitherto made upon his rival , was expeded
But Francis had gone through such a scene of

distress,

distress , and the impression it had made was Bootr 1p,
still so fresh in his memory, that he was become 1526.
diffident of himself, diftruftful of fortune, and
desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release
of his sons, and to avoid the restitution of Bur-
gundy by paying fonme reasonable equivalent,
were his chief objets; and for the fake of these,
he would willingly have sacrificed Sforza and
the liberties, of Italy to the Emperor; He flatter-
ed himself that the dread of the confederacy which
he had formed would of itflf induce Charles
to listen to what was equitable; and was afraid
of employing any considerable force for the re-
lief of the JVlilanefe, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their
own interest, than pundcual in fulilling their
engagements, Ihould abandon him as soon as the
Imperialists were driven out of that country, and
deprive his negociations with the Emperor' of
that weight which they derived from his being
at the head of a powerful league. In the meatn
time the castle of iMilan was prelfed more closely
)than ever, and Sforza was now reduced to tse
last extremity. The Pope and Venetians, trufl-
ing to Francis's concurrence, commanded thdir
troops to take the field, in order to relieve himn ;
, and an army more than fufficient for that
service was soon formed. The Mlilanefe, pdf-
fionately attached to their unfortunate Duke y

VOL IL Cc

BoOKi IV. and no less exasperated against the Imperialists

1x 6. who had oppressed them ,so cruelly, were ready

to aid the confederates in all their enterprizes.
But the Duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally
flow and indecisi-ve, and restrained, besides, by
his ancient enmity to the family of Medici,
from taking any step that might aggrandize or
add reputation to t~he PopeP, loft some oppor.
tunities, and refused to improve others, of
attacking the Imperialists, and raising the siege.
These delays gave Bourbon time to bring up a
reinforcement of fresh troops, and a supply of

July 24. money. He immediately took the command

of the army, and pufhe<d on the siege with such
vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to surrender,
who retiring to Lodi, which the confederates
had furprized, left Bourbon in full poffeflion
of the reft of the dutchy , the investiture of which
the Emperor had promised to grant him ".

DifIruietude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
oftthe ta. which Francis had played, and to be sensible
han powers. that, notwithstanding all their address, and re.

finements in negociation, which, they boasted
of as talents peculiarly their own, they had for
once been over-reached in those very arts by a
tramontane Prince. He had hitherto thrown
almost the whole burden of the war upon them,

" Guic. 1. xvii. 382. ? Guic. 1. xvii. 376, &c.

taking advaritage of their efforts, in order to Boot~ iV,
enforce the proposals which he often renewed J126.
at the court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty
of his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftu-
lated and complained '; but as they were not
able to rouse Francis from his inadtivity, their
own zeal and vigour gradually abated, and
Clement, having already gone farther than his
timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse
himself of rashness, and to .relapse into his nai-
tural state of doubt and uncertainty,

ALL the Emperor's motions depending on0 eaures of

himself alone, were more brisk and better con-the Jmpe-
certed. The narrowness of his revenues, in- ria'iQs
deed, did not allow him to make any sudden or
great effort in the field, but he abundantly sup-
plied that defed by his intrigues and negocia-
tions. The family of Colonna, the most power-
ful of all the Roman barons, had adhered uni,
formly to the Ghibeline or Imperial fadion, dur-
ing those fierce contentions between the Popes
and Emperors, which, for several ages, filled
Italy and Germany with discord and bloodshed.
Though the causes which at first gave birth to
these deftrudive fadions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated

" Rufcelli Lettere de'. Principi, ii, 17, &c. I 9, 160-

Cc

2

BooK IV.. wasidn a great meafure' spent, the Colonnas fill.

1 56. retained their attachment to the Imperial interest,

a'nd by placinig: themselves under the protedion
of the Emper.ors., secured the quiet poffeffion of
their own territories and privileges. The Car-
dinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent
and ambitious temper, at that time the head of
the family, had long been Clement's rival, to
whose influence in the last conclave he imputed
the disappointment .of all his schemes for at.
taining the papal dignity, of which, from his
known connection with the Emperor, hethought
himself secure. This was too great an injury
to an aspiring mind ever to be forgiven; and
though he had dissembled his resentment so far
as to vote for Clement at his. elecion, and to ac-
cept of great offices in his court, he waited with
th'e utmost impatience for an opportunity of
being revenged. Don Hugo di IVioncada, the
Imperial ambassador at Rome, who was no
stranger to. these sentiments, easily persuaded
him, that now was the time, while all the papal
troops were employed in Lombardy , to attempt
something which would at once avenge his own
wrongs , and be of eflential service to the Em-
peror his patron. The Pope, however, whose
timidity rendered him quick-fighted, was so at-
tentive to their operations, and began to be
alarmed to early , that he might have drawn to:

gether troops fufficient to 'have difcolncerted all.B1oO IV.
Colonna's measures. But MIoncad'a 'amufed ,,him i 5S6.
so :artfully with negociations, prnmifes', anid false
4ihtelligende ,; that he lulled a!Rep.allthis ;ffpi-
cions, and trieverit.ed his taking any. of the pre-
cautions necessary 'for his 'fa ftyV; andc to6lhe
etern'al disgrace of a Prince poffeffed of great
power, as well as renowned for political wisdom,
Colonna, at the head of'-three th6oufan:: 'ren,
seized one of the gates of his capital, while he, spt. -9.
imagining himself to be in perfect fecirity-,was Te cIoon-

nIas beci j t'e

altogether unprepared for refifling' such a feeble mnlers of
enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted "o-le
:Colonna's troops, from whom they apprehended
no injury, to advance without oppofitioni; the
Pope's guards were dispersed in a- moment ; and
Clement himself, terrified at the danger,. afham-
ed of his own credulity, and deserted by almoif
every person, fled with precipitation into the
castle of St. Angelo, which was- immediately in-
vested. The palace of the Vitican, the church
of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's mini-
fters and servants, were plundered in the most
licentious manner; the reft of the city was left
unmolested. Clement, destitute of every thing
necessary either for fubfiffence 'or defence, was
soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and
Moncada, being admitted into the castle , pre-Accommo,
fcribed to him, with all the hanghtinefs of a''aiof" be.

Cc3 twee-n the

TBooK IV. conqueror, conditions which it: was not in his
.1q26. -po;weri to ,reje&.t The chief of these was, That
Pope and Clement fbould not, only grant a :full pardon tto
Emperor. -

the;:.Colonnas, but receive them into favour, an
immediately withdraw all 'the troops in his pay
fro.m the army of the cpnfederates in Lo0,
bardy . ,

. ,THE Colonnas, :who talked of nothing less
than of deposing Clement, anrid of placing Porn.
peo,. their ;kirinfman, in the vacant chair of St.
Peter , exclaimed loudly against a treaty which
left them at the mercy of a Pontiff justly incensed
against them. But IMoncada, attentive -only to
.his mafter's interest, paid little regard to their
complaints, and by this fortunate measure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates,

The impeT- WHILE the army of the confederates fuffered
rial army such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists

Sreceived two great reinforcements; one from
Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alar.
con, which amounted to fix thousand men; the
oth'er was raised in the Empire by George
Frondfperg, a German nobleman, who having
fcrved in Italy with great reputation, had ac-
quired such influence and popularity, that mul-

" Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xvii. 407.

Rufcelli Lettere de' Principi, i. p. 104.

titudes of his countrymen, fond on every occa- BOOK IV.
sion of engaging in military enterprizes, and im-

x z6.

,patient at that juncture to escape from the op-
pression of their superiors in religious as well as
civil matters, crowded to hi.s standard; so that
without any other gratuity than the payment
of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand
enlisted in his service. To these the Archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Austrian dominions. But although the
Emperor, had raised troops, he could not remit
the sums necessary for their support. His or-
dinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some
innovations had been made in the constitution-,
in 'order to secure their concurrence, peremp-
torily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-
nary supply "5; so that the more his army in-
creased in number, the more were his generals
embarrassed and diftrefted. Bourbon, in par-
ticular, was involved in such difficulties, that
he stood in need of all his address and courage
in order to extricate himself. Vast fumns were
due to the Spanish troops already in the *Mnila-
nefe, when Frondfperg arrived with sixteen thou-
sand hungry Germans, destitute of every thing.

"' Sandov. i. 814,

Cc4

DooR IV. Both made their demands with equal fierceness;

r2z6. the former claiming- their arrears, and the lat.
The Empe- ter, the pay which had been promised them ori;
ror's si ia l-
cesdefici- their entering Lombardy. Bourboii was alto-'
enit. gether incapable of giving fatisfadion to either,

In this situation, he was constrained, to commit
aAs of violence extremely shocking to his own
nature, which was generous and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Milan, and by
threats, .and even by torture, forced from them
a considerable fum; he rifled the churches of
all their plate and ornaments; the inadequate
supply which these afforded, he distributed
among the soldiers; with so many soothing ex-
preilions of his sympathy and affedion, that,.
though it fell far short of the sums due to them,
it appeased their present murmurs '.

T3ourhon AMONG other expedients for raising money,

StlMo.roine Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone,

at libert' -.

who having been kept in prison since his in-
trigue with Pescara, had been condemned to die
by the Spanish judges empowered to try him.
For this remission he paid twenty thousand
ducats; and' such were his singular talents, and
the ;vonderful ascendant which he always acquired
over the minds of those to whom he had access,
that in a few days, from being Bourbon's pri-
foner, he became his prime confident, with whom

" Ripamond. HHit. iMediol. lib. ix. p. 717.

he confultea in all affairs of importance. To his
insinuations must .be imputed the suspicions which
Bourbon began to entertain, that the Emperor
had never intended to grant him the investiture
of IMilan, but had appointed Leyva, and the
other Spanish generals , rather to be fIiies on his
conduct, than to co-operate heartily towards the
execution of his schemes. To him likewise, as
he still -retained at the age of fourscore all the
enterprizing spirit of youth, may be attributed
the bold and unexpected measure on· which
Bourbon soon after ventured S. BEooiK IV.

I-C 6.

SuCH, indeed, were the exigences of the Im-His delibe-

perial troops in the MVilanefe, that it became rations wid

refpe& to

indispensably necelfary to take frome immediate his motions.
step for their relief. The arrears of the- soldiers
increased daily; the Emperor made ho remittan-
ces to his generals ; and the utrnmoft rigour of
military extortion could draw nothing more from
a country entirely drained and ruined. In this
situation there was no choice left, but either to
disband the army, or to march for fubfiftance
into the enemy's country. The territories of the
Venetians lay nearest at hand; but they, with
their usual foresight and prudence, had taken
fach precautions as secured them from any
insult. Nothing , therefore , remained but to
invade the dominions of the church, or of the

Cuic. 1. xvii. 419.

fBhor IV.; Florentines; and Clement had of late aded such

ij26. a part, as merited the severest vengeance from

the Emperor. No sooner did his troops return to
Rome after the infurredion of the Colonnas
than, without paying any regard to the treaty
with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal Co.
lonna, excommunicated 'the reft of the family,
seized their places of strength, and wasted thleir
lands with all the cruelty which the frIart of a
recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms against Naples, and as his opera.
tions were seconded by the French fleet, he made
some progress towards the conquest of that king.
dom; the Viceroy being no less destitute than
the other Imperial generals of the money requisite
for a vigorous defence ".

1r527. THESE proceedings of the Pope justified, in
Marches to appearance, the measures which Bourbon's fitua.

ews ter tion rendered necessary; and he set about execut.

ritories. ing them under such disadvantages, as furnish the

firongeft proof both of the despair to which he
was reduced, and of the greatness of his abilities
which were able to surmount so many obstacles.
Having committed the government of MJVIan to
Leyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave

January 30o. behind , he began his march in the depth of

winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand men,

" Jovii. Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xviii. 424.

composed of nations differing from each other Booi IV,
in language and manners ; without money, xs27.
without magazines, without artillery, without
carriages; in short, without any of those things
which are necessary to the smallest party, and
which seem essential to the existence and mo-
tions of a great army. His route lay through
a country cut by rivers and mountains, in which
the roads were almost impraticable; as an addi-
tion to his difficulties, the enemy's army, superior
to his own in number, was at hand to watch
all his motions, and to improve every advantage.
But his, troops, impatient of their present hard-
Ihips, and allured by the hopes of immense
booty, without considering how ill- provided
they were for a march , followed him with
great chearfulnefs, His firlt scheme was to have
made himself master of Placen'tia, and to have
gratified his soldiers with the plunder of that
city-; but the vigilance of the confederate gener-
als rendered the design abortive ; nor had he
better success in his project for the reduction of
Bologna, which was seasonably supplied with
as many troops as secured it from the insults
of an army which had neither artillery nor
ammunition. Having failed in both these at-
tempts to become master of some great city,
he was under a necessity of advancing. But
he had now been two months in the field ; his

Boort IV. troops had fuffered every calamity that a long

is2r7. march, together with the uncommon rigour of

the feafori , could bring upon men destitute
of all necessary accommodations in an enemyis
country ; the magnificent promises to which
they trusted, had proved altogether vain; they
saw no profped of relief; their patience, tried
to the utmost , failed at last, and they broke

Mntiny ofout into open mutiny. Some officers, who raftly
his troops.-attempted to restrain them, fell vidims to their

fury ; Bourbon himself, not daring to appear
during the hrft transports of their rage, yas
obliged to fly fecrctly from his quarters ',
But this sudden ebullition of wrath began at
last to subside; when Bourbon, who poffeffed
in a wonderful degree the arc of governing
the minds of soldiers, renewed his promises
with more confidence than formerly, and assured
them that they would be soon accomplished.
He endeavoured to render their hardship more
tolerable , by partaking of them himself; he
fared no better than the meanest ceritinel; he
marched along with them on foot; he joined
them in singing their camp-ballads, in which,
with high praises of his valour, they mingled
many firokes of military raillery on his poverty;
and wherever they came, he allowed them, as a
' foretaste of what he had promised, to plunder

Guic. 1. xviii. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. I6 3.

:he adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged BOOK IV.
by all these soothing arts, they entirely forgot iS Z7.
their fufferings and complaints, and followed
him wi'th the fame implicit confidence as for-
merly 6.

BOURBON, meanwhile , carefully concealed The Pope's

irresolution

his intentions. Rome and Florence, not know-a rimeoru-
ing on xibich the blow would fall, were held deuce.
in the most disquieting slate of suspense. Clement,
equally solicitous for the safety of both , fluc-
tuated in more than his usual uncertainty; and
while the rapid approach of danger called for
prompt and decisive measures , he spent the
time in deliberations which 'came to no issue,
or in taking resolutions , which , next day, his
restless mind, more sagacious in discerning than
in obviating difficulties, overturned, without
being able to fix on what should be substituted
in their place. At one time he determined to
unite himself more closely than ever with his
allies, and to push on the war with vigour; at
another, he inclined to bring all differences to
a final accommodation by a treaty with Lannoy,
who knowing his passion for negociation, soli-
cited him incessantly with proposals for that
purpose. His timidity at length prevailed, and

' Oeuvres de Brant. vol. iv. p. 246, &e.

BooIt IV. led him to conclude an agreement with Lannoyi

I27. of which the following were the chief articles,
lMarch i,a That a suspension of arms should take place

Concludes a . I
treaty with between the Pontifical and Imperia! troops
the viceroy for eight months; That Clement ihould advance
of Naples, sixty thousand crowns towards satisfying the

demands of the Imperial army; That the Co.
lonnas should be absolved from censure , and
their former dignities and poffeflions hle restored
to them; That the viceroy should come to
Rome, and prevent Bourbon from approaching
nearer to that city, or to Florence ". On this
hasty treaty, which deprived him of all hopes
of assistance .from his allies, without affording
him any solid foundation of security, Clement
relied fo' firmly, that, like a man extricated at
once out of all difficulties, he was at perfect
ease, and in the fulness of his confidence dif-
banded all his troops, except as many as were
fufficient to guard his own person, This ama,
zing confidence of Clement's, who on .every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to
excess, appeared to unaccountable to Guicciar-
dini, who being at that time the pontifical corn,
miffary- general and resident in the confederate
army, had great opportunities as well as great
abilities for observing how chimerical all his
hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's condud,

Guic. 1. xviil, 436.

at this junaure, wholly to infatuation, which BooK IV.
those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid "'. 2s 7.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have which

Bourbon

executed the treaty with great sincerity ; and disregards.
having detached Clement from the confederacy,
wished to turn Bourbon's arms against the Vene-
tians, who, of all the powers at war with the
Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour. With
this view he dispatched a courier to Bourbon,
informing him of the suspension of arms, which,
in the name of their common master, he had
concluded with the Pope. Bourbon had other
schemes ; and he had prosecuted them now
too far to think of retreating. To have men-
tioned a retreat to his soldiers , would have
been dangerous; his command was independent
on Lannoy: he was fond of mortifying a man
whom he had many reasons to hate: for these
reasons, without paying the least regard to the
message, he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical
territories , and to advance towards Florence.
Upon this , all Clement's terror and anxiety
returning with new force, he had recourse to
Lannoy, and intreated and conjured him to put
a stop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accord-
ingly set out for his camp , but durst not ap-
proach it; Bourbon's soldiers having got notice

"' Guic. 1. xviii. 446.

BooKr IV. of the truce, raged and threatened, demanding

is27. the accomplishment of the promises to which

they had trusted ; their general himself could
hardly restrain them; every person in Rome
perceived that nothing remained but to prepare
for resisting a storm which it was now impoffille
to dispel. Clement alone, relying on some ambi.
guous and deceitful profeffions which Bourbon
made of his inclination towards peace, funk back
into his former security '".

Advances BOURBON, on his part, was far from being
towards free from solicitude. All his attempts on any
Rome. place of importance had hitherto miscarried;

and Florence, towards which he had been ap.
proaching for some time , was, by the arrival
of the Duke d'Urbino's army, put in a condition
to set his power at defiance. As it now became
necessary to change his route, and to take in.
ltantly some new resolution, he fixed without
hesitation on one no less daring in itself, than
it was impious, according to the opinion of that
age. 'This was 'to' assault and plunder Rome.
IVIany reasons, however, prompted him to it
He was fond of .thwarting Lannoy, who had
undertaken for the safety of that city; he ima-
gined that the Emperor would be highly pleased
to fee Clement, the chief author of the league

8" Guic. 1. xviii. 437, &c. MVm. de Bellay, p. 10oo.

against

against him, humbled; he flattered himself,
that by gratifying the rapacity of his toldiers
with such immense booty , he would attach
them for ever to his interest; or (which is still
more probable than any of these) he hoped that
by means of the poweri and fame, which he
would acquire, from the conquest of the first
city in Christendom , he might lay the
foundation of an independent power; and that
after shaking off all connedion with the Em-
peror, he might take poffeflion of Naples, or
of some of the Italian fRates in his own name 6. Booic IV.

I 5 2 7.

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed The pope's

his resolution with a rapidity equal to the bold- preparations
ness with which he had formed it. His soldiers, or defeucQ.

now tiat they had their prey in full view, com-
plained neither of fatigue , not famine, nor
want of pay. No sooner did they begin to
move from Tuscany towards Rome, than the
Pope, sensible at last how fallacious the hopes

I

had been on which he reposed, started from his

security. But no time now remained, even for
a bold and decisive- Pontiff, to have taken
proper measures, or to have formed any effec-
tual plan of defence. Under Clement's feeble
condu&, all was consternation; disorder, and
irresolution. He colleded, however, such of
his difbarided soldiers as still remained in the

" Brant. iv. 271. vi.' 89. Belcarii Comment. 594.

VOL. IL D d

Boort IV. city; he armed the artificers of Rome; and the

22z7. footmen and train- bearers of the Cardinals;

'he repaired. the breaches in the walls; he began
to ered new works; he excommunicated Bour.
bon and all his troops, branding the Germans
with the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards
with that of Moors 66. Trusting to these inef.
fedual military preparations, or to his spiritual
arms, which were still more despised by rapa.
cious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside his
natural timidity, and contrary to the advice of
all his counsellors, determined to wait the ap.
proach of an enemy whom he might easily have
avoided, by a timely retreat.

urawalt of BOUtBON, who saw the necessity of difpatchi
.Rome. now that his intentions were known, advanced

with 'fuch speed, that he gained several marches
on the Duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped
in the plains of Rome on the evening of the
fifth of May. From thence he fhewed his fol-
diers the palaces and churches of that city, into'
which, as the capital of the Christian common-
weat.h, the riches of all Europe had flowed
during many centuries, without having been
once violated by any hostile hand; andn com-
manding them to refresh themselves that night,
as a preparation for the assault next day, pro-
mifed them, in reward of their toils and valour,

"6SCCICHnd. I~ib. ii. (68.

the poffeffion of all the treafares accumulated BOOK IV,
there. i ?7..

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had

determined to diflinguifh that day' either by his
death or. the success of his enterprize, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete
armour, above which he wore a vest of white
tifTue, that he might be more conspicuous both
to his friends and .to his enemies; and as all
depended on one bold impression, he led them
inflantly to scale the walls. Three diftinci bo-
dies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different
nations of whom the army was composed, were
appointed to this service; a separate attack was
afiigned to each; and the whole army advanced
to support them as occasion should require. A
thick mist concealed their approach until they
reached almofl the brink of the ditch which
surrounded the suburbs: having planted their
ladders in a moment, each brigade rushed on
i to the assault with an impetuosity heightened

by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own; the
Swiss in the Pope's guards, and the veteran fol-
diers who had been afferbled, fought with a
courage becoming men to whom the defence
of the noblest city in the world, was entrusted.
Bourbon's troops , notw.ithRfanding all their
valour, gained no ground, and even began to

D dc

-

BOOK IV

1527,
Bourbon
slain.

The city
taken. give way; when their leader , perceiving that

on this critical moment the fate of the day de.
pended, threw himself from his horse, pressed
to the front, snatched a scaling ladder from a
soldier, planted it against the wall, and began
to mount it, encouraging his men with his voice
anid hand, to follow him. But at that very
instant, a musket bullet from the ramparts
pierced his groin with a wound, which he im,
mediately felt to be mortal; but he retained so
much presence of mind as to desire ;those who
were near him to cover his body with a cloak,
that his death might not dishearten his troops;
and Loon after he expired with a courage worthy
of a better cause, ahd which would have enti:
tied him to the highest praise, if he had thus
fallen in defence of his country, not at the head
of its enemies. "7

THIs fatal event could not be concealed from

the army; the soldiers soon miffed their gene-
ral, whom they were accustomed to fee in every
time of danger; but instead of being difheart-
ened by their loss, it animated them with new
valour; the name of Bourbon refounded along
the line, accompanied with the cry of blood
and revenge. The veterans who defended the
walls, were -soon overpowered by numbers;
the untrained body of city-recruits fled at the

" Mem. de . Bellay, Io. Guic. 1. xviii. p. 445, &c.

Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 257, &c.

fight of danger, and the enemy with irresistible BOOK TV.
violence rufhled into the town. 5 27.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering tfp to <
Heaven unavailing prayers for vidory. No
sooner was he informed that his troops began to
give way, than he fled with precipitation; andc
with an infatuation still more amazing than any
thing already mentioned, instead of making his
escape by the opposite gate where there was no,
enemy to oppose it, he slut himself up, together
with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambassadors,
and many 'perfons oF diftindion, in the castle of
St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, rhe
might have' known to be an insecure retreat.
In his way from the Vatican to that fortress ,
he saw his troops flying before an enemy who
pursued without giving quarter; he heard the
cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens,
and beheld the beginning of those calamities
which his own credulity and iUI conduct had
brought upon his fubjedcs ".

ITr is impossible to dcfcribe, or even to ima- Cuserea.

gine the misery and' horror of that scene which
followed. Whatever a city taken by storm can
dread from military rage unrestrained by difci-
pline ; whatever excefles the ferocity of the
Germans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the.

' Jov. Vit. Colon. i 6 ;.

Dd 3

BoiOK IV. licentiousness of the Italians could commit;

15 27. these the wretched inhabitant's were obliged to

fuffer. Churches, palaces, and the houses of
private persons .,ere plundered without dif.
tindion. No age, or charaeder, or sex was
exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles, priests;
n matrons, virgins, were all the prey of soldiers,
and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice of
humanity. Nor did there outrages cease, as is
usual in towns which are carried by assault,
when the first fury of the storm was over; the
Imperialists kept poffeffion of Rome several
months; and during all that time the insolence
and brutality of the soldiers hardly abated.
Their booty in ready money alone amounted to
a million of ducatts; what they raised by ran-
fobms and exadions far exceeded that fum.
Rome, though taken several different times by
the northern nations, who over-ran the 'Empire
in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous
and heathen H1uns, Vandals, or Goths, as now
by the bigotted fubjeds "'of a catholick 1VAo-
narch l .

The pop!e AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of
beeer ,in' tle Imperial army devolved on Philibert de
the castle of
St. Angelo.

"6 Joy. Vit. Colon. I66. Guic. 1. xviiill. 440, &c. Com-

ment. cde capta urbe Roma ep. Scardium, ii. 230. Uiloa
Vita di Carlo V. p. x o, &c. Gianione Hist. of Nap.
B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

Chalons prince of Orange, who with difficulty BooK IV.
prevailed on as many of his soldiers to desist iz27.
from the pillage as were necessary to invest the
castle of St. Angelo. Clement was immediately
sensible of his error in having retired into that
ill-provided and untenable fort. But- as the
Imperialists, scorning discipline, and intent only
on plunder, pushed the siege with little vigour,
he did not despair of holding out, until the Duke
d'Urbino should come to his relief. That ge-
neral advanced at the head of an army com-
posed of Venetians, Florentines, and Swiss in
the pay of France , of fufficient firength to
have delivered Clement from the. present danger.
But d'Urbino, preferring the indulgence of his
hatred againfft the family of IMedici to the glory
of delivering, the capital of Christendom, and
the head of the church, pronounced the enter-
prize to be too hazardous;. and, from an ex-
quifite refinement in revenge , having marched
forward so far, that his army being fecn from
the ramparts of St. Angelo, flattered the Pope
with the *profp~ct of certain relief, ,he imme-
diately retired '. Clement , deprived of every surrenders
resource, and reduced to such extremity of fa-l1i"t1nfa

S1prifoner.

mine as to feed on aries fiefi ~, wns obliged to
capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors June 6..
were pleafed.tco prescribe. Hie agreed to pay
four hundred thousand ducats to the army; to

70 Guic. 1. xviii. 4 o. 7" Jov. Vit. Colon. I67.

BooK IV. surrender to the Emperor all the places of

1iZ7. strength belonging to the church; and besides

giving hostages, to remain a prisoner himself
until' the chief articles were performed. iHe
wiras committed "to the' care of Alarcon, who,
by his severe vigilance in guarding Francis, had
given, full proof of his being ,qualified for that
office; and thus, by a finguifar accident, the
fame man had the custody of the two most
illustrious personages who had been made pri.
foners in Europe during several ages.

The Em. THE account of this extraordinary and un.
peror's be- expeAed event -was no less surprising than agree-
haviour at
this junc- able to the Emperor. But in order to conceal
ture. his joy from his fubjeAs, who were filled with

horror at the success and crimes of their coun-
trymen, and to lefTen the indignation of the relf
of Europe, he declared that Rome had been
affTauled without any order from him. He
wrote to all the princes with whom he was in
alliance, disclaiming his having had any know-
ledge of Bourbon's intention 7": He - put hirnm-
self and court into mourning ; commanded the
rejoicings which .had been ordered for the birth
of his son Philip to be flopped; and employing
an artifice, no less hypocritical than gross, he
-appointed prayers and proceffions throughout

all' Spain for the recovery of the Pope's liberty,

- Rufcelli Lettere de' Principi, ii'. 234.

Pwhich by an order to his generals he could have BOOK IV.
immediately granted him 7". I$27.

THE good fortune of the house of AuftriaSolyman in-

. vades Hun-

was no less conspicuous in another part of Eu-gadesr
rope. Solyman having invaded Hungary- with
an army three hundred thousand strong, Lewis
II.'King of that country, and of Bohemia, a
weak and unexperienced prince, advanced rashly
to meet him with a body of men which did not
amount to thirty thousand. With an impru-
dence still more unpardonable, he gave the
command of these troops to Paul Tomorri, a
Franciscan monk, archbilhop of Goloczp This
aukward general, in the dress of his order, girt
with its cord, marched at the head of the
troops; and hurried on by his own prefump-
tion, as well as by the impetuosity of nobles
who despised danger, but were impatient of
long service, he fought the fatal battle of Mo- Aui. "9.
hacz , in which the, King, the flower of the 1526.
Hungarian nobility , .and upwards of twenty
thousand men, fell the vidims of his folly and
ill condud. Solyman, after his vidory, seized Defeat of
and kept poffeffion of several towns of greatest the Hui-

garians, anti

strength in the southern provinces of Hungary , death of
and over-running the reft of the country, car-their King.
ried near two hundred thousand persons into
captivity, As Lewis was the last male of the

Sleid.

i o9. Sandov. i. 82z. Mauroc. Hifc. Veneta,

lib. iii. 220.

*:t57. V. royal ifamily of Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdi.

nand claimed both his crowns. This claim was
founded on a. double title; the one derived
from- the an'cient pretensions of the house of
Auffria to both. kingdoms; the other from the
right of his wife, the only sifter of the deceased
Monarch. The feudal institutions however sub.
sifted both in Hungary and Bohemia in such
vigour, and the nobles poffeffed such extensive
power; that the crowns were still ele'clive, and
Ferdinand's rights , if they had not been power-
fully supported , would have met with little
regard. But his own perional merit; the re-
spect de to the brother of the greatest Monarch
in C1riftendom ; the necessity of ,chufing a
prince able to afford his fubjeds some additional

and protedtion against the Turkish arms, which', as

they had recently felt their power, they [greatly
dreaded ; together with the intrigues of his
sifter,, who had been married to the late King,
overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians
had conceived againff the Archduke as a so.
reigner; and though a considerable party, voted
for the Vaywode of Tranfilvania, at length
secured Ferdinand the throne of that kingdom,
The states of Bohemia imitated the example ol
'their neighbour kingdom; but in order to a.
certain and secure their own privileges, they
obliged Ferdinand, before his coronation ,'t<
subscribe a deed which they term a Revcr)

Ferlin
ele~ted
IRi ng.

declaring that he held that crown not by any BOOK IV.
previous right, but by their gratuitous and I5 7,y
voluntary eledion. By such a vast acce(iibn ds
territories, the hereditary poffeffion of which
they secured in process of time to their family,
the princes of the house of Austria attained that
pre-eminence in power which hath rendered
them so formidable to the reft of Germany

.

,

THE dissensions between the Pope and Em-Progres of

the Refor-

peror proved extremely favourable to the pro- mation.
grefs of Lutheranifm. Charles, exasperated by
Clement's condut,. and .fully employed in op-
posing the league which he* had formed against
them, had little inclination arid less leisure to
take any measures for suppressing the new opi-
nions in Germany. In a diet of the Empire June

-

held at Spires, the state of religion came to be ''56-
considered, and all that the Emperor required
of the princes was, that they would wait pva-
tiently, and without encouraging innovations,
for the meeting of a general council which he
had demanded of the Pope. They, in return,
acknowledged the convocation of a council to
be the proper and regular step towards reform-
ing abuses in the church; but contended, that
a national council held in Germany would be
more effeaual for that purpose than what he
had proposed. To his advice, concerning the
discouragement of innovations, they paid so

7" Steph. Broderick Procancellarii Hungar. Clades in

-campo Mohacz ap. Scardium, ii. 2 i8. P. Barre Hiit. d'Ak
lemagne, tom. viii. part i. p. 98.

3ooK ,IV, little regard, that. even during, the meeting of
15Z7. the diet at -Spires , the divines who attended the

Ele6Lor of. Saxony ..and Landgiave of Hesse
Cassel thither, preached ipublickly, and admi.
niftered the sacraments according to the rites
of the Reformed Church7 . The Emperor's o0.a
example emboldened the Germans to treat the
papal authority with little- reverence. During
" the heat of his resentment against Clement, he

had publilhed a long reply to an .angry brieve
which'the Pope had, intended as ari apology for
his own condut. In this manifetbo,, the Em.
peror, after, having enumerated many instances
of that.Podntiff's ingratitudg, deceit-, and ambi.
tion, all which he :painted'in, the strongest and
mpft aggravated colours, appealed from him to
a general council. At ,the famne time., he; wrote-
to .the, college of Cardinals, complaining. of
;ClI.ment's partiality. and injustice ; and requir.
.ing :theem, if he- refused or delayed to call a'
.council, to manifest their concern for the peace
of the Christian Church, to shamefully negleded
by its chief pastor, by summoning that affenbbly
.in their, own name "i. This- manifesto, little
* inferior in virulence to the intvedives of .Luther
Jhimfelf, was dispersed over Germany with.great
.industry/, and beipg eagerly read by persons of

, every rank, did much- more than .counterbalance

the effed of all Charles's declarations against
* the new opinions.

;7S Sled Io3i 7" Goldaft Polit Imper p. p. 984.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

/''i X ^D/
