THE
T H E
H I S T 0 R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. I.

r~~ ~~~~~

r
- ala

THE

HIST H ER
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G 1N

OF THE
E MPEROR CHARLES V.

WIT H'
A VIEW of the PRO-GRE-SS of SOCIETY in

EUROPE, from the Subversion of the R6MAN EMPIRte

to the Beginning of the SIXTEENTH .CENTVRY.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.
By W I L L I A M ROBE R T S O N, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF DINBVRGIH, AND
HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

V O L.U M E I.
The SEVENTH EDITION, Corretled.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

M DCC XC;I.

# TO THE KING.

TO T E

K I N G.

S I R,
I PRE S U ME to lay before Your

Majesty the History of a Period,

which, if the abilities of the Writer
were equal to the dignity of the Sub-
ject, would not be unworthy the at-
tention of a Monarch, who is no less
a Judge than a Patron of Literary
Merit.

H s TO R Y claims it as her preroga-

tive to offer instruction to KINGS, as
well as to their people. What re-
fietions the Reign of the Emperor

A 3 CHARLES

CHARLES V. may suggest to your Ma-
jefty, it becomes not me to conjecture.
But your Subjects cannot observe the
various calamaities, which that Mo-
narch's ambition to be diftinguiihed
as a Conqueror, brought upon his
dominions, without recolleting the
felicity of their own times, and look-
ing up with gratitude to their Sove-
reign, who, during the fervour of
youth, and amidst the career of vic-
tory, possessed such felf-command,
and maturity of judgment, as to set
bounds to his own triumphs, and pre-
ser the blessings of peace to the fplen-
dour of military glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate

the wisdom of Your Majesty's choice,
but will enumerate the many virtues,
which render Your Reign conspicuous
for a sacred regard to all the duties

incumbent

incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free
People.

IT is our happiness to feel the in-

fluence of there Virtues; and to live
under the dominion of a Prince, who
delights more in promoting the Pub-
lic Welfare, than in receiving the
just Praise of his Royal Beneficence.
I am,

S I R,
YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful SubjeE,

And most dutiful Servant,
WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

A 4

# THE PREFACE.

THE
P R E F A C E.

O period in the history of one's own
country can be confidered as alto-

gether uninteresting. Such tranfa&ions as
tend to illuflrate the progress of its confti-
tution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost
attention. Even remote. and minute events
are objects of a curiosity, which, being na-
tural to the human mind, the gratification of
it is attended with pleasure.

BUT, with refpe& to the history of foreign

States, we mufl set other bounds to our
desire of information. The universal pro-
grefs of science, during the two last centuries,
the art of printing, and other obvious causes,
have filled Europe with such a multiplicity
of histories, and with such vafi, collecions

of

of historical materials, that the term of hu-.
man life is too short for the study or even
the perusal of them. It is necessary, then,
not only for those who are called to conduct
the affairs of nations, but for such as inquire
and reason concerning them, to remain satis-
fled with a general knowledge of distant
events, and to confine their fudy of history
in detail chiefly to that period, in which the
several States of Europe having become inti-
mately connected, the operations of one
power are so felt by all, as to influence their
councils, and to regulate their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to separate there periods. An sera
hould be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conneted with those around
it, may trace its own history apart; after
which, the tranfadions of every considerable
nation in Europe become interefling and
inftruaive to all. With this intention I
undertook to write the history of the Em-
peror CHARLES V. It was during his ad-
ministration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in

which

which each took a tation, wherein it has
since remained with less variation, than could
have been expected after the hocks occa-
sioned by so many internal revolutions, and
so many foreign wars. The great events
which happened then have not hitherto spent
their force. The political principles and
maxims, then established, ill continue to
operate. The ideas concerning the balance of
power, then introduced or rendered general,
fill influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore

be confidered as the period at which the
political fate of Europe began to assume a
new form. I have endeavoured to render
my account of it, an introducion to the
history of Europe subsequent to his reign.
While his numerous Biographers describe his
personal qualities and ations; while the
historians of different countries relate occur-
rences the consequences of which were local
or transient, it hath been my purpose to
record only those great tranfations in his
reign, the effets of which were univerfll, or
continue to be permanent.

As

As my readers could derive little infiruc-

tion from such a history of the reign of
CHARE-ES V. without ome information con-
cerning the itate of Europe previous to the
fifteenth century, my desire of fuppyling
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and to
explain the great caues and events, to whose
operation all the improvements in the poli-
tical slate of Europe, from the subversion of
the Roman Empire to the beginning of the
ixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have
exhibited a view of the progress of society
in Europe, not only with refped to interior
government, laws, and manners, but with re-
fpetq to the command of the national force
requisite in foreign operations; and I have
described the political constitution of the prin-
cipal States in Europe at the time when
Charles V. began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led

into several critical disquisitions, which be-
long more properly to the province of the
lawyer or antiquary, than to that of the
hiltorian. These I have placed at the end of

G the

the first volume, under the title of Proofs
and Illufirations. Many of my readers will,
probably, give little attention to such re-
searches. To some they may, perhaps, ap-
pear the most curious and intereffing part of
the work. I have carefully pointed out the
sources from which I have derived informa-
tion, and have cited the writers on whole
authority, I rely with a minute exatnefs,
which might appear to border upon oftenta-
tion, if it were possible to be vain of having
read books, many of which nothing but the
duty of examining with accuracy whatever
I laid before the Public, would have induced
me to open. As my inquiries conducted me
often into paths which were obscure or little
frequented, such constant references to the
authors who have been my guides, were not
only necefflry for authenticating the fats
which are the foundations of n.y reasonings,
but may be useful in pointing out the way
to such as hall hereafter hold the fame
course, and in enabling them to carry on
their researches with greater facility and
success.

EVERY

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one

omifion in my work, the reason of which
it is necessary to explain. I have given no
account of the conquests of Mexico and
Peru, or of the eflablifhment of the Spanish
colonies in the continent and islands of
America. The history of these events I ori-
ginally intended to have related at confider-
able length. But upon a nearer and more
attentive consideration of this part of my
plan, I found that the discovery of the new.
world; the state of society among its ancient
inhabitants; their character, manners, and
arts; the genius of the European settlements
in its various provinces, together with the
influence of these upon the systems of policy
or commerce in Europe, were fubjeas so
splendid and important, that a superficial view
of them could afford little fatisfaCion; and,
on the other hand, to treat of them as exten-
fively as they merited, must produce an epi-
fode, disproportionate to the principal work.
I have therefore reserved there for a separate
history; which, if the performance now of-
sered to the Public shall receive its approbation,
I purpose to undertake.

THOUGH,

THOUGH, by omitting such considerable

but detached articles in the reign of Charles V.
I have circumscribed my narration within
more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded,
from this view of the intention and nature
of the work which I thought it necessary to
lay before my readers, that the plan muff
fiill appear to them too extensive, and the
undertaking too arduous. I have often felt
them to be so. But my conviction of the
utility of such a history prompted me to
persevere. With what success I have exe-
cuted it, the -Public muff now judge. I wait,
not without solicitude, for its decision; to
which I hall submit with a refpeaful ilence.

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.

. O.F T H E --
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
E U R O P E,

PROM THt
.UBVERSION OF THE ROMAN: EMPIR-

a TO T·HE .': . . .
BEGINNING OF THE. SIXTEENH CENTURY,.

S ECTION I.

Yiew of the Progrjs of Society in Europe, : tvth r- ,
Jpee7 to interior Government, Laws, and Manners ,
-T' W:O great.revolutions have fappened in SE'T. r.

the political state, and. in the manners of Qes
the European nations. The first was oc- of the Ko-

carloned by the progress of the Roman powers on th hPi atc
the second by the subversion of it. When the of e"uop'
spirit of conquest led the armies of Rome beyond
the Alps, they found all the countries which
they invaded, inhabited by people whom they
denominated barbarians, but who were never.

VOL. I, : theles

S'.CT. I. thelefs brave and independent. These defended

'-' their ancient poifefiions with obstinate valour.

It was by the superiority of their discipline, ra-
ther than that of their courage, that the Romans
gained any advantage over them. A single battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of
Asia, decide the fate of a state. The vanquished
people resumed their arms with fresh spirit, and
their undisciplined valour, animated by the love
of liberty, supplied the want of condu&t as well

The defola- as of union. During those long and fierce ftrulg-
tion which
itoccafion- gles for dominion or independence, the countries

of Europe were successively laid wafe, a great part
of their inhabitants perilhed in the field, many
were carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant,
incapable of further resistance, ubmitted to the
Roman power.

oThemim THE Romans having thus desolated Europe,
provements
which itin set themselves to civilize it. The form ofgo-
toduced. vernment which they eftablilhed in the conquered

provinces, though severe, was regular, and pre-
served publick tranquillity. As a consolation for
the loss of liberty, they communicated their arts,
sciences, language, and manners, to their new
subje&s. Europe began to breathe, and to re-
cover strength after the calamities which it had
undergone; agriculture was encouraged; popu-
lation increased; the ruined cities were rebuilt;
new towns were founded; an appearance of pro-
fperity fcceeded, and repaired, in forme degree,
the havock of wor.

Ii Tlxls

THIS state, however, was far from being happy SECT. I.
or favourable to the improvement of the human

The had
mind. The vanquished nations were disarmed by confequen-

ces f their

their conquerors, and overawed by soldiers kept in dominion.
pay to restrain them. They were given up as a
prey to rapacious governors, who plundered them
with impunity; and were drained of their wealth
by exorbitant taxes, levied with so little atten-
tion to the situation of the provinces, that the
impositions were often increased in proportion to
their inability to fuppbrt them. They were de-
prived of their most enterprizing citizens, who re-
forted to a distant capital in quest of preferment,
or of riches; and were accustomed in all their
actions to look up to a superior, and tamely to
receive his commands. Under so many depref-
sing circumstances, it was hardly possible that they
could retain vigour or generosity of mind. The
martial and independent spirit, which had diftin-
guifhed their ancestors, became, in a great inea-
sure, extinct among all the people fubjeced to
the Roman yoke; they loft not only the habit but
even the capacity of deciding for themselves, or
of aing from the impulse of their own minds;
and the dominion of the Romans, like that of all
great Empires, degraded and debased the human
species [A].

A SOCIETY in such a slate could not subsist long. The rni.

rion of he

There were defets in the Roman government, b;r,,rou,,,
even in its most perfe6t form, which threatened its ,lillo'.

[A] NOTE I.

B 2 diflilution,

SECT. I. dissolution. Time ripened these original feeds of
'L^"' corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders.

A constitution, unsound, and worn out, must have
fallen into pieces of itself, without any external
hock. The violent irruption of the Goths, Van-
dals, Huns, and other barbarians, hastened this
event, and precipitated the downfal of the Empire.
New nations seemed to arise, and to ruth from
unknown regions, in order to take vengeance on
the Romans for the calamities which they had in-
fliEted on mankind. These fierce tribes either in-
habited the various provinces in Germany which
had never been subdued by the Romans, or were
scattered over those vast countries in the north of
Europe, and north-west of Asia, which are now
occupied by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles,
the fubjefts of the Ruffian Empire, and the Tar-
tars. Their condition, and tranfaaions, previous
to their invasion of the Empire, are but little
known. Almost all our information with respect
to these is derived from the Romans; and as they
did not penetrate far irtto countries which were
at that time uncultivated and uninviting, the ac-
counts of their original ifate given by the Roman
hiflorians, are extremely imperfet. The rude
inhabitants themselves, desitute of science, as
well as of records, and without leisure, or curio.
fity to inquire into remote events, retained, per-
haps, some indiftint memory of recent occur-
rences, but beyond thei, all was buried in obli-
vion, or involved in darkness and in fable [B].

[I] NO T E 1.

T HE

THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon SECT. I.

the Empire from the beginning of the fourth cen- Sta" the
tury to the final extinction of the Roman power, countries
have given rife to an opinion that the countries theyif ued.
whence they issued were crowded with inhabitants;
and various theories have been formed to account
for uch an extraordinary degree of population as
hath produced there countries the appellation of
The Storehouse of Nations. But if we confider,
that the countries possessed by the people who in-
vaded the Empire were of vait extent; that a great
part of there was covered with woods and marshes ;
that ome of the moit considerable of the barba-
rous nations subsisted entirely by hunting or pas-
turage, in both which states of society large tra&s
of land are required for maintaining a few inha-
bitants; and that all of them were Itrangers to the
arts and industry, without which population can-
not increase to any great degree, we must conclude,
that these countries could not be so populous in
ancient times as they are in the present, when
they frill continue to be less peopled than any
other part of Europe or of Asia.

BUT the fame circumstances that prevented the The people

barbarous nations fiom becoming populous, con- ing eter
tributed to inspire, or to strengthen, the martial rize"
spirit by which they were diltinguifhed. Inured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardflips which rendered their bodies
firm, and their minds vigorous; accustomed to a
course of life which was a continual preparation
for ation; and disdaining every occupation but

B 3 that

SECT. I. that of war or of hunting; they undertook, and
^-^- ' pr.fecuted their military enterprizes with an ar-

dour and impetuosity, of which men softened by
the refinements of more polished times can scarcely
form any idea [C].

The mo- THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceeded
tives oftheir
i ftexcur. rather from the love of plunder, than from the
j'i". desire of new settlements. Roused to arms by

some enterprizing or popular leader, they falliLd
out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier
provinces with irresistible violence; put all who
opposed them to the sword; carried off the most
valuable effeots of the inhabitants ; dragged along
multitudes of captives in chains; wafted all before
them with fire or sword; and returned in triumph
to their wilds and fastnesses. Their success, toge-
ther with the-accounts which they gave of the un-
known conveniences and luxuries that abounded
in countries better cultivated, or blessed with a
milder climate than their own, excited new adven-
turers, and exposed the frontier to new devastations.

Their rea- WHEN nothing was left to plunder i the adja-
li.g , tb cent provinces, ravaged by frequent excursions,
hinchicy they marched farther from home, and finding it
which they
conqucred difficult, or dangerous to return, they began to set-

tle in the countries which they had subdued. The
sudden and flort excursions in quest of booty,
which had alarmed and disquieted the Empire,
cIafed; a more dreadful calamity impended.
Great bodies of armed men, with their wives and

[C] NOTE III.

children,
t

children, and slaves and flocks, issued forth, like SECT. I.
regular colonies, in quest of new settlements. Peo- *
pie who had no cities, and seldom any fixed habi-
tation, were so little attached to their native foil,
that they migrated without reluctance from one
place to another. New adventurers followed
them. The lands which they deserted were oc-
cupied by more remote tribes of barbarians.
These, in their turn, pushed forward into more Theextent

of their

fertile countries, and, like a torrent continually fttlements.
increasing, rolled on, and swept every thing be-
fore them. In less than two centuries from their
first irruption, barbarians of various names and
lineage plundered and took possession of Thrace,
Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at last of
Italy, and Rome itself. The vast fabrick of the
Roman power, which it had been the work of
ages to perfet, was in that hort period over-
turned from the foundation.

MANY concurring causes prepared the way for The cr-

c m I fllanCS
this great revolution, and ensured success to the which oc-

cafioned the

nations which invaded the Empire. The Roman downall of
commonwealth had conquered the world by the the Rmaa
wisdom of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its
military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the
former were forgotten or despised, and the latter
was gradually relaxed. The armies of the Empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries bore scarcely any
resemblance to those invincible legions which had
been vitorious wherever they marched. Instead
offireemen, who voluntarily took arms fiom the

B 4 love

SECT. I. love of glory, or of their country, provincials and
-'' -- barbarians were bribed or forced into service. These

were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the fa-
tigue of military duty. They even complained of
the weight of their defensive armour as intole-
rable, and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the
armies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and
stability, fell into cotempt; the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could hardly
be brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were the
only guardians of the Empire. The jealousy of
defpotifin had deprived the people of the use of
arms; and subjects, oppressed and rendered inca-
pable of defending themselves, had neither spirit
nor inclination to resist their invaders, from whom
they had little to fear, because their condition could
hardly be.rendered more unhappy. At the fame
time that the martial spirit became extinct, the
revenues of the Empire gradually diminished.
The taste for the luxuries of the East increased to
such a pitch in the Imperial court, that great umsn
were carried into India, from which, in the chan-
nel of commerce, money never returns. By the
large subsidies paid to the barbarous nations, a
still greater quantity of specie was withdrawn
from circulation. The fiontier provinces, wafted
by frequent incursions, became unable to pay the
customary tribute; and the wealth of the world,
which had long centered in the capital of the Em-
pire, ceased to flow thither in the fame abundance,
or was diverted into other channels. The limits

12 of

of the Empire continued to be as extensive as ever, SECT. .
while the spirit requisite for its defence declined, 'v--
and its resources were exhausted. A vatt body,
languid, and almost unanimated, became incapa-
ble of any effort to save itself, and was easily over-
powered. The emperors, who had the ahfolute
direction of this difsrdered system, funk in the
softness ofeaftern luxury, hut up within the walls
of a palace, ignorant of war, unacquainted with
affairs, and governed entirely by women and eu-
nuchs, or by ministers equally effeminate, trem-
bled at the approach of danger, and, under cir-
cumftances which called for the utmost vigour in
counsel as well as in aion, discovered all the im-
potent irrefolutionof fear, and of folly.

IN every refpeQ, the condition of the barbarous The cr-

cumf'ancee
nations was the reverse of that of the Romans. whichcon-

ribued to

Among the former, the martial spirit was in full thefucrTef
vigour; their leaders were hardy and enterprif- 'h bna'
ing; the arts which had enervated the Romans tions.
were unknown; and such was the nature of their
military institutions, that they brought forces into
the field -'ithout any trouble, and supported them
at little e::. .:ice. The mercenary and effeminate
troops ftaioned on the frontier, aflonifhed at their
fierceness, either fled at their approach, or were
routed on the first onset. The feeble expedient
to which the Emperors had recourle, of taking
large bodies of the barbarians into pay, and of
employing them to repel new invaders, instead of
retarding, hastened the deftruion of the Empire.
These mercenaries soon turned their arms against

their

SFCT. I. their maiters, and with greater advantage. than

ever, for, by serving in the Roman armies, they
had acquired all the discipline, or skill in war,
which the Romans till retained; and, upon add-
ing these to their native ferocity, they became
altogether irresistible.

The fp;rt BUT though from these, and many other causes,
with which
they carried the progress and conquests of the nations which
°o ar. over-ran the Empire, became so extremely rapid,

they were accompanied with horrible devastations,
and an incredible defru&ion of the human species.
Civilized nations, which take arms upon cool re-
flection, from motives of policy or prudence, with
a view to guard againit some distant danger, or to
prevent ome remote contingency, carry on their
hostilities with so little rancour or animosity, that
war among them is disarmed of half its terrors.
Barbarians are strangers to such refinements. They
rufl into war with impetuosity, and prosecute it
with violence. Their sole object is to make their
enemies feel the weight of their vengeance; nor
does their rage subside until it be satiated with
inflicting on them every possible calamity. It is
with such a spirit that the savage tribes in America
carry on their petty wars. It was with the fame
spirit that the more powerful and no less fierce
barbarians in the north of Europe, and of Asia,
fell upon the Roman Empire.

The derol. *7'Ii rEvrE R they marched,' their rout was
ticm' whicl
theybim..,,ht marked with blood. They ravaged or dlroyed
""l.P, Eu all around them. They made no diftinEtion be-

tween

tween what was sacred and what was profane. SECT. .
They refpeted no age, or sex, or rank. What -
escaped the fury of the first inundation, perished
in those which followed it. The most fertile and
populous provinces were converted into deserts,
in which were scattered the ruins of villages and
cities, that afforded shelter to a few miserable in-
habitants whom chance had preserved, or the
sword of the enemy, wearied with destroying, had
spared. The conquerors who first fettled in the
countries which they had wafted, were expelled or
exterminated by nw invaders, who, coming from
regions farther removed from the civilized parts
of the world, were still more fierce and rapaci-
ous. This brought fresh calamities upon 'man-
kind, which did not cease until the north, by
pouring forth successive swarms, was drained of
people, and could no longer furniih instruments
of deftruEtion. Famine and pestilence, which
always march in the train of war, when it ravages
with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every
part of Europe, and completed its sufferings. If
a man were called to fix upon the period in the
history of the world, during which the condition
of the human race was most calamitous and as-
flited, he would, without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Theodosius the
Great, to the establishment of the Lombards in
Italy a. The contemporary authors, who beheld

Theodosius died A. D. 395, the reign of Alboinus in
lombardy began A.D. 571 ; ob that this period was 176 years.

thalC

SECT. I. that scene of desolation, labour and are at a loss
*--V for expressions to describe the horror of it. The

scourge of God, The destroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they diftinguifli the
most noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on.the
world, to the hav6ck occasioned by eartlquakes,
conflagrations, or deluges, the most formidable
and fatal calamities which the imagination of man
can conceive.

Theun;er- BUT no expressions can convey o perfec an
,whch ghey idea of the detfruaive progress ofthe barbarians, as
nthie slade that which muff strike an attentive observer, when
ofEuroFe. he contemplates the total change which he will dif-

cover in the state of Europe, after it began to re-
cover ome degree of tranquillity, towards the
close of the sixth century. The Saxons were by
that time masters of the southern and more fertile
provinces of Britain; the Franks of Gaul; the;
Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain, the
Goths and Lombards of Italy and the adjacent
provinces. Very faint vestiges of the Roman po-
licy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature remained.
New forms ofgovernment, new laws, new manners,
new dresses, new languages, and new names of men
and countries, were every where introduced. To
make a great or sudden alteration with refpe to
any of there, unless where the ancient inhabitants
of a country have been almost totally exterminated,
has proved an undertaking beyond the power ofthe

greatest

greatest conquerors [D]. The great changewhich SECT. I.
the 'fttlement of the barbarous nations occasioned -
in the state of Europe, may, therefore, be con-
fidered as a more decisive proof, han even the
testimony of contemporary historians, of the de-
ftructive violence with which these invaders car-
ried o their conquefis, and of the havock which
they had made from one extremity of this quarter
of the Globe to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this Frnn this

fare of diCo

general wreck of nations, we must search for the order the
feeds of order, and endeavour to discover the first a.w oso-
rudiments of the policy and laws now established now efta-

Of t blif(hied mutt

in Europe. To this source the historians of its be traced.
different kingdoms have attempted, though with
less attention and industry than the importance of
the enquiry merits, to trace back the institutions
and customs peculiar to their countrymen. It is
not my province to give a minute detail of the pro-
grefs of government and manners in each particu-
lar nation, whose tranfadtions are the objec of the
following history. But, in order to exhibit ajut
view of the state of Europe at the opening of the
sixteenth century, it is neceflary to look back, and
to contemplate the condition of the northern na-
tions upon their first ficttlement in those countries
which they occupied. It is neceflary to mark the
great steps by which they advanced from barba-
rifin to refinement, and to point out those general
principles and events which, by their uniform as

[D] NOTE IV. [Ej NOTEr V.

well

SECT. I. well as extensive operation, conducted all of them
,---.. to that degree of improvement in policy and in

manners which they had attained at the period
when Charles V. began his reign.

The prin- WHEN nations fubje& to despotic government
cip'e on
which the make conquests, these serve only to extend the
northern
nations dominion and the power of their master. But ar-
fetatld the mies compo ed of freemen conquer for therfelves,
in Europe. not for their leaders. The people who overturned

the Roman Empire, and fettled in its various pro-
vinces, were of the latter class. Not only the dif-
ferent nations that issued froin the north of Europe,
which has always been confidered as the feat of
liberty, but the Huns and Alans who inhabited
part of those countries, which have been marked
out as the peculiar region of servitude b, enjoyed
freedom and independence in such a high degree as
seems to be scarcely compatible with a state of so-
cial union, or with the fubordinacion neceflary to
maintain it. They followed the chieftain who led
them forth in quest of new settlements, not by con-
firaint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom he
could order to march, but as volunteers who offered
to accompany him [F]. They confidered their
conqluiefs as a common property, in which all had
a title to fllare, as all had contributed to acquire
them [G]. In what manner, or by what prin-
cilplcs, they dividcd among them the lands which
they sicizcd, we cannot now determine with any

' 1)e I'cFprit des oix, liv. 17. ch. 3.
Li'] N Ol' L VI. [G] NO TE VIs.

certainty.

certainty. There is no nation in Europe whose SECT. r.
records reach, back to this remote period; and -
there is little information to be got fiom the un-
inftrutive and meagre chronicles, compiled by
writers ignorant of the true end, andiunacquainted
with the proper objects, of history.

THIS new division of property, however, toge- Thefeudal

ther with the maxims and manners to which it gave gradually
rife, gradually introduced a species of government 'f'aobn'Ied

among

formerly unknown. This singular institution is them.
now distinguished by the name of the Feudal yfem:
and though the barbarous nations which framed it,
fettled in their new territories at different times,
came from different countries, poke various lan-
guages, and were under the command of fcparate
leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were effabliled,
with little variation, in every kingdom of Europe.
This amazing uniformity hath induced some au-
thorse to believe that all these nations, notwith-
standing so many apparent circumst'ances of dif-
tinction, were originally the fame people. But it
may be ascribed, with greater probability, to the
similar fiate offociety and of manners to which they
were accustomed in their native countries, and to
the similar situation in which they found them-
selves on taking possession of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acqui-
fitions to maintain, not only againit such of the

° Procop. de belloVandal. ap. Script. Byz. cdit.Ven. vol. i.
P, 345-

ancient

SECT. I. ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but.againft

atl"a! the more formidable inroads of new invaders, self-

Nateo-at,
defencethe defence was their chief care, and seems to have
great ,hje&
of frudil been the chief objeEt of their first inltitutions and
policy. policy. Instead of those loofeaflociations, which,

though they scarcely diminifled their personal in-
dependence, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries,
they aw the necessity of uniting in more close con-
federacy, and ofrelinquifhing fume of their private
rights in order to attain publick iafery. Every
freeman, upon eceiving a portion of the lands
which were divided, bound himself to appear in
arms againit the enemies of the community. This
military lervice was the condition upon which he
received and held his lands; and as they were ex-
empted from every other burden, that tenure,
among a warlike people, was deemed both easy
and honourable. The king or general, who. led
them to cnqueft, continuing still to be the head
of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion
allotted to him. Having thus acquired the means
of rewarding past services, as well as of gaining
new adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this
view, binding those on whom they were bestowed,
to resort to his standard with a number of men in
proportion to the extent of the territory which
they received, and to bear arms in his defence.
His chief officers imitated the example of the so-
vereign, and, in distributing portions of their lands
among their dependents, annexed the fame condi-

tion

tion to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom re- SECT. I.
fembled a military establishment, rather than a
civil infitution. The vicorious army, cantoned
out in the country which it had seized, continued
ranged under its proper officers, and ubordinate
to military command. The names of a soldier
and of a freeman were synonymous d. Every pro-
prietor of land, girt with a sword, was ready to
march at the summons of his superior, and to
take the field against the common enemy.

Bur though the Feudal policy seems to be ob The Feudal

governmeot
admirably calculated for defence against the assaults defcaiec ia

it» provi-

of any foreign power, its provisions for the interior rionP for in-
order and tranquillity of fociecy were extremely in si^.
defetive. The principles of disorder and corrup-
tion are discernible in that constitution under its
best and molt perfect form. They soon unfolded
themselves, and, spreading with rapidity through
every part of the system, produced the most fatal
effeEts. The bond of political union was ex-
tremely feeble; the sources of anarchy were innu-
merable. The monarchical and ariftocratical parts
of the constitution, having no intermediate power
to balance them, were perpetually at variance, and
jutling with each other. The powerful vassals of
the crown oon extorted a confirmation for life of
those grants of land, which being at first purely
gratuitous, had been bestowed only during plea-

d Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Milek.
VOL. I. C sure.

Secr. I. sure. Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to
tt'-- have them converted into hereditary possessions.

One ftep more completed their usurpations, and
rendered them unalienable[H]. With an ambi-
tion no less enterprising, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour,
as well as offices of power or trufl. These per-
fonal marks of diftintian, which the public ad-
miration bestows on illustrious merit, or which the
public confidence confers on extraordinary abi-
lities, were annexed to certain families, and tranf-
mitted like fiefs, from father to son, by hereditary
right. The crown vassals having thus secured the
pofeffion of their lands and dignities, the nature
of the feudal inflitutions, which though founded
on subordination verged to independence, led them
to new, and still more dangerous encroachments
on the prerogatives of the sovereign. They ob-
tained the power of fupremejurifdi&ion, both civil
and criminal, within their own territories; the right
of coining money; together with the privilege of
carrying on war against their private enemies, in
their own name, and by their own authority. The
ideas of political fubjeEion were almost entirely
loft, and frequently scarce any appearance of feu-
dal subordination remained. Nobles, whohad ac-
quired such enormous power, scorned to confider
themselves as fubjees. They apired openly at
being independent: the bonds which connected the
principal members of the constitution with the
crown, were diflolved. A kingdom, considerable

[H] N 0 T E VIII.

in

in name and in extent, was broken into as many SECT. .
separate principalities as it contained powerful ba- '--
rons. A thousand causes ofjealoufy and discord
subsisted among them, and gave rife to as many
wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or kept
in continual alarm during these endless contests,
was filled with castles and places offtrength erect-
ed for the. security of the inhabitants; not against
foreign force, but against internal hostilities. An
universal anarchy, deftruaive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expet to derive
from society, prevailed. The people, the most
numerous as well as the most useful part of the
community, were either reduced to a state of
aEtual servitude, or treated with the fame info-
lence and rigour as if they had been degraded into
that wretched condition [I]. The king, stripped
of almost every prerogative, and without autho-
rity to enat or to execute salutary laws, could
neither protect the innocent, nor punish the
guilty. The nobles, superior to all restraint,
harassed each other withperpetual wars, oppressed
their fellow-fubjeEs, and humbled or insulted
their sovereign. To crown all, time gradually
fixed, and rendered venerable, this pernicious
system, which violence had established.

SUCH was the state of Europe with refpet to Itprevented

nations
the interior administration of government from the likewise

from aing

seventh to the eleventh century. All the external with vgour
operations of its various ifates, during this period, tnlliopc-

rtions.
[I] NOTE IX.

C 2 were,

SECT. I. were, ofcourfe, extremely feeble. A kingdom

- '-- dismembered, and torn with dissension, without

any common interest to rouze, or any common
head to conduEt its force, was incapable of ating
with vigour. Almost all the wars in Europe, dur-
ing the ages which I have mentioned, were triflingb
indecisive, and productive of no considerable event.
They resembled the short incursions of pirates or
banditti, rather than the steady operations of a
regular army. Every baron, at the head of his
vassals, carried on some petty enterprize, to which
he was prompted by his own ambition, or revenge.,
The state itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make any
effort, that served only to discover its impotence.
The super or genius of Charlemagne, it is true,
united all these disjointed and discordant members,
and forming them again into one body, restored to
government that degree-of activity which diftin-
guifhes his reign, and renders the transactions of
it, objects not only of attention but of admiration
to more enlightened times. But this state of union
and vigour, not beingnatural to the feudal govern-
ment, was of short duration. Immediately upon
his death, the spirit which animated and sustained
the vast system which he had established, being
withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, affliEted the different
kingdoms into which his empire was split.
From that time to the eleventh century, a fuccef.
sion of uninteresting events; a series of wars, the

motives

motives as well as- the consequences of'which SECT. I.
were unimportant, fill and-deform the annals of -J
all the nations in Europe.

To these pernicious effects of the feudal anarchy The fatal

may be added its fatal influence on the character thisfate of
and improvement of the human mind. If men f[cicty nd
do notenjoy the protection of regular government, art,
together with the expectation of personal security,
which naturally flows from it, they never attempt
to make progress in science, nor aim at attaining
refinement in taste, or in manners. That period
of turbulence, oppreflion, and rapine, which I have
described, was ill suited to favour improvement in
any of there. In less than a century after the bar-
barous nations fettled in their new conquests, al-
most all the effets of the knowledge and civility,
which the Romans had pread through Europe,
disappeared. Not only the arts of elegance, which
minister to luxury, and are supported by it, but
many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were ne-
glected or loft. Literature, science, taste, were
words little in use during the ages which we are
contemplating; or, if they occur at any time, emi-
nence in them is ascribed to persons and produc-
tions so contemptible, that it appears their true im-
port was little understood. Persons of the highest
rank, and in the most eminent stations, could not
read or write. Many of the clergy did not under-
stand the breviary which they were obliged daily

C3 to

SECT. I. to recite; some of them could scarcely read it [K.

'c' The memory of past tranfadtions was, in a great

degree, loft, or preferred in annals filled with tri-
fling events, or legendary tales. Even the codes
of laws, published by the several nations which
established themselves in the different countries
of Europe, fell into disuse, while, in their place,
customs, vague and capricious, were substituted.
The human mind, negleEed, uncultivated, and
depressed, continued in the most profound igno-
rance. Europe, during four centuries, produced
few authors who merit to be read, either on ac-
count of the elegance of their composition, or
the justness and novelty of their sentiments. There
are few inventions, useful or ornamental to so-
ciety, of which that long period can boast.
upon re- EVEN the Christian religion, though its precepts

are delivered, and its infitutions are fixed in scrip-
ture, with a precision which should have exempted
them from being misinterpreted or corrupted, de-
generatcd, during those ages of darkness, into an
illiberal uperftition. The barbarous nations, when
converted to Chrifianity, changed the object, ndt
the fpir-ir, of their religious worship. They endea-
voured to conciliate the favour of the true God by
means not unlike to those which they had em-
ployed in order to appcafe their false deities. In,
fead of aspiring to fansity and virtue, which alone
can render men acceptable to the great Author of

[K] NOTE X.

order

order and of excellence,, they imagined that they SECT. I.
satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous '-
observance of external ceremonies [L]. Reli-
gion, according to their conception of it, com-
prehended nothing else; and the rites, by which
they persuaded themselves that they hould gain
the favour of heaven, were of such a nature as
might have been expected from the rude ideas
of the ages which devised and introduced them.
They were either so unmeaning as to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Being to whose honour
they were consecrated; or so absurd as to be a
disgrace to reason and humanity [M]. Charle-
magne in Fiance, and Alfred the Great in Eng-
land, endeavoured to dispel this darkness, and
gave their fubjecs a short glimpse of light and
knowledge. But the ignorance of the age was
too powerful for their efforts and inffitutions.
The darkness returned, and fettled over Europe
more thick and heavy than before.

As the inhabitants of Europe, during these cen- upon the

charaaer
turies, were firangers to the arts which embellish and irtue

of the hu-

a polished age, they were destitute of the virtues Mha mi'.
which abound among people who continue in a
simple state. Force of mind, a sense ofperfonal
dignity, gallantry in enterprize, invincible perse-
verance in execution, contempt of danger and of
death, are the charaaeriftic virtues of uncivilized
nations. But these are all the offspring of equa-

[L] NOTE XI. [M] NOTE X.

C 4 lity

SECT. I. lity and independence, both which the feudal in-
-r-' ifitutions had destroyed. The spirit of domina-

tion corrupted the nobles; the yoke of Servitude
depressed the people; the generous sentiments in-
spired by a sense of equality were extinguished,
and hardly any thing remained to be a check cn
ferocity and violence. Human society is in its
most corrupted state, at that period when men
have loft their original independence and fimpli-
city of manners, but have not attained that de-
gree of refinement which introduces a sense of de-
corum and of propriety in conduc, as a restraint
on those passions which lead to heinous crimes.
Accordingly, a greater number of those atrocious
actions, which fill the mind of man with astonish-
ment and horror, occur in the history of the cen-
turies under review, than in that of any period of
the fame extent in the annals of Europe. If we
open the history of Gregory of Tours, or of any
contemporary author, we meet with a series of
deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so wild
and enormous, as almost to exceed belief.

Prom the BUT, according to the observation of an ele-
beginning
of the lr- gant and profound hiftoriane, there is an ultimate
tury g- point of deprefflon, as well as of exaltation,
ernmernt from which human affairs naturally return in a
2nd man-
nrrs begin contrary progress, and beyond which they never
to imrov. pass either in their advancement or decline. When

defeEts, either in the form or in the administration

* Hume'a Ililtory of England, vol. ii. p. 441.

of

of government, occasion such disorders in society as SECT. I.
are excessive and intolerable, it becomes the orm--
mon interest to discover and to apply such remedies
as will most effectually remove them. Slight incon-
veniences may be long overlooked or endured; but
when abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society
must go to ruin, or must attempt to reform them.
The disorders in the feudal system, together with
the corruption of taste and manners consequent
upon there, which had gone on increasing during
a long course of years, seemed to have attained their
utmost point of. excess towards the close of the
eleventh century. From that era, we may date
the return of government and manners in a con-
trary direction, and can trace a succession ofcaules
and events which contributed, some with a nearer
and more conspicuous, others with a more remote
and less perceptible influence, to abolish confu-
sion and barbarism, and to introduce order, re-
gularity, and refinement.

IN pointing out and explaining there causes and Necerary to

-. . <v i s \ * i- s ~point out

events, it is not necessary to observe the order of the cause
time with a chronological accuracy ; it is of more wheich:cn.
importance to keep in view their mutual connec- tribute to-

wards this

tion and dependance, and to show how the opera- improve-
tion of one event, or one cause, prepared the way
for another, and augmented its influence. We
have hitherto been contemplating the progress of
that darkness, which spread over Europe, from its
first approach, to the period ofgreateft obfcura-
tion; a more pleasant exercise begins here; to ob-

serve

SECT. I. serve the first dawnings of returning light, to mark
........ the various accessions by which it gradually in-

creased and advanced towards the full splendor of
day.

The ten- I, T-HE Crusades, or expeditions in order to
lency of the
Crurdes to rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi-
chiangec dels, seem to be the first event that roused Eu-
gove.nment ro.pe from the lethargy in which it had been long
and man-
ner!. funk, and that tended to introduce any confider-
The more able change in government or in manners. It is
aure sos natural to the human mind to view those places
ditineepe. which have been distinguished by being the refi-

dence of any illustrious personage, or the scene of
any great tranfaftion, with some degree of delight
and veneration. To this principle muff be ascribed
the superstitious devotion with which Christians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were accuf-
tomed to visit that country which the Almighty
had feleced as the inheritance of his favourite
people, and in which the Son of God had accom-
pliihed the redemption of mankind. As this-dif-
tant pilgrimage could not be performed without
considerable expence, fatigue, and danger, it ap-
peared the more meritorious, and came to be
confidered as an expiation for almost every crime.
An opinion which spread with rapidity over ku-
rope about the close of the tenth, and beginning
of the eleventh century, and which gained uni-
versal credit, wonderfully augmented the number
of credulous pilgrims, and increased the ardour
with which they undertook this useless voyage.

The

The thousand years, mentioned by St. John , SECT. I.
were supposed to be accomplished, and the end Em'
of the world to be at hand. A general confter-
nation seized mankind; many relinquished their
poffefflons; and abandoning their friends and
families, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Christ would
quickly appear to judge the world . While Pa-
leftine continued subjef to the Caliphs, they had
encouraged the retort of pilgrims to Jerusalem;
and confidered this as a beneficial species of com-
merce, which brought into their dominions gold
and ilver, and carried nothing out of them but
relics and consecrated trinkets. But the Turks
having conquered Syria about the middle of the
eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed to out-
rages of every kind from there fierce barbarians b.
This change happening precisely at the junc6ure
when the panic terror, which I have mentioned,
rendered pilgrimages most frequent, filled Europe
with alarm and indignation. Every person who
returned from Palestine related the dangers which
he had encountered, in visiting the holy city, and
described with exaggeration the cruelty and vex-
ations of the Turks.

r Revel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
e Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hifto-

riens de France, tom. x. p. z62.Vita Abbonis, ibid. p. 332.
Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Scrip. medii aevi,
vol. i. p. 909. Annalifta Saxo, ibid. 576.

h1 Jo. Dan. Schoepflini de facris Gallorum in orientem
expeditionibus, p. 4. Argent. 17z6. 4to.

W HEN

SECT. T. WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared, the
'Ts -me- zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of
The imme-
diate occa- leading all the forces of Christendom against the
them. infidels, and of driving them out of the Holy Land

by violence, was sufficient to give a beginning to
that wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that
was the name of this martial apostle, ran from
province to province with a crucifix in his hand,
exciting princes and people to this Holy War, and
:wherever he came kindled the fame enthusiastic
ardour for it with which he himself was animated.
The council of Placentia, where upwards of thirty
thousand persons were assembled, pronounced the
scheme to have been suggested by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
still more numerous, as soon as the measure was
proposed, all cried out with one voice, 'C It is the
" will of God." Persons of all ranks catched the
contagion; not only the gallant nobles of that
age, with their martial followers, whom we may
suppose apt to be allured by the boldness of a ro-
mantic enterprize, but men in the more humble
and pacific flations of life; ecclesiastics of every
order, and even women and children, engaged with
emulation in an undertaking, which was deemed
sacred and meritorious. If we may believe the
concurring testimony of contemporary authors, fix
millions of persons assumed the cross', which was
the badge that distinguished such as devoted them-
selves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the

! Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gcfia Dei per
Francos, vol. i. 387. edit. Han. 16 1.

Princess

Princess Anna Comnena, torn up from the foun- SECT. I.
dation, seemed ready to precipitate itself in one
united body upon Asia . Nor did the fumes of
this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: the frenzy
was as lasting as it was extravagant. During two
centuries, Europe seems to have had no object but
to recover, or keep possession of, the Holy Land;
and through that period vast armies continued to
march thither [N].

THE first efforts of valour, animated by enthufi- The success

of the ru~

afm, were irresistible; part of the lesser Asia, all Syria fadc.,
and Palestine, were wrested from the infidels; the
banner of the cross was displayed on Mount Sion;
Constantinople, the capital of the Christian empire
in the East, was afterwards seized by a body ofthofe
adventurers, who had taken arms against the Ma-
hometans, and an Earl ofFlanders, and his descend-
ants, kept possession of the Imperial throne during
half a century. But though the first impression of
the Crusaders was so unexpected that they made
their conquests with great ease, they found infinite
difficulty in preserving them. Establishments so
ditfant from Europe, surrounded by warlike na-
tions, animated with fanatical zeal scarcely inferior
to that of the Crusaders themselves, were perpetu-
ally in danger of being overturned. Before the ex- A.D, rag.
piration of the thirteenth century, the Christians
were driven out of all their Asiatic pofleffions, in
acquiring of which incredible numbers of men had

k Alexias, lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 224.
[N] NOTE XIII.

perished,

SECT. I. perilhed, and immense ums of money had been
'v -.J wafted. The only common enterprize in which

the European nations ever engaged, and which
they all undertook with equal ardour, remains a
singular monument of human folly.

The bene. BUT from these expeditions, extravagant as they
ficial effedts
ofthe ru- were, beneficial consequences followed, which had
Imdnn neither been forefeei nor expeted. In their pro-

grefs towards the Holy Land, the followers of the
cross marched through countries better cultivated,
and more civilized than their own. Their firt ren-
dezvous was commonly in Italy, in which Venice,
Genoa, Pisa, and other cities, had begun to apply
themselves to commerce, and had made confider-
able advances towards wealth as well as refinement.
They embarked there, and landing in Dalmatia,
pursued their route by land to Conifantinople.
Though the military spirit had been long extin in
the eastern Empire, and a despotism of the worst
species had annihilated almost every public virtue,
yet Constantinople, having never felt the deftruc-
tive rage of the barbarous nations, was the greatest,
as well as the most beautiful city in Europe, and
the only one in which there remained any image of
the ancient elegance in manners and arts. The
naval power of the eastern empire was considerable.
Manufa&ures of the most curious fabric were
carried on in its dominions. Constantinople was
the chief mart in Europe for the commodities of
the East Indies. Although the Saracens and Turks
had torn from the Empire many of its richest pro-

2 vinces,

vinces, and had reduced it within very narrow SECT. I.
bounds, yet great wealth flowed into the capital '<;-v-
from there various sources, which not only che-
rifhed such a taste for magnificence, but kept alive
such a relish for the sciences, as appears confider-
able, when compared with what was known in
other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the Euro-
peans, who had assumed the cross, found the re-
mains of the knowledge and arts which the exam-
ple and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused
through their Empire. Although the attention of
the historians of the Crusades was fixed on other
obje&s than the state offociety and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although mos of
them had neither taste nor discernment enough to-
describe these, they relate, however, such signal
a&s of humanity and generosity in the condu6t of
Saladin, as well as some other leaders of the Ma-
hometans, as give us a very high idea of their
manners. It was not poflible for the Crusaders to
travel through so many countries, and to behold
their various customs and inffitutions, without
acquiring information and improvement. Their
views enlarged; their prejudices wore off; new
ideas crowded into their minds; and they must have
been sensible, on many occasions, of the rusticity of
their own manners, when compared with those of a
more polished people. These impreflions were
not so flight as to be effaced upon their return to
their native countries. A close intercourse subsisted
between the Eaff and Weft during two centuries;
new armies were continually marching from Eu-

rope

SECT. I. rope to Asia, while former adventurers returned
a- - home and imported many of the customs to which

they had been familiarized by a long residence
abroad. Accordingly, we discover, soon after the
commencement of the Crusades, greater splendour
in the courts of princes, greater pomp in public
ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasure and
amusements, together with a more romantic spirit
ofenterprize spreading gradually over Europe;
and to there wild expeditions, the effe& of super-
flition or folly, we owe the first gleams of light
which tended to dispel barbarifin and igno-

rance.

Their in. B UT these beneficial consequences ofthe Crusades
luene on
the Sate of took place slowly; their influence upon the ltate
poproperty. ofroperty, and consequently of power, in the dif-

ferent kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate
as well as discernible. The nobles who assumed
the cross, and bound themselves to march to the
Holy Land, oon perceived that great fums were
necessary towards defraying the expence of such a
distant expedition, and enabling them to appear
with suitable dignity at the head of their vafials.
But the genius of the feudal system was averse to
the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and sub-
jeEts in that age were unaccuftpmed to pay them.
No expedient remained for levying the fums re-
quirite, but the sale of their poffeflions. As men
were inflamed with romantic expetations of the
splendid conquests which they hoped to make in
Alia, and possessed with such zeal for recovering the

Holy

Holy Land as wallowed up every other paflion, Secr. I.
they relinquiflhed their ancient inheritances without *
any reluctance, and for prices far below their value,
that they might sally forth as adventurers in quest
of new settlements in unknown countries. The
monarchs of the great kingdoms in the weft, none
of whom had engaged in the first Crusade eagerly
seized this opportunity of annexing considerable
territories to their crowns at small expence . Be-
fides this, several great barons, who perifihed in the
Holy War, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted
of course to their refpeAive sovereigns; and by
these acceflions of property, as well as power taken
from the one scale and thrown into the other, the
regal authority rose in proportion as that of the
Aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of many
potent vassals, accustomed to controul and give law
to their sovereigns, afforded them an opportunity
of extending their prerogative, and of acquiring a
degree of weight in the conititution which they
did not formerly posess. To these circumstances,
we may add, that as all who assumed the cross
were taken under the immediate protection of the
church, and its heaviest anathemas were denounced
againt such as should disquiet or annoy those who
had devoted therifelves to this service; the private
quarrels and hostilities which banished tranquillity
from a feudal kingdom, were suspended or extin-
gui(hed; a more general and steady administration
of justice began to be introduced, and ome ad-

Willelm. Malmlbur. Guibert. Abbas p Bongarf. vol. i.
1481.

VOL. I. D vances

SEc. I. vances were made towards the establishment of
~' i- -regular government in the several kingdoms of

Europem [0].

Their com- THE commercial effe&s of the Crusades were
mnrcial afcte. not less considerable than those which I have al-

ready mentioned. The first armies under the stand-
ard of the cross, which Peter the hermit and God-
frey of Bouillon led through Germany and Hun-
gary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the
length of the march, as well as by the fierceness
of the barbarous people who inhabited those coun-
tries, that it deterred others from taking the fame
route; and rather than encounter so many dan-
gers, they chole to go by sea. Venice, Genoa, and
Pisa furnihed the transports on which they em-
barked. The fum which there cities received merely
for freight from such numerous armies was im-
mense". This, however, was but a small part
of what they gained by the expeditions to the
Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted with them
for military llores and provisions; their fleets
kept on the coast as the armies advanced by land s
and supplying them with whatever was wanting,
engrossed all the profits of a branch of commerce
which, in every age, has deen extremely lucra-
tive. The success which attended the arms
of the Crusaders was productive of advantages

' Du Cange Gloflar. voc. CruceSgnaats. Gull. Abbaa ap,
Bongarf. vol. i. 480. 482.

[0] NOTE XIV.
Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii avi, vol. ii. go5.

4 stil

still more permanent. There are charters yet ex- SeCT. I.
tant, containing gants to the Venetians, Pifans,
and Genoese of the most extensive immunities in
the several ettlements which the Christians made
in Asia. All the commodities which they im-
ported or exported are thereby exempted from
every imposition; the property of entire suburbs
in some of the maritime towns, and of large streets
in others, is vested in them; and all questions,
arising among persons fettled within their pre-
cints, or who traded under their protection, are
appointed to be tried by their own laws, and by
judges of their own appointment . When the
Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed one
of their own leaders on the Imperial throne, the
Italian States were likewise gainers by that event.
The Venetians, who had planned the enterprize,
and took a considerable part in carrying it into
execution, did not negle&t to secure to themselves
the chief advantages redounding from its success.
They made themselves masters of part of the an-
cient Peloponnefus in Greece, together with fom,
of the most fertile iands in the Archipelago.
Many valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were tranf-
ferred to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a fuccef-
sion of events, occasioned by the HolyWar, opened
various sources, from which wealth flowed in such
abundance into these cities P, as enabled them, in

u Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii avi, vol. ii. 906, &c.
P Villehardouin Hill. de Conflant. fouas 'Empereurs Fran-
Fois, 105, &c.

ID concur-

SICT. I. concurrence with another institution, which lhaln

--*' be immediately mentioned, to secure their own

liberty and independence.

,!he fla II. THE institution to which I alluded was the
biTmm''n forming of cities into communities, corporations,
nities ,a- or bodies politic, and granting them the privi-
government lege of municipal jurifdiation, which contribut-
and order.

ed more, perhaps, than any other cause, to in-
troduce regular government, police, and arts,
and to diffuse them over Europe. The feudal
government had degenerated into a system of
oppreflion. The usurpations of the nobles were
become unbounded and intolerable: they had
reduced the great body of the people into a
slate of actual servitude: the condition of those
dignified with the name of freemen, was often
little preferable to that of the other. Nor was
such oppression the portion of those alone who
dwelt in the country, and were employed in

Theancient cultivating the estate of their master. Cities and
Oate of
cities. yillages found it necessary to hold of ome great

lord, on whom they might depend for protec-
tion, and became no less subjet to his arbi-
trary jurifdi6tion. The inhabitants were depriv-
ed of those rights, which, in social life, are
deemed most natural and inalienable. They
could not dispose of the effetes which their
own industry had acquired, either by a latter
will, or by any deed executed during their
life . They had no right to appoint guar-

q Dacherii Spiceleg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Or-
donances des Rois de France, tom. iii. 204. No. 2. 6.

dians

dians for their children during their minority. SECT. I.
They were not permitted to marry without pur-
chafing the content of the lord on whom they de-
pended'. If once they had commenced a law-suit,
they durst not terminate it by an accommodation,
because that would have deprived the lord, in
whose court they pleaded, of the perquisites due
to him on pafling sentence . Services of various
kinds, no less disgraceful than oppressive, were
exated from them without mercy or moderation.
The spirit of industry was checked in some cities
by absurd regulations, and in others by unrea-
Ibnable exations; nor would the narrow and op-
preffive maxims of a military aristocracy have
permitted it ever to rife to any degree of height
or vigour '

BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn Thtfrae-

dom of ci-

their attention towards commerce, and to conceive ties fir
tome idea of the advantages which they might de- intalyd
rive from it, they became impatient to hake off
the yoke of their insolent lords, and to establish
among themselves such a free and equal govern-
ment, as would render property secure, and indus-

Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. . 22. tom. iii.

203. No. . Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. o2. Dacher.
Spicel. vol. xi. 325. 341.

· Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182.

' M. 'Abbi Mably obfervat. fur l'hif. e France, tom. ii.
p. 2.96.

D 3 try

SECT. I. try flourishing. The German emperors, especially
- J those of the Franconian and Suabian lines, as the

feat of their government was far distant from
Italy, possessed a feeble and imperfe& jurifdition
in that country. Their perpetual quarrels, either
with the popes or with their own turbulent vassals,
diverted their attention from the interior police of
Italy, and gave constant employment to their arms.
These circumstances encouraged the inhabitants of
tome of the Italian cities, towards the beginning
of the eleventh century, to assume new privileges,
to unite together more closely, and to form them-
selves into bodies politic under the government of
laws established by common content ". The rights,
which many cities acquired by bold or fortunate
usurpations, others purchased from the emperors,
who deemed themselves gainers when they receiv-
ed large fums for immunities which they were no
longer able to withhold; and ome cities obtained
them gratuitously, from the generosity or facility of
the princes on whom they depended. The great
increase of wealth which the Crusades brought into
Italy, occasioned a new kind of fermentation and
aativity in the minds of the people, and excited
such a general passion for liberty and indepen-
dence, that, before the conclusion of the last
Crusade, all the considerable cities in that coun-
try had either purchaled or had extorted large
immunities from the Emperors [P].

· Murat. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.
[Pj NOT ' VE XV.

THIS

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy Sscr. I.

before it made its way into France. Louis le ' -
Gros, in order to create some power that might duced nto
counterbalance those potent vassals who controul- intoother
ed, or gave law to the crown, first adopted the plan Eurnp:
of conferring new privileges on the towns situated A. D zCs
within his own domaine. These privileges were
called charters of community, by which he en-
franchised the inhabitants, abolished all marks of
servitude, and formed them into corporations or
bodies politic, to be governed by a council and
magistrates of their own nomination. These ma-
giftrates had the right of adminifteringjuftice with-
in their own precincts, of levying taxes, of embody-
ing and training to arms the militia of the town,
which took the field when required by the fove-
reign, under the command of officers appointed by
the community. The great barons imitated the
example of their monarch, and granted like im-
munities to the towns within their territories. They
had wared such great fums in their expeditions to
the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold
on this new expedient for raising money, by the
sale of those charters of liberty. Though the in-
fitution of communities was as repugnant to their
maxims ,of policy, as it was adverse to their power,
they difiegarded remote consequences, in order to
obtain present relief. In les than two centuries,
servitude was abolished in most of the towns in
France, and they became free corporations, instead
of dependant villages, without jurifdiaion or pri-

D 4 vileges.

SiCT. . vileges [Q_]. Much about the fame period, the

-great cities in Germany began to acquire like im-

munities, and laid the foundation of their present
liberty and independence [R].The pracice spread
quickly over Europe, and was adopted in Spain,
England, Scotland, and all the other feudal king-
doms [S].

Its happy THE good effe&s of this new institution were
effeas upon
the condi- immediately felt, and its inluence on government
tion of the
inbabitants as well as manners was no less extensive than fa-

lutary. A great body of the people was released
from servitude, and from all the arbitrary and grie-
vous impositions to which that wretched condition
had fubjefted them. Towns, upon acquiring the
right of community, became so many little re-
publics, governed by known and equal laws.
Liberty was deemed such an essential and charac-
teriftic part in their constitution, that if any slave
took refuge in one of them, and resided there du-
ring a year without being claimed, he was initant-
ly declared a freeman, and admitted as a member
of the community w.

upon othe As one part of the people owed their liberty to
nobilityi the erection of communities, another was indebted

to them for their security. Such had been the
slate of Europe during several centuries, that self-

[Q_] NOTE X.VI. [R] NOTE XVII.
[S] NO TE XVIIT.
w Statut. Humberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182.
185. Charta Comit. Forenf. ibid. 193.

preservation

preservation obliged every man to court the pa- SECT. I.
tronage of some powerful baron, and in times of - . -
danger his castle was the place to which all re-
forted for safety. But towns surrounded with
walls, whose inhabitants were regularly trained to
arms, and bound by interest, as well as by the
most solemn engagements, reciprocally to defend
each other, afforded a more commodious and
secure retreat. The nobles began to be confi-
dered as of less importance when they ceased to be
the sole guardians to whom the people could look
up for protection against violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution of their upon the

power o£

credit and power by the privileges granted to the the crown
cities, the crown acquired an increase of both. As
there were no regular troops kept on foot in any
of the feudal kingdoms, the monarch could bring
no army into the field, but what was composed of
soldiers furnished by the crown vassals, always jea-
lous of the regal authority; nor had he any funds
for carrying on the public service but such as they
granted him with a very sparing hand. But when
the members of communities were permitted to
bear arms, and were trained to the use of them,
this in some degree supplied the first defet, and
gave the crown the command of a body of men,
independent of its great vassals. The attachment
of the cities to their sovereigns, whom they re-
spected as the first authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court as the protectors

of

SEcr. I. of their immunities against the domineering spirit

-Y -~ of the nobles, contributed somewhat towards re-

moving the second evil, as, on many occasions,
it procured the crown supplies of money, which
added new force to government .

mpon the THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy
ncre ' of
indunry. change in the condition of all the members of

communities, as roused them from that inaction
into which they had been funk by the wretch-
ednefs of their former state. The spirit of in-
duftry revived. Commerce became an object of
attention, and began to flourish. Population in-
creased. Independence was eftabliihed; and wealth
flowed into cities which had long been the feat of
poverty and oppression. Wealth was accompanied
by its usual attendants, ostentation and luxury;
and though the former was formal and cumber-
some, and the latter inelegant, they led gradually
to greater refinement in manners, and in the habits
of life. Together with this improvement in man-
ners, a more regular species of government and
police was introduced. As cities grew to be more
populous, and the occasions of intercourse among
men increased, statutes and regulations multiplied
of course, and all became sensible that their com-
mon safety depended on observing them with ex-
aatnefs, and on punishing such as violated them,
with promptitude and rigour. Laws and fubordi.

X Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. 6o2. 785; tom. ii
318. 422.

nation,

nation, as well as polished manners, taking their SECT. I.
rife in cities, diffused themselves insensibly through --
the reft of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities, having obtained ;hteinha-

bitants of
personal freedom and municipal jurifdiaion, soon citiesac-

,* quire poli-

acquired civil liberty and political power. It was tical power,
a fundamental principle in the feudal system of hcmobnr
policy, that no freeman could be subjected to new flitutio.
laws or taxes unless by his own content. In con-
sequence of this, the vassals of every baron were
called to his court, in which they established, by
mutual content, such regulations as they deemed
most beneficial to their small society, and granted
their superior such supplies of money, as were
proportioned to their abilities, or to his wants.
The barons themselves, conformably to the fame
maxim, were admitted into the supreme aembly
of the nation, and concurred with the overeign
in enacting laws, or in imposing taxes. As the
superior lord, according to the original plan of
feudal policy, retained the direEt property of those
lands which he granted, in temporary possession,
to his vassals; the law, even after fiefs became
hereditary, flill supposed this original praftice to
subsist. The great council of each nation, whe-
ther distinguished by the name of a parliament,
a diet, the Cortes, or' the States-general, was
composed entirely of such barons, and dignified
ecclesiastics, as held immediately of the crown.
Towns, whether situated within the royal domaine

or

SECT. I. or on the lands of a fubjeEt, depended originally
. ·
---- for proteEion on the lord of whom they held.

They had no legal name, no political existence,
which could entitle them to be admitted into
the legislative assembly, or could give them any
authority there. But as soon as they were enfran-
chifed, and formed into bodies corporate, they
became legal and independent members of the
conflitution, and acquired all the rights essential
to freemen. Amongst these, the moil valuable
was, the privilege of a decisive voice in enacting
public laws, and granting national subsidies. It
was natural for cities, accustomed to a form of
municipal government, according to which no
regulation could be eftablithed within the com-
munity, and no money could be railed but by
their own consent, to claim this privilege. The
wealth, the power, and consideration, which they
acquired on recovering their liberty, added weight
to their claim; and favourable events happened,
or fortunate conjunctures occurred, in the different
kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated their ob-
taining poffeflion of this important right. In
England, one of the first countries in which the
representatives of boroughs were admitted into
the great council of the nation, the barons who
A.D.1265. took arms against Henry III. summoned them

to attend parliament, in order to add greater po-
pularity to their party, and to strengthen the bar-
rier against the encroachment of regal power. In
France, Philip the Fair, a monarch no les saga-

cious

cious than enterprizing, confidered them as inftru- SECT. .
ments which might be employed with equal ad- -v--'
vantage to extend the royal prerogative, to coun.
terbalance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and
to facilitate the imposition of new taxes. With
there views, he introduced the deputies of such
towns as were formed into communities, into the
States-general of the nation Y. In the empire, the
wealth and immunities of the imperial cities
placed them on a level with the most considerable
members of the Germanic body. Conscious of
their own power and dignity, they pretended to
the privilege of forming a separate bench in the A. D. g93.
diet and made good their pretension z.

BUT in what way soever the representatives of The happy

effedh of

cities first gained a place in the legislature, that this pon
event had great influence on the form and genius of g.e.a-
government. It tempered the rigour ofariftocra-
tical oppression with a proper mixture of popular
liberty: It secured to the great body of the peo-
ple, who had formerly no representatives, ative
and powerful guardians of their rights and privi-
leges: It established an intermediate power between
the king and the nobles, to which each had recourse
alternately, and which at ome times opposed the
usurpations of the former, on other occasions
checked the encroachments of the latter. As. foorn

· Pafquier Rccherches de la France, p. 8 . edit. Par.i633.
L Pfefel AbRege de I'hifloirc & droit d'Allemagne, p. 408.
451.

as

SECT. I. as the representatives of communities gained any
'~-' degree of credit and influence in the legislature

the spirit of laws became different from what i
had formerly been; it flowed from new princi-
ples; it was directed towards new objects equa-
iity. order, the public good, and the redress o
grievances, were phrases and ideas brought int(
use, and which grew to be familiar in the ftatutei
and jurisprudence of the European nations. Al-
most all the efforts in favour of liberty in every
country of Europe, have been made by this new
power in the legislature. In proportion as it roil
to consideration and influence, the severity of the
ariffocratical spirit decreased; and the privileges
of the people became gradually more extensive,
as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdition of the
nobles was abridged [T].

The people IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been de-
acquire li- rt
bey by clared free by the charters of communities, that
hifemcnt. part of the people which resided in the country,

and was employed in agriculture, began to recover
liberty by enfranchifernent. During the rigour of
feudal government, as hath been already observed,
the great body of the lower people was reduced
to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the foil
which they cultivated, and together with it were
transferred fiom one proprietor to another, by sale,
or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy did
not favour the enfranchisement of that order of
men. It was an established maxim, that no vaflal

[T] NOTE XIX.

could

could legally diminish the value of a fief, to the Secr. I.
detriment of the lord from whom he had received '-
it. In consequence of this, manumiiflon by the
authority of the immediate master was not valid;
and unless it was confirmed by the superior lord of
whom he held, slaves belonging to the fief did not
acquire a complete right to their liberty. Thus it
became necessary to ascend through all the grada-
tions of feudal holding to the King, the lord Para-
mount . A form of procedure so tedious and
troublesome, discouraged the practice of manu-
miflion. Domestic or personal slaves often ob-
tained liberty from the humanity or beneficence of
their masters, to whom they belonged in absolute
property. The condition of slaves fixed to the
foil, was much more unalterable.

BUT the freedom and independence which one Themo-

tives nd

part of the people had obtained by the institution progres of
of communities, inspired the other with the motd th'
ardent desire of acquiring the fame privileges;
and their superiors, sensible of the various ad-
vantages which they had derived from their
former concessions to their dependants, were
less unwilling to gratify them by the grant of
new immunities. The enfranchisement of slaves
became more frequent; and the Monarchs of
France, prompted by necessity no le's than by A.D.1,5.
their inclination to reduce the power of the nobles, and 318.
endeavoured to render it general. Louis X. and
Philip the Long, issued ordinances, declaring,

a Etablilemens de St. Louis, liv, ii, ch. 3.. Ordon. toni. i.
283, not. (a).

" That

SECT. I. ' That as all men were by nature free-born, and

as their kingdom was called the kingdom of
Franks, they determined that it hould be so in
reality as well as in name; therefore they ap-
pointed that enfranchisements should be granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and
reasonable conditions b." These edits were car-
ried into immediate execution within the royal
domaine. The example of their sovereigns, to-
gether with the expetation of considerable ums
which they might raise by this expedient, led many
of the nobles to set their dependants at liberty;
and servitude was gradually abolished in almost
every province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy,
the establishment of republican government in
their great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were extremely different from those of the feudal
policy, together with the ideas of equality, which
the progress of commerce had rendered familiar,
gradually introduced the practice of enfranchi-
sing the ancient predial slaves. In ome provinces
of Germany, the persons who had been fubje&
to this species of bondage, were released; in
others, the rigour of their state was mitigated.
In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal
servitude, without any formal interposition of
the legislature to prohibit it, was totally ba-
nilhed.

b Ordon. tom. i. p. 583. 653.
[U] NOTE XX.

2 THIE

THE effeEts of such a remarkable change in the SECT. I.

condition of so great a part of the people, could 'I
not fail of being considerable and extensive. The of this upon

the im-

huSbandman, matler of his own induitry, and fe- provement
cure of reaping for himfelfthe fruits of his labour, offoeiety
became the farmer of the fame fields where he had
formerly been compelled to toil for the benefit of
another. The odious names of mailer and of slave,
the most mortifying and depressing of all diftinc-
tions to human nature, were abolished. New pro-
fpes opened, and new incitements to ingenuity
and enterprize presented themselves to those who
were emancipated. The expetation of bettering
their fortune, as well as that of raising themfSlves
to a more honourable condition, concurred in call-
ing forth their ativity and genius; and a nume-
rous class of men, who formerly had no political
exiitence, and were employed merely as initruments
of labour, became useful citizens, and contributed
towards augmenting the force or riches of the so-
ciety which adopted them as members.

V. THE various expedients which were em- Theintro-

dusion of

ployed in order to introduce a more regular, amoe re-
equal, and vigorous administration ofjuftice, con- gntradin of
tributed greatly towards the improvement of so- juflicc, on.
ciety. What were the particular modes of dif- theim-
pening justice, in their several countries, among PS "i""
the various barbarous nations, which over-ran the
Roman Empire, and took poffeflion of its differ-
ent provinces, cannot now be determined with cer-
tainty. We may conclude, from the form of go-
vernment eflablifhed among them, as well as fiom

VOL. . E their

SECT. I. their ideas concerning the nature of society, that
`- the authority of the magistrate was extremely li-

mited, and the independence of individuals pro-
portionally great. History and records, as far as
these reach back, justify this conclusion, and re-
present the ideas and exercise of justice in all the
countries of Europe, as little different from those
which must take place in the most simple state of ci-
vil life. To maintain the order and tranquillity of
society by the regular execution of knowrrlaws; to
infli& vengeance on crimes deftrutive of the peace
and safety of individuals, by a prosecution carried
on in the name, and by the authority of the commu-
nity; to confider the punishment of criminals as a
public example to deter others from violating the
laws; were objects of government little understood
in theory, and less regarded in practice. The ma-
giftrate could hardly be said to hold the sword of
justice; it was left in the hands of private peffons.
Resentment was almost the sole motive for prose-
cuting crimes; and to gratify that paflion, was con-
fidered as the chief end in punishing them. He who
suffered the wrong, was the only person who had a
right to pursue the aggressor, and to exaEt or to
remit the puniflhment. From a system of judicial
procedure, so crude and defective, that it--fe-ms to
be scarcely compatible with the iubfiftence of civil
society, disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition
concurred with this ignorance concerning the na-
ttre of government, in obftruaing the adminiftra-
tion of justice, or in rendering it capricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for there evils, so

J . as

as to give a more regular course to justice, was, SECT. I.
during several centuries, one great obje&c of poli-
tical wisdom. The regulations for this purpose
may be reduced to three general heads: To ex-
plain these, and to point out the manner in which
they operated, is an important article in the history
of society among the nations of Europe.

i. THE first considerable ftep towards eftablilh- Thiseffea-

ed by abo-

ng an equal adminifiration ofjuftice, was the abo- lithing the
ifhment of the right which individuals claimed of privavter.
waging war with each other, in their own name,
Ind by their own authority. To repel injuries,
nd to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man,
han to cultivate friendship: and while society re- Original

ideas of men

ains in its most finple fiate, the former is con- concerning
idered as a personal right no less unalienable than juice.
he latter. Nor do men in this situation deem that
hey have a title to redress their own wrongs alone;
hey are touched with the injuries done to those
ith whom they are connected, or in whose honour
Ihey are interested, and are no less prompt to avenge
!hem. The savage, how imperfetly soever he
hay comprehend the principles of political union,
eels warmly the sentiments of social affection, and
he obligations arising from the ties of blood. On
he appearance of an injury or affront offered to
iis family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pur-
Lies the authors of it with the keenest resentment.
Ie confiders it as cowardly to expe rdrefs from
ny arm but his own, and as infamous to give up
another the right of determining what repara-

21 a tion

SECT. I. tion he hould accept, or with what vengeance he

- - ' Ihould reft satisfied.

These lead' THE maxims and praEtice of all uncivilized na.
tice o pri- tions, with refpe& to the prosecution and punish.
vate war. ment of offenders, particularly those of the ancient

Germans, and other Barbarians who invaded the
Roman Empire, are perfectly conformable to these
ideas . While they retained their native fimpli.
city of manners, and continued to be divided into
small tribes or societies, the defe&s in this imper.
sect system of criminal jurisprudence (if it merits
that name) were less sensibly felt. When they
came to fettle in the extensive provinces which
they had conquered, and to form themf elves into
great monarchies; when new obje&ts of ambition
presenting themselves, increased both the number
and the violence of their dissensions, they ought to
have adopted new maxims concerning the redress
dofinjuries, and to have regulated, by general and
equal laws, that which they formerly left to be di.
reated by the caprice of private passion. But fierce
and haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge
themselves on such as had injured them, did not
think of relinquilhing a right which they con.
fidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark
of their independence. Laws enforced by the au-
thority of princes and magifrates, who pofleffed
little power, commanded no great degree of reve-
rence. The administration of juflice among rude

c Tacit. de Mor. German, cap. 2r. Veil. Paterc. lib.ii
c. It8.

illiterate

illiterate people, was not so accurate, or decisive, SEcT. I,
or uniform, as to induce men to submit implicitly
to its determinations. Every offended baron
buckled on his armour, and fought redress at the
head of his vassals. His adversary met him in
like hostile array. Neither of them appealed to
impotent laws, which could afford them no pro-
teaion. Neither of them would submit points,
in which their honour and their passions were
warmly interested, to the flow determination of a
judicial enquiry. Both trusted to their swords for
the decision of the contest. The kindred and de-
pendants of the aggressor, as well as of the de-
fender, were involved in the quarrel. They had
not even the liberty of remaining neutral. Such
as refused to as in concert with the party to which
they belonged, were not only exposed to infamy,
but fubje&ed to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn The pern.

and affliced, during several centuries, by intestine of it.
wars, excited by private animofities, and carried
on with all the rage natural to men of fierce man-
ners, and of violent passions. The estate of every
baron was a kind of independent territory, dif-
joined from those around it, and the hostilities be-
tween them seldom ceased. The evil became so
inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and laws
of private war were ascertained, and regulations
concerning it made a part in the 1yftem ofjurif-
prudence ', in the fame manner as if this praaice

i Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beauvoifis, ch. 59, ct les notes
de Thaumaflicre, p. 4 E7.

E 3 had

SECT. I. had been founded in some natural right of huma-
s"-^- nity, or in the original conltitution of civil society,

vrious So great was the disorder, and such the calami-

methto4s employedin ties, which these perpetual hostilities occasioned,
order to abo-
et it.bo that various efforts were made to wrest from the

nobles this pernicious privilege. It was the in-
terest of every sovereign to abolish a pra&ice
which almost annihilated his authority. Char-
lenagne prohibited it by an express law, as an
invention of the devil to destroy the order and
happiness of society e; but the reign of one mo-
narch, however vigorous and ative, was too hort
to extirpate a custom so firmly etablifhed. In-
ltead of enforcing this prohibition, his feeble fuc-
ceifors durst venture on nothing more than to ap-
ply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any
person to commence war, until he had lent a for-
mal defiance to the kindred and dependants of his
adversary; they ordained that, after the commis-
sion of the trespass or crime which gave rife to a
private war, forty days must elapse before the per-
son injured should attack the vaIfals of his adver-
fary; they enjoined all persons to suspend their
private animofities, and to cease from hostilities,
when the king was engaged in any war against the
enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil mnagiftrate, and interposed its autho-
ricy in order to extirpate a practice so repugnant
to the fpiric of Christianity. Various councils if-
ilcd decrees, prohibiting all private wars; and

" Capitul. A. D. 801. Edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 371.

denounced

denounced the heaviest anathemas against such as SECT. I.
thould disturb the tranquillity of society, by claim-
ing or exercising that barbarous right. The aid
of religion was called in to combat and subdue the
ferocity of the times. The Almighty was aid to
have manifested, by visions and revelations to dif-
ferent persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of
revenge, which armed one part of his creatures
against the other. Men were required, in the name
of God, to heath their swords, and to remember
the sacred ties which united them as Christians, and
as members of the famefociety. But this junction
of civil and ecclesiastic authority, though strength-
ened by every thing most apt to alarm and to over-
awe the credulous spirit of those ages, produced
no other effect than some temporary suspensions of
hostilities, and a cessation from war on certain days
and seasons consecrated to the more solemn acts of
devotion. The nobles continued to assert this dan-
gerous privilege; they refused to obey some of the
laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonstrated;
they struggled for the right of private war, as the
highest and most honourable distinction of their
order. Even so late as the fourteenth century, we
find the nobles, in several provinces of France, con-
tending for their ancient method of terminating
their differences by the sword, in preference to that
of submitting them to the decision of any judge.
The final abolition of this practice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which it prevailed,
-is not to be ascribed so much to the force of fta-

E 4 tutCS

SECT. I. had been founded in forne natural right of huma-
'>-^- nity, or in the original constitution of civil society,

various So great was the disorder, and such the calami-
methe's employed in ties, which there perpetual hostilities occasioned,
order to abo-

dl'h it.a that various efforts were made to wrest from the

nobles this pernicious privilege. It was the in-
terest of every sovereign to abolish a praEice
which almost annihilated his authority. Char-
lemagne prohibited it by an express law, as an
invention of the devil to destroy the order and
happiness of society ; but the reign of one mo-
narch, however vigorous and ative, was too short
to extirpate a custom so firmly established. In-
Itead of enforcing this prohibition, his feeble fuc-
ceffors durst venture on nothing more than to ap-
ply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any
person to commence war, until he had sent a for-
mal defiance to the kindred and dependants of his
adversary; they ordained that, after the commis-
sion of the trespass or crime which gave rife to a
private war, forty days must elapse before the per-
son injured should attack the vassals of his adver-
fary; they enjoined all persons to suspend their
private animofities, and to cease from hostilities,
when the king was engaged in any war against the
enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil magistrate, and interposed its autho-
-ity in order to extirpate a practice so repugnant
to the fpiric of Christianity. Various councils if-
lucd decrees, prohibiting all private wars; and

' Capitul. A. D. 8ol. Edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 371.

denounced

denounced the heaviest anathemas against such as SECT. I.
should disturb the tranquillity of society, by claim-
ing or exercising that barbarous right. The aid
of religion was called in to combat and subdue the
ferocity of the times. The Almighty was said to
have manifested, by visions and revelations to dif-
ferent persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of
revenge, which armed one part of his creatures
against the other. Men were required, in the name
of God, to sheath their swords, and to remember
the sacred ties which united them as Christians, and
as members of the fame society. But this jundtion
of civil and ecclesiastic authority, though strength-
ened by every thing most apt to alarm and to over-
awe the credulous spirit of those ages, produced
no other effect than some temporary suspensions of
hostilities, and a cessation from war on certain days
and seasons consecrated to the more solemn ats of
devotion. The nobles continued to assert this dan-
gerous privilege; they refused to obey some of the
laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonstrated;
they struggled for the right of private war, as the
highest and most honourable diftinition of their
order. Even so late as the fourteenth century, we
find the nobles, in several provinces of France, con-
tending for their ancient method of terminating
their differences by the sword, in preference to that
of submitting them to the deciion of any judge.
The final abolition of this practice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which it prevailed,
is not to be ascribed so much to the force of fta-

E 4 tutes

SECT. I. tutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase of the

*' " - royal authority, and to the imperceptible progress

of juster sentiments concerning government, or-
der, and public security [X].

The prohi; 2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by ju-
bition of -
trial byju- dicial combat, was another considerable ftep to-
dicial corn- wards the introdution offuch regular government,
batl another c o
improve- as secured public order and private tranquillity.
ment in the
admin;flra- As the right of private war left many of the quar-
tic.ju- rels among individuals to be decided, like those

between nations, by arms the form of trial by
judicial combat, which was eftabliied in every
country of Europe, banished equity from courts of
justice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of
their determinations. In civilized nations, all tranf-
aaions of any importance are concluded in writing.

Defeat in The exhibition of the deed or inifrument is full
procedigs evidence of the faa, and ascertains with precision
of the mid-
dfe as' what each party has stipulated to perform. But

among a rude people, when the arts of reading and
writing were such uncommon attainments, that to
be master of either intitled a person to the appel-
lation of a clerk or learned man, scarcely any thing
was committed to writing but treaties between
princes, their grants and charters to their fubjets,
or such transactions between private parties as were
of extraordinary consequence, or had an extensive
effec. The greater part of affairs in common
life and business were carried on by verbal con-

[X] N 0 T E XXr.

trats

tradts or promises. This, in many civil questions, SeCT. L
not only made it difficult to bring proof sufficient to- L -
establish any claim, but encouraged falsehood and
fraud, by rendering them extremely easy. Even in
criminal cafes, where a particular fad muf be afcer-
tained, or an accusation muff be disproved, the na-
ture and effe& of legal evidence were little under-
stood by barbarous nations. To define with accura-
cy that species of evidence which a court had reason
to expect; to determine when it ought to insist on
positive proof, and when it should be satisfied with
a proof from circumstances; to compare the tefti-
mony of discordant witnesses, and to fix the de-
gree of credit due to each; were difcuflions too
intricate and subtile for the jurisprudence of igno-
rant ages. In order to avoid encumbering them-
selves with these, a more simple form of procedure
was introduced into courts as well civil as criminal.
In all cafes where the notoriety of the fat did
not furnish the clearest and most direCt evidence,
the person accused, or he against whom an adtion
was brought, was called legally, or offered volun-
tarily, to purge himself by oath; and upon his de-
claring his innocence, he was instantly acquitted .
This absurd practice effefually screened guilt and
fraud from detetion and punishment, by render-
ing the temptation to perjury so powerful, that it
was not easy to resist it. The pernicious effets
of it were sensibly felt; and in order to guard

f Leg. Burgund. tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Aleman. tit. 89.
Leg. Baiwar. tit. 8. § 5. z, &c.

against

SeCT. I. againit them, the laws ordained, that oaths hould

-v-- be administered with great solemnity, and accom.

panied with every circumstance which could in-
spire religious reverence, or fuperltitious terror g
This, however, proved a feeble remedy: these
ceremonious rites became familiar, and their im-
pression on the imagination gradually diminished;
men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at the folemnities of ar oath.
Their observation of this, put legislators upon de-
vising a new expedient for rendering the purgation
by oath more certain and fatisfacory. They re-
quired the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
who corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed all that he had uttered to be
true. These were called Compurgators, and their
number varied according to the importance of the
subjet in dispute, or the nature of the crime with
which a person was charged h. In some cafes, the
concurrence of no les than three hundred of these
auxiliary witnesses was requisite to acquit the per-
son accuifed1. But even this device was found to
be ineffe&tual. It was a point of honour with
every man in Europe, during several ages, not to
desert the chief on whom he depended, and to stand
by those with whom the ties of blood connected
him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate

I Du Cange Glofrar. voc. Juramentum, vol. iii. p. 1607.
Edit. Beneditt. h1 Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 599.

' Spelman Glof(ar. voc. 4 rbth. Gregor. Turon. Hilt.
lib viii. c. 9.

the

the laws, was sure of devoted adherents, willing to SECT. I.
abet, and eager to serve him in whatever manner- -
he required. The formality of calling compur-
gators proved an apparent, not a real security,
against falsehood and perjury; and the sentences
of courts, while they continued to refer every
point in question to the oath of the defendant, be-
came so flagrantly iniquitous, as excited universal
indignation against this method of procedure k.

SENSIBLE of these defects, but itrangers to the There in

troducedtho

manner of correcting them, or of introducing a praic of
more proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible hppv te
method of discovering truth, and of guarding
against deception, appealed to Heaven, and re-
ferred every point in dispute to be determined, as
they imagined, by the decisions of unerring wis-
dom and impartial juflice. The person accused,
in order to prove his innocence, submitted to
trial, in certain cafes, either by plunging his arm
in boiling water; or by lifting a red-hot iron
with his naked hand; or by walking bare-foot
over burning plough-shares; or by other expe-
riments equally perilous and formidable. On part;cuiarlr

by judicial

other occasions, he challenged his accuser to fight combat.
him in single combat. All these various forms
of trial were conducted with many devout cere-
monies; the ministers of religion were employed,
the Almighty was called upon to interpose for the
manifestation of guilt, and for the protection of
innocence; and whoever escaped unhurt, or came

k Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. 34.

off

SECT. I. against them, the laws ordained, that oaths should

"-v_- be administered with great solemnity, and accom-

panied with every circumstance which could in-
spire religious reverence, or fiuperftitious terror .
This, however, proved a feeble remedy: there
ceremonious rites became familiar, and their im-
preflion on the imagination gradually diminished;
men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at the folemnities of arn oath.
Their observation of this, put legislators upon de-
vising a new expedient for rendering the purgation
by oath more certain and fatisfatory. They re-
quired the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
who corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed all that he had uttered to be
true. These were called Compurgators, and their
number varied according to the importance of the
subjea in dispute, or the nature of the crime with
which a person was charged h. In some cafes, the
concurrence of no less than three hundred of these
auxiliary witnesses was requisite to acquit the per-
son accufied But even this device was found to
be ineffectual. It was a point of honour with
every man in Europe, during several ages, not to
desert the chief on whom he depended, and to stand
by thole with whom the ties of blood connected
him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate

z Du Cange GlofTar. voc. uramenlum, vol. iii. p. 1607.
Edit. Benediet. la Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1599.

1 Spelman Gloflar. voc. ath. Gregor. Turon. Hilt.
li viii. c. ,.

the

the laws, was sure of devoted adherents, willing to SECT. I.
abet, and eager to serve him in whatever manner '-"e
he required. The formality of calling compur-
gators proved an apparent, not a real fecuriky,
against falsehood and perjury; and the sentences
of courts, while they continued to refer every
point in question to the oath of the defendant, be-
came so flagrantly iniquitous, as excited universal
indignation against this method of procedure k,

SENSIBLE of these defe&s, but strangers to the Thefre n-

troduced th

manner of correc&ing them, or of introducing a praficeof
more proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible hPan:' to
method of discovering truth, and of guarding
against deception, appealed to Heaven, and re-
ferred every point in dispute to be determined, as
they imagined, by the decisions of unerring wis-
dom and impartial justice. The person accused,
in order to prove his innocence, submitted to
trial, in certain cafes, either by plunging his arm
in boiling water; or by lifting a red-hot iron
with his naked hand; or by walking bare-foot
over burning plough-shares; or by other expe-
riments equally perilous and formidable. On particu'arly
other occasions, he challenged his accuser to fight combat.
him in single combat. All these various forms
of trial were conducted with many devout cere-
monies; the mirrifters of religion were employed,
the Almighty was called upon to interpose for the
manifestation of guilt, and for the protection of
innocence; and whoever escaped unhurt, or came

k Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 34.

off

SECT. . offviaorious, was pronounced to be acquitted by

~' - the Judgment of God'.

The intro- AMONG all the whimsical and absurd institutions
duaion of
thi praetice which owe their existence to the weakness of hu-
thfYpr^iP . man reason, this, which submitted questions that
tion of he asseted the property, the reputation, and the lives

of men, to the deternyination of chance, or of
bodily lfrength and address, appears to be the mofl
extravagant and preposterous. There were cir-
cumftances, however, which led the nations of Eu-
rope to confider this equivocal mode of deciding
any point in contest, as a dire& appeal to Heaven,
and a certain method of discovering its will. As
men are unable to comprehend the manner in which
the Almighty carries on the government of the uni-
verse, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they are
apt to imagine, that in every cafe which their pas-
sions or interest render important in their own eyes,
the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to display
his power in vindicating innocence and punishing
guilt. It requires no inconsiderable degree of fci-
ence and philosophy to correct this popular error.
But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the
dark ages, instead of correting, strengthened it.
Religion, for several centuries, consisted chiefly in
believing the legendary history of those faints
whose names crowd and disgrace the Romish ca-
lendar. The fabulous tales concerning their mi-
racles, hd been declared authentic by the bulls of

* Murat. diflrtatio de judiciis Dei. Antiquit.Ital. vol. iii.
p. 6rz.

popes,

popes, and the decrees of councils; they made SECT. .
the great subjec of the inftruaions which the ---
clergy offered to the people, and were received
by them with implicit credulity and admiration.
By attending to these, men were accustomed to
believe that the established laws of nature might
be violated on the most frivolous occasions, and
were taught to look rathlr for particular and ex-
traordinary as of power under the divine d-
ministration, than to contemplate the regular
progress and execution of a general plan. One
superstition prepared the way for anbther; and
whoever believed that the Supreme Being had
interposed miraculously on those trivial occasions
mentioned in legends, could not but expe& his
intervention in matters of greater importance,
when solemnly referred to his decision.

WITH this fuperfitious opinion, the martial and lik-

spirit of Europe, duringthe middle ages, concurred heir mar-
in eftabliffiing the mode of trial by judicial corn- ti1l fitt.
bat. To be ready to maintain with his sword
whatever his lips had uttered, was the first maxim
of honour with every gentleman. To assert their
own rights by force of arms, to inflict vengeance
on those who had injured or affionted them, were
the diftintion and pride of high-fpirited nobles.
The form of trial by combat coinciding with this
maxim, flattered and gratified there passions. Every
man was the guardian of his own honour, and of
his own life; the justice of his cause, as well as his
future reputation, depended on his own courage
and prowess. This mode of decision was con-

fidered,

SECT. I. fidered, accordingly, as one of the happiefs efforts
-v--' of wife policy; and as soon as it was introduced,

all the forms of trial by fire or water, and other
superstitious experiments, fell into disuse, or were
employed only in controversies between persons of
inferior rank. As it was the privilege of a gentle-
man to claim the trial by combat, it was quickly
authorized over all Europe, and received in
every country with equal fatisfaaion. Not only
questions concerning uncertain or contested facts,
but general and- abftraft points in law, were de-
termined by the issue of a combat; and the latter
was deemed a method of discovering truth more
liberal, as well as more fatisfaEtory, than that by
investigation and argument. Not only might
parties, whose minds were exasperated by the
eagerness and the hostility of opposition, defy
their antagonist, and require him to make good
his charge, or to prove his innocence, with his
sword; but witnefles, who had no interest in the
iffie of the question, though called to declare the
truth by laws which ought to have afforded them
protection, were equally exposed to the danger
of a challenge, and equally bound to aert the
veracity of their evidence by dint of arms. To
complete the absurdities of this military jurif.
prudence, even the chara'er of a judge was not
tacred from its violence. Any one of the parties
might interrupt a judge when about to deliver his
opinion; might accuse him of iniquity and cor-
ruption in the most reproachful terms, and throw-
ing down his gauntlet, might challenge him to

defend

defend his integrity in the field; nor could he, SECT. !.
without infamy, refuse to accept the defiance, or -- -
decline to enter the lilts against such an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other Itbecomes

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to all uaiver&.
persons, and almost to all cafes. Ecclesiastics, wo-
men, minors, superannuated and infirm persons,
who could not with decency or justice be com-
pelled to take arms, or to maintain their own
cause, were obliged to produce champions, who
offered from affedion, or were engaged by re-
wards, to fight their battles. The folemnities of
a judicial combat were such as were natural in an
a&ion, which was confidered both as a formal ap
peal to God, and as the final decision of questions
of the highest moment. Every circumstance re-
lating to them was regulated by the edicts of
princes, and explained in the comments of law-
yers, with a minute and even superstitious accu-
racy. Skill in these laws and rights was frequently
the only science of which warlike nobles boasted,
or which they were ambitious to attain ".

By this barbarous custom, the natural course of The per.

nirious es-

proceeding, both in civil and criminal questions, fas of it.
was entirely perverted, Force usurped the place of
equity in courts of judicature, and justice was
banished from her proper mansion. Difcerrnment
learning, integrity, were qualities less necelfary to

"' See a curious difcourfc concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of Woodflock, duke of Glouceller,
uncle to Richard II. in Spelnan's Glofar. voc. Campus.

a judge,

SECT. r. a judge, than bodily strength and dexterity in the
IL use of arms, Daring courage, and superior vigour

or address, were of more moment towards ecuring
the favourable issue of a it, than the equity ol
a cause, or the clearnes of the evidence. Men,
of course, applied themselves to cultivate the ta-
lents which they found to be of greatest utility.
As strength of body and address in arms were no
Iefs requisite in those lifts which they were obliged
to enter in defence of their private rights, than in
the field of battle, where they met the enemies of
their country, it became the great object of edu-
cation, as well as the chief employment of life, to
acquire thee martial accomplishments. The ad.
ministration ofjuftice, inflead ofaccuftoming men
to liften to the voice of equity, or to reverence
the decisions of law, added to the ferocity of their
manners, and taught them to confider force as the
great arbiter of right and wrong.

Variont e. THESE pernicious effeds of the trial by combat
pedient! for
abo.ieting' were so obvious, that they did not altogether escape
thi. pra- the view of the unobierving age in which it was

introduced. The clergy, from the beginning, re-
monftrated against it as repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity, and subversive ofjuftice and orders.
But the maxims and pafflons which favoured it, had
taken such hold of the minds of men, that they
disregarded admonitions and censures, which, on
other occasions, would have struck them with
terror. The evil was too great and inveterate to
yield to that remedy, and continuing to increase,

" D Cange Gtoffar. voc. Dullum, vol. ii. p. 1675.

the

the civil power at length found it necessary to in- SECT. I.
terpofe. Conscious, however, of their own limited
authority, monarchs proceeded with caution, and
their first attempts to restrain, or to set any bounds
to this pra&tice, were extremely feeble. One of the
earliest restrictions of this practice which occurs in
the history of Europe, is that of Henry I. of Eng-
land. It extended no farther than to prohibit
the trial by combat in questions concerning pro-
perty of finall value . Louis VII. of France imi-
tated his example, and issued an edict to the fame
effect P. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legislator were
far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to in-
troduce a more perfect jurisprudence, and to sub-
flitute the trial by evidence, in place of that by
combat. But his regulations, with refpe6t to this,
were confined to his own domains; for the great
vassals of the crown possessed such independent
authority, and were so fondly attached to the an-
cient practice, that he had not power to venture to
extend it to the whole kingdom. Some barons vo-
luntarily adopted his regulations. The spirit of
courts ofjuftice became averse to the mode ofde-
cifion by combat, and discouraged it oh every
occasion. The nobles, nevertheless, thought it
so honourable to depend for the security of their
lives and fortunes on their own courage alone,
and contended with so much vehemence for the
preservation of this favourite privilege of their
order, that the successors of St. Louis, unable to

o Bruflel Usage des Fiefs, vol. ii. p. 962.
' Ordon. tom. i p. 16.
VoL.'I. F oppose,

SECT. I. oppose, and afraid of offending such powerful

fubje&ts, were obliged not only to tolerate, but to
authorize the practice which he had attempted to
abolifl q. In other countries of Europe, efforts
equally zealous were employed to maintain the
established cuffom; and similar concessions were
extorted from their refpeative sovereigns. It con-
tinued, however, to be an object of policy with
every monarch of abilities or vigour, to explode
the trial by combat; and various edicts were
issued for this purpose. But the observation
which was made concerning the right of private
war, is equally applicable to the mode of trial
under review. No custom, how absurd soever it
may be, if it has subsisted long, or derives its
force from the manners and prejudices of the age
in which it prevails, was ever abolished by the bare
promulgation of laws and statutes. The senti-
ments of the people must change, or some new
power, sufficient to counterat the prevalent cuf-
tom, mufft be introduced. Such a change accord-
ingly took'place in Europe, as science gradually
increased, and society advanced towards more
perfec& order. In proportion as the prerogative
of princes extended, and came to acquire new
force, a power, interested in suppressing every
practice favourable to the independence of the
nobles, was introduced. The struggle, neverthe-
less, subsisted for several centuries; fonmetimes the
new regulations and ideas seemed to gain ground;
sometimes ancient habits recurred: and though,

i Ordon. to. .

t p.
i $. 390. 435.

I upon

upon the whole, the trial by combat went more SECT. I.
and more into disuse, yet instances of it occur, as
late as the fifteenth century, in the history both
of France and of England. In proportion as it
declined, the regular administration ofjuftice was
refored, the proceedings of courts were directed
by known laws, the study of there became an ob-
e& of attention to judges, and the people of
Europe advanced fast towards civility, when this
great cause of the ferocity of their manners was
removed [Y].

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from the The privi-

lege of ap-

courts of the barons to those of the king, and pelingfrom
ubjecting the decisions of the formet to the review the coubt,
f the latter, a new fep, not less considerable rn"',an"0
than those which I have already mentioned, was improve-

ment in the

aken towards eltablifhing the regular, confifdent, adinitrar-
nd vigorous administration of justice. Among uiice."'"
1a the encroachments of the feudal nobles on
he prerogative of their monarchs, their usurping
he administration of justice with supreme autho-
ity, both in civil and criminal causes, within the
precints of their own estates, was the most fin-
ular. In other nations, fubjedts have contended
ith their sovereigns, and have endeavoured to
xtend their own power and privileges; but in
he history of their itruggles and pretensions, we
ifcover nothing similar to this right which the
feudal barons claimed, and obtained. It muff Origi of
have been omething peculiar in their genius and 'and ind^-e
manners that suggested this idea, and prompted ,P`dc,:, o`f

the Ie biity.
[Y] NOT E XXII. thbi

F thelp

SECT. I. them to insist on such a claim. Among the rude

' ipeople who conquered the various provinces ol

the Roman Empire, and established new king.
doms there, the passion of resentment, too impe-
tuous to bear controul, was permitted to remain
almost unrestrained by the authority of laws.
The person offended, as has been observed, re.
tained not only the right of prosecuting, but of
punishing his adversary. To him it belonged to
infli such vengeance as satiated his rage, or to
accept of such fatisfation as appeared it. But
while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole
judges in their own cause, their enmities were im-
placable and immortal; they set no bounds either
to the degree of their vengeance, or to the dura-
tion of their resentment. The excesses which this
occasioned, proved so destructive of peace and or-
der in society, as to render it necefary to devie
some remedy. At first, recourse was had to arbi-
trators, who by persuasion or intreaty prevailed on
the party offended to accept of a fine or comppfi.
tion from the aggressor, and to drop all farther
prosecution. But as fuibmiion to persons who had
no legal or magisterial authority was altogether
voluntary, it became necessary to establish judges,
with power sufficient to enforce their own deci-
sions. The leader whom they were accustomed
to follow and to obey, whoe courage they refped-
ed, and in whose integrity they placed confidence,
was the person to whom a martial people na-
turally committed this important prerogative.
Every chieftain was the commander of his tribe

in

in war, and their judge in peace. Every baron SECT. I.
led his vassals to the field, and administered jus- '<
tice to them in his hall. The high-fpirited de-
pendants would not have recognized any other
authority, or have ubmitted to any other jurif-
dition. But in times of turbulence and violence,
the exercise of this new funion was attended not
only with trouble, but with danger. No person
could assume the character of a judge, if he did not
possess power sufficient to protet the one party
from the violence of private revenge, and to com-
pel the other to accept of such reparation as he
enjoined. In consideration of the extraordinary
efforts which this office required, judges, betides
the fine which they appointed to be paid as a
compensation to the person or family who had
been injured, levied an additional fum as a recom-
pence for their own labour; and in all the feudal
kingdoms the latter was not only as precisely as-
certained, but as regularly exacted, as the former.

THrus, by the natural operation of circum- The extent

fiances peculiar to the manners or political state seas oftis
of, the feudal nations, separate and territorial ju- privilege.
rifdiEions came not only to be established in
every kingdom, but were established in such a
way, that the interest of the barons concurred
with their ambition in maintaining and extending
them. It was not merely a point of honour with
the feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vas-
fals; but from the exercise of that power arose
one capital branch of their revenue; and the

F 3 emo-

SECT. . emoluments of their courts were frequently the

C ~L13 r main support of their dignity. It was with in.

finite zeal that they aferted and defended this
high privilege of their order. By this institution,
however, every kingdom in Europe was split into
as many separate principalities as it contained
powerful barons. Their vassals, whether in peace
or in war, were hardly sensible of any authority,
but that of their immediate superior lord. They
felt themselves subjea to no other command.
They were amenable to no other jurifdi6tion.
The ties which linked together these smaller con-
federacies became close and firm; the bonds of
public union relaxed, or-were dissolved. The
nobles strained their invention in devising regu-
lations which tended to ascertain and perpetuate
this diftintion. In order to guard against any
appearance of subordination in their courts to
those of the crown, they frequently constrained
their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from
entering their territories, or from claiming any
jurifdi&ion there; and if, either through mistake,
or from the spirit of encroachment, any royal judge
ventured to extend his authority to the vassals of
a baron, they might plead their right of exemp-
tion, and the lord of whom they held could not
only rescue them out of his hands, but was inti-
tied to legal reparation for the injury and affront
offered to him. The jurisdiction of the royal
judges scarcely reached beyond the narrow limits
of the king's denehes. Inflead of a regular gra-
dation of courts, all acknowledging the authority

of

of the fame general laws, and looking up to these SECT. I.
as the guides of their decisions, there were in -
every feudal kingdom a number of independent
tribunals, the proceedings of which were direced
by local customs and contraditory forms. The
collision of jurifdition among these different
courts often retarded the execution of justice:
The variety and caprice of their modes of pro-
cedure must have for ever kept the adminiftra-
tion of it from attaining any degree of uniformity
or perfection.

ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived there Expedients

mployed in
encroachments on their jurifdiA ion, and bore ordertoli-

mit or abo-

them with impatience. But the usurpations of the ib it.
nobles were so firmly established, and the danger
of endeavouring to overturn them by open force
was so manifest, that kings were obliged to remain
satisfied with attempts to undermine them. Vari-
ous expedients were employed for this purpose;
each of which merit attention, as they mark the
progress of law and equity in the several king-
doms of Europe. At first, princes endeavoured
to circumscribe the jurisdiCtion of the barons, by
contending that they ought to take cognizance
only of smaller offences, reserving those of greater
moment, under the appellation of Pleas of the
Crown, and Royal Caiifes, to be tried in the king's
courts. This, however, affeAed only the barons
of inferior note; the more powerful nobles scorned
such a diftinetion, and not only claimed unlimited
jurifdiion, but obliged their sovereigns to grant
them charters, conveying or recognizing this pri-

F 4 vilege

SECT. I. vilege in the most ample form. The attempt, ne-
s-- verthelefs, was productive of some good confe-

quences, and paved the way for more. It turned
the attention of men towards a jurisdiction diflinfE
from that of the baron whose vassals they were;
it accustomed them to the pretensions of fupe-
riority which the. crown claimed over territorial
judges; and taught them, when oppressed by
their own superior lord, to look up to their so-
vereign as their protector. This facilitated the
introduction of appeals, by which princes brought
the decisions of the barons' courts under the re-
view of the royal judges. While trial by combat
fubrifted in full vigour, no point decided accord-
ing to that mode, could be brought under the re-
view of another court. It had been referred to
the judgment of God; the issue of battle had de-
clared his will; and it would have been impious
to have called in question the equity of the divine
decision. But as oon as that barbarous custom
began to fall into disuse, princes encouraged the
vassals of the barons to ue for redress, by appeal-
ing to the royal courts. The progresS of this
pra6tice, however, was flow and gradual. TIhe
first instances of appeals were on account of the
delay or the reftJal ofjuzjice in the barons' court;
and as these were countenanced by the ideas,of
subordination in the feudal constitution, the no-
bles allowed them to be introduced without much
oppoftiion. But when there were followed by
appeals on account of the ijuflice or iniquity of the
Jenfence, the nobles then began to be fcnfible,

that

that if this innovation became general, the shadow SECT. I.
of power alone would remain in their hands, and --
all real authority and jurifdiótion would centre in
those courts which pofefied the right of review.
They instantly took the alarm, remonferated
against the encroachment, and contended boldly
for their ancient privileges. But the monarchs
in the different kingdoms of Europe pursued their
plan with steadiness and prudence. Though forced
to suspend their operations on ome occasions,
and seemingly to yield when any formidable con-
federacy of their vassals united against them, they
resumed their measures as soon as they observed
the nobles to be remiss or feeble, and pushed them
with vigour. They appointed the royal courts,
which originally were ambulatory, and irregular
with refpet to their times of meeting, to be held
in a fixed place, and at stated seasons. They
were Solicitous to name judges of more diftin-
guifhed abilities than such as usually presided in
the courts of the barons. They added dignity
to their character, and splendour to their assem-
blies. They laboured to render their forms re-
gular, and their decrees confifdent. Such judi-
catories became, of course, the objects of public
confidence as well as veneration. The people,
relinquishing the tribunals of their lords, were
eager to bring every subjea of contest under the
more equal and discerning eye of those whom
their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in
his name. Thus kings became once more the
heads of the community, and the dispensers of

juflice

SECT. . justice to their fubjets. The barons, in fomi

- - kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of jurif.

diction, because it funk into contempt; in others
it was circumscribed by such regulations as ren.
dered it innocent, or it was entirely abolished by
express flatutes. Thus the administration ofjuf.
tice taking its rife from one source, and following
one diretion, held its course in every state with
more uniformity, and with greater force [Z].

The regula- VI. THE forms and maxims of the canon law,
canon law which were become universally refpecable from
potrpera their authority in the piritual courts, contributed
.sea admi- not a little towards those improvements in jurif-

prudence which I have enumerated. If we confider
the canon law politically, and view it either as a
system framed on purpose to aflfft the clergy in
usurping powers and jurifdition no less repugnant
to the nature of their function, than inconsistent
with the order of government; or as the chief'in.
firument in establishing the dominion of the popes,
which shook the throne, and endangered the liber-
ties of every kingdom in Europe, we must pro.
nounce it one of the most formidable engines ever
formed against the happiness of civil society. But
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws
refpeting the rights and property of individuals,
and attend only to the civil effeets of its decisions
concerning there, it will appear in a different,
and a much more favourable light. In ages of

[Z] NO T E XXII.

ignorance

ignorance and credulity, the ministers of religion SECT. I.
are the objets of superstitious veneration. When '" -

The pro-
the barbarians who over-ran the Roman Empire gresofc-

clefiaftical

first embraced the Christian faith, they found f,,irpaion.
the clergy in possession of considerable power;
and they naturally transferred to those new guides
the profound submission and reverence which
they were accustomed to yield to the priests of
that religion which they had forsaken. They
deemed their persons to be equally sacred with
their funcion; and would have confidered it as
impious to fubje& them to the profane jurifdic-
tion of the laity. The clergy were not blind to
these advantages which the weakness of mankind
afforded them. They eftablifled courts, in which
every question relating to their own character,
their function, or their property, was tried. They
pleaded, and obtained an almost total exemption
from the authority of civil judges. Upon differ-
ent pretexts, and by a multiplicity of artifices,
they communicated this priviiege to ob many
persons, and extended their jurifdiEtion to such
a variety of cafes, that the greater part of those
affairs which give rife to contest and litigation,
was drawn under the cognizance of the spiritual
courts.

BUT in order to dispose the laity to susser these The plI of

eee fiafiical

usurpations without murmur or opposition, it jurifpru.
was necessary to convince them, that the admi- dperfct,
nitration of justice would be rendered more per- h i the
seA by the etabliflment of this new jurisdiction.

This

SECT. I. This was not a difficult undertaking at that pe-

* n riod, when ecclefiaflics carried on their encroach-

ments with the greatest success. That scanty por-
tion of science which served to guide men in the
ages of darkness, was almost entirely engrossed
by the clergy. They alone were accustomed to
read, to enquire, and to reason. Whatever
knowledge of ancient jurisprudence had been
preserved, either by tradition, or in such books
as had escaped the deftrutive rage of barbarians,
was poffefled by them. Upon the maxims of
that excellent system, they founded a code of
laws consonant to the great principles of equity,
Being directed by fixed and known rules, the
forms of their courts were ascertained, and their
decisions became uniform and consistent. Nor
did they want authority sufficient to enforce their
Sentences. Excommunication and other ecclefi-
aftical censures, were punishments more formi-
dable than any that civil judges could infliri in
support of their decrees.

The good IT is not surprising, then, that ecclesiastical
iifating jurisprudence should become such an objec of
an adopt- admiration and refpec&, that exemption from civil

jurifdiótion was courted as a privilege, and con-
ferred as areward. It is not surprising, that even
to rude people, the maxims of the canon law
Thould appear moie equal and just than thofeofthe
ill-digefted jturifprudcnce which directed all pro-
ccedings in civil courts. According to the latter,
the diffcrences between contending barons were

terminated,

terminated, as in a state of nature, by the sword; SECTr. I.
according to the former, every matter was sub- -"
jeted to the decision of laws. The one, by per-
mitting judicial combats, left chance and force to
be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth or false-
hood; the other, paired judgment with refpe to
these by the maxims of equity, and the testimony
of witnefles. Any error or iniquity in a sentence
pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdition
belonged, was irremediable, because originally'it
was fubje& to the review of no superior tribunal;
the ecclesiastical law established a regular grada-
tion of courts, through all which a cause might be
carried by appeal, until it was determined by that
authority which was held to be supreme in the
church. Thus the genius and principles of the
canon law prepared men for approving those three
great alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which
I have mentioned. But it was not with refpe to
there points alone that the canon law fuggefled
improvements beneficial to society. Many of the
regulations, now deemed the barriers ofperfonal
security, or the safeguards of private property,
are contrary to the spirit, and repugnant to the
maxims of the civil jurisprudence known in Eu-
rope during several centuries, and were borrowed
from the rules and practice of the ecclefitical
courts. By observing the wiclorm and equity of
the decisions in tlhefe courts, men began to per-
ceive the necefity either of deserting the martial

tribunal;

SeTr. . tribunals of the barons, or of attempting to re
' -' form them [AA].

The revival VII. THE revival of the knowledge and fludy
of the Ro-
man law of the Roman law co-operated with the causes
contrib UeS
towardses which I have mentioned, in introducing more
seas oieral just and liberal ideas concerning the nature o
cerningjur- government, and the administration of jutflice
tice and .
order. Among the calamities which the devastations of

the barbarians who broke in upon the empire
brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was
their overturning the system of Roman jurifpru-
dence, the noblest monument of the wisdom of
that great people, formed to subdue and to

Thecir- govern the world. The laws and regula-
foR hih tions of a civilized community, were repugnant
the Roman to the manners and ideas of these fierce in-
law fell in-
to oblivion. vaders. They had refpe& to objects of which

a rude people had no conception; and were
adapted to a state of society with which they
were entirely unacquainted. For this reason,
wherever they fettled, the Roman jurisprudence
soon funk into oblivion, and lay buried for ome
centuries under the load of those institutions
which the inhabitants of Europe dignified with
the name of laws. But towards the middle of
the twelfth century, a copy of Justinian's Pan-
deds was accidentally discovered in Italy. By
that time, the slate of society was so far ad-
vanced, and the ideas of men so much enlarged

[AA] NOTE XXIV.

and

and improved by the occurrences of several cen- SECT. I.
turies, during which they had continued in po- 'rcun-
litical union, that they were struck with admi- ft nes

which f-

ration of a fyffem which their ancetors could not voured the
comprehend. Though they had nor hitherto at- revivalof it
tained such a degree of refinement, as to acquire
from the ancients a relish for true philosophy or
peculative science; though they were frill insen-
ible, in a great degree, to the beauty and ele-
ance of classical composition; they were sus-
ciently qualified to judge with refpec to the
merit of their system of laws, in which the many
points most interesting to mankind were set-
led with discernment,. precision, and equity.
11 men of letters fludied this new science with
agernefs; and within a few years after the dif-
overy of the PandeEts, professors of civil law
were appointed, who taught it publicly in most
ountries of Europe.

THE effe&s of having such an excellent model Thh' ,
o study and to imitate were immediately per- the ideas of

men, and

eived. Men, as soon as they were acquainted thedilfrn-
ith fixed and general laws, perceived the ad- jfaion of
antage of them, and became impatient to as-
ertain the principles and forms by which judges
ould regulate their decilions. Such was the
rdour with which they carried on an under-
aking of so great importance to society, that,
fore the close of the twelfth century, the
eudal law was reduced into a regular yltlim
he code of canon law was enlarged and me-

thodized

SECT. . thodized; and the loose uncertain customs c

I "-' different provinces or kingdoms were colleted

and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired
from the knowledge of Roman julifprudence. In
iome countries of Europe the Roman law was
adopted as subsidiary to their own municipal law;
and all cafes to which the latter did not extend
were decided according to the principles of the
former. In others, the maxims as well as forms
of Roman jurisprudence, mingled imperceptib
with the laws of the country, and had a powerful
though less sensible, influence, in improving and
perfecting them [BB].

From 21 THESE various improvements in the fyftemo
thee aore
aditinaikn jurisprudence, and administration of justice, occa
f,,as. sioned a change in manners, of great importance,

and of extensive effec. They gave rife to a dif
tinfion of professions; they obliged men to cul-
tivate different talents, and to aim at different
accomplishments, in order to qualify themselves
for the various departments and functions which
became necessary in society r. Among uncivilized
nations, there is but one profession honourable,
that of arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of
the human mind are exerted in acquiring military
skill or address. The functions of peace are few
and simple; and require no particular courfeof

[BB] N 0 T E XXV.

r Dr. Ferguson's Eay on the Iiflory of Civil Society,
part iv. fed. .

education

education or of fludy, as a preparation for dif- SECT. I;
charging them. This was the state of Europe '
during several centuries. Every gentleman, born
a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was
taught no science but that of war; even his exer-
cifes and pastimes were feats of martial prowess.
Nor did the judicial character, which persons of
noble birth were alone entitled to assume, demand
any degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers poieffed. To recolle& a few
traditionary customs which time had confirmed,
and rendered respectable; to mark out the lifts of
battle with due formality; to observe the issue of
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conduEted according to the laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron, who acted as a
judge, found it necessary to understand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were The efrea

of this on

fixed, when the rules of decision were committed society.
to writing, and collected into a body, law be-
came a science, the knowledge of which required
a regular course of itudy, together with long at-
tention to the practice of courts. Martial and illi-
terate nobles had neither leisure nor inclination to
undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so foreign
from all the occupations which they deemed en-
tertaining, or suitable to their rank. They gradu-
ally relinquifled their places in courts ofjuftice,
where their ignorance exposed them to contempt.
They became weary of attending to the difcuflion

VOL. . G .of

SEBC.I. of. cafes, which grew too intricate for them tc

v-J' comprehend. Not only the judicial determinatior

of points which were the subjet of controversy
but the conduc of all legal business and tranfac.
tions, was committed to persons trained by previous
fludy and application to the knowledge of law.
An order of men, to whom their fellow-citizen!
had daily recourse for advice, and to whom the)
looked up for decision in their most important
concerns, naturally acquired consideration and in-
fluence in society. They were advanced to ho-
nours which had been confidered hitherto as the
peculiar rewards of military virtue. They were en-
truftedwith offices of the highest dignity and mofl
extensive power. Thus, another profeflion than
that of arms, came to be introduced among the
laity, and was reputed honourable. The functions
of civil life were attended to. The talents requi-
site for discharging them were cultivated, A new
road was opened to wealth and eminence. The arts
and virtues of peace were placed in their proper
rank, and received their due recompence [CC].

The pirit VIII. WHILE improvements,fo important with
itrO'duces refpecc to the state of society and the adminiftra.
tnor libetal tion ofjuftice, gradually made progress in Europe,
sentiments
and more sentiments more liberal and generous had begun
generous manncr. to animate the nobles. These were inspired by

the spirit of Chivalry, which, though confidered,
commonly, as a wild institution, the effect of

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

caprice,

caprice, and the source of extravagance, arose SEcT. I.
naturally from the state of society at that period, ----
and had a very serious influence in refining the
manners of the European nations. The feudal Originof
state was a fate ofalmoft perpetual war, rapine,
and anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed
were exposed to insults or injuries. The power
of the sovereign was too limited to prevent these
wrongs; and the adminifiration of justice too
feeble to redress them. The most effe&ual pro-
tection againit violence and oppression, was often
found to be that which the valour and generosity
of private persons afforded. The fame spirit of
enterprise which had prompted so many gentle-
men to take arms in defence of the oppressed
pilgrims in Palestine, incited others to declare
themselves the patrons and avengers of injured
innocence at home. When the final reduaion
of the Holy Land under the dominion of infidels
put an end to these foreign expeditions, the lat-
ter was the only employment left for the aivity
and courage of adventurers. To check the in-
folence of overgrown oppressors; to rescue the
helpless from captivity; to protect, or to avenge
women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could
not bear arms in their own defence; to redress
wrongs, and to remove grievances; were deemed
acts of the higheR prowels and merit. Valour,
humanity, courtesy, justice, honour, were the
chara'leriflic qualities of chivalry. To these
were added religion, which mingled itself with
every paflion and institution during the middle

G 2 .lges,

SECT. I. ages, and by infusing a large proportion of en-

thufiatic zeal, gave them such force, as carried
them to romantic excess. Men were trained to
knighthood by a long previous dicipline; they
were admitted into the order by folemnities no less
devout than pompous; every person of noble
birth courted that honour; it was deemed a dif-
tin&tion superior to royalty; and monarchs were
proud to receive it from the hands of private
gentlemen.
Itsbenei- THIS singular institution, in which valour, gal-

lantry, and religion, were so strangely blended,
was wonderfully adapted to the taste and genius
of martial nobles; and its effects were soon visible
in their manners. War was carried on with less
ferocity, when humanity came to be deemed the
ornament of knighthood no less than courage.
More gentle and polished manners were intro.
duced, when courtesy was recommended as the
most amiable of knightly virtues. Violence and
oppression decreased, when it was reckoned meri-
torious to check and to punish them. A fcrupu-
lous adherence to truth, with the mofi religious
attention to fulfil every engagement, became the
diflinguifhing characteristic of a gentleman, be-
cause chivalry was regarded as the school of ho-
nour, and inculcated the moi delicate sensibility
with refpel to those points. The admiration of
there qualities, together with the high ditintions
and prerogatives conferred on knighthood in every
part of Europe, inspired persons of noble birth on

some

forne occasions with a species of military fana- SECT. I.
ticism, and led them to extravagant enterprises. 'C'
But they deeply imprinted on their minds the
principles of generosity and honour. These were
strengthened by every thing that can affect the
senses or touch the heart. The wild exploits of
those romantic knights who sallied forth in quest
of adventures, are well known, and have been
treated with proper ridicule. The political and
permanent effects of the spirit of chivalry have-
been less observed. Perhaps, the humanity which
accompanies all the operations of war, the refine-
ments of gallantry, and the point of honour, the
three chief circumstances which distinguish mo-
dern from ancient manners, may be ascribed in a
great measure to this institution, which has appear-
ed whimsical to superficial observers, but by its es-
sets has proved of great benefit to mankind. The
entiments which chivalry inspired, had a wonder-
ful influence on manners and condut during the
twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth cen-
turies. They were so deeply rooted, that they con-
tinued to operate after the vigour and reputation
of the institution itself began to decline. Some
considerable tranfaions, recorded in the fol-
lowing history, resemble the adventurous ex-
ploits of chivalry, rather than the well-regulated
operations of found policy. Some of the most
eminent personages, whose characters will be
delineated, were strongly tinctured with this ro-
mantic spirit. Francis I. was ambitious to dif-
tinguifl himself by all the qualities of an accom-

G 3 plifhed

SEC+. I. plifhed knight, and endeavoured to imitate the
t4-'v- enterprising genius of chivalry in war, as well as

its pomp and courtesy during peace. The fame
which the French monarch acquired by there fplen-
did ations, so far dazzled his more temperate ri-
val, that he departed on rome occasions from his
usual prudence and moderation, and emulated Fran.
cis in deeds of prowess, or of gallantry [DD].

The pro- IX. THE progress of science, and the cultiva.
grefs of fci-
ence has tion of literature, had considerable effect in chang-
greontcfhe ing the manners of the European nations, and
manhrac- introducing that civility and refinement by which
ter ofmen. they are now distinguished. At the time when

their Empire was overturned, the Romans, though
they had loft that correct taste which has rendered
the productions of their ancestors standards of ex-
cellence, and models of imitation for succeeding
ages, still preserved their love of letters, and cul-

Ignorance tivated the arts with great ardour. But rude
of the mid-
die ages. barbarians were so far from being struck with any

admiration of there unknown accomplishments,
that they delfifed them. They were not arrived
at that state of society, when those faculties of the
human mind, which have beauty and elegance for
-their objects, begin to unfold themselves. They
were strangers to most of those wants and desires
which are the parents of ingenious invention ; and
as they did not comprehend either the merit or
utility of the Roman arts, they destroyed the mont-
nmicnts of them, with an indutry not inferior to that

[DD] N OT E XXVII.

with

with which their posterity have since studied to pre- SECT. I.
serve or to recover them. The convulsions oc-
cafioned by the settlement of so many unpolifhed
tribes in the Empire; the frequent as well as vi-
olent revolutions in every kingdom which they
eftablifled; together with the interior defects in
the form of government which they introduced,
banished security and leisure; prevented the
growth of taste, or the culture of science; and
kept Europe, during several centuries, in that
state of ignorance which has been already defcrib-
ed. But the events and institutions which I have
enumerated, produced great alterations in so-
ciety. As soon as their operation, in restoring
liberty and independence to one part of the com-
munity, began to be felt; as soon as they began
to communicate to all the members of society
some taste of the advantages arising from com-
merce, from public order, and from personal fe-
curity, the human mind became conscious of
powers which it did not formerly perceive, and
fond of occupations or pursuits of which it was
formerly incapable. Towards the beginning of
the twelfth century, we discern the first symptoms
of its awakening fiom that lethargy in which it
had been long funk, and observe it turning with
curiosity and attention towards new objects.

THE first literary efforts, however, of the Euro- The sirs li-

pean nations in the middle ages, were extremely fort'sI.
ill-diretedd. Among nations, as well as individu- dithed,

and the
als, the powers of imagination attain some degree cufe5 o

G 4 of

SECT. I. of vigour before the intellectual faculties are much

i - exercised in speculative or abftradt disquisition.

Men are poets before they are philosophers. They
feel with sensibility, and describe with force, when
they have made but little progress in investigation
or reasoning. The age of Homer and of Hesiod
long preceded that of Thales or of Socrates. But,
unhappily for literature, our ancestors, deviating
from this course which nature points out, plunged
at once into the depths of abstruse and metaphy-
fical inquiry. They had been converted to the
Christian faith, oon after they fettled in their new
conquests. But they did not receive it pure. The
presumption of men had added to the simple and
inftrueive doCtrines of Christianity the theories
of a vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate
into mysteries, and to decide questions which the
limited faculties of the human mind are unable to
comprehend or to resolve. These over-curious
peculations were incorporated with the fyflem of
religion, and came to be confidered as the most
essential part of it. As oon, then, as curiosity
prompted men to inquire and to reason, these were
the subjects which first presented themselves, and
engaged their attention. The fcholaflic theology,
with its infinite train of bold difquiitions, and ub-
tile diftindions concerning points which are not
the objet of human reason, was the first production
of the spirit of inquiry after it began to resume
some degree of activity arid vigour in Europe. It
v.as not, however, this circumstance alone that gave

such

such a wrong turn to the minds of men, when SECT. .
they began again to exercise talents which they - -
had so long negleted. Most of the perfbns who
attempted to revive literature in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received inftrudion, or
derived their principles of science from the Greeks
in the eastern Empire, or from the Arabians in
Spain and Africa. Both these people, acute and
inquisitive to excess, had corrupted those fci-
ences which they cultivated. The former ren-
dered theology a systen of speculative refinement,
or of endless controversy. The latter communi-
cated to philosophy a spirit of metaphysical and
firivolous subtlety. Misled by these guides, the
persons who first applied to science were involved
in a maze of intricate inquiries. Inlead of al-
lowing their fancy to take its natural range, and
to produce such works of invention as might
have improved their taste, and refined their fen-
tinients; instead of cultivating those arts which
embellish human life, and render it comfortable;
they were fettered by authority, they were led
astray by example, and wafted the whole force of
their genius in speculations as unavailing as they
were difficult.

BUT fruitless and ill-direaed as these fpecula- They had,

tions were, their novelty routed, and their boldness con,er bicl
interefled the human mind. The ardour with which tcfr't.
men pursued those uninviting studies, was altonifl-
ing. Genuine philosophy was never cultivated, in
any enlightened age, with more zeal. Schools, up-
on the model of those instituted by Charlemagne,

were

SECT. . were opened in every cathedral, and almot ir
'--i every monastery of note. Colleges and univerli.

ties were ereced and formed into communities
or corporations, governed by their own laws, anc
invested with separate and extensive jurifdition
over their own members. A regular course ol
studies was planned. Privileges of great value
were conferred on matters and scholars. Acade.
mical titles and honours of various kinds were in.
vented as a recompence for both. Nor was it in
the schools alone that superiority in science led to
reputation and authority; it became an objec ol
relpeEt in life, and advanced such as acquired it
to a rank of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured
by all there advantages, an incredible number ol
students resorted to those new feats of learning,
and crowded with eagerness into that new path
which was opened to fame and distinction.

A cirrum- BUT how considerable soever these first efforts
si ncewh h
prevented may appear, there was one circumstance which
hoibeing prevented the effefts of them from being as ex-

fit tensive as they naturally ought to have been. All

the languages in Europe, during the period under
review, were barbarous. They were destitute of
elegance, of force, and even of perspicuity. No
attempt had been hitherto made to improve or to
polish them. The Latin tongue was consecrated
by the church to religion. Custom, with autho-
rity scarcely lets sacred, had appropriated it to
literature. All the sciences cultivated in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries were taught in
Latin. All books with refped to themi were

written

written in that language. It would have been SECT. I.
deemed a degradation of any important subjed, .-
to have treated of it in a modern language. This
confined science within a very narrow circle. The
learned alone were admitted into the temple of
knowledge; the gate was shut againit all others,
who were suffered to remain involved in their
former darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, dur- Itinfluence

ing several ages, from diffusing itself through erits at-
society, and its influence was much circum- tentio'
fcribed; the progress which it made may be
mentioned, nevertheless, among the great causes
which contributed to introduce a change of
manners into Europe. The ardent, though
ill-judged spirit of inquiry which I have de-
fcribed, occasioned a fermentation of mind that
put ingenuity and invention in motion, and gave
them vigour. It led men to a new employment
of their faculties, which they found to be agree-
able as well as interesting. It accustomed them
to exercises and occupations which tended to
soften their manners, and to give them tome
relish for the gentle virtues, peculiar to people
among whom science has been cultivated with
success [EE].

X. TE-il progress of commerce had confider- The pro.
able influence in polishing the manners of the va of

I'l sco l

m rce
European nations, and in eftabliflling among i"d great

tl, i ii i« * ,.iinfluencecon
them order, equal laws, and humanity. he wants mranner

and govcrn-
[EEI N 0 T E XXVIII. n1ent.

of

SECT. . of men, in the original and most simple state o

~-' society, are so few, and their desires so limited

that they reft contented with the natural pro-
ducaions of their climate and foil, or with whai
they can add to these by their own rude industry,
They have no superfluities to dispose of, and seA
necessities that demand a supply. Every littk
community subsisting on its own domestic flock,
and satisfied with it, is either little acquaintec
with the states around it, or at variance witd

Low fateof them. Society and manners must be confider.
commerce
in he mid- ably improved, and many provisions muff be
die ages. made for public order and personal security, be.

fore a liberal intercourse can take place betweer
different nations. We find, accordingly, thai
the first effect of the settlement of the barbarian!
in the Empire, was to divide those nations whid
the Roman power had united. Europe wa!
broken into many separate communities. The
intercourse between these divided states, ceafte
almost intirely during several centuries. Navi.
gation was dangerous in eas infested by pirates
nor could strangers trust to a friendly receptior
in the ports of uncivilized nations. Even be.
tween distant parts of the fame kingdom, the corn
munication was rare and difficult. The lawlef
rapine of banditti, together with the avowed ex.
aaions of the nobles, scarcely less formidable
and oppreflive, rendered a journey of any lengtl
a perilous enterprise. Fixed to the spot in whice
they resided, the greater part of the inhabitant!
of Europe loft, in a great mcafure, the know.

ledg(

ledge of remote regions, and were unacquainted StcT. I.
with their names, their situations, their climates, '-
and their commodities [FS].

VARIOUS causes, however, contributed to revive Causes of

the spirit of commerce, and to renew, in some de-
gree, the intercourse between different nations.
The Italians, by their connection with Conftanti-
nople, and other cities of the Greek empire, had
preserved in their own country considerable relish
for the precious commodities and curious manu-
fatures of the East. They communicated some
knowledge of these to the countries contiguous to
Italy. But this commerce being extremely limited,
the intercourse which it occasioned between different
nations was not considerable. The Crusades, by
leading multitudes from every corner of Europe
into Asia, opened a more extensive communication
between the East and Weft, which subsisted for two
centuries; and though the object of these expe-
ditions was conquest and not commerce; though
the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the
motives for undertaking them were wild and en-
thufiaftic; their commercial effeEts, as hath been
shewn, were both beneficial and permanent. Dur-
ing the continuance of the Crusades, the great cities
il Italy, and in other countries of Europe, acquired
liberty, and together with it such privileges as ren-
dered them relpectable and independent commu-
nities. Thus, in every state, there was formed a
new order of citizens, to whom commerce pre-
sented itself as their proper object, and opened to

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

them

SECT. I, them a certain path to wealth and consideration.
'"· ~ Soon after the close of the Holy War, the mariner's

compass was invented, which, by rendering navi.
gation more secure, encouraged it to become more
adventurous, facilitated the communication be.
tween remote nations, and brought them nearer
to each other.
Firl among THE Italian States, during the fame period, efta-

blifhed a regular commerce with the East in the
ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all the rich
products of the Indies. They introduced into
their own territories manufatures of various kinds,
and carried them on with great ingenuity and vi-
gour. They attempted new arts; andtranfplanted
from warmer climates, to which they 'had been
hitherto deemed peculiar, several natural produc-
tions which now furnish the materials of a lucra-
tive and extended commerce. All there commodi-
ties, whether imported from Asia, or produced by
their own fill, they disposed of to great advan-
tage among the other peopleof Europe, who began
to acquire ome taste for an elegance in living un-
known to their anceflors,or despised by them. Dur-
ing the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the com-
merce of Europe was almost entirely in the hands of
the Italians, more commonly known in those ages
by the name of Lombards. Companies or focie-
ties of Lombard merchants fettled in every differ-
ent kingdom. They were taken under the imme-
diate protection of the several governments. They
en joyed extensive privileges and immunities. The
operation of the ancient barbarous laws concerning

Ir»~~ itr~firangers,

rangers, was suspended with refpe& to them. SECT. I.
They became the carriers, the manufacturers, and -
he bankers of all Europe.
WHILE the Italians, in the South of Europe, were Then by the

meang of the

ultivating trade with such industry and success, Hanfcatic.
he commercial spirit awakened in the North to-
ards the middle of the thirteenth century. As
he nations around the Baltic were, at that time,
xtremely barbarous, and infested that ea with
heir piracies, the cities of Lubec and Hamburgh,
oon after they began to open some trade with these
eople, found it necessary to enter into a league of
utual defence. They derived such advantages
rom this union, that other towns acceded to their
onfederacy, and, in a short time, eighty of the
oft considerable cities scattered through those ex-
nfive countries which stretch from the bottom of
he Baltic to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the
amous Hanseatic league, which became so for-
idable, that its alliance was courted, and its en-
ity was dreaded by the greatest monarchs. The
embers of this powerful association formed the
rft fyftemratic plan of commerce known in the
niddle ages, and conduced it by common laws
naled in their general afemblies. They supplied
he reft of Europe with naval stores, and pitched
n different towns, the most eminent of which was
ruges in Slanders, where they eftablifehd staples
n which their commerce was regularly carried on.
'hither the Lombards brought the productions of

In.liiJ,

SECT. I. India, together with the manufactures of Italy, an,

L"y"- exchanged them for the more bulky, but not lel

useful commodities of the North. The Hansea
tic merchants disposed of the cargoes which the'
received from the Lombards, in the ports of th
Baltic, or carried them up the great rivers into thi
interior parts of Germany.

Commerce THIS regular intercourse opened between thi
.oakes pro-

frfs in the nations in the North and South of Europe, madi
ndsher them sensible of their mutual wants, and create

such new and increasing demands for commoditie
of every kind, that it excited among the inhabit.
ants of the Netherlands a more vigorous fpiritil
carrying on the two great manufactures of woo
and flax, which seem to have been confiderabk
in that country as early as the age of Charlemagne.
As Bruges became the centre of communication
between the Lombard and Hanseatic merchant,
the Flemings traded with both in that city to such
extent as well as advantage, as spread among them
a general habit of industry, which long rendered
Slanders and the adjacent provinces the most opu
lent, the most populous, and best cultivated coun.
tries in Europe.

and in SrRUCcK with the flourifhtng state of these pro.
E""ngnd. vinces, of which he discerned the true cause, Ed.

ward III. of England endeavoured to excite a fpi.
rit of industry among his own fubjecs, who, blind
to the advantages of their situation, and ignoran

of

of the ource from which opulence was destined to SECT. ';
flow into their country, were so little attentive to
their commercial interests, as hardly to attempt
those manufactures, the materials of which they
furnished to foreigners. By alluring Flemish arti-
fans to fettle in his dominions, as well as by many
wife laws for the encouragement and regulation of
trade, Edward gave a beginning to the woollen
manufatures of England, and first turned the ac-
tive and enterprising genius of his people towards
those arts which have raised the English to the
highest rank among commercial nations.

THIS increase of commerce, and of intercourse The bene-

between nations, how inconsiderable soever it may ftieff*
appear in respect of their rapid and extensive pro-
grefs during the last and present age, seems won-
derfully great, when we compare it with the state
of both in Europe previous to the twelfth century.
It did not fail of producing great effects. Com-
merce tends to wear off those prejudices which
maintain distinction and animosity between nations.
It softens and polilhes the manners of men. It unites
them by one of the strongest of all ties, the desire of
supplying their mutual wants. It disposes them to
peace, by establishing in every slate an order of
citizens bound by their interest to be the guardians
of public tranquillity. As oon as the commercial
spirit acquires vigour, and begins to gain an as-
cendant in any society, we discover a new genius
in its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its nego.

VOL I. I ciations.

SsCT. I. ciations. Conspicuous proofs of this occur ir

.
t- !ihe history of the Italian States, of the Hanseatic

league, and the cities of the Netherlands during
the period under review. In proportion as com-
merce made its way into the different countries of
Europe, they successively turned their attention to
those objets, and adopted those manners, which
occupy and diftinguilh polished nations [GG].

[GG] NOTE XXX.

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
V I E W

OF THE
ROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUR O P E,

PROM TEH
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPI-RE,

TO, THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

S.E C TI ON II.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-
Jpest to the command of the nationalforce requi-
site in foreign oprations,
SUCH are the events and inr(itutions, which, SECT.Ir.

by their powerful operation, contributed sfr
gradually to introduce regular government and cictygreatly

improved at

polished manners into the various nations of th begin.
Europe. When we survey the state of society, or ifgh
the charafter of individuals, at the opening of the centuy.

H 2 fifteenth

SECT. I. fifteenth century, and then turn back to view the
'C 'J ' condition of both at the time when the barbarou!

tribes, which overturned the Roman power, corn.
pleted their settlement in their new conquests, th(
progress which mankind had made towards orde
and refinement will appear immense.

Still defec- GOVERNMENT, however, was still far from hay.
tive with
rerpea to ing attained that state, in which extensive monar.
the com-
mand of the chies aat with the united vigour of the whole corn.
national munity, or carry on great undertakings with per.

severance and success. Small tribes or communi.
ties, even in their rudef Lftate, may operate in con.
cert, and exert their utmost force. They are excited
to aft not by the distant objects or the refined fpe-
culations, which interest or affect men in polished
societies, but by their present feelings. The insults
of an enemy kindle resentment; the success of a
rival tribe awakens emulation: there paflions corn.
municate from breast to breat, and all the members
of the community, with united ardour, rush into the
field in order to gratify their revenge, or to acquire
diftintion. But in widely extended states, such as
the great kingdoms of Europe, at the beginning of
the fifteenth century, where there is little inter-
course between the distant members of the commu-
nity, and where every great enterprize requirespre-
vious concert and long preparation,nothing can
rouse and call forth their united strength, but the
absolute command of a despot, or the powerful in-
fluence of regular policy. Of the former, the var

empires

empires in the East are an example; the irrefift- SECT. II.
ible mandate of the fbvereign reaches the most '"
remote provinces of his dominions, and compels
whatever number of his subjects he is pleased to
summon, to follow his Riandard. The kingdoms
of Europe, in the present age, are an instance of
the latter; the prince, by the less violent, but no
less effectual operation of laws and a well-regu-
lated government, is enabled to avail himself of
the whole force of his state, and to employ it in
enterprizes which require strenuous and perfever-
ing efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, The power

the political constitution in all the kingdoms of verylimi.
Europe was very different from either of there ed'
states of government. The several monarchs,
though they had omewhat enlarged the boundaries
of prerogative by successful encroachments on the
immunities and privileges of the nobility, were
possessed of an authority extremely limited. The
laws and interior police of kingdoms, though much
improved by the various events and regulations
which I have enumerated, were still feeble and im-
perfect In every country, a numerous body of
nobles, who continued to be formidable notwith-
standing the various expedients employed to de-
press them, watched all the motions of their fove-
reign with a jealous attention, which et bounds
to his ambition, and either prevented his forming

H 3 schemes

SECT. . schemes of extensive enterprize, or obftruted tht
'-' execution of them.
Their reve. THE ordinary revenues of every prince were so

extremely small as to be inadequate to any great
undertaking. He depended for extraordinary sup.
plies on the good-will of his subjects, who granted
them often with a.reluctant, and always with
sparing hand.

Their. r- As the revenues of princes were inconsiderable,
Imies unfit
forcon- the armies which they could bring into the field
quest. were unfit for long and effeaual service. Instead

of being able to employ troops trained to kill in
arms, and to military subordination, by regular
discipline, monarchs were obliged to depend on
such forces as their vassals condu&ed to their
standard in consequence of their military tenures.
These, as they were bound to remain under arms
only for a hort time, could not march far from
their ual place of residence, and being more
attached to the lord of whom they held, than to
the sovereign whom they served were often as
much disposed to counteract as to forward his
schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been
more subjea to the command of the monarch,
proper instruments to carry into execution any
great and arduous enterprize. The ftrengthof
an army, formed either for conquest or defence,
lies in infantry. To the flability and discipline
of their legions, confilling chiefly of infantry, the

Romans,

Romansy during the times of the republic, were SeCT. II.
indebted for their vi&tories; and when their de- '
feendants, forgetting the institutions which had led
them to universal dominion, so far altered their
military system as to place their principal confi-
dence in a numerous cavalry, the undisciplined
impetuosity of the barbarous nations, who fought
mostly on foot, was fufficientj as I have already
observed, to overcome them. These nations, foot
after they fettled in their new conquests, unin-
struted by the fatal error of the Romans, relin-
quifhed the customs of their ancestors, and con-
verted the chief force of their armies into cavalry.
Among the Romans this change was occasioned
by the effeminacy of their troops, who could not
endure the fatigues of service, which their more
virtuous and .hardy ancestors had sustained with
cafe. Among the people who established the riew
monarchies into which Europe was divided, this
innovation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who, scorning
to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at
being distinguished from them in the field, as well
as during peace, The inflitution of chivalry, and
the frequency of tournaments, in which knights,
in complete armour, entered the lifts on horseback
with extraordinary splendour, displaying amazing
address, force, and valour, brought cavalry into
still greater eteem. The fondness for that ser-
vice increased to such a degree, that, during the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the armies

H 4 of

SECT. II. of Europe were composed almost entirely of ca-

-V- 'valry. No gentleman would appear in the field

but on horseback. To serve in any other manner,
he would have deemed derogatory to his rank,
The cavalry, by way of diftindion, was called
The battle, and on it alone depended the fate of
every action. The infantry, collected from the
dregs and refute of the people, ill armed and
worse disciplined, was almost of no account.

They arc As these circumstances rendered the operations
focmiaglel of particular kingdoms less considerable and less
gteneral r vigorous, so they long kept the princes of Europe
plan of ope. from giving such attention to the schemes and tranf-
ration.

aations of their neighbours, as might lead them to
form any regular fyflem of public security. They
were, of consequence, prevented from uniting in
confederacy, or from acting with concert, in order to
establish such a distribution and balance of power,
as hould hinderany state fromrifingtoa superiority,
which might endanger the general liberty and inde-
pendence. During several centuries, the nations
of Europe appear to have confidered them'selves as
separate societies, scarcely connected together by
any common interest, and little concerned in each
other's affairs or operations. An extensive com-
merce did not afford them an opportunity ofob-
serving and penetrating into the fchernes of every
difierent f-ate. They had not ambassadors residing
constantly in every court to watch and give early
intelligence of all its motions. The expectation

of

f remote advantages, or the profpet of distant SECt.I.
nd contingent evils, were not sufficient to excite -
ations to take arms. Such only as were within
he sphere of immediate danger, and unavoidably
xpofed to injury or insult, thoiight themselves
nterefted in any contest, or bound to take pre-
autions for their own safety.

WHOEVER records the tranfaEtions of any of They were
he more considerable European states during the neled with
wo lat centuries, must write the history of Eu- each other.
ope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
eriod, have been formed into one great system,
b closely united, that each holding a determinate
ation, the operations of one are so felt by all,
s to influence their counsels and regulate their
easures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
nlefs when vicinity of territory rendered the oc-
afions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or
hen national emulation fomented or embittered
e spirit of hostility, the affairs of different coun-
ries are seldom interwoven with each other. In
ach kingdom of Europe great events and
evolutions happened, which the other powers
eheld with almost the fame indifference as if
hey had been uninterefled fpeftators, to whom
he effec of these tranfaitions could never ex-
nd.

DURING the violent struggles between France A confirm..
nd England, and notwithlianding the alarming tin 'fhie
rogrcfs which was made towards rendering one f"e of

prince

SECT. I. prince the master of both there kingdoms, hardi!

one measure, which can be confidered as the refuli
of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in
order to guard against an event so fatal to Europe,
The dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, whom
their fituatior would not permit to remain neutral
engaged, it is true, in the contest; but in taking
their part, they seem rather to have followed the
impulse of their passions3 than to have been
guided by any just discernment of the danger
which threatened themselves and the tranquillity
of Europe. The other princes, seemingly unaf,
feted by the alternate fuccefles of the contending
parties, left them to decide the quarrel by them.
selves, or interposed only by feeble and ineffetual
,negociations.
From tre NOTWITHSTANDtNG the perpetual hostilities in

which the various kingdoms of Spain were engaged
during several centuries, and the successive occur.
rences which visibly tended to unite that part ol
the continent into one great monarchy, the prince!
of Europe hardly took any ftep from which we ma)
conclude that they gave a proper attention to thai
important event. They permitted a power t(
arise imperceptibly, and to acquire strength there
which oon became formidable to all its neighbours

From those AMIDS'r the violent convulsions with whiclthl
Cany., spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and thi

turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitatec
the empire, neither the authority of the popes
fcconded by all their artifices and intrigues, no

,~~~~I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ till

the solicitations of the emperors, could induce SECT. II.
any of the powerful monarchs in Europe to en-
gage in their quarrel, or to avail themselves of
many favourable opportunities of interposing with
effe and advantage.

THIS amazing inactivity, during tranfa&ions so This inar

interesting, is not to be imputed to any incapacity fiorled en-
of discerning their political consequences. The i:reyobyhe
power of judging with sagacity, and of ating with vernment.
vigour, is the portion of men in every age. The
monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms
of Europe during several centuries, were not blind
to their particular interest, negligent of the pub-
lic safety, or strangers to the method of securing
both. If they did not adopt that salutary yftem,
which teaches modern politicians to take the alarm
at the profpet of distant dangers, which prompts
them to check the firPt encroachments of any
formidable power, and which renders each state
the guardian, in ome degree, of the rights and in-
dependence of all its neighbours, this was owing
entirely to such imfperfections and disorders in the
civil government of each country, as made it im-
possible for sovereigns to at suitably to those ideas,
which the poflure of affairs, and their own obfer-
vation, must have Iuggefted.

BUT during the course of the fifteenth century, Events hiip.

Soned dure

various events happened, which, by giving princes inc gtihe d
more entire command of the force in their refpec- ccn"'Y.,

which elo
tive dominions, rendered their operations more d- t'eci.

f,.rt of t -
vigorous and cxtcnlive. In conficluence of this, tiols m..

the

SECT. II. prince the mafier of both there kingdoms, hardly
~-"-v.. one measure, which can be confidered as the refulc

of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in
order to guard against an event so fatal to Europe,
The dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, whom
their situation would not permit to remain neutral,
engaged, it is true, in the contet but in taking
their part, they seem rather to have followed the
impulse of their passions3 than to have been
guided by any just discernment of the danger
which threatened themselves and the tranquillity
of Europe. The other princes, seemingly unaf,
fe&ed by the alternate successes of the contending
parties, left them to decide the quarrel by them-
selves, or interposed only by feeble and ineffectual
negociations.
From thre NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities in

Spai. which the various kingdoms of Spain were engaged

during several centuries, and the successive occur-
rences which visibly tended to unite that part of
the continent into one great monarchy, the princes
of Europe hardly took any ftep from which we may
conclude that they gave a proper attention to that
important event. They permitted a power to
arise imperceptibly, and to acquire strength there,
which soon became formidable to all its neighbours.

From thoe AMIDS'r the violent convulsions with whichthe
fm' i spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and the

turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitated
the empire, neither the authority of the popesi
fccondcd by all their artifices and intrigues, noi

thi

the solicitations of the emperors, could induce SECT.II.
any of the powerful monarchs in Europe to en- - *-
gage in their quarrel, or to avail themselves of
many favourable opportunities of interposing with
effec and advantage.

THIS amazing inaivity, during tranfations so Thisinar-

interesting, is not to be imputed to any incapacity fioied en-
of discerning their political consequences. The tireIybyOhe
power of judging with sagacity, and of ating with vernment.
vigour, is the portion of men in every age. The
monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms
of Europe during several centuries, were not blind
to their particular interest, negligent of the pub-
lic safety, or firangers to the method of securing
both. If they did not adopt that salutary system,
which teaches modern politicians to take the alarm
at the profpet of distant dangers, which prompts
them to check the firt encroachments of any
formidable power, and which renders each state
the guardian, in some degree, of the rights and in-
dependence of all its neighbours, this was owing
entirely to such iiperfetions and disorders in the
civil government of each country, as made it im-
pofible for sovereigns to at suitably to those ideas,
which the posture of affairs, and their own obfer-
vation, must have tlggefted.

BUT during the course. of the fifteenth century, Events hap-

*·i i * i i

* * * pened dur,-

various events happened, which, by giving princes i,,g tie 1d5l
more entire command of the force in their refpcc- 'ei",',y;cl
tive dominions, rendered their operations more -,r thc si..

frts o i1.-
Vigorous and extensive. In conlequence of this, tiClm.-r

the

SECT.II. the affairs of different kingdoms becoming mott
L -- f frequently as well as more intimately conne&ed,
pom erful
and exten- they were gradually accustomed to at in concert

si' and confederacy, and were insensibly prepared for

forming a 1system of policy, in order to establish
or to preserve such a balance of power as was most
confifent with the general security. It was dur.
ing the reign of Charles the Fifth, that the ideas,
on which this fyffem is founded, first came to be
fully understood. It was then, that the maxims
by which it las been uniformly mraintained since
that era, were universally adopted. On this ac-
count, a view of the causes and events which con.
tributed to eftablilh a plan of policy, more salutary
and extensive than any that has taken place in the
condu& of human affairs, is not only a necessary
introduction to the following work, but is a capi-
tal object in the history of Europe.

The fin, as THE first event that occasioned any considerable
thefc was alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Europe,
the dep:iv-
ingtheEng- was the annexation of the extensive territories,
lilh of their
territories which England possessed on the continent, to the
ti ".el- crown of France. While the English were matters

of several of the most fertile and opulent provinces
in France, and a great part of its most martial
inhabitants was bound to follow their standard,
an English monarch confidered himself rather as
the rival, than as the vassal of the sovereign of
whom he held. The kings of France, circum-
fcribed and thwarted in their schemees and opera-

tionI

tions by an adversary no less jealous than formi- SECT. I.
dable, durst not enter upon any enterprize of '
importance or of difficulty. The English were
always at hand, ready to oppose them. They dif-
puted even their right to their crown, and being
able to penetrate, with ease, into the heart of the
kingdom, could arm against them those very
hands which ought to have been employed in their
defence. Timid counsels and feeble efforts were
natural to monarchs in such a situation. France,
dismembered and overawed, could not attain its
proper station in the system of Europe. But the
death of Henry V. of England, happily for France,
and not unfortunately for his own country, deli-
vered the French from the calamity of having a
foreign master feated on their throne. The weak-
ness of a long minority, the dissensions in the
English court, together with the unsteady and
languid condu& which there occasioned, afforded
the French a favourable opportunity of recovering
the territories which they had loft. The native
valour of the French nobility, heightened to an
enthusiastic confidence, by a supposed interpofi-
tion of Heaven in their behalf; conduEted in the
field by skilful leaders; and dire&ed in the cabinet
by a prudent monarch; was exerted v,ich fucl
vigour and success, during this favourable junc-
ture, as not only wrested from the English their
new conquests, but fiript them of their ancient
poffeflions in France, and reduced them within
the narrow precints of Calais, and its petty ter-
ritory.

AS

SECT. Ir. As soon as To many considerable provinces wer
"-"- 'reunited to their dominions, the kings of France
The ecct
of this on conscious of this acquisition of frength, began t
the wrof form bolder schemes of interior policy, as well a
the i-rench
monarchy. of foreign operations. They immediately becam

formidable to their neighbours, who began tofix
their attention on their measures and motions, the
importance of which they fully perceived. Fron
this era, France, possessed of the advantage
which it derives from the situation and contiguity
of its territories, as well as from the number ant
valour of its people, rose to new influence in Eu.
rope, and was the first power in a condition t(
give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the flates
around it.

Ontheflate NOR was France indebted for this increase o
of the milo

-

try force importance merely to the reunion of the provinces
th nation. which had been torn from it. A circumstance

attended the recovery of there, which, though less
considerable, and less observed, contributed not a
little to give additional vigour and decision to all
the efforts of that monarchy. Duirng the oQbfi
nate struggles between France and England, all
the defecs of the military system under the feudal
government were sensibly felt. A war of long con-
tinuance languished, when carried on by troops
bound and accustomed to keep the field qaly for
a flort time. Armies, composed chiefly ofheavy,
armed cavalry, were unfit either for the defence or
the attack of the many towns and castles, which
it became necessary to guard or to reduce. In or.

der

er to obtain such permanent and effetive force, SECT.II.
s became requifipe during there lengthened con- '
efts, the kings of France took into their pay con-
iderable bands of mercenary soldiers, levied some-
imes among their own fubjecds, and sometimes in
reign countries.. But as the feudal policy pro-
ided no sufficient fund for such extraordinary ser-
ice, these adventurers were difmiiffd at the close
f every campaign, or upon any prolpeal of ac-
ommodation; and having been little accustomed
tthe restraints of discipline, they frequently
turned their arms against the country which they
ad been hired to defend, and delolated it with
cruelty not inferior to that of its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept constantly on foot, and t occaionq
regularly trained to military ubordination, would daion of
have supplied what was wanting in the feudal con- fain.' a"
(itution, and have furnished princes with the
means of executing enterprizes, to which they
were then unequal. Such an establishment, how-
ever, was so repugnant to the genius of feudal
policy, and so incompatible with the privileges
and pretensions of the nobility, that during fe-
veral centuries no monarch was either so bold, or
o powerful, as to venture on any ftep towards
introducing it. At last, Charles VII. availing
himself of the reputation which he had acquired
y his fuccefes against the English, and taking
advantage of the imprefions of terror which such
a formidable enemy had left upon the minds of
his subjects, executed that which his predeceifors
durst not attempt. Under pretence of having al-

ways

$ECT. I. ways ready a force sufficient to defend the king.
'- -' dom against any sudden invasion of the Englilh,

he, at the time when he disbanded his other troops,
retained under arms a body of nine thousand ca.
valry, and of sixteen thousand infantry. He ap.
propriated funds for the regular payment ofthefe;
he stationed them in different places of the king.
dom, according to his pleasure; and appointed
the officers who commanded and disciplined them.
The prime nobility courted this service, in which
they were taught to depend on their sovereign, to
execute his orders, and to look up to him as the
judge and rewarder of their merit. The feudal
militia, composed of the vassals whom the nobles
could call out to follow their flandard, as itwas
in no degree comparable to a body of soldiers re-
gularly trained to war, funk gradually in reputa-
tion. The strength of an army was no longer efti-
mated solely by the number of cavalry which served
in it. From the time that gunpowder was invent-
ed, and the use of cannon in the field became general,
horsemen cased in complete armour loft all the ad-
vantages which gave them the pre-eminence over
other soldiers. The helmet, the hield,. and the
breat- plate, which refilled the arrow or the spear,
no longer afforded them security against thee new
inftrun-,ents of destruction. The service of infantry
roe again into elteem, and victories were gained,
and conquells made, chiefly by their efforts. The
nobles and their military tenants, though sometimes
summoned to the field, according to ancient sorn,
were confidered as an incumbrance upon the troops

with

With which they a&ted; and were viewed with con- SECT. II.
tempt by soldiers accustomed to the vigorous and
steady operations of regular service.

THus the regulations of Charles the Seventh, The, ffeac

by establishing the first ftandihg army known in
Europe, occasioned an important revolution in
its affairs and policy. By taking from the no-
bles the sole direction of the national military
force, which had raised them to such high autho-
rity and importance, a deep.wound was given to
the feudal aristocracy, in that part where its power
seemed to be most complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body ofregular troops,
at a time when there was hardly a squadron or
company kept in constant pay in any other part of
Europe, acquired such advantages over its neigh-
bours, either in attack or defence, that felf-pre-
servation made it necelfary for them to imitate its
example. Mercenary troops were introduced into
all the considerable kingdoms on the continent.
They gradually became the only military force
that was employed or truied. It has long been
the chief objeEt of policy to increase and to sup-
port them. It has long been the great aim of
princes and ministers to discredit and to annihilate
all other means of national aivity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the start of other The Mo,
powers in establishing a military force in their do- France -
minions, which enabled them to carry on foreign extend teir
operations with more vigour, and to greater ex- prtrogative.
tent, so they were the first who effectually broke
the feudal arifocracy, and humbled the great vas.

VOL. I. I fals

SCET.II. fals of the crown, who by their exorbitant power

v-^-- had long circumscribed the royal prerogative with-

in very narrow limits, and had rendered all the
efforts of the monarchs of Europe inconsiderable.
Many things concurred to undermine, gradually,
the power of the feudal aristocracy in France. The
wealth and property of the nobility were greatly
impaired during the long wars which the kingdom
was obliged to maintain with the English. The
extraordinary zeal with which they exerted them.
selves in defence of their country against its an-
cient enemies, exhaufled entirely the fortunes of
ome great families. As almost every province in
the kingdom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the
lands of others were exposed to the depredations
of the enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary
troops which their sovereigns hired occasionally,
but could not pay, or were desolated with rage fill
more deftrucEive by the peasants, in different infur-
rections. At the fame time, the necessities of go-
vernment having forced their kings upon the de-
fperate expedient of making great and sudden al-
terations in the current coin of the kingdom, the
fines, quit-rents, and other payments fixed by an-
cient cufl-om, funk much in value, and the reve-
nues of a fiefwere reduced far below the fum which
it had once yielded. During their contests with
the Englifl, in which a generous nobility courted
every station where danger appeared, or honour
could be gained, many families of note became
extint, and their fiefs were reunited to the crown.
Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell to female

2 heirs,

heirs, and were divided among them; were dimi- SECT. I.
nifhed by profuse donations tothe church, or were
broken and split by the fuccefflon,of remote col-
lateral heirs'.

ENCOURAGED by there manifest symptoms of The pro.

grefs of the
decline in that body which he wished to depress, royal power

under

Charles VII. during the first interval of peace with charlcsVIr.
England, made several efforts towards establishing
the regal prerogative on the ruins of the arifto-
cracy. But his obligations to the nobles were so
many, as well as recent, and their services in re-
covering the kingdom so splendid, as rendered it
necessary for him to proceed with moderation and
caution. Such, however, was the authority which
the crown had acquired by the progress of its arms
against the English, and so much was the power
of the nobility diminished, that, without any op-
position, he soon made innovations of great confe-
quence in the constitution. He not only efta-
blilhed that formidable body of regular troops,
which has been mentioned, but he was the first
monarch of France who, by his royal edit, with-
out the concurrence of the States-general of the A D. 440;
kingdom, levied an extraordinary subsidy on his
people. He prevailed likewise with his fubjeas,
to render several taxes perpetual, which had for-
merly been imposed occasionally, and exated dur-
ing a flort time. By means of all these innova-
tions, he acquired such an increase of power, and

'Boulainvillicrs Hiloire de Gouvernement de France,
Lcttre xii.

I 2 extended

SECT. II. extended his prerogative so far beyond its ancient
i-'-y- limits, that, from being the most dependent

prince who had ever fat upon the throne of France,
he came to possess, during the latter years of his
reign, a degree of authority which none of his
predecessors had enjoyed for several ages .
Lunder . THAT plan of humbling the nobility which

Charles began to execute, his son Louis XI. car.
ried on with a bolder spirit, and with greater fuc-
cess. Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant;
and at whatever period he had been called to
ascend the throne, his reign must have abounded
with schemes to oppress his people, and to render
his own power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel;
a firanger to every principle of integrity, and re-
gardlefs of decency, he scorned all the reitraints
which a sense of honour, or the desire of fame,
impose even upon ambitious men. Sagacious, at
the fame time, to discern what he deemed his true
interest, and influenced by that alone, he was
capable of pursuing it with a persevering industry,
and of adhering to it with a systematic spirit, from
which no obje& could divert, and no danger
could deter him.

Bts mea- THE maxims of his administration were as pro-

fares for
humbling found as they were fatal to the privileges of the
the nobi-
iLy; ' nobility. He filled all the departments of govern-

ment with new men, and often with persons whom

' Hiltoire de France par Velly & Villaret, tom. xv. 331.

&c. 389. tom. xvi. 324. Variations de la Monarchie Fran
Foife, tom. iii. (,z.

he called from the lowest as well as most despised SECT. I1.
functions in life, and raied at pleasure to tfations -
of great power or trust. These were his only con-
sidents, whom he consulted in forming his plans,
and to whom he committed the execution of them:
While the nobles, accustomed to be the compa-
nions, the favourites, and the ministers of their
sovereigns, were treated with such studied and
mortifying neglec, that if they would not submit
to follow a court in which they appeared without
any hadow of their ancient power, they were
obliged to retire to their castles, where they re-
mained unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied
with having rendered the nobles of less confider-
ation, by taking out of their hands the sole direc-
tion of affairs, Louis added insult to neglet; and
by violating their most valuable privileges, endea-
voured to degrade the order, and to reduce the
members of it to the fame level with other sub-
ess. Persons of the highest rank among them,
if o bold as to oppose his schemes, or so unfor-
tunate as to awaken the jealousy of his capricious
temper, were persecuted with rigour, from which
all who belonged to the order of nobility had
hitherto been exempt; they were tried by judges
who had no right to take cognizance of their
acions; and were fubjeaed to torture, or con-
demned to an ignominious death, without regard
to their birth or condition. The people, acctlftom-
ed to fee the blood of the most illultrious person-
ages tbed by the hands of the common execu-
tioner, to behold them hut up in dungeons, and

I 3 carried

SECT. II. carried about in cages of iron, began to view the
^^-- ' nobility with less reverence than formerly, and

looked up with terror to the royal authority,
which seemed to have humbled or annihilated
every other power in the kingdom.

and of di- AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that op-
thcrin preflion might rouse the nobles, whom the rigour

of his government had intimidated, or that self-
preservation might at last teach them to unite,
dexterously cattered among them the feeds ofdif-
cord, and industriously fomented those ancient
animofities between the great families, which the
spirit of jealousy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and
frill kept alive. To accomplish this, all the arts
of intrigue, all the mysteries and refinements of
his fraudulent policy were employed, and with
such success, that at a juncture which required the
most strenuous efforts, as well as the most perfet
union, the nobles never ated, except during one
short ally of resentment at the beginning of his
reign, either with vigour or in concert.

He adds to As he ifripped the nobility.of their privileges,
the number
of landing he added to the power and prerogative of the
forces. crown. In order to have at command such a body

of soldiers as might be sufficient to crush any force
that his difaffeced fubjeets could draw together,
he not only kept on foot the regular troops which
his father had raised, but, beides augmenting their
number considerably, he took into his pay fix

thousand

thousand Swiss, at that time the best disciplined SECT. II.
and most formidable infantry in Europe". From
the jealousy, natural to tyrants, he confided in these
foreign mercenaries, as the most devoted inftru-
ments of oppression, and the most faithful guard-
ians of the power which he had usurped. That
they might be ready to aft on the shortest warning,
he, during the latter years of his reign, kept a
considerable body of them encamped in one
place w.

GREAT funds were requisite, not only to defray Fe aug-

ments the

the expence of this additional establishment, but revenucsof
to supply the fums employed in the various en- thlecrown
terprizes which the restless activity of his genius
prompted him to undertake. But the preroga-
tive that his father had assumed of levying taxes
without the concurrence of the Rfates-general,
which he was careful not only to retain but to ex-
tend, enabled him to provide in some measure for
the encreafing charges of government.

WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could His addresr

not furnish, his address procured. iHe was the tliaibl
firit monarch in Europe who discovered the me- "fflate.
thod of managing those great assemblies, in which
tle feudal policy had vested the power of granting
subsidies and of imposing taxes. He first taught
other princes the fatal art of beginning their
attack on public liberty, by corrupting the
turce from which it hould flow. By exerting all

" Mem. de Comines, tom. i. 367. Dan. Hist. de la Milice
"ranFoife, tom. i. 18. , v Mem. de Comr. tom. i. 381.

I 4 his

SECT. II. his power and address in influencing the eleEion
0- - of representatives, by bribing or overawing the

members, and by various changes which he art.
fully made in the-form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired such entire diretion of there as.
femblies, that, from being the vigilant guardians
of the privileges and property of the people, he
rendered them tamely subservient towardstromot-
ing the most odious measures of his reign . As
no power remained to set bounds to his exations,
he not only continued all the taxes imposed by his
father, but made great additions to them, which
amounted to a fum that appeared aftonilhing to
his contemporaries Y.*

Reenlarges NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the
the bounds
of the crown that Louis increased; he extended its terri-
Farcbmy. tories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got

possession of Roufillon by purchase; Provence
was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a strong hand Burgundy and Artois,
which had belonged to that prince. Thus, dur-
ing the course of a single reign, France was
formed into one compaa kingdom, and the teady
unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued

Memn. de Comin. tom..i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid.
tom. ii. p. 71. Y Mem. de Cor. tom. i. 334.

*Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of 1,800,000

francs ; Louis XI. raired 4,700,000. The former had in pay
9ooo cavalry and 16,ooo infantry. The latteraugmented te
cavalry to 15.ooa, and the infantry to 25,900. Mem. de
Comines, i. 384.

the

the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but efta- SECT. II.
lilhed a species of government, scarcely less ab- '--
olute, or less terrible than eastern despotism.
BUT fatal as his administration was to the liber- Br al these

the French

ies of his fubjets, the authority which he ac- gocrnment
uired, the resources of which he became master, redae': v
nd his freedom from restraint in concerting his and enter
lans as well as in executing them, rendered his
eign ative and enterprizing. Louis negociated

all the courts of Europe; he observed the
otions of all his neighbours; he engaged, either
s principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great
ranfaion; his resolutions were prompt, his ope-
ations vigorous; and upon every emergence he
ould call forth into aion the whole force of his
ingdom. From the era of his reign, the kings
f France, no longer fettered and circumscribed
thome by a jealous nobility, have exerted them-
elves more abroad, have formed more e.xtensive
chemes of foreign conquests, and have carried on
ar with a spirit and vigour long unknown in
urope.

THE example which Louis set was too inviting Step* taken
ot to be imitated by other princes. Henry VII. tending the
s oon as he was feated on the throne of England, Phe rof
ormed the plan of enlarging his own prerogative, in England;
y breaking the power of the nobility. The cir-
umftances under which he undertook to execute
, were less favourable than those which induced
harles VII. to make the fame attempt; and
e spirit with which he conduted it, was very

different

SECT. II. different from that of Louis XI. Charles, by the

'- - success of his arms againfi the English, by the

merit of having expelled them out of so many
provinces, had established himself so firmly in th(
confidence of his people, as encouraged him to
make bold encroachments on the ancient confli.
tution. The daring genius of Louis broke through
every barrier, and endeavoured to surmount or to
remove every obstacle that flood in his way. But
Henry held the sceptre by a disputed title; a po.
pular fation was ready every moment to take
arms against him; and after long civil wars, dur-
ing which the nobility had often displayed their
power in creating and deposing kings, he felt that
the regal authority had been so much relaxed, and
that he entered into pofleffion of a prerogative so
much abridged, as rendered it necefary to carry
on his measures deliberately, and without any vio.
lent exertion, He endeavoured to undermine that
formidable ftrusture, which he durst not attack
by open force. His schemes, though cautious
and flow in their operation, were well concerted,
and produ&ive in the end of great effe&s. By
his laws, permitting the barons to break the en-
tails of their estates, and expose them to sale;
by his regulations to prevent the nobility from
keeping in their service those numerous bands of
retainers, which rendered them formidable and
turbulent; by favouring the rising power of the
commons; by encouraging population, agricul-
ture, and commerce; by securing to his fubjecs,
during a long reign, the enjoyment of the bleflings

which

which flow from the arts of peace; by accustom- SEcr.II.
ling them to an administration of government, un-
der which the laws were executed with steadiness
and vigour; he made imperceptibly considerable
'alterations in the English constitution, and tranf-
mitted to his successor authority so extensive, as
rendered him one of the most absolute monarchs
in Europe, and capable of the greatest and most
vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the nai n
marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory that
they acquired by the conquest of Granada, which
brought the odious dominion of the Moors to a
period; the command of the great armies which
it had been necessary to keep long on foot, in
order to accomplish this; the wisdom and fteadi-
ness of their administration; and the address with
which they availed themselves of every incident
that occurred to humble the nobility, and to ex-
tend their own prerogative, conspired in raising
these monarchs to such eminence and authority,
as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed.
Though several causes, which shall be explained
in another place, prevented their attaining the
fame powers with the kings of France and Eng-
land, and preserved the feudal constitution longer
entire in Spain, their great abilities supplied the
defcts of their prerogative, and improved with
such dexterity all the advantages which they pof-
fcfled, that Ferdinand carried on his foreign ope-

rations,

SECT. II. rations, which were very extensive, with extraor.
'- ' dinary vigour andeffet.

Events hap- WHILE these princes were thus enlarging the
hichcalled boundaries of prerogative, and taking such fleps
the several towards rendering their kingdom capable of a.
monarchs to kp
exert the ing with union and force, events occurred, which
.ew powers y
which they called them forth to exert the new powers which
-adacqir they had acquired. These engaged them in such

a series of enterprizes and negociations, that the
affairs of all the considerable nations in Europe
came to be insensibly interwoven with each other;
and a great political system was gradually form.
ed, which grew to be an obje& of universal at.
tention,

The firR of THE first event which merits notice, on account
there events
was the of its influence in producing this change in the
the heirs state of Europe, was the marriage of the daughter
of Buth h" of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress of the house
gundy. of Burgundy. For rome years before her father's

death, she had been confidered as the apparent
successor to his territories, and Charles had made
proposals of marrying her to several different
princes, with a view of alluring them, by that
offer, to favour the schemes which his reflefs am-
bition was continually forming,

Theimport, THIS rendered the alliance with her an objet
to the flna of general attention; and all the advantages of ac-
of Europe. quiring possession of her territories, the most opu'

lent at that time, and the best cultivated of any on

this

his fide of the Alps, were perfeEtly understood. SECT. IE.
s soon, then, as the untimely death of Charles '
pened the succession, the eyes of all the princes
n Europe were turned towards Mary, and they A.D. 1477,
elt themselves deeply interested in the choice Jauar 5.
hich she was about to make of the person on
hom Ihe would bestow that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the view of
rovinces which she possessed had been difmem- with refpea
ered, and whose dominions firetched along the
frontier of her territories, had every inducement
o court her alliance. He had, likewise, a good
title to expect the favourable reception of any rea-
fonable proposition he should make, with respect
to the disposal of a princess, who was the vassal
f his crown, and descended from the royal blood
of France. There were only two propositions,
however, which he could make with propriety.
The one was the marriage of the dauphin, the
other that of the count of Angouleme, a prince
ofthe blood, with the heiress of Burgundy. By
the former, he would have annexed all her terri-
tories to his crown, and have rendered France at
once the most refpetable monarchy in Europe.
But the great disparity of age between the two
parties, Mary being twenty, and the dauphin
only eight years old; the avowed resolution of the
Flemings, not to chue a master possessed of such
power as might enable him to form schemes dan-
gerous to their liberties; together with their dread
of falling under the odious and oppreflive govern-

ment

SECT. II. ment of Louis, were obstacles in the way of exe,
t-- -w' cuting this plan, which it was vain to think ol

surmounting. By the latter, the accomplishment
of which might have been attained with ease, Mary
having discovered some inclination to a match with
the count of Angouleme z, Louis would have pre.
vented the dominions of the house of Burgundy
from being conveyed to a rival power, and in re.
turn for such a splendid establishment for the count
of Angouleme, he must have obtained, or would
have extorted from him, concessions highly bene.
ficial to the crown of France. But Louis had been
accustomed so long to the intricacies of a crooked
and insidious policy, that he could not be satisfied
with what was obvious and simple; and was so
fond of artifice and refinement, that he came to
confider there rather as an ultimate obje&t, than
merely as the means of conduaing affairs. From
this principle, no less than from his unwillingness
to aggrandize any of his own fubje6ts, or from his
desire of oppressing the house of Burgundy, which
he hated, he negleaed the course which a prince
less able and artful would have taken, and fol-
lowed one more suited to his own genius.

The ingu- I-E propoed to render himself, by force of arms,
which he mafler of those provinces which Mary held of

the crown of F rance, and even to pulh his con-
quests into her other territories, while he amused
her with infilling continually on the impraicable
match with the dauphin. In prosecuting this

z Mem. do Comincs, i. 358. ln

plan,

plan, he displayed wonderful talents and industry, SECT. II.
and exhibited such scenes of treachery, falsehood, -
and cruelty, as are amazing even in the history
of Louis XI. Immediately upon the death of
Charles, he put his troops in motion, and ad-
vanced towards the Netherlands. He corrupted
theleading men in the provinces of Burgundy and
Artois, and reduced them to desert their sbvereign.
He got admission into ome of the frontier towns
by bribing the goverhors; the gates of others were
opened'to him in consequence of his intrigues
with the inhabitants. He negociated with Mary;
and, in order to render her odious' to her fubjeds,
he betrayed to them her moR important secrets.
He carried on a private correspondence with the
two ministers whom he chiefly trusted, and then
communicated the letters which he had received
from them to the states of Slanders, who, enraged
at their perfidy, brought them immediately to
trial, tortured them with extreme cruelty, and,
unmoved by the tears and entreaties of their fove-
reign, who knew and approved of all that the
ministers had done, they beheaded them in her
prefcncea.

WHILE Louis, by this conduc, unworthy of a The efrf

of this, the

great monarch, was securing the poffefion of marriage of
Burgundy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme, Mixi'nilian

with the
the flates of Slanders carried on a negociation heiref of

Burgundy,

with the emperor Frederic III. and concluded a A.U. 1477.
treaty of marriage between their sovereign and his

" Mcm. de Comines, liv. v. chap. 15. p. 309, &c.

son

SECT.. son Maximilian, archduke of Austria. The il,
(--»-' luftriout birth of that prince, as well as the high

dignity of which he had the profpe&, rendered
the alliance honourable for Mary, while, from
the distance of his hereditary territoriesi and the
scantiness of his revenues, his power was so incon.
fiderable, as did not excite the jealousy or fear of
the Flemings.

The 'flat THUS Lotis, by the caprice of his temper, and
ence of that:
on the flac the excess of his refinements, put the house of

Arope. Austria in poffefion of this noble inheritance,
By this acquisition, the foundation of the future
grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became
matter of those territories, which enabled him to
carry on his most formidable and decisive opera.
tions against France. Thuss too, the fame mo-
narch who first united the interior force of France,
and established it on such a footing as to render
it formidable to the reft of Europe, contributed,
far contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival
power, which, during two centuries, has thwarted
the measures, opposed the arms, and checked the
progress of his fuccefors.

The nex t THE next event of consequence in the fifteenth
confider,,ble
event was century, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into
the invasions
of t^ly by Italy. This occasioned revolutions no les me-
vinl!. morable; produced alterations, both in the mili-
A.D. 1494. tary and political syser, which were more im-.

mediately perceived; roused the states of Europe
to bolder efforts; and blended their affairs and

intercits

interests more closely together. The mild admi- SECT. I.
niftration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince, T7o-
seems to have revived the spirit and genius of tive ofthic.
the French nation, which the rigid despotism of
Louis XI. his father, had deprefled, and almost
extinguished. The ardour for military service,
natural to the French nobility, returned, and their
young monarch was impatient to distinguish his
reign by ome splendid enterprize. While he was
uncertain towards what quarter he should turn his
arms, the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian
politician, no less infamous on account of his
crimes, than eminent for his abilities, determined
his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the
design of deposing his' nephew the duke of Milan,
and of placing himself on the ducal throne, was
so much afraid of a combination of the Italian
powers to oppose this measure, and to support the
injured Prince, with whom most of them were
conneted by blood or alliance, that he saw the
necessity of securing the aid of ome able pro-
tecor. The King of France was the person to
whom he applied; and without disclosing his own
intentions, he laboured to prevail with him to
march into Italy, at the head of a powerful army,
in order to seize the crown of Naples, to which
Charles had pretensions as heir of the house of
Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed by
the Angevin family, had been conveyed to Louis
XI. by Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and
Provence. But that agacious monarch, though
he took immediate poffyTnon of those territories of

VOL. I. K which

SECT. II. which Charles was really master, totally disregarded
- J his ideal title to a kingdom, over which another

prince reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly de.
cined involving himself in the labyrinth of Italian
politics. His on, more adventurous, or more
inconsiderate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize;
and contemning all the remonstrances of his most
experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on
with the utmof vigour.

His refour- THE power which Charles pofIefled was so
ces for tis
entcrprize. great, that he reckoned himself equal to this ar-

duous undertaking. His father had transmitted
to him such an ample prerogative, as gave him
the entire command of his kingdom. He himself
had added considerably to the extent of his do-
minions, by his prudent marriage with the heiress
of Bretagne, which rendered him master of that
province, the last of the great fiefs that remained
to be annexed to the crown. He oon assembled
forces which he thought sufficient; and so impa.
tient was he to enter on his career as a conqueror,
that acrificing what was real, for what was chime-
rical, he restored Roufillon to Ferdinand, and
gave up part of his father's acquisitions in Artois
to Maximilian, with a view of inducing these
princes not to molcit France, while he was carry.
ing on his operations in Italy.

H.4ipspt- BUT so different were the efforts of the States
tions for it.

of Europe in the fifteenth century, from thoef
which we hall behold in the course of this history,

that

at the army with which Charles undertook this SECT.I.
reat enterprize, did not exceed twenty thousand -
en. The train of artillery, however, the ammu-
ition, and warlike fores of every kind provided
r its use, were so considerable, as to bear ome
semblance to the immense apparatus of modern
arb.

WHEN the French entered Italy, they met with ts ruccefs.
othing able to resist them. The Italian powers
aving remained, during a long period, undif-
urbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy, had
ormed a system with refpeA to their affairs, both
n peace and war, peculiar to themselves. In
rder to adjust the interests, and balance the power
fthe different states into which Italy was divided,
hey were engaged in perpetual and endless nego-
iations with each other, which they conducted
ith all the subtlety of a refining and deceitful
olicy. Their contests in the field, when they
ad recourse to arms, were decided in mock bat-
es, by innocent and bloodless victories. Upon
he first appearance of the danger which now im-
ended, they had recourse to the arts which they
had fudied, and employed their utmost kill in in-
trigue in order to avert it. But this proving inef-
fetual, their bands of effeminate mercenaries, the
only military force that remained in the country,
being fit only for the parade of service, were terri-
sied at the aspea of real war, and flrunk at its ap-

b Mczeray Hit. tom. ii. 777.

K 2 proach.

SEcr. II. proach. The impetuosity of the French valoi
- --^~ appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pisa, an

Rome opened their gates as the French armr
advanced. The profpe& of this dreadful invali
struck one King of Naples with such panic terroi
that he died (if we may believe historians) ofth
fright. Another abdicated his throne from th
fame pusillanimous spirit. A third fled out
his dominions, as soon as the enemy appeared on
the Neapolitan frontiers. Charles, after marching
thither from the bottom of the Alps, with a
much rapidity, and almost as little opposition, a
if he had been on a progress through his owi
dominions, took quiet pofleffion of the throne o
Naples, and intimidated or gave law to ever
power in Italy.

Its effets. SucH was the conclusion of an expedition
particu''y that must be confidered as the first great exertior
fe to the of those new powers which the princes of Europi
fiernm con-
cerning a had acquired, and now began to exercise. It
balance of
pbw.:. effeóts were no le's considerable, than its fuccefi

had been astonishing. The Italians, unable to
relift' the impression of the enemy who broke in
upon them, permitted him to hold on his courfc
undiflurbed. They quickly perceived that no
tingle power, which they could rouse to ation
was an equal match for a monarch who ruled
over such extensive territories, and was at the
licad of such a martial people; but that a confe
Ici-acy Inigllt accomplifi what the separate meiln

bers

bers of it durst not attempt. To this expedient, SECT. II.
the only one that remained to deliver or to pre-
serve them from the yoke, they had recourse.
While Charles inconsiderately wafted his time at
Naples in festivals and triumphs on account of
his past successes, or was fondly dreaming of fu-
ture conquets in the East, to the empire of which
he now aspired, they formed against him a power-
ful combination of almost all the Italian states,
upported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ser-
dinand King of Aragon. The union of so many
powers, who suspended or forgot all their parti-
cular animosities, that they might at in. concert
against an enemy who had become formidable to
them all, awakened Charles from his thought-
less security. He faw-now no profpea of safety
but in returning to France. An army: of thirty
thousand men, assembled by the allies, was ready
to obftrut his march; and though the French,
with a daring courage, which more than counter-
vailed their inferiority in number, broke through
that great body, and gained a victory, which
opened to their monarch a safe passage into his
own territories, he was tripped of all his con-
quests in Italy in as short a time as it had taken
to acquire them; and the political fyfltem in that
country resumed the fame appearance as before his
invasion.

THE sudden and decisive eea of this confe-

deracy, seems to have inftrutred the princes and
latefiTen of Italy as much as the irruption of the

K 3 riclllh

SECT. II. French had disconcerted and alarmed them.
i'", ' They had extended, on this occasion, to the
comr the affairs of Europe, the maxims of that political
great objea
of p,;yw, science which had hitherto been applied only to
and thenin regulate the operations of the petty states in their
Europe. own country. They had discovered the method

of preventing any monarch from rising to fucha
degree of power, as was inconsistent with the
general liberty; and had manifested the import.
ance of attending to that great secret in modern
policy, the preservation of a proper distribution
of power among all the members of the system
into which the states of Europe are formed.
During all the wars of which Italy from that time
was the theatre, and amidst the hostile operations
which the imprudence of Louis XII. and the am.
bition of Ferdinand of Aragon, carried on in that
country, with little interruption, from the close
of the fifteenth century, to that period at which
the subsequent history commences, the maintain-
ing a proper balance of power between the con-
tending parties, became the great object of at.
tention to the statesmen of Italy. Nor was the
idea confined to them. Self-prefervation taught
other powers to adopt it. It grew to be falhion
able and universal. From this -era we can trace
the progress of that inrercourfe between nations,
which has linked the powers of Europe so closely
together; and can discern the operations of that
provident policy, which, during peace, guards
against remote and contingent dangers; and,

inl

in war, has prevented rapid and deftrutive con- SECT.TIL
quests. ,

THIS was not the only effect of the dperations The war,

which the great powers of Europe carried on in lily render
Italy. They contributed to render general such a mcssia-
change, as the French had begun to make in the
state of their troops; and obliged all the princes,
who appeared on this new theatre of ation, to
put the military force of their kingdoms on an
establishment similar to that of France. When
the feat of war came to be remote from the coun-
tries which maintained the contest, the service of
the feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and the
necessity of employing soldiers regularly trained to
arms, and kept in constant pay, came at once to
be evident. When Charles VIII. marched into
Italy, his cavalry was entirely composed of those
companies of Gendarmes, embodied by Charles
VII. and continued by Louis XI.; his infantry
confilted partly of Swiss, hired of the Cantons,
and partly of Gascons, armed and disciplined after
the Swiss model. To there Louis XII. added a
body of Germans, well known in the wars of
Italy by the name of the Black Bands. But nei-
ther of these monarchs made any account of the
feudal militia, or ever had recourse to that
military force which they might have com-
manded, in virtue of the ancient infitutions in
their kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as
soon as they began to at in Italy, employed fimi-

K 4lar

SECT. II. milar instruments, and trusted the execution of
'-v~T' their plans entirely to mercenary troops.

Teach the THIS innovation in the military system was
Europeans thejfuperior quickly followed by another, which the custom of
importance
of infantry employing Swiss in the Italian wars was the occa.
in war. sion of introducing. The arms and discipline of

the Swiss were different from those of other Euro.
pean nations, During their long and violent ftrug.
gles in defence of their liberties againif the house
of Austria, whose armies, like those of other con-
fiderable princes, consisted chiefly of heavy-armed
cavalry, the Swiss found that their poverty, and
the small number of gentlemen residing in their
country, at that time barren and ill cultivated, put
it out of their power to bring into the field any
body of horse capable of facing the enemy. Ne-
ceffity compelled them to place all their confidence
in infantry; and in order to render it capableof
withstanding the shock of cavalry, they gave the
soldiers breast-plates and helmets as defensive ar-
mour; together with long spears, ha!berts, and
heavy swords, as weapons of offence. They formed
them into large battalions, ranged in deep and
close array, so that they could present on every fide
a formidable front to the enemyc. The men at
arms could make no impression on the solid strength
of such a body. It repulied the Austrians in all
their attempts to conquer Swifferland. It broke
the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarcely

cMachiavel's Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 451.

inferior

inferior to that of France, either in number or re- SECT. .
putation; and when first called to at in Italy, it -
bore down, by its irresistible force, every enemy
that attempted to oppose it. These repeated proofs
of the decisive effect of infantry, exhibited on
such conspicuous occasions, restored that service
to reputation, and gradually re-established the
opinion, which had been long exploded, of its
superior. importance in the operations of war.
But the glory which the Swiss had acquired,
having inspired them with such high ideas of their
own prowess and consequence as frequently ren-
dered them mutinous and insolent, the princes
who employed them became weary of depending
on the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and began
to turn their attention towards the improvement
of their national infantry.

THE German powers having the command of Natinnal
men, whom nature has endowed with that fleady cabihied
courage and persevering strength which forms them in Ger-
to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops in such a
manner, that they vied with the Swiss both in
discipline and valour.

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, In France.
and with greater difficulty, accultomed the im-
petuous spirit of their people rj subordination
and discipline; and were at such pains to render
their national infantry refpecable, that as early
as the reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of
higih rank had so far abandoned their ancient

ideas,

SECT. II. ideas, as to condescend to enter into tha
'v' service .
In Spain. THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficul

to employ any other than their national troops it
the southern parts of Italy, which was the chiel
scene of their operations in that country, notonly
adopted the Swiss discipline, but improved upon
it, by mingling a proper number of soldiers,
armed with heavy muskets, in their battalions;
and thus formed that famous body of infantry,
which, during a century and a half,,was the ad.
miration and terror of all Europe. The Italian
states gradually diminished the number of their
cavalry, and, in imitation of their more powerful
neighbours, brought the strength of their armies
to consist in foot soldiers. From this period the
nations of Europe have carried on war with forces
more adapted to every species of service, more
capable of acting in every country, and better
fitted both for making conquets, and for preferv.
ing them.

The Italian As their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe
wars ocCa-
t(in n in- to these improvements in the art of war, they gave
pbicrfe-h them likewise the firfl idea of the expence with
enrue" n which it is accompanied when extensive or of

long continuance, and accustomed every nation
to the burden of such impositions as are necessary
for supporting it. While the feudal policy sub.
siteed in full vigour, while armies were composed

d Brantome, tom. x. p. 1i. Mem. de Fleuranges, I+3

of military vassals called forth to attack some SECT. II.
neighbouring power, and to perform, in a short '-- '
campaign, the services which they owed to their
sovereign, the expence of war was extremely
moderate. A finall subsidy enabled a prince to
begin and to finish his greatest military opera-
tions. But when Italy became the theatre on
which the powers of Europe contended for fupe-
riority, the preparations requisite for such a distant
expedition, the pay of armies kept constantly on
foot, their subsistence in a foreign country, the
sieges to be undertaken, and the towns to be de-
fended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and,
by creating demands unknown in less ative times,
multiplied taxes in every kingdom. The progress
of ambition, however, was so rapid, and princes
extended their operations so fast, that it was im-
poflible at first to establish funds proportional to
the increase of expence which there occasioned.
When Charles VIII. invaded Naples, the fums
requisite for carrying on that enterprize so far ex-
ceeded those which France had been accustomed
to contribute for the support of government, that
before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his trea-
fury was exhausted, and the dorneftic resources,
of which his extensive prerogative gave him the
command, were at an end. As he durst not ven-
ture to lay any new imposition on his people, op-
prefled already with the weight of unusual
burdens; the only expedient that remained was,
to borrow of the Genoese as much money as
might enable him to continue his march. But he

could

SECT II. could not obtain a sufficient fum, without con

r -v-J senting to pay annually the exorbitant interest o

forty-two livres for every hundred that he re
ceived c. We may observe the fame difproportioi
between the efforts and revenues of other princes,
his contemporaries. From this period, taxes
went on increaing; and during the reign ol
Charles V. such fums were levied in every state,
as would have appeared enormous at the close ol
the fifteenth century, and gradually prepared the
way for the still more exorbitant exa ions of mo.
dern times.

te Ceamre THE last tranfadion, previous to the reign of
inot er im- Charles V. that merits attention on account of its
portait oc-
curre,o. influence upon the state of Europe, is the league

of Cambray. To humble the republic of Venice,
and to divide its territories, was the obje2 of all
the powers who united in this confederacy. The
civil confitution of Venice, established on a firm
basis, had suffered no considerable alteration for
leveral centuries; during which, the senate con,
duaed its affairs by maxims of policy no less pru.
dent than vigorous, and adhered to there with an
uniform consistent spirit, which gave that common-
wealth great advantage over other fates, wliofe
views and mealures changed as often as the form of
their government, or the persons who adminitered
it. By there unintermitted exertions of wisdom
and valour, the Venetians enlarged the domi-
nions of their commonwealth, until it became the

' Mem. de Comines, lib. vii. c. . p. 440.

nol

most considerable power in Italy; while their ex- SECT. II.
tensive commerce; the useful and curious manufac-
tures which they carried on, together with the large
share which they had acquired of the lucrative com-
merce with the East, rendered Venice the most
opulent state in Europe.

THE power of the Venetians was the obje6t of Themo-

terror to their Italian neighbours. Their wealth tivcs Of '
was viewed with envy by the greatest monarchs,
who could not vie with many of their private citi-
zens in the magnificence of their buildings, in the
richness of their dress and furniture, or in splendor
and elegance of living f. Julius II. whose ambi-
tion was superior, and his abilities equal, to those
of any pontiff who ever fat on the papal throne,
conceived the idea of this league against the Vene-
tians, and endeavoured, by applying to those pas-
sions which I have mentioned, to persuade other
princes to join in it. By working upon the fears
of the Italian powers, and upon the avarice of feve-
ral monarchs beyond the Alps, he induced them,
in concurrence with other causes, which it is not
my province to explain, to form one of the most
powerful confederacies that Europe had ever be-
held, against those haughty republicans.

TIl emperor, the king of France, the king of The rpid

Aragon, the pope, were principals in the league Ph"fft
of Cambray, to which almoit all the princes of d'er"-
Italy acceded, the lealt considerable of them hoping
for foiln share in the spoils of a Itate, which
they deemred to be now devoted to deftrution.
f Ieliani oatio apud Goldafium in polit. mnperial. ip. 9'<o.

SECT. II. The Venetians might have diverted this form, 01
'-"- have broken its force; but with a prefumptuoul

rashness, to which there is nothing imilar in the
course of their history, they waited its approach.
The impetuous valour of the French rendered
ineffetual all their precautions for the safety of the
republic; and the fatal battle of Ghiarraddada en.
tirely ruined the army, on which they relied for
defence. Julius seized all the towns which they
held in the ecclesiastical territories. Ferdinand re.
annexed the towns of which they had got poffeflion
on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan domi.
nions. Maximilian, at the head of a powerful
army, advanced towards Venice on the one fide.
The French pushed their conquests on the other.
The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies,
and left without one ally, funk from the height of
presumption to the depths of despair; abandoned
all their territories on the continent; and slut
themselves up in their capital, as their last refuge,
and the only place which they hoped to preserve.

Divifon THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the
arifel among
them. confederacy. The members of it, whose union

continued while they were engaged in seizing their
prey, began to feel their ancient jealousies and
animofities revive, as soon as they had a profpea
of dividing it. When the Venetians observed
there symptoms of distrust and alienation, a ray
of hope broke in upon them; the spirit natural
to their councils returned; they resumed such wis-
dom and firmness, as made ome atonement for
their former imprudence and dejeaion; they re-

i . covered

vered part of the territory which they had loft; SECT. II.
hey appeared the pope and Ferdinand by well- -
imed concessions in their favour; and at length
iffolved the confederacy, which had brought their
ommonwealth to the brink of ruin.

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a Newobje a
eague which he himself had planned, and ima- ^licy an
ining that nothing was too arduous for him to ambition.
ndertake, conceived the idea of expelling every
reign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
f his mind towards executing a scheme so well
uited to his enterprizing genius. He directed
is first attack against the French, who, on many
ccounts, were more odious to the Italians, than
ny of the foreigners who had acquired dominion
n their country. By his aivity and address, he
revailed on moft-of the powers, who had joinel
nthe league of Cambray, to turn their arms
gainft the king of France, their former ally;
ndengaged Henry VIII. who had lately ascended
he throne of England, to favour their operations
y invading France. Louis XII. resifted all the
eforts of this formidable and unexpected con-
federacy with undaunted fortitude. Hostilities
were carried on, during several campaigns, in
Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy,
'with alternate success. Exhausted, at length, by
the variety as well as extent of his operations
tnable to wichftand a confederacy which brought
against him superior force, condu6ted with wifdorm
and aaing with perseverance; Louis found it ne-

ceffary

SECT. II. ceffary to conclude separate treaties of peacewitl
'-rc-' his enemies; and the war terminated with the o

of every thing which the French had acquired i
Italy, except the cattle of Milan, and a few incon
fiderable towns in that dutchy.

By this the THE various negociations carried on during thil
interoufse
among the busy period, and the different combination
naions in- formed among powers' hitherto little conne&ed
uzafes. with each other, greatly increased that intercourfi

among the nations of Europe, which I have
mentioned as one effect of the events in the sis.
teenth century; while the greatness of the ob.
jee6s at which different nations aimed, the distant
expeditions which they undertook, as well asthi
length and obstinacy of the contefi in which they
engaged, obliged them to exert themselves witha
Vigour and perseverance unknown in the preceding

ages.

They ate THOSE active scenes which the following hiftor
thetranf will exhibit, as well as the variety and importana
the^.of of those tranfations which distinguish the period
tenth to which it extends, are not to be ascribed folel

enu. to the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rival,

ship of Charles V. and of Francis I. The king
doms of Europe had arrived at such a degree
improvement in the internal administration o
government, and princes had acquired such corn
mand of the national force which was to be ex
erted in foreign wars, that they were in a con
dition to enlarge the fp.llere of their operations

t(

to multiply their claims and pretensions, and to SECT. I.
increase the vigour of their efforts. Accord-
ingly the sixteenth century opened with the certain
profpet of its abounding in great and interesting
event s.

/
VOL. I. L

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E URO P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

SECTION III.
Siew of the political Conflitution of the principal

States in Europe, at the Commiencement of te
Jixteenth Century.
SECT.II. AV I N G thus enumerated the principal

'L- v LJ

iH causes and events, the influence of which

A confHider-
ble variety was felt in every part of Europe, and contributed
titution of either to improve internal order and police in its
natl';diof t various states, or to enlarge the sphere of their ac-
Eur)pe. tivity, by giving them more entire command of

the force with which foreign operations are car-
ried on; nothing farther seems requisite for prepar-

ing

ing my readers to enter, with full information, SECT.III.
upon perusing the History of Charles V., but to '-
give a view of the political constitution and form
of civil government in each of the nations which
aRed any considerable part during that period.
For as the institutions and events which I have en-
deavoured to illuffrate, formed the people of Eu-
rope to resemble each other, and conducted them
from barbarism to refinement, in the fame path,
and by nearly equal steps; there were other cir-
cumftances which occasioned a difference in their
political eftablilhments, and gave rife to those pe-
culiar modes of government, which have produced
such variety in the character and genius of nations.

IT is no less necessary to become acquainted with NeceTiry to
the latter, than to have contemplated the former. fiateoftch
Without a diftin6 knowledge of the peculiar form "ce v
and genius of civil government in each state, a began his

reign.

great part of its transactions muff appear altogether
mysterious and inexplicable. The historians of
particular countries, as they seldom extended their
views farther than to the amusement or instruction
of their fellow-citizens, by whom they might pre-
fume that all their domestic cufloms and inffitu-
tions were perfectly understood, have often ne-
gleted to descend into such details with refpe to
these, as are sufficient to convey to foreigners full
light and information concerning the occurrences
which they reiate. But a history, which compre-
hends the tranfiations of so many different coun-
tries, would be extremely imperfea, without a pre-
vious survey of the constitution and political lRate

L 2 of

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
V I E W

OF TH E
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

S E C T I ON III.
View of the political Conf/itution of the principal

States in Europe, at the Comhmencement of the
sixteenth Century.

SECT.III. H AV I N G thus enumerated the principal
AL v 11e-i H causes and events, the influence of which
A confiler-
able variety was felt in every part of Europe, and contributed
in the con-
fitutinn of either to improve internal order and police in its

'nhatdoifof various fiates, or to enlarge the sphere of their ac-
Eur'pe. tivity, by giving them more entire command of

the force with which foreign operations are car-
ried on nothing farther seems requisite for prcpar-

ing

ing my readers to enter, with full information, SECT.III.
upon peruing the History of Charles V., but to "-"
give a view of the political contiitution and form
of civil government in each of the nations which
aced any considerable part during that period.
For as the intfitutions and events which I have en-
deavoured to illustrate, formed the people of Eu-
rope to resemble each other, and conduced them
from barbarism to refinement, in the fame path,
and by nearly equal steps; there were other cir-
cumtances which occasioned a difference in their
political establishments, and gave rife to those pe-
culiar modes of government, which have produced
such variety in the character and genius of nations.

IT is no less necessary to become acquainted with Necef.iry to

explain the

the latter, than to have contemplated the former. earateof ech
Without a diftin6 knowledge of the peculiar form hes v
and genius of civil government in each state, a beganhis

reign.

great part of its transaCtions must appear altogether
mysterious and inexplicable. The historians of
particular countries, as they seldom extended their
views farther than to the amusement or inflrution
of their fellow-citizens, by whom they might pre-
fume that all their domestic customs and inftitu-
tions were perfectly underifood, have often ne-
glefted to descend into such details with respect to
there, as are sufficient to convey to foreigners full
light and inforlna-ion concerning the occurrences
which they reiate. But a hitory, which compre-
hends the tranlfaions of so many different coun-
tries, would be extremely imperfect, without a pre-
Vious survey of the constitution and political itate

L z of

SECT.IIl. of each. It is from his knowledge of these, that

v"* ' the reader must draw those principles, which will

enable him to judge with discernment, and to
decide with certainty concerning the condu& of
nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would lead
to dedutions of immeasurable length. To' ketch
out the great lines which distinguish and charade-
rife each government, is all that the nature of my
present work will admit of, and all that is necessary
to illultrate the events which it records.
The state AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the

o ta71 political afpe& of Italy was extremely different from

that of any other part of Europe. Instead of those
extensive monarchies, which occupied the ret of
the continent, that delightful country was parcelled
out among many small flates, each of which pof-
sessed sovereign and independent jurifdidtion. The
only monarchy in Italy was that of Naples. The
dominion of the popes was of a peculiar species, to
which there is nothing similar either in ancient or
modern times. In Venice, Florence, and Ge-
noa, a republican form of government was ea-
blifhed. Milan was ubjea to sovereigns, who had
aitumed no higher title than that of dukes.

digrHily lc TIHE Pope was the sirs of these powers in dig-
highcst ill nity, and not the lealt considerable by the extent
L'Urrv. of his territories. In the primitive church, the

juriflicion of bishops was equal and co-ordinate.

'They

They derived, perhaps, some degree of conider- SECT.IIIl
ation from the dignity of the fee in which they pre- ---
tided. They possessed, however, no real autho-
rity or pre-eminence, but what they acquired by
superior abilities, or superior fanaity. As Rome Originand
had so long been the feat of empire, and the capi- tprefs f
tal of the world, its bishops were on that account powcr.
entitled to refpe ; they received it; but during
several ages they received, and even claimed no-
thing more. From these humble beginnings, they
advanced with such adventurous and well-direEted
ambition, that they established a spiritual dominion
over the minds and sentiments of men, to which all
Europe ubmitted with implicit obedience. Their
claim of universal jurifdiEion, as heads of the
church; and their pretensions to infallibility in
their decisions, as successors of St. Peter, are as
chimerical, as they are repugnant to the genius of
the Christian religion. But on these foundations,
the superstition and credulity of mankind enabled
them to ereE an amazing fuperftruture. In all
ecclesiastical controversies, their decisions were re-
ceived as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor was
the plenitude of their power confined solely to what
was spiritual; they dethroned monarchs; dfpofed
of crowns; absolved fubjets from the obedience
due to their sovereigns; and laid kingdoms under
interdids. There was not a state in Europe which
had not been disquieted by their ambition. There
was not a throne which they had not flhaken; nor a
prince, who did not tremble at their power.

L 3 NOTHING

SECT.III. NOTHING was wanting to render this empire
'-- ' absolute, and to eflablifh it on the ruins of all civil
The territo-
rics ofthe authority, but that the popes should have possessed
adequate to such a degree of temporal power, as

was fuffiient

eir fpii- to second and enforce their spiritual decrees. Hap.
tual jurif- pily for mankind, at the time when their spiritual

jurifdiEtion was most extensive, and most revered,
their secular dominion was extremely limited.
They were powerful pontiffs, formidable at a
distance; but they were petty princes, without any
'considerable domestic force. They had early en-
deavoured, indeed, to acquire territory by arts
similar to those which they had employed in extend-
ing their spiritual jurifdiEion. Under pretence of
a donation from Constantine, and of another from
Charlemagne or his father Pepin, they atttempted
to take possession of some towns adjacent to Rome.
But there donations wre ficitious, and availed
them little. The benefactions, for which they were
indebted to the credulity of the Norman adven-
turers, who conquered Naples, and to the super-
flition of the countess Matilda, were real, and
added ample domains to the Holy See.
Their u. BUT the power of the popes did not increase in

theirwn proportion to the extent of territory which they had

teritoril acquired. In the dominions annexed to the Holy
limited. See, as well as in those subjet to other princes in

Italy, the sovereign of a state was far from having
the command of the force which it contained.
During the turbulence and confusion of the middle
ages, the powerful nobility, or leaders of popular

2 factions

faCtions in Italy, had seized the government of dif- SEcr.IIL
ferent towns ; and after strengthening their fortifi- ' '
cations, and taking a body of mercenaries into
pay, they aspired at independence. The territory
which the church had gained was filled with petty
lords of this kind, who left the Pope hardly the
ihadow of domestic authority.

As there usurpations almost annihilated the Itwas ir-

cumfcribed

papal power in the greater part of the towns ub- by the am-
jea to the church, the Roman barons frequently bRtoafth
disputed the authority of the popes, even in Rome baron#,
itself. In the twelfth c(entury, an opinion began
to be propagated, " That as the function of ec-
clefiafics was purely spiritual, they ought to
possess no property, and to claim no temporal
jurifdition; but, according to the laudable ex-
ample of their predecessors in the primitive
church, should subsist wholly upon their tithes,
or upon the voluntary oblations of the people ."
This dotrine being addressed to men, who had
beheld the scandalous manner in which the ava-
rice and ambition of the clergy had prompted
them to contend for wealth, and to exercise
power, they listened to it with fond attention.
The Roman barons, who had felt most sensibly
the rigour of ecclesiastical oppression, adopted
these sentiments with such ardour, that they set
themfclves intantly to flake off the yoke. They

Otto Frifigenris de Gelis Fridcr. Imp. lib. ii. cap. o.

L 4 endea-

SECT.III. endeavoured to restore some image of their ancient
A.' 3 liberty, by reviving the intitution of the Roman

senate, in which they vested supreme authority;
committing the executive power sometimes to one
chief senator, sometimes to two, and ometimes to
a magistrate dignified with the name of The Patri.
cian. The popes exerted themselves with vigour,
in order to check this dangerous encroachment on
their jurifdiion. One of them, finding all his
endeavours ineffectual, was so much mortified,
that extreme grief cut short his days. Another,
having ventured to attack the senators at the head
of some armed men, was mortally wounded in the
fray b. During a considerable period, the power
of the popes, before which the greatefr monarchs
in Europe trembled, was circumscribed within
such narrow limits in their own capital, that
they durst hardly exert any at of authority,
without the permiflion and concurrence of the
senate.

end by the ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the papal
turbulence
ofthe Ro. sovereignty, not only by the usurpations of the
son P^Pl. Roman nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of
13c8,to the people. During seventy years of the four-

teenth century, the popes fixed their residence in
Avignon. The inhabitants of Rome, accuf-
tomed to confider themselves as the descendants

b Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27. 31. Id. de Gef.

Frid. lib. i. c. 27. Muratori Annali d'ltalia, vol. ix. 398.
404. of

f the people who had conquered the world, SECT.III.
nd had given laws to it, were too high-fpirited 'v-
o submit with patience to the delegated autho-
ity of those persons to whom the popes commit-
ed the government of the city. On many oc-
afions, they opposed the execution of the papal
nandates, and on the slightest appearance of inno-
ation or oppression, they were ready to take arms
n defence of their own immunities. Towards
he middle of the fourteenth century, being in-
tigated by Nicolas Rienzo, a man of low birth
nd a seditious spirit, but of popular eloquence,
nd an enterprising ambition, they drove all the
obility out of the city, established a democrati-
al form of government, eleced Rienzo tribune
If the people, and invested him with extensive
uthority. But though the frantic proceedings
if the tribune oon overturned this new system;
hough the government of Rome was reinfiated
n its ancient form; yet every fresh attack con-
ributed to weaken the papal jurifdidion: and
he turbulence of the people concurred with the
pirit of independence among the nobility, in cir-
umfcribing it more and more'. Gregory VII.
nd other domineering -pontiffs, accomplished
hose great things which rendered them so for-

c Hiltoire Florentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. 104.
. Murat. Script. Rerium Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di
enzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 399, &c. Hifi.
'Nic.Ricnzy, par M. de Boifpreaux, p. 91, &c.

midable

SECT.III. midable to the emperors with whom they contend

C^~~' ed, not by the force of their arms, or by theex

tent of their power, but by the dread of their fpi
ritual censures, and by the effect of their intrigues
which excited rivals, and called forth enemie!
against every prince whom they wished to depref
or to destroy.

Alexander MANY attempts were made by the popes, nol
V. and Ju-
lius i. en only to humble those usurpers, who lorded il
der the
pop on. over the cities in the ecclefiaflical tate, but to
fiderabc break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people,

These were long unsuccessful. But at last Alex.
ander VI. with a policy no less artful than flagi.
tious, subdued or extirpated most of the great
Roman barons, and rendered the popes matlers
of their own dominions. The enterprizing am.
bition of Julius II. added conquests of no in.
considerable value to the patrimony of St. Pe.
ter. Thus the popes, by degrees, became
powerful temporal princes. Their territories,
in the age of Charles V. were of greater extent
than at present; their country seems to have
been better cultivated as well as more popu-
lous; and as they drew large contributions from
every part of Europe, their revenues far exceed,
ed those of the neighbouring powers, and ren
dered them capable of more sudden and vigorous
efforts.

THE genius of the papal government, how- SECT.II.
ver, was better adapted to the exercise of fpiri- '--
ual dominion, than of temporal power. With thenatue
espe2t to the former, all its maxims were fleady fiec'ald:-
and invariable. Every new pontiff adopted the minion.
lan of his predecessor. By education and ha-
bit, ecclesiastics were so formed, that the cha-
rafter of the individual was funk in that of the
profeflon; and the passions of the man were fa-
crificed to the interest and honour of the order.
The hands which held the reins of adminiftra-
tion might change; but the spirit which con-
dusted them was always the fame. VWhile the
measures of other governments flucuated, and
the objecs at which they aimed varied, the church
kept one end in view; and to this unrelaxing
constancy of pursuit, it was indebted for its fuc-
cess in the boldest attempts ever made by human
ambition.

BUT in their civil administration, the popes fol-
lowed no such uniform or consistent plan. There,
as in other governments, the character, the pas-
sions, and the interest of the person who had the
supreme direction of affairs, occasioned a varia-
tion both in objets and measures. As few pre-
lates reached the summit of ecclefiaffical dignity
until they were far advanced in life, a change of
maflers was more fiequent in the papal domi-
nions than iil other states, and the political fyflem
was, of course, less flable and permanent. Every

pope

SECT.II. pope was eager to make the most of the short pe
* .-J riod, during which he had the prospect of enjoy

ing power, in order to aggrandize his own fa
mily, and to attain his private ends; and it wa
often the first business of his fuccffor to undo al
that he had done, and to overtuih what he ha(
established.

As ecclesiastics were trained to pacific arts, anc

early initiated in the mysteries of that policy by
which the court o Rome extended or supported
its spiritual dominjon, the popes in the conduft ol
their temporal as irs were apt to follow the fame
maxims, and in their measures were more ready
to employ the r. ements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It was in the papal court that
address and subtlety in negociation became a fci.
ence; and during the sixteenth century, Rome
was confidered as the school in which it might be
best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical charaaer

prevented the popes from placing themselves at
the head of their armies, or from taking the
command in person, of the military force in their
dominions, they were afraid to arm their subje&s;
and in all their operations, whether offensive or
defensive, they trusted entirely to mercenary
tr oops.

As their power and dominions could not de.
scend to their posterity, the popes were less 'soli

citotus

itous than other princes to form or to encou- SECT.III.
age schemes of public utility and improvement. - -
heir tenure was only for a hort life; present
dvantage was what they chiefly studied; to
squeeze and to amass, rather than to meliorate,
was their obje&t. They erected, perhaps, ome
work of ostentation, to remain as a monument
of their pontificate; they found it necessary, at
ome times, to establish useful institutions, in
order to soothe and silence the turbulent popu-
lace of Rome; but plans of general benefit to
their fubjets, framed with a view to futurity,
were rarely obje&s of attention in the papal po-
licy. The patrimony of St. Peter was worse go-
verned than any part of Europe; and though a
generous pontiff might suspend for a little, or
counteraEt the effects of those vices which are
peculiar to the administration of ecclelaftics;
the disease not only remained without remedy,
but has gone on increasing from age to age; and
the decline of the slate has kept pace with its
progress.

ONE circumstance, farther, concerning the pa- The pope

derive ome

pal government, is so singular, as to merit at- dvantages
tention. As the spiritual supremacy and tempo- fro, the

union of
ral power were united in one person, and uni- their piri-

tual and

forinly aided each other in their operations, they temporal
became so blended together, that it was difficult authority.
to separate them, even in imagination. The po-
tentates, who found it necessary to oppose the
lenafures which the popes pursued as temporal

princes,

SECT.III. princes, could not easily divest themselves of thi

--' reverence which they imagined to be due to then

as heads of the church, and vicars of Jesus Chris
It was with relu&ance that they could be broughi
to a rupture with the head of the church; they
were unwilling to push their operations againf
him to extremity; they listened eagerly to the sirs
overtures of accommodation, and were anxious to
procure it almost upon any terms. Their confci.
oufnefs of this encouraged the enterprizing pon.
tiffs, who filled the papal throne about the begin.
ning of the sixteenth century, to engage in schemes
seemingly the moit extravagant. They trusted,
that if their temporal power was not fufficientto
carry them through with success, the refpec paid
to their Ipiritual dignity would enable them to ex.
tricate themselves with facility and with honour'.

But

d The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook

and carried on war against Julius II. remarkably illufirates
this observation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergyof
France, whether it was lawful to take arms againls a pope
who had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and whom nei-
ther the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received,
nor the decorum of his charater, could restrain from the
molt violent ations to which the lull of power prompts
ambitious princes. Though his clergy authorised the war,
yet Anne of Bretagne, his queen, entertained scruples with
regard to the lawfulness of it. The king himself, from
some fuperflition of the fame kind, carried it on faintly;
and, upon every frefli advantage, renewed his propositions
of peace. Mezeray, Hilt. de France, fol. edit. 1685. tom. .
852. I shall produce another proof of this reverence for the
papal character, still more friking. Guicciardini, the molt
sagacious, perhaps, of all modern hiRforians, and the boldClt

in

ut when popes s:ame to take part more frequently SECT.III.
n the conteits among princes, and to engage as
rincipals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
urope, this veneration for their sacred character
egan to abate; and striking instances will occur
n the following History of its being almost totally
!xtinft.
OF all the Italian powers, the republic of Ve- Conflitution

ofthe re-

ice, next to the papal fee, was most connected publicof
with the reft of Europe. The rife of that corn-. wiet itsrifi
monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in the and pro-
fifth century; the singular situation of its capital in
the small isles of the Adriatic gulf; and the more
fngular form of its civil confitution, are generally
known. If we view the Venetian government as
calculated for the order of nobles alone, its infti-
tutions may be pronounced excellent; the deli-
berative, legislative, and executive powers, are so
admirably distributed and adjusted, that it muff be
regarded as a perfect model of political wisdom.
But if we confider it as formed for a numerous
body of people fubjeft to its jurifdiLion, it will
appear a rigid and partial ariftdcracy, which lodges
all power in the hands of a few members of the
community, while it degrades and oppresses the
reft.

in painting the vices and ambition of the popes, represents
the death orMigliau, a Spanifil officer, who was killed dur-
ing the siege of Naples, as a punifliment infli&ed on him
bylceaven, on account of his having opposed the setting of
Clement Vl. at liberty. Guic. IIiltotia d'ltalia. Genev.
165. vol. ii. lib. IS, p. 467.

THE

SEcT.III. THE spirit of government, in a commonweal[
Defets in of this species, was, of course, timid and jealou:
its govtn- The Venetian nobles distrusted their own fut
,icularLpa jeds, and were afraid of allowing them the use c
with re
toits mili- arms. They encouraged among them arts of in
taOpera' duftry and commerce; they employed themi
hion s.

manufactures and in navigation; but never ad
mitted them into the troops which the slate kep
in its pay. The military force of the republii
consisted entirely of foreign mercenaries. Th
command of these was never trusted to noble Ye
netians, left they should acquire such influenci
over the army, as might endanger the public li
berty; or become accustomed to the exercise o
such power, as would make them unwilling tc
return to the condition of private citizens. A fol.
dier of fortune was placed at the head of tht
armies of the commonwealth; and to obtain thai
honour, was the great object of the Italian Condot
tieri, or leaders of bands, who, in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, made a trade of war, and
raised and hired out soldiers to different Itates
But the fame suspicious policy, which induced the
Venetians to employ there adventurers, prevented
their placing entire confidence in them. Two
noblemen, appointed by the senate, accompanied
their army, when it took the field, with the appel-
lation of Proveditori, and, like the field-deputies
of the Dutch republic in latter times, observed all
the motions of the general, and checked and con-
trouled him in all his operations.

A COMMON-

A COMMONWEALTH, with such civil and mili- SEcT.III.
tary institutions, was not formed to make con- -
quests. While its fubjecs were disarmed, and its
nobles excluded from military command, it car-
ried on its warlike enterprizes with great difadvan-
tage. This ought to have taught the Venetians to
reft satisfied with making felf-prefervation, and the
enjoyment of domefRic security, the objets of their
policy. But republics are apt to be seduced by
the spirit of ambition, as well as kings. When
the Venetians o far forgot the interior defects in
their government as to aim at extensive conquests,
the fatal blow, which they received in the war ex-
cited by the league of Cambray, convinced them
of the imprudence and danger of making violent
efforts, in opposition to the genius and tendency of
their constitution.

IT is not, however, by its military, but by its Excellence
naval and commercial power, that the importance infitutio
of the Venetian commonwealth muff be estimated.
The latter confitruted the real force and nerves
of the itate. The jealousy of government did not
extend to this department. Nothing was appre-
hended from this quarter, that could prove formi-
dable to liberty. The senate encouraged the nobles
to trade, and to serve on board the fleet. They
became merchants and admirals. They increased
the wealth of their country by their industry.
Thy added to its dominions, by the valour with
which they condued its naval armaments.

VOL. 1. M COMMERCE

SECT.III. COMMERCE was an inexhaustible source of opu.

- - lence to the Venetians. All the nations in Europe

The extent
of its cm. depended upon them, not only for the commodities
mrce. of the East, but for various manufactures. fabri.

cated by them alone, or finished with a dexterity
and elegance unknown in other countries. From
this extensive commerce, the state derived such im.
mense supplies, as concealed those vices in its con.
ftitution which I have mentioned; and enabled it
to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an
over-match for the force which any of its neigh-
bours could bring into the field, but were sufficient
to contend, for ibme time, with the powerful mo-
narchs beyond the Alps. During its firuggles
with the princes united against it by the league
of Cambray, the republic levied fums which, even
in the present age, would be deemed considerable;
and while the king of France paid the exorbitant
interest which I have mentioned for the money ad.
vanced to him, and the emperor, eager to borrow,
but destitute of credit, was known by the name of
Maxiilianl tbe Money-less, the Venetians railed
whatever fums they pleased, at the moderatepre-
mium of five in the hundred °.

The ot- THE conflitution of Florence was perfetly the
Florcace. reverse of the Venetian. It partook as much o

democratical turbulence and licentiouleflS, as

e Ililt. de aI Licue fait a Cambray, par M. I'Abb6 du Bo0,

lib. v. Sandi Storia Civil V'neziana, lib. viii. c. 16. p. 89'
&c. the

the other of ariftocratical rigour. Florence, how- SECT.III.
ever, was a commercial, not a military democracy.
The nature of its institutions was favourable to
commerce, and the genius of the people was turned
towards it. The vast wealth which the family of
Medici had acquired by trade, together with the
magnificence, the generosity, and the virtue of
the firet Cosmo, gave him such an ascendant over
the affeEtions as well as the councils of his coun-
trymen, that though the forms of popular govern-
ment were preserved, though the various depart-
ments of administration were filled by magif-
trates distinguished by the ancient names, and
eleced in the usual manner, he was in reality the
head of the commonwealth; and in the station of
a private citizen, he pofieffed supreme authority.
Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of this
power to his descendants; and during the greater
part of the fifteenth century, the political itate of
Florence was extremely singular. The appearance
of republican government subsisted, the people
were paflionately attached to it, and on ome oc-
cafions contended warmly for their privileges, and
yet they permitted a single family to assume the di-
reftion of their affairs, almost as absolutely as if it
had been formally invested with sovereign power.
The jealousy of the Medici concurred with the
commercial Ipirit of the Florentines, in putting
the military force of the republic upon the fame
footing with that of the other Italian states. The
troops, which the Florentines employed in their

M 2 wars,

SECT.II1. wars, conifted almost entirely of mercenary foI.
L~- diers, furnished by the Condottieri, or leaders of

bands, whom they took into their pay.

The confli- IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the fove.
kingd,,mof reignty of the iiland of Sicily was annexed, the
Naple'. feudal government was established in the fame

form, and with the fame defects, as in the other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent re.
volutions which happened in that monarchy had
considerably increased these defects, and rendered
them more intolerable. The succession to the
crown of Naples had been so often interruptedor
altered, and so many princes of foreign blood had,
at different periods, obtained poffeflion of the
throne, that the Neapolitan nobility had loft, in
a great measure, that attachment to the familyof
their sovereigns, as well as that reverence for their
persons, which, in other feudal kingdoms, con-
tributed to set rome bounds to the encroachments
of the barons upon the royal prerogative and
power. At the fame time, the different pretenders
to the crown, being obliged to court the barons
who adhered to them, and on whose support they
depended for the success of their claims, they
augmented their privileges by liberal concessions,
and connived at their boldest usurpations. Even
when feated on the throne, it was dangerous fora
prince, who held his ceptre by a disputed title, to
venture on any ftep towards extending his own
power, or circumilcribing that of the nobles.

FiROM

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples SECT.I1I.
was the most turbulent of any in Europe, and the '
authority of its monarchs the least extensive.
hough Ferdinand I., who began his reign in the
ear one thousand four hundred and fixty-eight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy;
though his on Alphonfo, that he might crush it at
once by cutting off the leaders of greatest repu-
tation and influence among the Neapolitan barons,
ventured to commit one of the most perfidious
and cruel ations recorded in history; the order of A. D. 487.
nobles was nevertheless more exasperated than
humbled by their measuress. The resentment
which there outrages excited was so violent, and
the power of the malcontent nobles was still so
formidable, that to these may be ascribed, in a
great degree, the ease and rapidity with which
Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom of Naples g.

THE event that gave rife to the violent contests State ofth.

concerning the fuccefflon to the crown of Naples dering th'c
and Sicily, which brought so many calamities right of fuc
upon these kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth thecrown.
century. Upon the death of the emperor Frede-
ric II., Manfi-ed, his natural ton, apiring to the
Neapolitan throne, murdered his brother the em- A.D. 1254.
peror Conrad (if we may believe contemporary
hiltorians), and by that crime obtained poftefiion
of it1'. The'popes, from their implacable enmity

G(iannone, book xxviii, chap. z vol. ii. p. 4.c, &c.
Giannone, ibid. p. 414.
hStruv. Corp. Iint. Germ. i. ,. . Giannone, book xviii.

hM 3 to

M 3 to

SECT.1II. to the house of Swabia, not only refused to recog.
'.. nize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to excite

against him some rival capable of wrefsing the
sceptre out of his hand. Charles, count of Anjou,
the brother of St. Louis king of France, under.
took this; and he received from the popes the
investiture of the kingdom of Naples and Sicily
as a fief held of the Holy See. The count of
Anjou's efforts were crowned with success; Man-
fred fell in battle; and he took poireffion of the
vacant throne. But oon after, Charles sullied the
glory which he had acquired, by the injustice and
cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands
of the executioner, Conradin, the last prince of
the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the
Neapolitan crown. That gallant young prince
asserted his title, to the last, with a courage worthy
of a better fate. On the scaffold, he declared
Peter, at that time prince, and oon after king
of Aragon, who had married Manfred's only
daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove among
the people, he entreated that it might be carried
to Peter, as the symbol by which he conveyed all
his rights to him . The desire of avenging thein-
fult offered to royalty, by the death of Conradin,
concurred with his own ambition, n prompting
Peter to take arms in support of the title which he
had acquired. From that period, during almoR
two centlries, the houses of Aragon and Anjou
contended for the crown of Naples. Ainidlt a
ilcceflion of revolutions more rapid, as well as of

I Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. § z. rle

crim"~

crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the SECT.IJI.
history of almost any other kingdom, monarchs,
sometimes of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes
of the Angevin, were feated on the throne. At
length the princes of the house of Aragon obtained A.D. 1434.
such firm possession of this long-dilputed inherit-
ance, that they transmitted it quietly to a battard
branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angevin kings, however, was Pretensions
not extinct; nor had they relinquished their title rench and

Soanifh

to the Neapolitan crown. The couint of Maine monarchs.
and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed
all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to
his successors. Charles VIII., as I have already A. D.1494
related, crossed the Alps at the head of a powerful
army, in order to prosecute his claim with a degree
ofvigour, far superior to that which the princes
from whom he derived it had been capable of
exerting. The rapid progress of his arms in Italy,
as well as the short time during which he enjoyed
the fruits of his success, have already been men-
tioned, and are well known. Frederic, the heir of
the illegitimate branch of the Aragonefe family,
soon recovered the throne of which Charles had dif-
poffefled him. Louis XII. and Ferdinand of Ara-
gon united against this prince, whom both, though
for different reasons, confidered as an usurper,
and agreed to divide his dominions between
them. Frederic, unable to refif the combined A. D. 151.
monarchs, each of whom was far his fi-pcrior in

k Giannone, book xxvi. ch. .

M 4 power,

SECT.III. power, resigned his sceptre. Louis and Ferdinand,
'-»- though they had concurred in making the con.

quest, differed about the division of it; and from
allies became enemies. But Gonfalvo de Cor.
dova, partly by the exertion of such military
talents as gave him a just title to the appellation
of the Great Captain, which the Spanish historians
have bellowed upon him; and partly by such
shameless and frequent violations of the moRs
solemn engagements, as leave an indelible stain
on his memory; stripped the French of all that
they possessed in the Neapolitan dominions, and
secured the peaceable poffeflion of them to his
mafler. These, together with his other kingdoms,
Ferdinand transmitted to his grandson Charles V.,
whose right to poflefs them, if not altogether un-
controvertible, seems, at leafR, to be as well
founded as that which the kings of France set up
in opposition to it'.

State of the THERE is nothing in the political constitution,
dut ; of
Miln, and or interior government of the dutchy of Milan,
the right of
fuccefflio so remarkable, as to require a particular expla-
to it. nation. But as the right of succession to that

fertile province was the cause or the pretext of
almost all the wars carried on in Italy during the
reign of Charles V., it is neceflary to trace these
disputes to their source, and to inquire into the
pretensions of the various competitors.

i Droits des Rois de France au Royaume de Sicile. Mem.
de Comin. Edit. de Frcfnoy, tom. iv. part iv. p. 5.

DURING

DURING the long and fierce contests excited in SECT.III.
aly by the violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline Re nd
lions, the family of Vilconti rose to great emi- progress of
ence among their fellow-citizens of Milan. As concering
e Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibel- ths
ne or Imperial interest, they, by way of recoin-
ence, received, from one emperor, the dignity A.D.IS34.
f perpetual vicars of the empire in Italy m: they
ere created, by another, dukes of Milan; and, A. D. 1395.
gether with that title, the possession of the city
nd its territories was bestowed upon them as an
ereditary fief". John, king of France, among
ther expedients for raising money, which the
alamities of his reign obliged him to employ,
ondefcended to give one of his daughters in mar-
iage to John Galeazzo Visconti, the first duke of
ilan, from whom he had received considerable
rns. Valentine Visconti, one of the children of
is marriage, married her cousin, Louis, duke of
rleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their
arriage-contrat, which the pope confirmed, it
as stipulated that, upon failure of heirs male in
he family of Visconti, the dutchy of Milan should
efcend to the posterity of Valentine and the
uke of Orleans. That event took place. In
he year one thousand four hundred and forty-
ven, Philip Maria, the last prince of the ducal
family of Visconti, died. Various competitors
tlaimed the succession. Charles, duke of Orleans,

"~ Pctrarch epil. ap. Struv. Corp. i. 6.
" ILcibnit. Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplom. vol. i. 257.

pleaded

SECT.II. pleaded his right to it, founded on the marriage.
*-- ~~ contract of his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonso

king of Naples claimed it in consequence of a
will made by Philip Maria in his favour. The
emperor contended that, upon the extinEtion of
male issue in the family of Visconti, the fief re.
turned to the superior lord, and ought to be re.
annexed to the empire. The people of Milan,
smitten with the love of liberty which in that age
prevailed among the Italian states, declared againl
the dominion of any master, and established a re.
publican form of government.

BUT during the firuggle among so many com.

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
seized by one from whom none of them appre-
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural
son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant to
be one of the most eminent and powerful of the
Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his fatherin
the command of the adventurers who followed
his flandard, had married a natural daughter of
the last duke of Milan. Upon this shadow ofa
title Francis founded his pretensions to the dutchy,
which he supported with such talents and valour,
as placed him at last on the ducal throne. The
virtues, as well as abilities, with which he governed,
inducing his fubjets to forget the defeas in his
title, he tranfinitted his dominions quietly to his
son; from whom they deleended to his grandson.
He was murdered by his grand-uncle Ludovico,

surnamed

surnamed the Moor, who took possession of the SEcT.III.
dutchy; and his right to it was confirmed by the
investiture of the emperor Maximilian in the year
one thousand four hundred and ninety-fouro.

Louis XI., who took pleasure in depressing the
princes of the blood, and who admired the poli-
tical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not permit
the duke of Orleans to take any ftep in prose-
cution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close connection
with Charles VIII. that, during the greater part of
his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans con-
tinued to lie dormant. But when the crown of
France devolved on Louis XII., duke of Orleans,
he instantly asserted the rights of his family with
the ardour which it was natural to expect, and
marched at the head of a powerful army to support
them. Ludovico Sforza, incapable of contending
with such a rival, was stripped of all his domi-
nions in the space of a few days. The king, clad
in the ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph;
and oon after, Ludovico, having been betrayed
by the Swiss in his pay, was sent a prisoner into
France, and fiut up in the castle of Loches, where
he lay unpitied dring the remainder of his days.
In consequence of one of the singular revolutions
which occur so frequently in the history of the
Milanese, his on Maximilian Sforza was placed
O" the ducal throne, of which he kept possession

Ripnalin. Hifi. Mediol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. Corp. i.
930. Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iii. p. ii. 333. ibid.

AI^~ ~during

SECT.III. during the reign of Louis XII. But his fucceffol
A.--.'S Francis I. was too high-fpirited and enterprizine

tamely to relinquish his title. As oon as hewa!
feated upon the throne, he prepared to invade the
Milanese; and his right of fuccetion to it ap.
pears, from this detail, to have been more
natural and more just than that of any other conm
petitor.

IT is unnecessary to enter into any detail with

refpe&t to the form of government in Genoa,
Parma, Modena, and the other inferior states of
Italy. Their names, indeed, will often occur in
the following history. But the power of these
states themselves was so inconsiderable, that their
fate depended little upon their own efforts; and
the frequent revolutions which they underwent,
were brought about rather by the operations of the
princes who attacked r defended them, than by
any thing peculiar in their-internal constitution.

The confti- OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps,
governent Spain is one of the most considerable; and as it
of Spain. was the hereditary domain of Charles V., as well

as the chief source of his power and wealth, a
distinct knowledge of its political constitution is of
capital importance towards understanding the tranf-
actions of his reign.

conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
by the
Vandals, Roman power in Spain, established a form of

government in that country, and introduced cl-
toms and laws, perflcly similar to those which

were

were eftablilfed in the reft of Europe, by the other SECT.III.
vitorious tribes which acquired settlements there. -
For some time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the fame steps, and seemed
to hold the fame course, as in other European
nations. To this progress, a sudden flop was put A. D. 71.
by the invasion of the Saracens or Moors from andbythe
Africa. The Goths could not withstand the efforts Moor.
of their enthusiastic valour, which subdued the
greatest part of Spain, with the fame impetuous ra-
pidity that distinguishes all the operations of their
arms. The conquerors introduced into the coun-
try in which they fettled, the Mahometan religion,
the Arabic language, the manners of the East, to-
gether with that taste for the arts, and that love of
elegance and splendour, which the Caliphs had be-
gun to cultivate among their subjects.

SUCH Gothic nobles as disdained to submit to TheChrit-
the Moorish yoke, fled for refuge to the inac- ay rcoder
ceeible mountains of Asturias. There they com- dspinion
forted themselves with enjoying the exercise of
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined by
many of the boldest and moit warlike among their
countrymen, they allied out upon the adjacent
ifttlements of the Moors in small parties; but
venturing only upon flort excursions at firfl, they
Vwec satisfied with plunder and revenge, without
thinking of conquest. By degrees, their strength
Incrcalcfd, their views enlarged, a regular govern-
ment was cftablilhed among them, and they began

to

SEc.lIIr. to aim at extending their territories. While they

-"v"- pushed on their attacks with the unremitting

ardour, excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hpe of rescuing their
_country from oppression; while they condufed
their operations with the courage natural .to men
who had no other occupation but war, and.who
were firangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind; the Moors gradually loft many
of the advantages to which they had beep in-
debted for their first success. They threw off all
dependence on the Caliphs P; they negleated o
preserve a close conlpetion with their countrymen
in Africa; their empire in Spain was split ito
many small kingdoms; the arts which they cul-
tivated, together with the luxury to which these
gave rife, relaxed, in ome measure, the force of
their military institutions, and abated the vigourof
their warlike spirit. The Moors, however, conti-
nued still to be a gallant people, and poffeffed,great
resources. According to the magnificent style of
the Spanish historians, eight centuries of almost un-
interrupted war elapsed, and three thousand seven
!492. hundred battles were fought, before the last of the

Moorish kingdoms in Spain submitted to the
Christian arms.
The union As the Christians made their conquests upon

,,.' the Mahometans at various periods, and under

different leaders, each formed the territory which
he had wrefl-ed from the common enemy, into an
P Jos. Sim. AflmanniH-iltor. Ital. Scriptores, vol. iii. P. 35'

independent

independent state. Spain was divided into almost SECTIIr.
s many separate kingdoms as it contained pro- '-
vinces; in each city of note, a petty monarch
eftablifled his throne, and assumed all the ensigns
of royalty. In a series of years, however, by the
usual events of intermarriages, or fuccefflon,
or conquest, all these inferior principalities were
annexed to the more powerful kingdoms of
Castile and of Aragon. At length, by the for-
tunate marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella, the
former the hereditary monarch of Aragon, and
the latter raised to the throne of Castile by
the affection of her subjects, all the Spanish i,4s,
crowns were united, and descended in the fame
line.

FROM this period, the political confitution of Theiran-
Spain began to assume a regular and uniform ap- ,,to and
pearance; the genius of its government may be eadwaridev
delineated, and the progress of its laws and man- alltheirre-
ners may be traced, with certainty. Notwith-
standing the singular revolution which the inva-
sion of the Moors occasioned in Spain, and the
peculiarity of its fate, in being so long subjea to
the Mahometan yoke, the customs introduced by
the Vandals and Goths had taken such deep root,
and were so thoroughly incorporated with the
frame of its government, that in every province
which the Chrifians recovered fiom the Moors,
we find the condition of individuals, as well as the
political conflitution, nearly the fame as in other
nations of Europe. Lands were held by the fame

tenure

SECT.II. tenure; justice was dispensed in the fame form; th(
which rn- fame privileges were claimed by the nobility; and
ders their the fame power exercised by the Cortes, or general
state in ome
degree rfmi- aircmbly of the kingdom. Several circumstances
lar to that
of other contributed to secure this permanence of the feuda
uroCe.f institutions in Spain, notwithflanding the conquel

of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned
them. Such of'the Spaniards, as preserved their
independence, adhered to their ancient customs,
not only from attachment to them, but out of
antipathy to the Moors, to whole ideas concerning
property and government thele customs were to.
tally repugnant. Even among the Christians, who
submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and con-
sented to become their fubjeEts, ancient customs
were not entirely abolished. They were permitted
to retain their religion, their laws concerning pri.
vate property, their forms of adminifteringjutice,
and their mode of levying taxes. The followers
of Mahomet are the only enthusiasts who have
united the spirit of toleration with zeal for making
proselytes, and who, at the fame time that they
took arms to propagate the doftrine of their Pro-
phet, permitted uch as would not embrace it, to
adhere to their own tenets, and to praise their
own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of
the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire
which the Moors had of reconciling the ChriRians
to their yoke, it was owing that the ancient man-
ners and laws in Spain survived the violent flock
of a conquest, and were permitted to subsist, not-
withstanding the introducion of a new religion

and

and a new form of government into that country. SECT.IIr.
Ir is obvious, from all these particulars, that the -
Chriflians must have found it extremely easy to
re-eftablilh manners and government on their
ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain
which they wrested fucceflively from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retained such
afondnefs for the customs, and such a reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that, wishing to fee
them completely restored, they were not only will-
ing but eager to resume the former, and to recog-
nize the authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, Certainpe.
with all the institutions which characterize it, was in their
thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as confltution
well as in all the kingdoms which depended on
these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political conflitutions, which distinguish
them from those of any other country in Europe.
The royal prerogative, extremely limited in every The prero-
feudal kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, gatitedmaor
within such narrow bounds, as reduced the power thi"mmfuh

nities of the

of the sovereign almost to nothing. The privi- people more
leges of the nobility were great in proportion, and extn
extended so far, as to border on absolute inde-
pendence. The immunities of the cities were
li:ewife greater than in other feudal kingdoms,
they poffeild considerable influence in the Cortes,
and they alpired at obtaining more. Such a state
oT locicty, in which the political machine was so

VOL, I. N ill

SEcT.II. tenure; justice was dispensed in the fame form; the
hich rn fame privileges were claimed by the nobility; and
ders their the fame power exerci'ed by the Cortes, or general
ftae in ome
degree fimi- alffmbly of the kingdom. Several circumltances
Jar to that 0
ofother contributed to secure this permanence of the feudal
EurAo"e. institutions in Spain, notwithstanding the conquest

of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned
them. Such of'the Spaniards, as preserved their
independence, adhered to their ancient customs,
not only from attachment to them, but out of
antipathy to the Moors, to whole ideas concerning
property and government hele customs were to.
tally repugnant. Even among the Christians, who
submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and con-
sented to become their fubjets, ancient customs
were not entirely abolished. They were permitted
to retain their religion, their laws concerning pri-
vate property, their forms of adminifteringjuftice,
and their mode of levying taxes. The followers
of Mahomet are the only enthusiasts who have
united the spirit of toleration with zeal for making
proselytes, and who, at the fame time that they
took arms to propagate the doctrine of their Pro.
phet, permitted such as would not embrace it, to
adhere to their own tenets, and to praise their
own rites. To this peculiarity'in the genius of
th-e Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire
which the Moors had of reconciling the ChrifianS
to their yoke, it was owing that the ancient man-
ners and laws in Spain survived the violent shock
of a conquest, and were permitted to fubflft, not-
withstanding the introduction of a new religion

and

and a new form of government into that country. SECT.III.
Ir is obvious, from all these particulars, that the
Christians must have found it extremely easy to
re-eftablilh manners and government on their
ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain
which they wrested successively from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retained such
a fondness for the customs, and such a reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that, wishing to fee
them completely restored, they were not only will-
ing but eager to resume the former, and to recog-
nize the authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, Certain pe

with all the inflitutions which charafterize it, was intheir
thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as Calindliw
well as in all the kingdoms which depended on
these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political confitutions, which distinguish
them fiom those of any other country in Europe.
The royal prerogative, extremely limited in every Theprero-
feudal kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, gative mre
within such narrow bounds, as reduced the power ie of -he
of the sovereign almost to nothing. T'he privi- peoplemore
leges of the nobility were great in proportion, and
extended so far, as to border on absolute inde-
pendence. The immunities of the cities were
likewise greater than in other feudal kingdoms,
they ponIleid considerable influence in the Cortes,
and they aspired at obtaining more. Such a state
o0 society, in which the political machine was so

VOL I. N ill

SECT.III. ill adjusted, and the several members of the legis.
'--"' lature so improperly balanced, produced internal

disorders in the kingdoms of Spain, which rose
beyond the pitch of turbulence and anarchy usual
under the feudal government. The whole tenor
of the Spanish history confirms the truth of this
observation; and when the mutinous spirit, to
which the genius of their policy gave birth and
vigour, was no longer restrained and overawed by
the immediate dread of the Moorish arms, it broke
out into more frequent insurrections against the
government of their princes, as well as more out.
rageous insults on their dignity, than occur in the
annals of any other country. These were accom-
panied at ome times with more liberal senti.
ments concerning the rights of the people, at
other times with more elevated notions concerning
the privileges of the nobles, than were common in
other nations.

Inflances IN the principality of Catalonia, which was an-
o his. nexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience

of the people to obtain the redress of their griev-
ances having prompted them to take arms againR
A.D.146z. their sovereign John II., they, by a solemn deed,

recalled the oath of allegiance which they had
sworn to him, declared him and his posterity to
be unworthy of the throne P, and endeavoured to
establish a republican form of government, in
order to ecure the perpetual enjoyment of that

P Zurita Annalcs dc Arag. tom. iv. 113. 1I5, &c

liberty,

liberty, after which they aspired q. Nearly about SEcT.III
the fame period, the indignation of the Castilian *
nobility against the weak and flagitious adminiftra-
tion of Henry IV., having led them to combine
against him, they arrogated, as one of the privi-
leges belonging to their order, the right of trying
and of pasing sentence on their sovereign. That
the exercise of this power might be as public and
solemn, as the pretension to it was bold, they fum-
moned all the nobility of their party to meet at AD. 465.
Avila; a spacious theatre was erected in a plain,
without the walls of the town; an image, repre-
fening the king, was feated on a throne, clad in
royal robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre
in its hand, and the sword of justice by its fide.
The accusation against the king was read, and the
sentence ofdepofition was pronounced, in presence
ofa numerous afembly. At the close of the first
article of the charge, the archbishop of Toledo
advanced, and tore the crown from the head of
the image; at the close of the second, the Conde
de Placentia snatched the sword of justice from its
fide; at the close of the third, the Conde de Be-
nevente wrested the sceptre from its hand; at the
clbfe of the las, Don Diego Lopes de Stuniga
tumbled it headlong from the throne. At the fame
instant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother, was pro-
claimed king of Castile and Leon in his lRead r.

Perreras Hid. d'Erpagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans

Revol. d'Efpagne, tom. iii. p. 155. L. Marinx:us Siculus de
Reb. l-ifpan. apud Schotti Script. I-ifpan. fol. 429.

Marian. Ilit. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

N 2 rI£

SECT.III. THE nioft daring leaders of faEtion would not
'--"- have ventured on there measures, nor have con-

duced them with such public ceremony, if the
Sentiments of the people concerning the royal
dignity had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in
Castile and Catalonia, as prepared them to ap-
prove of such extraordinary proceedings, or to
acquiesce in them.

The conti- IN Aragon, the form of government was mo-
tution and
government narchical, but the genius and maxims of it were
ofAragon. purely republican. The kings, who were long

eletive, retained only the shadow of power; the
real exercise of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This supreme assembly wascom-
posed of four different arms or members. The
nobility of the first rank. The equestrian order,
or nobility of the second class. The reprefenta-
tives of the cities and towns, whose right to a place
in the Cortes, if we may give credit to the hifto-
rians of Aragon, was coeval with the constitution,
The ecclefiftical order, composed of the digni-
taries of the church, together with the represent--
atives of the inferior clergy . No law could pals
in this assembly without the assent of every single
member who had a right to vote . Without the
permission of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed;
no war could be declared; no peace could be con-
cluded; no money could be coined; nor cold

s orma de Celebrar. Cortes en Aragon. por Gcron. Martel.
t Martel. ibid. p. z.
n

any alteration be made in the current specie . The SECT.III.
power of reviewing the proceedings of all inferior --
courts, the privilege of inspecting every depart-
ment of adminifration, and the right of redrefling
all grievances, belonged to the Cortes. Nor did
those who conceived themselves to be aggrieved,
address the Cortes in the humble tone of fuppli-
cants, and petition for redres ; they demanded it
as the birthright of freemen, and required the
guardians of their liberty to decide with refpet to
the points which they laid before them . This
i lovereign court was held, during several centuries,
every year; but, in consequence of a regulation in-
troduced about the beginning of the fourteenth
century, it was convoked from that period only
once in two years. After it was assembled, the king
had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without its
own consent; and the session continued forty days Y

NOT satisfied with having erected such form- Officeand
idable barriers against the encroachments of the ofthe
royal prerogative, nor willing to commit the sole Juf"i2a.
guardianship of their liberties intirely to the vi-
gilance and authority of an assembly, similar to
the diets, ftates-general, and parliaments, in
which the other feudal nations have placed so
much confidence, the Aragonefe had recourse to
an infltution peculiar to themselves, and elected

" Hier. Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. Script.
lifpan. vol. iii. p. 750.

Martel. orma de Celebr. p. 2.

Blicr. Banca Comment. 763.

N 3 a 7f-

SECT.III. a 7Jujiza or supreme judge. This magistrate,

- -' whose office bore ome resemblance to that of

the Ephori in ancient Sparta, acted as the pro.
teEor of the people, and the comptroller of the
prince. The person of the Juftiza was sacred,
his power and jurifdition almost unbounded,
He was the supreme interpreter of the laws. Not
only inferior judges, but the kings themselves, were
bound to consult him in every doubtful cafe, and
to receive his responses with implicit deference*,
An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as
well as fiom those appointed by the barons within
their refpetive territories. Even when no appeal
was made to him, he could interpose by his own
authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to proceed,
take immediate cognizance of the cause himself,
and remove the party accused to the Manifeation,
or prison of the stare, to which no person had ac-
cess but by his permission. His power was exerted
with no less vigour and effe& in superintending
the adminifiration of government, than in regulat-
ing the course of justice. It was the prerogative
of the Juftiza to inspect the conduct f the king.
He had a title to review all the royal proclama-
tions and patents, and to declare whether or not
they were agreeable to law, and ought to be car-
ried into execution. He, by his sole authority,
could exclude any of the king's ministers from
the condutl of aflfirs, and call them to answer for

* Blanca has prefcrved two responses of the Jufliza to

Janlcs 11. vwhI reigned towards the close of the thirteentlh
century, J;l:I, .8. tluit

their mal-adminifiration. He himself was ac- SECT.III.
countable to the Cortes only, for the manner in ---
which he discharged the duties of this high office;
and performed functions of the greatest importance
that could be committed to a fubjeat HHj 2.

IT is evident, from a bare enumeration of the The regal

privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of Oumcrb,.-d
the rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a very ,oihlimnta.
small portion of power remained in the hands of
the king. The Aragonefe seem to have been so-
licitous that their monarchs should know and feel
this state of impotence, to which they were re-
duced. Even in swearing allegiance to their fove-
reign, an act which ought naturally to be accom-
panied with professions of fubmiflion and refpet,
they devised an oath, in such a form, as to remind
him of his dependence on his fubjets. " We,"
said the Juftiza to the king in name of his high-
spirited barons, c who are each of us as good, and
who are altogether more powerful than you, pro-
mise obedience to your government, if you main-
tain our rights and liberties; but if not, not."
Conformably to this oath, they established it as a
fundamental article in their constitution, that if
the king should violate their rights and privileges,
it was lawful for the people to disclaim him as
their sovereign, and to elect another, even though
a heathen, in his place . The attachment of the

[HH] NOTE XXXI.
Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-755.
I-icr. Blanca Comment. 720.

N + Aragonefe

SECT.II. Aragonefe to this singular constitution of govern.
<->-- meht was extreme, and their refpeft for it ap.

proached to superstitious veneration [II]. In the
preamble to one of their laws, they declare, that
such was the barrenness of their country, and the
poverty of the inhabitants, that, if it were not on
account of the liberties by which they were dif
tinguifhed from other nations, the people would
abandon it, and go in quest of a settlement to
some more fruitful region b.

Contitu- IN Castile, there were not such peculiarities in
tion and
government the form of government, as to establish any re-
oef aflil markable ditinftion between it and that of the

other European nations. The executive part of
government was committed to the king, but with
a prerogative'extremely limited. The legifative
authority resided in the Cortes, which was com-
posed of the nobility, the dignified ecclesiastics, and
the representatives of the cities. The assembly of
the Cortes in Castile was very ancient, and seems
to have been almost coeval with the constitution.
The members of the three different orders, who had
a right of suffrage, met in one place, and delibe-
rated as one collective body; the decisions of which
were regulated by the sentiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enacing laws,
and of redressing grievances, belonged to this as-
fembly; and in order to secure the assent of the
king to iich flattutcs and regulations as were

fr1] N O 'I' XXI[.
b lliit'. Bdllica Corn. p. 75

dc..CIl

emed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was SECT.III.
ual in the Cortes to take no ftep towards grant-
g money, until all business relative to the pub-
c welfare was concluded. The representatives
cities eem to have obtained a fear very early
the Cortes of Castile, and soon acquired such
fluence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a
eriod when the splendour and pre-eminence of the
obility had eclipsed or depreied all other orders
f men. The number of members from cities
ore such a proportion to that of the whole col-
tive body, as rendered them extremely respect-
ble in the Coites [KK]. The degree of confi-
eration, which they poffiefed in the slate, may be
limated by one event. Upon the death of John I. A.D. 390.
council of regency was appointed to govern the
ingdom during the minority of his son. It was
ompofed of an equal number of noblemen, and
f deputies chosen by the cities; the latter were
dmitted to the fame rank, and invested with the
me powers, as prelates and grandees of the first
rder'. But though the members of communi-
ies in Castile were elevated above the condition
herein they were placed in other kingdoms of
urope; though they had attained to such poli-
cal importance, that even the proud and jealous
lirit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude
them fiom a considerable flhare in government; yet
the nobles, notwithfsanding these acquisitions of
the comlmons, continued to afsi rt the privileges of

[KK] NOT E XXXIII.
Mlarian. H- ill. lib. xviii. c. 15.

h their

SzcT.IIr. their order, in opposition to the crown, in a ton

C-"-- extremely high. There was not any body ofnobi

lity in Europe more distinguished for independent
of spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and bol
pretensions, than that of Cafile. The history o
that monarchy affords the mot striking example
of the vigilance with which they observed, andol
the vigour with which they opposed, every measure
of their kings, that tended to encroach on their
jurifdiation, to diminish their dignity, or to abridge
their power. Even in their ordinary intercourse
with their monarchs, they preserved such a con.
fcioufnefs of their rank, that the nobles of the firt
order claimed it as a privilege to be covered in the
royal presence, and approached their sovereigns
rather as equals than as fubje6ts.

THE constitutions of the subordinate monarchies,

which depended on the crowns of CafRile and
Aragon, nearly resembled those of the kingdoms
to which they were annexed. In all of them, ihe
dignity and independence of the nobles were
great; the immunities and power of the cities
were considerable.

Varions AN attentive observation of the fngular situation
the niled of Spain, as well as the various events which oc-
auth,;riry f curred there, from the invasion of the Moors to
theSpanifli
mia,.s. the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand and

Isabella, will diicover the causes to which all the
peculiarities in its political conflitution I have
pointed out, ought to be ascribed. As

As the provinces of Spain Were wrested from SECT.III.
e Mahometans gradually and with difficulty, r
e nobles who followed the standard of any emi-
nt leader in thee wars, conquered not for him
one, but for themselves. They claimed a share
the lands which their valour had won from the
nemy, and their prosperity and power increased,

proportion as the territory of the prince ex-
nded.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors,
e monarchs of the several kingdoms in Spain
epended so much on their nobles, that it be-
ame necessary to conciliate their good-will by
cceffive grants of new honours and privileges.
y the time that any prince could establish his
minion in a conquered province, the greater
art of the territory was parcelled out by him
mong his barons, with such jurifdiation and
mmunities as railed them almost to sovereign
ower.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms erected in so
many different corners of Spain, were of incon-
iderable extent. The petty monarch was but little
elevated above his nobles. They, feeling them-
selves to be almost his equals, aced as such; and
could not look up to the kings of such limited
domains with the fame reverence that the fove-
reig"s of the great monarchies in Europe were
viewed by their subjeCts LL].

ILL] NOTE XXXIV.

WHILE

SECT.IIr. VWHILE these circumfiances concurred in exalting

v--i -' the nobility, and in depreffng the royal authority

there were other causes which raised the cities i
Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the

Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excursions
of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce was
so permanent as to prove any lasting security, self
preservation obliged persons of all ranks to fix
their residence in places of strength. The cafles
of the barons, which, in other countries, afforded
a commodious retreat from the depredations of
banditti, or from the transient violence of anyin-
terior commotion, were unable to resist an enemy
whose operations were conducted with regular and
persevering vigour. Cities, in which great num-
bers united for their mutual defence, were the
only places in which people could reside with any
profpet of safety. To this was owing the rapid
growth of those cities in Spain of which the Chris'
tians recovered poffefnon. All who fled from the
Moorish yoke resorted to them, as to an afylunm;
and in them, the greater part of those who took
the field against the Mahometans, established their
families.

SEVERAL of thee cities, during a longer or

shorter course of years, were the capitals of little
states, and enjoyed all the advantages which acce-
lerate the increase of inhabitants in every place that
is the feat of government.

fRou

FROM those concurring causes, the number of SECT.III.
ities in Spain, at the beginning of the fifteenth
entury, had become considerable, and they were
eopled far beyond the proportion which was
ommon in other parts of Europe, except in Italy
nd the Low-Countries. The Moors had intro-
uced manufactures into those cities, while under
heir dominion. The Christians, who, by inter-
ixture with them, had learned their arts, con-
inued to cultivate there. Trade in several of
he Spanish towns appears to have been carried
n with vigour; and the spirit of commerce con-
inued to preserve the number of their inhabitants,
sthe sense of danger had first induced them to
rowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of
the inhabitants were of a rank superior to those
ho resided in towns in other countries of Europe.
That cause, which contributed chiefly to their
population, affeEted equally persons of every con-
dition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in or-
der to find shelter there, or in hopes of making a
stand against the enemy, with greater advantage
than in-any other flation. The persons eleEted as
the;r representatives in the Cortes by the cities,
or promoted to offices of trufl and dignity in the
government of the community, were often, as
will appear from tranfclnions which I shall here-
after relate, of ilch confilerable rank in the king-
dom, as relec(ted lustre on their constituents, and
011 the Rations wherein they vere placed.

As

SECT.III. As it was impossible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without ome other milii
tary force than that which the barons were obliged
to bring into the field, in consequence of the feudal
tenures, it became necefTary to have some troops
particularly a body of light cavalry, in constant
pay. It was one of the privileges of the nobles, tht
their lands were exempt from the burden of taxes,
The charge of supporting the troops requisite for
the public safety, fell wholly upon the cities; and
their kings, being obliged frequently to apply to
them for aid, found it necessary to gain their fa.
vour by concessions, which not only extended their
immunities, but added to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumstances,

peculiar to Spain, is added to the general and
common causes, which contributed to aggrandize
cities in other countries of Europe, this will fully
account for the extensive privileges which they
acquired, as well as for the extraordinary confi-
deration to which they attained, in all the Spanilh
kingdoms [MM].

Meafuresof BY there exorbitant privileges of the nobility,
Pdiffnrt, and this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the
order tuex- royal prerogative was hemmed in on every fide,
re, d their j

j C ihk
power, and reduced within very narrow bounds. Sensible

of this, and impatient of such reltraint, everal
monarchs endeavoured, at various junaures, a"d
by ldiferent means, to enlarge their own jurifdic-

[MM] NOT' E XXXV. tio

on. Their power, however, or their abilities, SECT.II.
ere so unequal to the undertaking, that their
orts were attended with little success. But
hen Ferdinand and Isabella found themselves at particularly

of Ferdi-

e head of the united kingdoms of Spain, and nand an
livered from the danger and interruption of Iabcll
omeftic wars, they were not only in a condition
resume, but were able to prosecute with ad-
antage, the schemes of extending the preroga-
ve, which their ancestors had attempted in vain.
erdinand's profound sagacity in concerting his
easures, his persevering industry in conducting
em, and his uncommon address in carrying them
to execution, fitted him admirably for an under-
king which required all there talents.
As the overgrown power and high pretensions Ferdinans

different

f the nobility were what the monarchs of Spain cheines for
t most sensibly, and bore with the greatest im- abridging

the privi-
atience, the great obje& of Ferdinand's policy lege"and

"

, s

* 11- j i- -i power of the

as to reduce there within more moderate bounds. nobility.
nder various pretexts, sometimes by violence,
lore frequently in consequence of decrees ob-
ained in the courts of law, he wrested from the
arons a great part of the lands which had been,
granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of
former monarchs, particularly during the feeble
nd profuife reign of' his i)reeceflbr Henry 1V.
He did not give the entire conduct of affairs to
perf(ns of noble birth, who were accuflomed to
occupy every department of importance in peace
Dr in war, as if it had been a privilege peculiar to

i their

SECT.MII. their order, to be employed as the sole counellors

w- and ministers of the crown. He often tranfaded

business of great conifequence without their inter.
vention, and beltowed many offices of power and
trust on new men, devoted to his intereftd. He
introduced a degree of itate and dignity into his
court, which being little known in Spain, while
it remained split into many small kingdoms, taught
the nobles to approach their sovereign with more
ceremony, and gradually rendered him the objec
of greater deference and refpet.

Particularly THE annexing the maflerfhips of the three mili.
by annexing
he grand- tary orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara,
aflehips to the crown, was another expedient, by which

of the three
orders tjthe Ferdinand greatly augmented the revenue and
crown .

power of the kings of Spain. These orders were
instituted in imitation of those of the Knights
Templars and of St. John ofJerufalem, on pur-
pose to wage perpetual war with the Mahometans,
and to protect the pilgrims who visited Compos-
tella, or other places of eminent sanCtity in Spain.
The zeal and superstition of the ages in which
they were founded, prompted persons of every
rank to beflow such liberal donations on those holy
warriors, that, in a flort time, they engrofted a
considerable share in the property and wealth of
the kingdom. The maferflhips of these orders
came to be flations of the greatest power and opu-
lence to which a Spanish nobleman could be ad-
vanced. The-ie high dignities were in the dliiolal

d Zurita Annales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 22. o

of the knights of the order, and placed the per- SECT.III.
sons on whom they conferred them almost on a
level with their sovereign [NN]. Ferdinand, un-
willing that the nobility, whom he confidered as
already too formidable, should derive such addi-
tional credit and influence from possessing the
government of these wealthy fraternities, was soli-
citous to wrest it out of their hands, and to veit
it in the crown. His measures for accomplishing A.D. 476,
this, were wifely planned, and executed with an 493.
vigour'. By address, by promises, and by threats,
he prevailed on the knights of each order to
place Isabella and him at the head of it. Inno-
cent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this election
the fanfion of papal authoritys; and subsequent
pontiffs rendered the annexation of these master-
ships to the crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished And bycir.

cumfcribing
the power and influence of the nobility, and added thejurifdic-

tion of the

new lustre or authority to the crown, he was nobility.
taking other important steps with a view to the
fame object. The sovereign jurifdiion, which
the feudal barons exercised within their own terri-
tories, was the pride and diflintion of their order.
To have invaded openly a privilege which they
prized so highly, and in defence of which they

[NN] NOTE XXXVI.
' Marian. I-Iil. lib. xxv. c. 5.
f Zurita Annales, tomn . v. p . A. lii Anton. NebiWlenfi
rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe gefarum decades ii. apud Schot.
script, Hifpan, i. 86o.

VoL, I. 0 would

sECT.Lr. would have run to eagerly to arms, was a measure

too daring for a prince of Ferdinand's cautious
temper. He took advantage, however, of an op.
portunity which the slate of his kingdoms and the
spirit of his people presented him, in order to
undermine what he durst not assault. The incef-
sant depredations of the Moors, the want ofdif.
cipline among the troops which were employed to
oppose them, the frequent civil wars between the
crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private
wars with each other, filled all the provinces of
Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and mur-
der became so common, as not only to interrupt
commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourle between one place and another. That
lecurity and protection, which men expec from
entering into civil society, ceased in a great degree.
Internal order and police, while the feudal infiitu-
tions remained in vigour, were so little objects of
attention, and the administration of justice was so
extremely feeble, that it would have been vain to
have expeted relief from the established laws or
the ordinary judges. But the evil became so in-
tolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were
the chief ilUlrers, grew so impatient of this
anarchy, that Ielf-prefervation forced them to have
i260. recourse to an cxtraorinary remedy. About the

middle of the thirteenth century, the cities in the
Icingdom of Aragon, and, after their example,
those in Caftilc, formed themnfelves into an affo-

ciatio0,

ciation, distinguished by the name of the Holy SEcr.III.
Brotherhood. They exaded a certain contribution
from each of the associated towns; they levied a
considerable body of troops, in order to protea
travellers, and to pursue criminals; they appoint-
ed judges, who opened their courts in various
parts of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of
murder, robbery, or of any a that violated the
public peace, and was seized by the troops of the
Brotherhood, was carried before judges of their
nomination, who, without paying any regard to
the exclusive and sovereign jurifdition, which
the lord of the place might claim, tried and con-
demned the criminals. By the establishment of
this fraternity, the prompt and impartial ad-
ministration of juflice was restored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity and order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this falu-
tary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their most valuable privi-
leges. They remonstrated against it in an high
tone; and, on ome occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless it were abolished.
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effecs of the Holy Brotherhood with refpec
to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate,
the territorial jurifdition of the nobility. He
countenanced it on every occasion. He sip-
ported it with the whole force of royal authority
ald, besides the expedients employed by him in
common with the other monarchs of Europe, he

0 2 availed

SecT.lIr. would have run to eagerly to arms, was a measure

too daring for a prince of Ferdinand's cautious
temper. He took advantage, however, of an op.
portunity which the state of his kingdoms and the
spirit of his people presented him, in order to
undermine what he durst not assault. The incef-
sant depredations of the Moors, the want of dif-
cipline among the troops which were employed to
oppose them, the frequent civil wars between the
crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private
wars with each other, filled all the provinces of
Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and mur-
der became so common, as not only to interrupt
commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourfs between one place and another. That
security and protection, which men expect from
entering into civil society, ceased in a great degree.
Internal order and police, while the feudal inttitu-
tions remained in vigour, were so little objecs of
attention, and the administration of justice was so
extremely feeble, that it would have been vain to
have expeted relief from the established laws or
the ordinary judges. But the evil became so in-
tolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were
the chief filferl-s, grew so impatient of this
anarchy, that lelf-prefervation forced them to have
160o. recourse to an extraordinary remedy. About the

middle of the thirteenth century, the cities in the
kingdom of Aragon, and, after their example,
thole in Cafile, formed thelnfilves into an aflo-

ciation,

elation, distinguished by the name of the Holy SECT.III.
Brotherhood. They exacted a certain contribution 't '
from each of the associated towns; they levied a
considerable body of troops, in order to protet
travellers, and to pursue criminals; they appoint-
ed judges, who opened their courts in various
parts of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of
murder, robbery, or of any at that violated the
public peace, and was seized by the troops of the
Brotherhood, was carried before judges of their
nomination, who, without paying any regard to
the exclusive and sovereign jurifdition, which
the lord of the place might claim, tried and con-
demned the criminals. By the establishment of
this fraternity, the prompt and impartial ad-
ministration of justice was restored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity and order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this falu-
tary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their most valuable privi-
leges. They remonstrated against it in an high
tone; and, on ome occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless it were abolished.
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effects of the Holy Brotherhood with refpea
to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate,
the territorial jurisdiction of the nobility. He
countenanced it on every occasion. He sup-
ported it with the whole force of royal authority;
and, betides the expedients employed by him in
common with the other monarchs of Europe, he

0 2 availed

SECT.II. availed himself of this inflitution, which was

-' ~peculiar to his kingdom, in order to limit and

abolish that independentjurifdicion of the nobility,
which was no less inconsistent with the authority of
the prince, than with the order of society [OO].

Notitlh- BUT though Ferdinand by these measures con.
sanding all
there, he fiderably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative,
tgfvSprnflill and acquired a degree of influence and power far
extrenely beyond what any of his predecessors had enjoyed,

yet the limitations of the royal authority, as wellas
the barriers against its encroachments, continued
to be many and trong. The spirit of liberty was
vigorous among the people of Spain; the spirit
of independence was high among the nobility;
and though the love of glory, peculiar to the Spa-
niards in every period of their history, prompted
them to support Ferdinand with zeal in his foreign
operations, and to afford him such aid as enabled
him not only to undertake but to execute great
enterprizes; he reigned over his subje&s with a
jurifdition less extensive than that of any of the
great monarchs in Europe. It will appear from
many padfhges in the following history, that, dur-
ing a considerable part of the reign of his fuc-
ceifor Charles V., the prerogative of the Spanifi
crown was equally circumnfcibed.

Conilitt- TI-HE ancient government and laws in France so
ti",nand g, nearly rclei-bled those of the other feudal king-
France.

[00] NOTE XXXVII.

domS.

doms, that such a detail with refpeft to them as SECT.III.
was necelfary, in order to convey forne idea of the --
nature and effets of the peculiar institutions which
took place in Spain, would be superfluous. In
the view which I have exhibited of the means by
which the French monarchs acquired such a full
command of the national force of their kingdom,
as enabled them to engage in extensive schemes of
foreign operation, I have already pointed out the
great steps by which they advanced towards a
more ample poffefion 'of political power, and a
more uncontrouled exercise of their royal prero-
gative. All that now remains is to take notice of
such particulars in the constitution of France, as
serve either to distinguish it from that of other
countries, or tend to throw any light on the tranf-
acions of that period, to which the following
hiitory extends.

UNDER the Fiench monarchs of the first race, Poverof
the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. acthlesI
The general assemblies of the nation, which met "der the

ft race of

annually at stated seasons, extended their authority kils.
to every department of government. The power
of eleting kings, of enacting laws, of redrefling
grievances, of conferring donations on the prince,
of passing judgment in the last retort, with refped
to every person and to every cause, resided in
this great convention of the nation. Under the t,,d,r ,,t
Ilcond race of kings, notwithfanding the power fccol.
and splendour which the conquests of Charle-
magne aldded to the crown, the general afien-

0 3 blics

SECT.IIn. blies of the nation continued to possess extensive
t-J - authority. The right of determining which of the

royal family hould be placed on the throne, was
vetled in them. The princes, elevated to that dig.
nity by their suffrage, were accustomed regularly
to call and to consult them with respect to every
affair of importance to the state, and without
their consent no law was passed, and no new tax
was levied.

Under the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father
third.

of the third race of kings, took possession of the
throne of France, such changes had happened in
the political state of the kingdom, as considerably
affected the power and jurisdiction of the general
assembly of the nation. The royal authority, in
the hands of the degenerate posterity of Charle-
magne, had dwindled into insignificance and con.
tempt. Every considerable proprietor of land had
formed his territory into a barony, almost inde-
pendent of the overeign. The dukes or gover-
nors of provinces, the counts or governors of
towns and finall diftrits, and the great officersof
the crown, had rendered there dignities, which
originally were granted only during pleasure or
for life, hereditary in their families. Each of
these had usurpcd all the rights which hitherto
had been deemed the liftinctions of royalty, par-
ticularly the privileges of dispensing justice within
their own domains, of coining money, and of
waging war. Every cillic was governed by
local cuiloms, acknowlcdged a distinct lord, and

pursued

pursued a separate interest. The formality of SEcT.liI.
doing homage to their sovereign, was almost the --
only aa of fubjeion which those haughty barons
would perform, and that bound them no farther
than they were willing to acknowledge its obliga-
tion [PP].

IN a kingdom broken into so many independent The power

o. the gene-

baronies, hardly any common principle of union ral aenmbly
remained; and the general afTenbly, in its delibe- ,fraefIdc
rations, could scarcely confider the nation as exicfive.
forming one body, or eftablifl common regula-
tions to be of equal force in every part. Within
the immediate domains of the crown, the king
might publish laws, and they were obeyed, be-
cause there he was acknowledged as the only lord.
But if he had aimed at rendering these laws ge-
neral, that would have alarmed the barons as an
encroachment upon the independence of their
jurisdiction. The barons, when met in the great
national convention, avoided, with no lets care, the
enafting of general laws to be observed in every
part of the kingdom, because the execution of
them must have been vested in the king, and
would have enlarged that paramount power, which
was the objet of their jealousy. Thus, under
the descendants of ugh Capet, the States Ge-
neral (for that was the name by which the u-
preme assembly of the French nation came then
to be distinguished) loft their legislative authority,
or at leafi entirely relinquished the exercise of it.
lrom that period, the jurisdiction of the States

[I'P] N 0 TE XXXVII1.

0 4. General

SECT.IL. General extended no farther than to the impoj,
- r d tion of new taxes, the determination of questions

with refpet to the righto. oftucceffion to the
crown, the fettling of the regency when the pre-
ceding monarch had not fixed it by his will, and
the presenting remonstrances enumerating the
grievances of which the nation wished to obtain
redress.

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of

Europe seldom demanded extraordinary subsidies
of their fubjeas, and the other events, which re-
quired the interposition of the States, rarely oc-
curred, their meetings in France were not fre-
quent. They were summoned occasionally by
their kings, when compelled by their wants or by
their fears to have recourse to the great conven-
tion of their people; but they did not, like the
Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the
parliament in England, form an essential member
of the constitution, the regular exertion of whose
powers was requisite to give vigour and order to
government.

Thecrnwn WHEN the states of France ceased to exercise
bqi.stoa'c-
qlre'c-if-' legislative authority, the kings began to assume
tive au- it. They ventured at first on as of legislation

with great reserve, and after taking every precau-
tion that could prevent their fulbjccts fi-om being
alarmed at the exercise of a new power. They
did not at once issue their ordinances in a tone of
authority and commnand. They treated with
their lilbjees; they pointed out what was bert;

and

and allured the m to comply with it. By degrees, SecT.IrI.
however, as the p rigative of the crown ex-
tended, and as the fuime jurisdiction of the royal
courts came to be established, the kings of France
assumed more openly the flyle and authority of law-
givers; and, before the beginning of the fifteenth
century, the complete legislative power was vested
in the crown [Q ].

HAVING secured this important acquisition, the andthe
ifeps which led to the right of imposing taxes levyirg
were rendered few and easy. The people, ac- t'""'
customed to fee their sovereigns issue ordinances,
by their sole authority, which regulated points
of the greatest consequence with refpe(t to the
property of their fubjets, were not alarmed when
they were required, by the royal edicts, to con-
tribute certain ums towards supplying the exi-
gencies of government, and carrying forward
the measures of the nation. When Charles VII.
and Louis XI. first ventured to exercise this new
power, in the manner which I have already de-
fcribed, the gradual increase of the royal autho-
rity hd so imperceptibly prepared the minds of
the people of France for this innovation, that it
excitedl no commotion in the kingdom, and seems
scarcely to have given rifii to any murmnur or
complaint.

WHEN the kings of France had thus cngrofed Govern.
every power which can be exerted in government F rAnce be.

ellcn the right of rnakling laws, o levying 11ony,)' purel

[<d.] N OTE XXXIX. Iarchical.

of

SECT.III. of keeping an army of mercenaries in confant

' --' pay, of declaring war, and of concluding peace,

centered in the crown, the constitution of the
kingdom, which, under the first race of kings,
was nearly democratical; which, under the second
race, became an ariflocracy; terminated, under
the third race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing
that tended to preserve the appearance, or revive
the memory, of the ancient mixed government,
seems from that period to have been industriously
avoided. During the long and a&ive reign of
Francis I., the variety as well as extent of whose
operations obliged him to lay many heavy i.
positions on his fubjeds, the States General of
France were not once assembled, nor were the
people once allowed to exert the power of taxing
themselves, which, according to the original ideas
of feudal government, was a right essential to every
freeman.

The exer- Two things, however, remained, which mode-
rogative- rated the exercise of the regal prerogative, and
fthprviey restrained it within such bounds as preserved the
legesof the constitution of France from degenerating into

nilty mere despotism. The rights and privileges claim-

ed by the nobility, mutt be confidered as one bar-
rier against the absolute dominion of the crown.
Though the nobles of France had loft that poli-
tical power which was vested in their order as a
body, they fill retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank.
They preserved a consciousness of elevation above
other clafles of citizens; an exemption from bur-

dens

dens to which persons of inferior condition were SECT.III.
subjet; a contempt of the occupations in which ^-
they were engaged; the privilege of assuming
ensigns that indicated their own dignity; a right
to be treated with a certain degree of deference
during peace; and a claim to various diftinftions
when in the field. Many of these pretensions
were not founded on the words of statutes, or
derived from positive laws; they were defined
and ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title
more delicate, but no less sacred. These rights,
established and proteted by a principle equally
vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in defending
them, are to the sovereign himself objects of re-
spect and veneration. Wherever they stand in its
way, the royal prerogative is bounded. The
violence of a deipot may exterminate such an
order of men; but as long as it subsists, and its
ideas of personal diftintion remain entire, the
power of the prince has limits g.

As in France the body of nobility was very nu-
merous, and the individuals of which it was com-
posed retained an high sense of their own pre-emi-
nence, to this we may ascribe, in a great measure,
the mode of exercising the royal prerogative which
peculiarly distinguishes the government of that
kingdom. An intermediate order was placed be-
tween the monarch and his other fubjets, and in
every a of authority it became necessary to at-
tend to its privileges, and not only to guard

nc I'Efprt des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Fcrgufon's Essay
on the Iili, of Civil Society, part i. fe. o.

against

SECT.III. against any real violation of them, but to avoid

any suspicion of supposing it to be pofible that
they might be violated. Thus a species of govern.
ment was ellablilhed in France, unknown in the
ancient world, that of a monarchy, in which the
power of the sovereign, though unconfined by any
legal or constitutional restraint, has certain bounds
set to it by the ideas which one class of his fubjefts
entertain concerning their own dignity.

and by the THE jurisdiction of the parliaments in France,
jurifdiaion
ofthepar particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier
Iparentscr which served to confine the exercise of the royal
that of Pa- prerogative within certain limits. The parlia-

ment of Paris was originally the court of the
kings of France, to which they committed the
supreme administration of justice within their own
domains, as well as the power of deciding with
refped to all cafes brought before it by appeals
from the courts of the barons. When, in con-
sequence of events and regulations which have
been mentioned formerly, the time and place of
its meeting were fixed, when not only the form of
its procedure, but the principles on which it de-
cided, were rendered regular and consistent, when
every cause of importance was finally determined
there, and when the people became accultomed
to resort thither as to the supreme temple of
juflice, the parliament of Paris rose to high efti-
mation in the kingdom, its members acquired
dignity, and its decrees were Submitted to with
deference. Nor was this the only source of te
power and influence which the parliament obtain

ed.

ed. The kings of France, when they first began SECT.II.;
to assume the legislative power, in order to recon- --"
cile the minds of their people to this new exertion
of prerogative, produced their edits and ordi-
nances in the parliament of Paris, that they might
be approved of and registered there, before they
were published and declared to be of authority
in the kingdom. During the intervals between
the meetings of the States General of the king-
dom, or during those reigns in which the States
General were not assembled, the monarchs of
France were accustomed to consult the parliament
of Paris with respect to the most arduous affairs
of government, and frequently regulated their
conduc by its advice, in declaring war, in con-
cluding peace, and in other tranfaftions of public
concern; Thus there was erected in the kingdom
a tribunal which became the great depository of
the laws, and by the uniform tenour of its de-
crees, established principles of justice and forms
of proceeding which were confidered as so sacred,
that even the sovereign power of the monarch
durst not venture to disregard or to violate them.
The members of this illustrious body, though
they neither possess legislative authority, nor can
be confidered as the representatives of the people,
have availed themselves of the reputation and
influence which they had acquired among their
countrymen, in order to make a -and, to the
ut'nofl of their ability, against every unprecc-
dtntcli and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative.
11 every period of te 'relch

h ilory, they have
":eritcd the praifi of being the virtuous but feeble

guardia.ns

SECT.III. guardians of the rights and privileges of the na.
'--v~' tion [RR].

Conftiu- AFTER taking this view of the political state of
tion and
government France, I proceed to confider that of the German
of the Ger-
manempire. empire, from which Charles V. derived his titleof

highest dignity. In explaining the conftitutionof
this great and complex body at the beginning of
the sixteenth century, I shall avoid entering into
such a detail as would involve my readers in that
inextricable labyrinth, which is formed by the mul.
tiplicity of its tribunals, the number of its mer.
bers, their interfering rights, and by the endless
dilcuffions or refinements of the public lawyers of
Germany, with refpea to all these.

it slate un- THE empire of Charlemagne was a ruure
da' Charle-
magn. and ereced in so short a time, that it could not be per-
a.dcfcnd- manent. Under his immediate successor it began

to totter; and oon after fell to pieces. The
crown of Germany was separated from that of
France, and the descendants of Charlemagne elta-
blifhed two great monarchies so situated as to give
rife to a perpetual rivalfip and enmity between
them. But the princes of the race of Charle-
magne who were placed on the Imperial throne,
were not altogether so degenerate, as those of the
lame family who reigned in France. In the hands
of the former the royal authority retained ome
vigour, and the nobles of Germany, though pof-

[RR] NOTE XL.

scacc

esed of extensive privileges as well as ample ter- SECT.IIT.
itories, did not so early attain independence. -
he great offices of the crown continued to be at
he disposal of the sovereign, and during a long
eriod, fiefs remained in their original slate,
ithout becoming hereditary and perpetual in the
milies of the persons to whom they had been
ranted.
AT length the German branch of the family of Other fami-

lles are raif-

harlemagne became extinct, and his feeble de- ed to the
endants who reigned in France had funk into dignity.
ch contempt, that the Germans, without look-
ng towards them, exerciSed the right inherent in
free people; and in a general assembly of the A.D. 911.
ation eleced Conrad count of Franconia em-
eror. After him Henry of Saxony, and his de-
cendants the three Othos, were placed, in fuc-
effion, on the Imperial throne, by the uiffrages
f their countrymen. The extensive territories
f the Saxon emperors, their eminent abilities
nd enterprizing genius, not only added new
igour to the Imperial dignity, but raised it to
igher power and pre-eminence. Otho the Great A.D. 95a.
arched at the head of a numerous army into
taly, and after the example of Charlemagne,
ave law to that country. Every power there re-
ognized his authority. He created popes, and
eposed them, by his sovereign mandate. He an-
exed the kingdom of Italy to the German empire.
lated with his success, he afltibned the title of
Clar Augustus . A prince, born in the heart of
1 Alnaalifla Saxo, &c. p. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

Jrs~~~~ Germany,

SECT.III. Germany, pretended to be the successor of tE

emperors of ancient Rome, and claimed a right t
the fame power and prerogative.

ah no- BUT while the emperors, by means of thei
)ity acquire new titles and new dominions, gradually acquire
and fove- additional authority and splendour, the nobilit
reign au-
thoity. or Germany had gone on at the fame time extend

ing their privileges and jurifdition. The fitua
tion of affairs was favourable to their attempts
The vigour which Charlemagne had given to
government quickly relaxed. The incapacity o
some of his successors was such, as would have
encouraged vassals less enterprizing than th
nobles of that age, to have claimed new rights
and to have assumed new powers. The civil war
in which ther emperors were engaged, obligee
them to pay perpetual court to their fubjets, on
whole support they depended, and not only to
connive at their usurpations, but to permit, and
even to authorize them. Fiefs gradually became
hereditary. They were tranfinitted not only in the
direct, but also in the collateral line. The in-
veftiture of them was demanded not only by male
but by female heirs. Every baron began to exercire
sovereign jurifdition within his own domains; and
the dukes and counts of Germany took wide steps

The Cer- towards rendering their territories diftinc and
man ece-
fnlicNra independent fates '. The Saxon emperors ob-
fain: pwver. served their progress, and were aware of its ten-

i Pfcffel, Abreg:, p. 1zo. 15z. Lib. Feudor. tit. i.

dency.

ency. But as they could not hope to humble SEcT.II.
affals already grown too potent, unless they had '-'~
rned their whole force as well as attention to that
nterprize, and as they were extremely intent on
eir expeditions into Italy, which they could not
dertake without-the concurrence of their nobles,
y were Solicitous not to alarm them-by any dire&c
tack on their privileges and jurifdiEions. They
imed, however, at undermining their power.
ith this view, they inconsiderately bestowed ad-
tional territories, and accumulated new honours
n the clergy, in hopes that this order might serve
sa counterpoise to that of the nobility in any future
ruggle k
THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in policy The fatal

'effets of

ere quickly felt. Under the emperors of the aggrandiz-
ranconian and Swabian lines, whom the Ger- 'clrgh
ans, by their voluntary election, placed on the A. D.1024.
mperial throne, a new face of things appeared,
nd a scene was exhibited in Germany, which
atonilhed all Christendom at that time, and in
the present age appears almost icredible. The
popes, hitherto dependent on the emperors, and
indebted for power as well as dignity to their be.
eficence and proteEtion, began to claim a fupe-
iorjuridition; and) in virtue of authority which
they pretended to derive from heaven, tried,
condemned, excommunicated, and deposed their
formaer masters. Nor is this to be confidered

k Pfffel. Abrcge, p. 54.
1OL. I. p merely

SECT.IIt. merely as a frantic sally of passion in a pontiff in
'-' toxicated with high ideas concerning the exten

of prieffly domination, and the plenitude of papa
authority. Gregory VII. was able as well as daring
His presumption and violence were accompanie
with political discernment and sagacity. Hehad
observed that the princes and nobles of Germany
had acquired such considerable territories and fuc
extensive jurifdition, as rendered them not only
formidable to the emperors, but disposed them to
favour any attempt to circumscribe their power.
He foresaw that the ecclesiastics of Germany,
raised almost to a level with its. princes, were
ready to support any person who would frand forth
as the protetor of their privileges and independ.
ence. With both of there Gregory negociated,
and had secured many devoted adherents among
them, before he ventured to. enter the lifts againt
the head of the empire.

Thecontefls HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upona
ttpopesand pretext that was popular and plausible. He com.
'emperos plained of the venality and corruption with which
con.c- the emperor had granted the investiture of.bene'
quences of
qle.c sices to ecclesiastics. He contended that this

right belonged to him as the head of the church; he
required Henry to confine himself within the
bounds of his civil jurifdition, and to. abstain for
the future firom such sacrilegious encroachments
on the spiritual dominion. All the cenfuresof tle
church were denounced against Henry, because

lhe

e refused to relinquish those powers which his SECT.1II.
redeceffors had uniformly exercised. The most
onfiderable of the German princes and ecclesias-
ics were excited to take arms against him. His
other, his wife, his sons were wrought upon to
ifregard all the ties of blood as well as of duty,
nd to join the party of his enemies k. Such were
he successful arts with which the court of Rome
nflamed the superstitious zeal, and conduted the
atious spirit of the Germans and Italians, that an

peror, distinguished not only for many virtues,
ut possessed of considerable talents, was at length
bliged to appear as. a supplicant at the gate of the
afle in which the pope resided, and to stand there,
hree days, bare-footed, in the depth of winter,
mploring a pardon, which at length he obtained A.D. 1077.
ith difficulty [SS].

THIS act of humiliation degraded the Imperial
ignity. Nor was the depression momentary only.
he contest between Gregory and Henry gave
ire to the two great facions of the Guelfs and
hibellines; the former of which supporting the
retensions of the popes, and the latter defending
h rights of the. emperor, kept Germany and
taly in perpetual agitation during three centuries.
regular fyflem for humbling the emperors and The Impe-

ia. autho-

Ircumfcribing their power was formed, and ad- rity gradu-
ered to uniformly throughout that period. The llye
popes, the free tates in Italy, the nobility, and

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 325.
[SS] NOTE XLI.

P ^ ccclefiaftics

SECr.it. ecclesiastics of Germany, were all interested in it
k^^-" fuccef ; and. notwithtlanding the return of sorn

fhoit intervals of vigour, under the adminiftratioi
of a few able emperors, the Imperial authorit
A. D. 156. continued to decline. During the anarchy of the

long interregnum subsequent to the death of Wil.
liaia of Holland, it dwindled down almost to no.
A.D. 12;3. thing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder o

the House of Austria, and who first opened the
way to its future grandeur, was at length eleaed
emperor, not that he might re-efliablifh and extend
the Itnperial'authority, but because his territories
and influence were so inconiderable as to excite no
jealousy in the German princes, who were willing
to preserve the forms of a constitution, the power
and vigour of which they had destroyed. Several
of his successors were placed on the Imperial
throne from the fame motive; and almost every
remaining prerogative was wrested out of the hands
of feeble princes unable to exercise or to defend
them.

A tora DURING this period of turbulence and confu-
,L',^'i^.a sion, the conltitution of the Germanic body under-
conliitution went a total change. The ancient names ofcourts
of the em-
pirc. and magiflrates, together with the original formi'

and appearance of policy, were prele-ved; but
such new privileges and jurifdidion were affuleld,
and to many various rights eftabliflied, that the
lllte fpecics of governlmnt no longer fubifted.
'.'he princes, the great nobility, the dignified ec-
clcfilatics, the free cities had taken advantage of

the

le interregnum, which I have mentioned, to efta- SECT.I1I.
ish or to extend their usurpations. They claimed -
d exercised the right of governing their refpec
ive territories with full sovereignty. They ac-
nowledged no fperior with refpea to any point,
lative to the interior administration and police
f their domains. They enacted laws, imposed
axes, coined money, declared war, concluded
eace, and exerted every prerogative peculiar to
ndependent flates. The ideas of order and politi-
alunion, which had originally formed the various
rovinces of Germany into one body, were almost
ntirely loft; and the society must have dissolved,
f the forms of feudal subordination had not pre-
served such an appearance of connection or de-
pendence among the various members of the cornm
munity, as preserved it from falling to pieces.

THIS bond of union, however, was extremely Fxpediens
feeble; and hardly any principle remained in the an end ti
German conflitution, of sufficient force to main- anachy.
tain public order, or even to ascertain perlbnal fe-
curity. From the accession of Rodulph of Hapf-
burgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the immediate
predecessor of Charles V., the empire felt every
calamity which a state must endure, when the au-
thority of government is so much relaxed as to
have loft its proper degree of vigour. The causes
f dissension among that vast number of members,
which composed the Germanic body, were infinite
and unavoidable. Thele gave rile to perpetual
private wars, which were carried on with all the

P ,3 violknce

SEcT.III. violence that usually accompanies resentment,
'-T r- when unrestrained by superior authority. Rapine,

outrage, exactions, became universal. Commerce
was interrupted; industry suspended; and every
part of Germany resembled a country which an
enemy had plundered and left desolate '. The va.
riety of expedients employed with a view to restore
order and tranquillity, prove that the grievances
occasioned by this state of anarchy had grown in.
tolerable. Arbiters were appointed to terminate
the differences among the several ifates'. The
cities united in a league, the object of which was
to check the rapine and extortions of the nobility,
The nobility formed confederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquillity among their own order,
Germany was divided into several circles, in each
of which a provincial and partial jurifdifion was
established, to supply the place of a public and
common tribunal .

Particularly BUT all thee remedies were so ineffectual, that
tution of they served only to demonstrate the violence of
,halchpe- that anarchy which prevailed, and the infuficiency
ber. of the means employed to correc it. At length

Maximilian re-eflablifhed public order in the
empire, by instituting the Imperial chamber, a
tribunal composed of judges named partly by the
A. D. 149. emperor, partly by the several states, and veled

with authority to decide finally concerning all dif-
ferences among the members of the Germanic

I See above, page 53, and note xxi. Datt. de pacepublica
Imper p zs, no. 53. p. 28, no. 26. p. 35, no. .

m D.itt ullin. Struv. Corp. 1- i:. 4to, &Lc.

body.

ody. A few years after, by giving a new form SEcT.III.
o the Aulic council, which takes cognizance of "-
11 feudal causes, and such as belong to the em-
eror's immediate jurifdidion, he restored ome
egree of.vigour to the Imperial authority.
BUT notwithstanding the salutary effets of these Atthe be-

ginning of

egulations and improvements, the political con- thefix.
itution of the German empire, at the commence- turythe
ment of the period of which I propose to write e;lpireaon

a fsciation

the history, was of a species o peculiar, as not to of .vertign
resemble perfectly any form of government known
either in the ancient or modern world. It was a
complex body, formed by the affociacion of several
fates, each of which possesed overeign and in-
dependent jurifdition within its own territories.
Of all the members which composcd this united
body, the emperor was the head. In his name,
all decrees and regulations, with refpeft to points
of common concern, were issued; and to him the
power of carrying them into execution was com-
mitted. But this appearance of monarchical power
in the emperor was more than counterbalanced
by the influence of the princes and states of the
empire in every at of administration. No law
extending to the whole body could ipas, no refo-
lution that asseted the general interest could be
taken, without the approbation of the diet of the
empire. In this aembly, every sovereign prince
and state of the Germanic body had a right to be
present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees

P 4 or

SECT.III. or Receies of the diet were the laws of the em.
'-r-' pire, which the emperor was bound to ratify and

enforce.

Peculiari- UNDER this aspect, the constitution of the em.
ties in the
nature of pire appears a regular confederacy, similar to the
this affoci-
ation. Achaan league in ancient Greece, or to thatof

the United Provinces and of the Swiss cantons in
modern times. But if viewed in another light,
striking peculiarities in its political ifate present
themselves. The Germanic body was not formed
by the union of members altogether diftint and
independent. All the princes and states, joined
in this association, were originally fubjeEt to the
emperors, and acknowledged them as sovereigns.
Besides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiefs, and in consequence of this tenure
owed the emperor all those services which feudal
vassals are bound to perform to their liege lord.
But though this political fubjedtion was entirely
at an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminished, the ancient forms and inflitu-
tions, introduced while the emperors governed
Germany with authority not inferior to that which
the other monarchs of Europe poflefed, ftillre-
mained. Thus an opposition was established be-
tween the genius of the government, and the
forms of adriniflration in the German empire.
The former confidered the emperor only as tie
head of a confederacy, the members of which,
by their voluntary choice, have raised him to that
dignity; the latter stemed to imply, that lie is

I really

eally inveRted with overeign power. By this cir- SECT.IlI.
umf'tance, such principles of hoffility and discord ----

The defe"'

ere interwoven into the frame of the Germanic ihccon-
body, as affected each of its members, rendering the empire,
heir interior union incomplete, and their external

forts feeble and irregular. The pernicious in-

uence of this defect inherent in the conflitution
f the empire is so confderable, that, without at-
ending to it, we cannot fully comprehend many
ranfactions in the reign of Charles V., or form jut
ideas concerning the genius of the German go-

vernment.
THE emperors of Germany, at the beginning Arifin

from te l{-

ofthe sixteenth century, were distinguished by the itndtp,,o,,
most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of dig- of the rn-
nity, as intimated their authority to be superior to
that of all other monarchs. The greatet princes
ofthe empire attended, and served them, on foine
occasions, as the officers of their household. They
exercised prerogatives which no other sovereign
ever claimed. They retained pretensions to all
theextenfive powers which their predecessors had
enjoyed in any former age. But, at the fame time,
inifead of pofffling that ample domain which had
belonged to the ancient emperors of Germany,
and which firetched from Basil to Cologne, along
both banks of the Rhine", they were fdripped of all
teritorial property, and hadc not a tingle city,
single cattle, a ingle foot of land, that belonged
to them, as heads of the empire. As their domain

PfeFel. Abreg, &c. p. !.

was

SEcT.III. was alienated, their stated revenues were reduced

almost to nothing; and the extraordinary aids,
which on a few occasions they obtained, were
granted sparingly and paid with reluctance. The
princes and ares of the empire, though they
1eemed to recognize the Imperial authority, were
subjects only in name, each of them poffeffinga
complete municipal jurifdiEtion within the pre.
cinets of his own territories.

Frem the FROM this ill.compacted frame of government,
thirtiles effects that were unavoidable resulted. The em.
id preten. perors, dazzled with the splendour of their titles,

and the external signs of vast authority, were apt
to imagine themselves to be the real sovereigns of
Germany, and were led to aim continually at re-
covering the exercise of those powers which the
forms of the constitution seemed to vest in them,
and which their predecessors, Charlemagne and
the Othos, had actually enjoyed. The princes
and fates, aware of the nature as well as extent
of these pretensions, were perpetually on their
guard, in order to watch all the motions of the
Imperial court, and to circumscribe its power
within limits still more narrow. The emperors,
in support of their claims, appealed to ancient
forms and institutions, which the flates held tobe
obsolete. The states founded their rights on re-
cent praEtice and modern privileges, which the
emperors confidered as usurpations.

Tinrs

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge- SECT.IIL

therwith the opposition between it and the rights t .he
of the flates, increased considerably from the time manner in

which they

that the emperors were eleced, not by the collec- were eleat
tive body of German nobles, bur by a few princes ed'
of chief dignity. During a long period, all the
members of the Germanic body had a right to as-
femble, and to make choice of the person whom
they appointed to be their head. But amidst the
violence and anarchy which prevailed for several
centuries in the empire, fcvcn princes who pof-
sessed the most extensive territories, and who had
obtained a hereditary title to the great offices of
the fiate, acquired the exclusive privilege of no-
minating the emperor. This right was confirmed
tothem by the Golden Bull; the mode of exer-
cifing it was ascertained, and they were digni-
sied with the appellation of. EleSors. The nobi-
lity and free cities being thus stripped of a pri-
vilege which they had once enjoyed, were less
connected with a prince, towards whose elevation
they had not contributed by their suffrages, and
came to be more apprehensive of his authority.
The eleEtors, by their extensive power, and the dif-
tinguifhing privileges which they possesscd, be-
came formidable to the emperors, with whom they
were placed almost on a level in several as of
jurifdition. Thus the introduction of the elec-
toral college into the empire, and the authority
which it acquired, instead of diminishing, contri-
buted to strengthen, the principles of hostility and
discord in the Germanic conflitution.

TH-IESE

SECT.III. THESE were further augmented by the various
Fro~-m h and repugnant forms of civil policy in the several
Fram the
different fiates which compored the Germanic body. It
form5 of
governlnent is no easy matter to render the union of idepend.
i the hae, ent states perfelt and entire, even when the genius
which corn- and forms of their respective governments hap.
Cermnic pen to be altogether imilar. But in the German

empire, which was a confederacy of princes, of
ecclesiastics, and of free cities, it was impossible
that they could incorporate thoroughly. The
free cities were finall republics, in which the
maxims and spirit peculiar to that species of go.
vernmenr prevailed. The princes and nobles, to
whom supreme jurifdiEtion belonged, pofeffed a
fort of monarchical power within their own terri.
tories, and the forms of their interior adminiftra.
tion nearly resembled those of the great feudal
kingdoms. The inrerefts, the ideas, the objets
of fRates so diffrently conffituted, cannot be the
fame. Nor could their common deliberationsbe
carried on with the fame spirit, while the loveof
liberty, and attention to commerce, were the
reigning principles in the cities; while the desire
of power, and ardour for military glory, were the
governing passions of the princes and nobility.

Trom the THE secular and ecclefiaflical members of the
,'ppofition
1 tween the empire were as little fitted for union as the free
Secular and . .
eccleflaflical cities and the nobility. Considerable territories had
yncmber. been granted to several of the German bifioprics

and abbeys, and ome of the highest offices i tile
empire having been annexed to them inalicnaly,

vilre

STATE OF EUROPE. 221

were held by the ecclesiastics raised to these digni- SECT.III.
ties. The younger sons of noblemen of the second
order, who had devoted themselves to the church,
were commonly promoted to there stations of
eminence and power; and it was no small mor-
tification to the princes and great nobility, to fee
persons raised from an inferior rank to the fame
level with themselves, or even exalted to superior
dignity. The education of these churchmen, the
genius of their profeflion, and their connection
with the court of Rome, rendered their charac-
ter as well as their interest different from those of
the other members of the Germanic body, with
whom they were called to at in concert. Thus
another source of jealousy and variance was open-
ed, which ought not to be overlooked when we
are searching into the nature of the German con-
ftitution.

To all thee causes of dissension may be added From the

unequal dir-
one more, arising from the unequal distribution of tri bution of

0 more, aising fro ti e unwealth and

power and wealth among the ftates'of the empire. power a-
The electors, and other nobles of the highest rank, mmberth
not only possessed sovereign jurifdiCion, but go-
verned such extensive, populous, and rich coun-
tries, as rendered them great princes. Many of
the other members, though they enjoyed all the
rights of sovereignty, ruled over such petty do-
mains, that their real power bore no proportion to
tiis high prerogative. A'well-compacted and vi-
goro(s confedeiacy could not be formed of such
diflililar flates. The weaker were jealous, timid,

and

SECT.II. and unable either to assert or to defend their jus
~-r-' privileges. The more powerful were apt to assume

and to become oppressive. The eleEtors and em.
perors, by turns, endeavoured to extend their own
authority, by encroaching on those feeble members
of the Germanic body, who sometimes defended
their rights with much spirit, but more fre.
quently, being overawed or corrupted, they tamely
surrendered their privileges, or meanly favoured
the designs formed against them [TT].

Allthefe AFTER contemplating all these principles of
tenserthe Germanic disunion and opposition in the constitution of the
aody inca- German empire, it will be easy to account for the
pabie of aft-
ing with want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous in its
union and
wigour. councils and proceedings. That flow, dilatory,

distrustful, and irresolute spirit, which charaterizes
all its deliberations, will appear natural in a body,
the junction of whose members was so incomplete,
the different parts of which were held together by
such feeble ties, and set at variance by such power-
ful motives. But the empire of Germany, never-
thelefs, comprehended countries of such great ex-
tent, and was inhabited by such a martial and hardy
race of men, that when the abilities of an emperor,
or zeal for any common cause, could rouse this
unwieldy body to put forth its f-rength, it aed
with almost irrefifible force. In the following his-
tory we shall find, that as the measures on which
Charles V. was most intent, were often thwarted
or rendered abortive by the spirit of jealousy and

[TT] NOTE XL1I.

livilion

dvifion peculiar to the Germanic constitution; SECT.II.
f0 it was by the influence which he acquired over -
the princes of the empire, and by engaging them
to co-operate with him, that he was enabled to
make ome of the greatest efforts which distinguish
his reign.
THE Turkilh history is so blended, during the Viewofthe

Turkifl go.

reign of Charles V., with that of the great nations vernLent.
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so
often, and with such decirive influence, in the wars
and negociations of the Christian princes, that
some previous account of the state of government
in that great empire, is no less neceflary for the
information of my readers, than those views of
the conffitution of other kingdoms which I have
already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the southern and more Its origin.
fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy race of men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the an-
cients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these
people, called Turks or Turcomans, extended its
conquests, under various leaders, and during feve-
ral centuries, from the shore of the Caspian Sea
to the Straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, these formidable
conquerors took Constantinople by storm, and
established the feat of their government in that
imperial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and
the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms of

Thrace

SECT.III. Thrace and Macedonia, together with part ofHun.
'v- gary, were fubje&ed to their power.

Its despotic BUT though the feat of the Turkish government
geni us.

was fixed in Europe, and the sultans obtained pof.
session of such extensive dominions in that quarter
of the globe, the genius of their policy continued to
be purely Asiatic; and may be properly termeda
defpotifin, in contradistinction to those monarchical
and republican forms of government which we have
been hitherto contemplating. The supreme power
was vested in sultans of the Ottoman race, that
blood being deemed o sacred, that no other was
thought worthy of the throne. From this eleva-
tion, these sovereigns could look down and behold
all their fubjeds reduced to the fame level before
them. The maxims of Turkish policy do not au-
thorife any of those institutions, which, in other
countries, limit the exercise, or moderate the rigour
of monarchical power: they admit neither of any
great court with conffitutional and permanent jurif-
diction t6 interpose, both in enacting laws, and in
superintending the execution of them; nor of a body
of hereditary nobles, whose sense of their own pre-
eminence, whose consciousness of what is due to
their rank and character, whose jealousy of their
privileges circumscribe the authority of the prince,
and serve not only as a barrier against the excesses of
his caprice, but stand as an intermediate order be-
tween him and the people. Under the Turkilh go-
vernment, the political condition of every fubje is
equal. I'o be employed in the service of the fll-

tall,

tan, is the only circumstance that confers diftinc- SECT.III.
tion. Even this diftin&tion is rather official than '-
personal, and so closely annexed to the itation in
which any individual serves, that it is scarcely
communicated to the persons of those who are
placed in them. The highest dignity in the en-
pire does not give any rank or pre-eminence to
the family of him who enjoys it. As every man,
before he is raised to any station of authority, must
go through the preparatory discipline of a long and
servile obedience0, the moment he is deprived of
power, he and his posterity return to the fame con-
dition with other fubjeas, and fink back into ob-
fcurity. It is the distinguishing and odious cha-
rateriftic of Eastern despotism, that it annihilates
all other ranks of men, in order to exalt the mo-
narch; that it leaves nothing to the former, while
it gives every thing to the latter; that it endea-
vours to fix in the minds of those who are subject
to it, the idea of no relation between men, but
that of a master and of a slave, the former destined
tocommand and to punish, the latter formed to
tremble and to obey [UU].

BUT as there are circumstances which frequently Power of
obfrut or defeat the salutary effects of the best- ltesulab
regulated governments, there are others which con- rc'igi,
tribute to mitigate the evils of the most defective
forms of policy. There can, indeed, be no con-
titutional restraints upon the will of a prince in a
despotic government; but there may be such as

° State of the Turkifi Empire by Rycaut, p z5.
[UU] N 0 T E XLIII.
VOL. I. Q are

$ECTr.tr. are accidental. Absolute as the Turkish Sultans

^J
- are, they feel themselves circumscribed both by

religion, the principle on which their authority is
foundedP, and by the army, the instrument which
they mufR employ in order to maintain it. Where-
ever religion interposes, the will of the overeign
muff submit to its decrees. When the Koran hath
prescribed any religious rite, hath enjoined any
moral duty, or hath confirmed by its fantion
any political maxim, the command of the Sultan
cannot overturn that which an higher authority
hath established. The chief reflrition, however,
on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by the mili-

and by the tary power. An.armed force must surround the
military.

throne of every defpor, to maintain his authority,
and to execute his commands. As the Turks ex-
tended their empire over nations which they did
not exterminate, but reduce to fubjetion, they
found it necessary to render their military establish-

or;iin o ment numerous and formidable. Amurath, their
zlries. third Sultan, in order to form a body of troops
A. D. 361. devoted to his will, that might serve as the im-

mediate guards of his person and dignity, com-
manded his officers to leize annually, as the Im-
perial property, the fifth part of the youth taken
in war. These, after being inltructed in the Ma-
hometan religion, inured to obedience by evere
discipline, and trained to warlike exercises, were
formed into a body diilinguihed by the name of
7aniizaries, or new obldiers. Every Iientiment which
entlhuiiafli can inrpire, every mark of diftini0n

P Rycaut, p. 8.

that

that the favour of the prince could confer, were SecT.IIl.
employed in order to animate this body with mar-
tial ardour, and with a consciousness of its own
pre-eminence9. The Janizaries oon became the
chief strength and pride of the Ottoman armies;
and, by their number as well as reputation, were
distinguished above all the troops, whose duty it
was to attend on the person of the Sultans [XX].
THUS, as the supreme power in every society is Theirvaft

influence in

possessed by those who have arms in their hands, the Turkilh
this formidable body of soldiers, destined to be the goven'
iniruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority, ac-
quired, at the fame time, the means of controuling
it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like the Pra-
torian bands in ancient Rome, quickly perceived
all the advantages which they derived from being
stationed in the capital; from tir union under
one standard; and from being masters of the per-
son of the prince. The Sultans became no less
sensible of their influence and importance. The
Capiculy, or: soldiery of the Port, was the only
power in the empire that a Sultan or his vifier
had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity and
attachment of the Janizaries, was the great art of
goernment, and the principal objeEt of attention
in the policy of the Ottoman court. Under a mo-
narch, whose abilities and vigour of mind fit him
for command, they are obsequious instruments;
execute whatever he enjoins; and render his power

Prince Cantemir's Hiltory of the Othman Empire, p. 87.
[XX] NOTE XLIV.

Q'a2 irre-

.EcCT.JII. irresistible. Under feeble princes, or such as are
'-- '- unfortunate, they become turbulent and mutinous;

assume the tone of masters; degrade and exalt
Sultans at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on
whose nod, at other times, life and death depend.

Progress f FROM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople,
the Turks
towards do- to Solyman the Magnificent, who began his reign
iniion. a few months after Charles V. was placed on the

Imperial throne of Germany, a succession of illus-
trious princes ruled over the Turkish empire. By
their great abilities, they kept their fubjets of
every order, military as well as civil, fubmiffiveto
government; and had the absolute command of
whatever force their vail empire was able to exert.
Solyman, in particular, who is known to the Chris-
tians chiefly as a conqueror, but is celebrated in
the Turkish annals, as the great law-giver who
eflablifhed order and police in their empire, go-
verned, during his long reign, with no less autho-
rity than wisdom. He divided his dominions into
several diftrits; he appointed the number of fol-
diers which each ffiould furnish; he appropriated a
certain proportion of the land in every province,
for their maintenance; he regulated, with a mi-
nute accuracy, every thing relative to their difci-
pline, their arms, and the nature of their service.
lie put the finances of the empire into an orderly
train of adminifration; and, though the taxes in
the 'lurkifi dominions, as well as in the other
despotic monarchies of the East, are far from being
considerable, he supplied that defe6t by an atten-
tive and ievere economy.

No;

NOR was it only under such Sultans as Soly- SEcT.II.
Iman, whose talents were no less adapted to pre- ''
|an, whose talens r Advantages
serve internal order than to conduct the opera- w tic they

peofTesd

tions of war, that the Turkifl empire engaged ver the
with advantage in its contests with the Christian poer in
fates. The long succession of able princes, the fix-

teenth

which I have mentioned, had given such vigour century.
and firmness to the Ottoman government, that
it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth
century, the highest degree of perfetion of which
its constitution was capable. Whereas the great
monarchies in Christendom were still far from
that fRate, which could enable them to at with
a full exertion of their force. Besides this, the
Turkish troops in that age poffefTed every ad-
vantage which arises from superiority in military
discipline. At the time when Solyman began
his reign, the Janizaries had been embodied near
a century and a half; and, during that long pe-
riod, the severity of their military discipline had
in no degree relaxed. The other soldiers, drawn
from the provinces of the empire, had been kept
almost continually under arms, in the various
wars which the Sultans had carried on, with
hardly any interval of peace. Againit troops
thus trained and accustomed to service, the forces
ofthe Christian powers took the field with great
disadvantage. The most intelligent as well as
impartial authors of the ixteenth century ac-
knowledge and lament the superior attainments
of the Turks in the military art [YY]. The

[YY] NOT E XLV.

(Q 3 success

SECT.IIJ. success which almost uniformly attended their arms,

^'-.- in all their wars, demonstrates the justness of this

observation. The Christian armies did not ac-
quire that superiority over the Turks, which they
now possess, until the long eablifhlnent of
standing forces had improved military discipline
among the former; and until various causes and
events, which it is not my province to explain, had
corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike infti.
tutions among the latter.

P R 0 F S

A N D
ILLUSTRAT I ON S.

Q.4

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

P R F S

AND-
ILLUS TRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. I. P. 3. [A].

THE consternation of the Britons, when
T invaded by the Pices and Caledonians
after the Roman legions were called out of
the ifand, may give some idea of the degree of
debasement to which the human mind was re-
duced by long servitude under the Romans. In
their supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call
thegroans of Britain, We know not (fay they)
which way to turn us. The Barbarians drive us
to the sea, and the sea forces us back on the bar-
barians; between which we have only the choice
oftwo deaths, either to be swallowed up by the
waves, or to be slain by the sword." Hiftor.
Gilda, ap. Gale, Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.--
One can hardly believe this dastardly race to be
the descendants of that gallant people, who re-
puled Cefar, and defended their liberty so long
againt the Roman arms.

NOTE

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate

but regarded literature with contempt. The]
found the inhabitants of all the provinces of thl
empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to war,
Such a charaEter was the objet of scorn to an
high-fpirited and gallant race of men. " When
we would brand an enemy," fays Liutprandus,
(C with the most disgraceful and contumelious ap.
pellation, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id R
Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid
timiditatis, quicquid avaritie, quicquid luxurix,
quicquid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum eR
comprehendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Mu.
rat. Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars i. p. 481. This
degeneracy of.manners, illiterate barbarians im.
puted to their love of learning. Even after they
fettled in the countries which they had conquered,
they would not permit their children to be in-
ftruaed in any science; 'I for (said they) infiruc.
tion in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and
depress the mind; and he who has been accuf-
tomed to tremble under the rod of a pedagogue,
will never look on a sword or fpear-with an un-
daunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib.i.
p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Venet. vol. i. A con-
fiderable number of years elapsed, before nations
so rude, and so unwilling to learn, could produce
historians capable of recording their tranifations
or of describing their manners and intitutins.
By that time, te memory of their ancient con-

dltion

ition was in a great measure loft, and few monu-
ents remained to guide their first writers to any
ertain knowledge of it. If one expects to receive
any fatisfatory account of the manners and laws of
the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during their re-
fidence in those countries where they were origi-
nally feated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus,
or Gregory of Tours, the earliest and most au-
thentic historians of these people, he will be mise-
rably disappointed. Whatever imperfeEt know-
ledge has been conveyed to us of their ancient
slate, we owe not to their own writers, but to the
Greek and Roman historians.

NOTE III. SECT. I. p. 6. [C].

A CIRCUMSTANCE, related by Prifcus in his his-
tory of the embassy to Attila, king of the Huns,
gives a striking view of the enthusiastic paflion
for war which prevailed among the barbarbus
nations. When the entertainment, to which that
fierce conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors,
was ended, two Scythians advanced towards At-
tila, and recited a poem in which they celebrated
his viEtories and military virtues. All the Huns
fixed their eyes with attention on the bards.
Some seemed to be delighted with the verses;
others, remembering their own battles and exploits,
exulted with joy; while such as were become
feeble through age, burst out into tears, bewail-
ing the decay of their vigour, and the state of
inativity in which they were now obliged to

~I Caremain.

remain. Excerpta ex hifloria Prifci Rhetorisap
Byzant. Hiftor. Script. vol. i. p. 45.

NO T E V. SECT. I. p. 12. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both partsof

this reasoning occurs in the history of England,
The Saxons carried on the conquest of that coun.
try with the fame deftrutive spirit which diftin.
guifhed the other barbarous nations. The ancient
inhabitants of Britain were either exterminated,
or forced to take helter among the mountains of
Wales, or reduced to servitude. The Saxon go.
vernment, laws, manners, and language were of
consequence introduced into Britain; and were so
perfeEtly eftablilhed, that all memory of the in.
ititutions previous to their conquest of the coun.
try, was, in a great measure, loft. The very reverse
of this happened in a subsequent revolution. A
single victory placed William the Norman on the
throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants, though
oppressed, were not exterminated. William em-
ployed the utmost efforts of his power and policy
to make his new fubjerls conform in every thing
to the Norman standard, but without success. The
Saxons, though vanquished, were far more nu-
merous than their conquerors; when the two races
began to incorporate, the Saxon laws and manners
gradually gained ground. The Norman inftitu-
tions became unpopular and odious; many of them
fell into difafe; and in the English confticttion
and language, at this day, many essential parts .re
rnanifeftly of Saxon, not of Norman extiraion

N OT

NOTE V. SECT. I p. 13. [E].

PROCOPIUS, the historian, declines, from a prin-
iple of benevolence, to give any particular detail
f the cruelties of the Goths: " Left, fays he, I
hould transmit a monument and example of in-
humanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de bello
Goth. lib. iii. cap. Io. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. i 26.
But as the change, which I have pointed out s
a consequence of the settlement of the barbarous
nations in the countries formerly subject to the
Roman empire, could not have taken place, if
the greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not
been extirpated, an event of such importance and
influence merits a more particular illustration.
This will justify me for exhibiting ome part of
that melancholy fpeaacle, over which humanity
prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I ihall nor,
however, disgust my readers by a minute narration;
but reft satisfied with colleting some instances of
the devaitations made by two of the many nations
which fettled in the empire. The Vandals were
the first of the barbarians who invaded Spain. It
was one of the richest and most populous of the
Roman provinces; the inhabitants had been diftin-
guifled for courage, and had defended their liberty
against the arms of Rome, with greater obstinacy,
and during a longer course of years, than any
nation ill Europe. But so entirely were they ener-
vated by their fubje6tion to the Romans, that the
Vandals, who entered the kingdom A. D. 409,
completed the conquest of it with such rapidity,

that

that in the year 41 I, these barbarians divided ii
among them by casting lots. The desolation oc.
cafioned by their invasion is thus described by
Idatius an eye-witness: " The barbarians waited
every thing with hostile cruelty. The pestilence
was no less deitrutive. A dreadful famine raged,
to such a degree, that the living were constrained
to feed on the dead bodies of their fellow-citizens;
add all those terrible plagues desolated at once the
unhappy kingdoms." Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth,
Patrum, vol. vii. p. 1233. edit. Lugd. 1677. The
Goths having attacked the Vandals in theirnew
settlements, a fierce war ensued; the country was
plundered by both parties; the cities which had
escaped from destruCtion in the first invasion of
the Vandals, were now laid in ahes, and the
inhabitants exposed to susser every thing that the
wanton cruelty of barbarians could inflict. Ida-
tius describes these scenes of inhumanity, ibid.
p. I235. b. 1236. C. f. A similar account of
their devastations is given by Ifidorus Hifpa.
lenis, and other contemporary writers. lid.
Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 732. From Spain
the Vandals passed over into Afiica, A. D. 428.
Africa was, next to Egypt, the molt fertile of the
Roman provinces. It was one of the granaries
of the empire, and is called by an ancient writer,
the foul of the commonwealth. Tlough the army
with which the Vandals invaded it did not exceed
30,000 fighting men, they became absolute rnaf
ters of the province in less than two years. A
contemporary author gives a dreadful account of

the

e havoc which they made: "c They found a
rovince well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the
auty of the whole earth. They carried their
ftrutive arms into every corner of it; they dif-
opled it by their devastations; exterminating
very thing with fire and sword. They did not
yen spare the vines and fruit-trees, that those,

whom caves and inaccessible mountains had
forded a retreat, might find no nourishment of
ny kind. Their hostile rage could not be sati-
ted, and there was no place exempted from the
fses of it. They tortured their prisoners with.
he most exquisite cruelty, that they might force
ron them a discovery of their hidden treasures.
he more they discovered, the more they ex-
le&ed, and the more implacable they became.
either the infirmities of age nor of sex; neither
he dignity of nobility, nor the san&ity of the
acerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but
he more illustrious their prisoners were, the more
arbaroufly they insulted them. The public
uildings, which resifted the violence of the flames,
hey levelled with the ground. They left many
cities without an inhabitant. When they ap-
proached any fortified place, which their undif-
ciplined army could not reduce, they gathered
together a multitude of prisoners, and putting
them to the sword, left their bodies unburied,
that the flench of the carcases might oblige the
garrison to abandon it." Victor Vitenfis de per-
fecutione Afi-icana ap. Bibl. Patrurn, vol. viii.
p. 666. St. Auguftin, an African, who survived
the conques of his country by the Vandals ome

years,

years, gives a similar description of their cruelties
Opera, vol. x. p. 372. edit. 616.--About a
hundred years after the settlement of the Vandals in
Africa, Belisarius attacked and difpoffeffed them,
Procopius, a contemporary historian, describes the
devastation which that war occasioned. " Africa,
fays he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one might
travel several days in it without meeting one man;
and it is no exaggeration to fay, that in the course
of the war five millions of persons perished." Proc.
hist. Arcana, cap. 18. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 35
-I have dwelt longer upon the calamities of this
province, because they are described not only by
contemporary authors, but by eye-witnesses. The
present state of Africa confirms their teflimony.
Many of the most flourishing and populous cities
with which it was filled, were so entirely ruined,
that no vestiges remain to point-out where they
were situated. That fertile territory which sus
tained the Roman empire, still lies in a great mea-
sure uncultivated; and that province, whichVitor,
in his barbarous Latin, called Speciofitas totiusterra
florentis, is now the retreat of pirates and banditti,

WHILE the Vandals laid waste a great part of

the empire, the Huns desolated the remainder. Of
all the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and
molt formidable. Amnmianus Marcellinus, a con-
temporary author, and one of the best of the later
historians, gives an account of their policy and
manners; which nearly resembles those of the Scy-
thians dcfcribecl by the ancients, and of the Tartars

knowvl

known to the moderns. Some parts of their cha-
rater, and several of their customs, are not unlike
those of the savages in North America. Their
passion for war was extreme. ' As in polished
societies (fays Ammianus) ease and tranquillity
are courted, they delight in war and dangers.
He who falls in battle is reckoned happy. They
who die of old age or of disease are deemed infa-
mous. They boast, with the utmost exultation, of
the number of enemies whom they have slain, and,
as the most glorious of all ornaments, they
fasten the scalps of those who have faHen by
their hands to the trappings of their horses." Am-
mian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov.
Ludg. 693.-Their incursions into the empire
began in the fourth century; and the Romans,
though no strangers, by that time, to the effects
of barbarous rage, were astonished at the cruelty
of their devastations. Thrace, Pannonia, and
Illyricum, were the countries which they first laid
desolate. As they had at first no intention of
fettling in Europe, they made only inroads of ihort
continuance into the empire, but these were fre-
quent, and Procopius computes that in each of
these, at a medium, two hundred thousand per-
sons perished, or were carried off as slaves. Pro-
cop. Hilt. Arcan. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 316.
Thrace, the best cultivated province in that quar-
ter of the empire, was converted into a desert,
and, when Prifcus accompanied the ambassadors
sent to Attila, there were no inhabitants in ome
of the cities, but a few miserable people who
had taken flelter among the ruins of the churches;

VOL. . R and

and the fields were covered with the bones of
those who had fallen by the sword. Prifcusap.
Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attila became king of
the Huns, A. D. 434. He is one of the greatest
and most entirprizing conquerors mentioned in
history. He extended his empire over all the valt
countries comprehended under the general names
of Scythia and Germany in the ancient division
of the world.. While he was carrying on his
wars against the barbarous nations, he kept the
Roman empire under perpetual apprehenfons,
and extorted enormous, subsidies from the timid
and effeminate monarchs who governed it. In
the year 451, he entered Gaul, at the head of an
army composed of all the various nations which
he had subdued. It was more numerous than
any with which the barbarians had hitherto in-
vaded the empire. The devastations which he
committed were horrible; not only the open
country, but the most flourishing cities, were defo.
lated. The extent and cruelty of his devastations
are described by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei, edit.
Baluz. Par. 669. p. 139, &c. and by Idatius,
ubi supra, p. I235. Aetius put a flop to his pro-
grefs in that country by the famous battle of
Chalons, in which (if we may believe the hifto-
rians of that age) three hundred thousand persons
perished. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de Rebus Geticis
ap. Grot. Hilt. Gothor. p. 671. Amft. I665. But
the next year he resolved to attack the centre of
the empire, and, marching into Italy, wafted it
with rage, inflamed by the sense of his late dif-
grace. What Italy suffered by the Huns ex-

"~7 -
. ceeded

ceeded all the calamities which the preceding in-
curfions of the barbarians had brought upon it.
Conringius has colleted several passages from the
ancient historians, which prove that the devafta-
tions committed by the Vandals and Huns in the
countries situated on the banks of the Rhine,
were no less cruel and fatal to the human race.
Exercitatio de urbibus Germaniae, Opera, vol. i.
488. It is endless, it is hocking, to follow these
destroyers of mankind through so many scenes of
horror, and to contemplate the havoc which they
made of the human pecies.

BUT the state in which Italy appears to have
been, during several ages after the barbarous
nations fettled in it, is the most decisive proof of
the cruelty as well as extent of their devastations.
Whenever any country is thinly inhabited, trees
and shrubs spring up in the uncultivated fields,
and, spreading by degrees, form large forests;
by the overflowing of rivers, and the tfagnating
of waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes
and marshes. Ancient Italy, which the Romans
rendered the feat of elegance and luxury, was cul-
tivated to the highest pitch. But so effechually
did the devastations of the barbarians destroy all
the effe&s of Roman industry and cultivation, that
that in the eighth century a considerable part of
Italy appears to have been covered with forests and
marfies of great extent. Muratori enters iinto a
minute detail concerning the situation and limits of
several of these and proves, by the most authentic
evidence, that great traets of territory, in all the

R 2 different

different provinces of Italy, were either over-
run with wood, or laid under water. Nor did
these occupy parts of the country naturally bar-
ren or of little value, but were spread over dif-
trits which ancient writers represent as extremely
fertile, and which at present are highly cultivated.
Muratori Antiquitates Italica mediia vi, dissert.
xxi. v. ii. p. 49. 53, &c. A strong proof of
this occurs in a description of the city of Mo-
dena, by an author of the tenth century. Murat.
Script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars ii. p. 69I. The
state of desolation in other countries of Europe
seems to have been the fame. In many of the
most early charters now extant, the lands granted
to monasteries, or to private persons, are dif-
tinguifhed into such as are cultivated or inha-
bited, and such as were eremi, desolate. In many
instances, lands are granted to persons because
they had taken them from the desert, ab eremo,
and had cultivated and planted them with inha-
bitants. This appears from a charter of Char-
lemagne, published by Eckhart de Rebus Francie
Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 864. and from many char-
ters of his successors quoted by du Cange, voc.
eremus.-Wherever a right of property in land
can be thus acquired, it is evident that the coun-
try muff be extremely desolate, and thinly peopled.
The first settlers in America obtained poflefion
of land by such a title. Whoever was able to
clear and to cultivate a field, was recognized as
the proprietor. His industry merited such a re-
compence. The grants in the charters which I
have mentioned flow from a similar principle,

and

and there must have been some resemblance in the
state of the countries.

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and

ninth centuries, Italy was greatly infefled by
wolves and other wild beasts; another mark of its
being destitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq. vol.
ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient
world for its fertility and cultivation, was reduced
to the slate of a country newly peopled and lately
rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that some of thee de-

scriptions of the devastations, which I have quoted,
may be exaggerated, but that the barbarous tribes,
in making their settlements, did not proceed in-
variably in the fame manner. Some of them seem-
ed to be bent on exterminating the ancient inha-
bitants; others were more disposed to incorporate
with them. It is not my province either to en-
quire into the causes which occasioned this variety
in the condut of the conquerors, or to describe
the state of those countries where the ancient in-
habitants were treated most mildly. The facts
which I have produced are sufficient to justify the
account which I have given in the text, and to
prove, that the deftruaion of the human species,
occasioned by the hostile invasions of the northern
nations, and their subsequent settlements, was much
greater than many authors seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 14. [F].

I HAVE observed, Note II., that our only cer-

tain information concerning the ancient state of
the barbarous nations must be derived fi-om the
Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account

R 3

of the institutions and customs of one people, to
which those of all the reft seem to have been in
a great measure similar, has been. transmitted to
us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps,
that ever wrote, of observing them with profound
discernment, and of describing them with pro-
priety and force. The reader must perceive that
Caesar and Tacitus are the authors whom I have
in view. The former gives a short account of
the ancient Germans in a few chapters of the
sixth book of his Commentaries: the latter
wrote a treatise expressly on that fubje:. These
are the most precious and inftrudive monuments
of antiquity to the present inhabitants of Europe,
From them we learn,

i. THAT the state of society among the ancient

Germans was of the rudest and molt simple form.
They subsisted entirely by hunting or by paftu-
rage. Caef. lib. vi. c. 2I. They negle&ed agri-
culture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and
flesh. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees with him in
most of these points; De morib. Germ. c. 14, 5.
23. The Goths were equally negligent of agri-
culture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 31.
B. Society was in the fame state among the HIunc,
who disdained to cultivate the earth, or to touch
a plough. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The
fame manners took place among the Alans; ibid.
p. 477. While society remains in this simple
flatc, men by uniting together scarcely relinquilh
any portion of their natural independence. Ac-
cordingly we are informed, 2. That the authority
of civil government was extremely limited among

the

the Germans. During times of peace they had
no common or fixed magistrate, but the chief men
of every district dispensed justice, and accommo-
dated differences. Caf. ibid. c. 23. Theirkings
had not abfotute or unbounded power; their au-
thority consisted rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of
small consequence were determined by the chief
men; affairs of importance by the whole com-
munity. Tacit. c. 7. Ii. The Huns, in like
manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were not
subjet to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual
among the ancient Germans was left at liberty to
chufe whether he would take part in any military
enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by public authority. " When any of the
chief men proposes an expedition, such as ap-
prove of the cause and of the leader rife up, and
declare their intention of following him; after
coming under this engagement, those who do
not fulfil it, are confidered as deserters and
traitors, and are looked upon as infamous."
Cf. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly points at the
fame custom, though in terms more obscure.
Tacit. c. I . 4. As every individual was so
independent, and matter in so great a degree of
his own ations, it became, of consequence, the
great object of every person among the Germans,
who aimed at being a leader, to gain adherents,
and attach them to his person and interest.

R 4 These

These adherents Caesar calls Ambadi and Clientes,
i. e. retainers or clients; Tacitus, Comites, or
companions. The chief diftineion and power
of the leaders confited in being attended by a
numerous band of chosen youth. This was their
pride as well as ornament during peace and their
defence in war. The leaders gained or preserved
the favour of these retainers by presents of ar-
mour and of horses; or by the profuse though
inelegant hospitality with which they entertained
them. Tacit. c. 14, I5. 5. Another consequence
of the personal liberty and independence which
the Germans retained, even after they united in
society, was their circumscribing the criminal
jurifdition of the magistrate within very narrow
limits, and their not only claiming but exer-
cifing almost all the rights of private resentment
and revenge. Their magistrates had not the
power either of imprisoning or of inflicting any
corporal -punishment on a free man. Tacit. c. 7.
Every person was obliged to avenge the wrongs
which his parents or friends had sustained. Their
enemies were hereditary, but not irreconcilable.
Even murder was compensated by paying a cer-
tain number of cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of
the fine went to the king, or slate, a part to the
person who had been injured, or to his kindred.
Ibid. c. 2.

THOSE particulars concerning the institutions

and manners of the Germans, though well known
to every person conversant in ancient literature, I
have thought proper to arrange in this order, and

to

to lay before such of my readers as may be less
acquainted with these faEts, both because they con-
firm the account which I have given of the state of
the barbarous nations, and because they tend to
illustrate all the observations I hall have occasion
to make concerning the various changes in their
government and customs. The laws and customs
introduced by the barbarous nations into their new
settlements, are the belt commentary on the writ-
ings of Cefar and Tacitus; and their observations
are the best key to a perse& knowledge of these
laws and customs.

ONE circumstance, with refpeac to the testimonies
ofCxfar and Tacitus, concerning the Germans, me-
rits attention. Cefar wrote his brief account of
their manners more than an hundred years before
Tacitus composed his treatise De Moribus Germa-
norum.. An hundred years make a confiderablepe-
riod in the progress of national manners, especially
if, during that time, those people who are rude
and unpolifhed have had much communication
with more civilized states. This was the cafe with
the Germans. Their intercourse with the Romans
began when Caesar crossed the Rhine, and increased
greatly during the interval between that event and
the time when Tacitus flourished. We may ac-
ccrdingly observe, that the manners of the Ger-
mans, in his time,- which Cefar describes, were
less improved than those of the fame people as de-
lineated by Tacitus. Betides this, it is remark-
able that there was a considerable difference in
lhe fate of society among the different tribes of

Germans.

Germans. The Suiones were so much improved,
that they began to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44.
The Fenni were so barbarous, that it is wonderful
how they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46. Who.
ever undertakes to describe the manners of the
Germans, or to found any political theory upon
the state of society among them, ought carefully
to attend to both these circumstances.

;BEFORE I quit this fubje&, it may not be im.

proper to observe, that, though successive altera.
tions -in their institutions, together with the gra.
dual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people who
conquered the Roman empire, there is still one
race of men nearly in the fame political situation
with theirs, when they first fettled in their new con.
quefis; I mean the various tribes and nationsof
Savages in North America. It cannot then be
confidered either as a digression. or as an improper
indulgence of curiosity, to enquire whether this
similarity in their political state has occasioned any
resemblance between their character and manners,
If the likeness turns out to be striking, it is a
stronger proof that a just account has been given
of the ancient inhabitants of Europe, than the
testimony even of Caesar or of Tacitus.

I. THE Americans fubfifi chiefly by huntingand

fishing. Some tribes negleEt agriculture entirely.
Among those who cultivate some small spot near
their huts, that, together with all works of labour)
is performed by the women. P. Charlevoix Jour.
nal Hiftorique d'un Voyage de lAmerique, 4t

Par.

Par. 1744. P. 334. In such a state of society, the
common wants of men being few, and their mutual
dependence upon each other small, their union is
extremely imperfet and feeble, and they continue
to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired.
It is the first idea of an American, that every man
is born free and independent, and that no power
on earth hath any right to diminish or circumscribe
his natural liberty. There is hardly any appearance
offubordination either in civil or domeflic govern-
ment. Every one does what he pleases. A father
and mother live with their children, like persons
whom chance has brought together, and whom no
common bond unites. Their manner of educating
their children is suitable to this principle. They
never chastise or punish them, even during their
infancy. As they advance in years, they continue
to be entirely masters of their own aions, and
seem not to be conscious of being responsible for
any part of their condut. Id. p. 272, 273.-
2. The power of their civil magistrates is extremely
limited. Among most of their tribes, the Sachem
orchief is elective. A council of old men is chosen
to assist him, without whose advice he determines
no affair of importance. The Sachems neither pof-
sers nor claim any great degree of authority. They
propose and intreat, rather than command. The
obedience of their people is altogether voluntary.
Id. p.266. 68.---3. The savages of America
engage in their military enterprizes, not from con-
firaint, but choice. When war is relolved, a chief
arises, and offers himself to be the leader. Such

as

as are willing (for they compel no person) fland
up'one after another, and sing their war-fong. But
if, after this, any of there hould refuse to follow
the leader to whom they have engaged, his life
would be in danger, and he would be confidered
as the most infamous of men. Id. p. 217, 218.
-- 4. Such as engage to follow any leader, ex.
pes to be treated by him with great attention and
refpe ; and he is obliged to make them presents
of considerable value. Id. p. 28.-- . Among
the Americans, the magistrate has scarcely anycri.
minaljurifdidion. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any
injury, the person or family offended may infiic
what punishment they please on the person who
was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment
and desire of vengeance are excessive and impla.
cable. Time can neither extinguish nor abate it.
It is the chief inheritance parents leave to their
children; it is transmitted from generation to ge-
neration, until an occasion be found of satisfying
it. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the offended
party is appeared. A compensation is paid fora
murder that has been committed. The relations
of the deceased receive it; and it consists most
commonly of a captive taken in war, who being
substituted in place of the person who was mur-
dered, assumes his name, and is adopted into his
family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my
purpose to have pointed out the similarity of those
great features which distinguish and charaterize
both people. Bochart, and other philologists of

the

the last century, who, with more erudition than
science, endeavoured to trace the migrations of va-
rious nations, and who were apt, upon the slightest
appearance of resemblance, to find an affinity be-
tween nations far removed from each other, and
to conclude that they were descended from the
fame ancestors, would hardly have failed, on view-
ing such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with
confidence, " That the Germans and Americans
must be the fame people." But a philosopher will
satisfy himself with observing, " That the charac-
ters of nations depend on the state of society in
which they live, and on the political institutions
established among them; and that the human
mind, whenever it is placed in the fame situation,
will, in ages the most distant, and in countries the
most remote, assume the fame form, and be diftin-
guifhed by the fame manners."

I HAVE pushed the comparison between the Ger-
mans and Americans no farther than was necessary
for the illustration of my subjeCt. I do not pretend
that the state of society in the two countries was
perfetly similar in every refpe&. Many of the
German tribes were more civilized than the Ame-
ricans. Some of them were not unacquainted with
agriculture; almost all of them had flocks of tame
cattle, and depended upon them for the chief part
of their fubfiftcnce. Most of the American tribes
subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and more
timple state than the ancient Germans, The re-
semblance, however, between their condition, is
greater, perhaps, than any that history affords an

opportu-

opportunity of observing between any two race
of uncivilized people, and this has produced a fur.
prizing similarity of manners.

NO T E VII. SECT. I. P. I4, [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to the

army. The king himself had no part of it but
what he acquired by lot. A remarkable inflance
of this occurs in the history of the Franks. The
army of Clovis, the founder of the French mo.
narchy, having plundered a church, carried off,
among other sacred utensils, a vase of extraordi.
nary size and beauty. The bishop ent deputiesto
Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, thatit
might be again employed in the sacred fervicesto
which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired the
deputies to follow him to Soissons, as the booty
was to be divided in that place, and promired,
that if the lot hould give him the disposal of
the vase, he would grant what the bishop desired.
When he came to Soissons, and all the booty was
placed in one great heap in the middle of the
army, Clovis entreated, that before making the
division, they would give him that vase over and
above his flare. All appeared willing to gratify
the king, and to comply with his request, when a
fierce and haughty soldier lifted up his battle-axe,
and striking the vase with the utmost violence,
cried out with a loud voice, You flall receive
nothing here but that to which the lot gives you a
right." Gregor. Turon. Hiltor. Francorum,
lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. i6io.

NOT

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. P. 8. [H].
THE history of the establishment and progress of
the feudal system, is an inrerefting object to all the
nations of Europe. In rome countries, their ju-
rifprudence and laws are fill in a great measure
feudal. In others, many forms and practices efta-
blifhed by custom, or founded on statutes, took
their rife from the feudal law, and cannot be un-
dertood without attending to the ideas peculiar to
it. Several authors of the highest reputation for,
genius and erudition, have endeavoured to illustrate
this subjea, but still many parts of it are obscure.
I hall endeavour to trace, with precision, the pro-
grefs and variation of ideas concerning. property in
land among the barbarous nations; and shall
attempt to point out the causes which introduced
these changes, as well as the effecs which followed
upon them. Property in land seems to have gone
through four successive changes among the people
who fettled in the various provinces of the Roman
empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in
their original countries, their property in land was
only temporary, and they had no certain limits to
their poffelons. After feeding their flocks in one
difrit, they removed with them, and with their
wives and families, to another; and abandoned
that likewise in a hort time. They were not, in
consequence of this imperfec species of property,
brought under any positive or formal obligation

to

to serve the community; all their services were
purely voluntary. Every individual was at liberty
to chufe how far he would contribute towards car-
rying on any military enterprize. If he followed a
leader in any expedition, it was from attachment,
not from a sense of obligation. The clearet proof
of this has been produced in Note VI. While
property continued in this state, we can discover
nothing that bears any resemblance to a feudal
tenure, or to the ubordination and military ser.
rice which the feudal system introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they

had subdued, the victorious troops divided the
conquered lands. Whatever portion of them fell
to a soldier, he seized as the recompence due to
his valour, as a ettlement acquired by his own
sword. He took possession of it as a freeman in
full property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it
as an inheritance to his children.. Thus property
in land became fixed. It was at the fame time
allodial, i. e. the possessor had the entire rightof
property and dominion ; he held of no sovereign
or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
homage and perform service. But as these new
proprietors were in ome danger (as has been ob-
served in the text) of being disturbed by the
remainder of the ancient inhabitants, andlin till
greater danger of being attacked by fuccelivc
colonies of barbarians as fierce and rapacious a
themselves, they saw the necessity of coming under

obligal

obligations to defend the community, more ex-
plicit than those to which they had been fubje&
in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new fettle-
ments, every freeman became bound to take arms
in defence of the community, and, if he refused
or negleEed so to do, was liable to a considerable
penalty. I do not mean that any contract of this
kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified
by any legal solemnity. It was established by
tacit content, like the other compacts which hold
society together. Their mutual security and pre-
servation made it the interest of all to recog-
nize its authority, and to enforce the observation
of it. We can trace back this new obligation on
the proprietors of land to a very early period in
the history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began
his reign A. D. 562, exa&ed a fine, bannos jufit
exigi, from certain persons who had refused to ac-
company him i an expedition. Gregor. Turon.
lib. v. c. 26. p. 21. Childebert, who began his
reign A. D. 576, proceeded in the fame manner
againfl others who had been guilty of a like crime.
Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 342. Such a fine could not
have been exaced while property continued in its
fit state, and military ervice was entirely volun-
tary. Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman
who possessed five manfi, i. e. sixty acres of land,
i)]properly, should march in person against the
enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807. Louis le Debonnaire,
A.D. 5, granted lands to certain Spaniards
who fled from the Saracens, and allowed them to

VOL. I. S ifede

fettle in his territories, on condition that they
hould serve in the army like other freemen. Capitul.
vol. i. p. 500oo. By land possessed in property, which
is mentioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are
to understand, according to the style of that age,
allodial land; alodes and proprietas, alodum and
proprium being words perfectly fynonimous. Du
Cange voce Alodis. The clearest proof of the
diftincEion between allodial and beneficiary posses-
sion, is contained in two charters publified by
Muratori, by which it appears, that a person
might possess one part of his estate as allodial,
which he could dispose of at pleasure, the other as
a beneficium, of which he had only the ufufrut, the
property returning to the superior lord on his de-
mise. Antiq. Ital. medii aevi, vol. i. p. 559. 56.
The fame distinction is pointed out in a Capitulare
of Charlemagne, A. D. 8I2, edit. Baluz. vol.i.
p. 491. Count Everard, who married a daugh-
ter of Louis le Debonnaire, in the curious testa-
ment, by which he disposes of his vast estate among
his children, distinguishes between what he pof-
sessed proprietate, and what he held beneficio; and
it appears that the greater part was allodial.
A. D. 837. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplornatica,
Lovan. 1723. Vol. p. I9.

IN the fame manner Liher homo is commonly

opposed to /afjus or Vajallus; the former denotes
an allodial proprietor, the latter one who held of
a superior. These 'free men were under an obli-
gation to serve the ftatc, and this duty was co

fidered

fidered as so sacred, that free men were prohibited
from entering into holy orders unless they had
obtained the consent of the sovereign. The reason
given for this in the statute is remarkable, '. For
we are informed that some do so, not so much
out of devotion, as irn order to avoid that military
service which they are bound to perform, Capitul.
lib. i. § I4. If, upon being summoned into
the field, any free man refused to obey,,a full
-erebannum, i. e. a fine of sixty crowns, was to
be exaEted from him according to the law of the
Franks." Capit. Car. Magn. ap. Leg. Longob.
lib. i. tit. 14i. § 3. p. 539. This exprefliori ac-
cording to the law of the Franks, seems to
imply, that both the obligation to serve, and the
penalty on those who disregarded it, were coeval
with the laws made by the Franks at their first set-
tlement in Gaul. This fine was levied with such
rigour, That if.any person convicted of this
crime was insolvent, he was reduced to servitude,'
and continued in that state until such time as his
labour should amount to the value of the hereban-
num." Ibid. The emperor Lotharius rendered
the penalty still more revere; and if any person
possessing such an extent of property as made it
incumbent on him to take the field in person, re-
fused to obey the summons, all his goods were
declared to be forfeited, and he himself might be
punished with banishment. Murat. Script. Ital.
vol. i. pars ii, p. 53.

S '2 III. PRO-

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed, and fubje& to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and fep
by ftep. We learn from Tacitus, that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents
whom he calls Comites. These fought under their
standard, and followed them in all their enter-
prizes. The fame custom continued among them
in their new settlements, and those attached or
devoted followers were called fideles, antrufiones,
homines in trufje Dominica, leudes. Tacitus informs
us, that the rank of a Comes was deemed honour-
able; De morib. Germ. c. 3. The composition,
which is the standard by which we must judge of
the rank and condition of persons in the middle
ages, paid for the murder of one in trufle Dormi
nica, was triple to that paid for the murder of a
freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44. § & 2. While
the Germans remained in their own country, they
courted the favour of these Comites by presents of
arms and horses, and by hospitality. See Note VI.
As long as they had no fixed property in land,
there were the only gifts that they could bestow,
and the only reward which their followers desired.
But upon their fettling in the countries which they
conquered, and when the value of property came
to be understood among them, instead of those
flight presents, the kings and chieftains bellowed
a more fubflantial recompence in land on their
adherents. These grants were called beneficia, be-

cause

cause they were gratuitous donations; and honores,
because they were regarded as marks of diltinclion.
What were the services originally exacted in return
for these beneficia cannot be determined with ab-
solute precision; because -there are no records so
ancient. When allodial poffeflions were first ren-
dered feudal, they were not, at once, subjected
to all the feudal services. The transition here, as
in all other changes of importance, was gradual.
As the great object of a feudal vassal was to ob-
tain protection, when allodial proprietors first con-
sented to become vassals of any powerful leader,
they continued to retain as much of their ancient
independence as was consistent with that new rela-
tion. The homage which they did to the superior
of whom they chose to hold, was called homagiun
planum, and bound them to nothing more than
fidelity, but without any obligation either of mi-
litary service, or attendance in the courts of their
superior. Of this homagium planum ome traces,
though obscure, may still be discovered. BruffeL,
torn. i. p. 97. Among the ancient writs published
by D. D. De Vic and Vaifette hist. de Langued. are
a great many which they call homagia. They
feern to be an intermediate tep between the ho-
m7agium planum mentioned by Bruffel, and the
engagement to perform complete feudal service,
The one party promises protection, and grants
certain castles or lands; the other engages to de-
fend the person of the granter, and to assist him
likewie in defending his property as often as he

S 3 flall

shall be summoned to do so. But these engage-
ments are accompanied with none of the feudal for-
malities, and no mention is made of any of the
other feudal services. They appear rather to be a
mutual contract between equals, than the engage-
ment of a vaflal to perform services to a superior
lord. Preuves de 'hist. de Lang. tor. ii. I73.
& passim. As soon as men were accustomed to
these, the other feudal services were gradually in-
troduced. M. de Montesquieu confiders these
beneficia as fiefs, which originally ubjeted those
who held them to military service. L'Efprit des
Loix, 1. xxx. c. 3. & i6. M. l'Abbe de Mably
contends that such as held there were at first sub-
jeEted to no other service than what was incum-
bent on every free man. Observations fur l'hiftoire
de France, I. 356. But, upon comparing their
proofs and reafonihgs and conjectuies, it seems to
be evident, that as every free man, in consequence
of his allodial property, was bound to serve the
community under a severe penalty, no good rea-
son can be assigned for conferring these beneficia,
if they did not subject such as received them to
some new obligation. Why should a king have
Itripped himself of his domain, if he had not ex-
pected that, by parcelling it our, !e might acquire
a right to f-rvices, to which he had formerly no
title ? We may then warrantably conclude, " That
as allodial property subjected those who possessed
it to frve the community, so beneficia fubjeted
such as held thein to personal service and fidelity

I to

to him from whom they received there lands.
These beneficia were granted originally only dn-
ring pleasure. No circumstance relating to the
customs of the middle ages is better ascertained
than this; and innumerable proofs of it might
be added to those produced in L'Efprit des Loix,
1. xxx. c. 16. and by Du Cange, voc. beneficium &
feudumz.

IV. BUT the poffefion-of benefices did not con-
tinue long in this state. A precarious tenure du-
ring pleasure, was not sufficient to satisfy such as
held lands, and by various means they gradually
obtained a confirmation of their benefices during
life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces fe-
veral quotations from ancient charters and chro-
nicles in proof of this; Glof. voc. Beneficium.
After this it was easy to obtain or extort charters
rendering beneficia hereditary, first in the dired
line, then in the collateral, and at lafi in the fe-
male line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du
Cange, voc. Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when
each of these changes took place. M. l'Ab. Mably
conjectures, with some probability, that Charles
Martel first introduced the practice of granting be-
neficia for life: Obfervat. tom. i. p. 103. 16o; and
that Louis le Debonnaire was among the first who
rendered them hereditary, is evident from the au-
thorities to which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon
however has published a placitum of Louis le De-

S 4 bonnaire,

.bonnaire, A. D. 860, by which it appears, that he
still continued to grant ome beneficia only during
life. De Re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the
year 889, Odo king of France granted lands toRi-
cabodo, fideli suo, jure beneficiario & fruduario,
during his own life; and if he should die, and a son
were born to him, that right was to continue du-
ring the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs merely
during life, and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity.
While beneficia continued under their first form,
and were held only during pleasure, he who granted
them not only exercised the dominium or preroga-
tive of superior lord, but he retained the property,
giving his vassal only the zfufrulf. But under the
latter form, when they became hereditary, although
feudal lawyers continued to define a beneficium
agreeably to its original nature, the property was
in effec taken out of the hands of the superior
lords, and lodged ih those of the vassal. As soon
as the reciprocal advantages of the feudal mode
of tenure came to be understood by superiors as
well as vassals, that species of holding became so
agreeable to both, that not only lands, but casual
rents, such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at
ferries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of offices,
and even pensions themselves, were granted and
held as fiefs; and military service was promised
and exaaed on account of these. Morice Mem.
pour fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
78. 690. Bruffel, tom. i. p 41. How abfurdfo-
ever it may seem to grant or to hold such preca-

y, rious

rious and casual property as a fief, there are in-
stances of feudal tenures still more singular. The
profits arising from the masses said at an altar,
were properly an ecclesiastical revenue, belong-
ing to the clergy of the church or monastery
which performed that duty; but these were some-
times seized by the powerful barons. In order to
ascertain their right to them, they held them as
fiefs of the church, and parcelled them out in the
fame manner as other property to their fub-vaf-
fals. Bouquet, receuil des hist. vol. x. 238. 480.
The fame spirit of encroachment which rendered
fiefs hereditary, led the nobles to extort from
their sovereigns hereditary grants of offices. Many
of the great offices of the crown became heredi-
tary in most of the kingdoms in Europe; and so
conlcious were monarchs of this spirit of usurp-
ation among the nobility, and so solicitous to
guard against it, that, on ome occasions, they
obliged the persons whom they promoted to any
office of dignity, to grant an obligation, that nei-
ther they nor their heirs should claim it as belong-
ing to them by hereditary right. A remarkable
instance of this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des
Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in
the Thefaur. anecdot. published by Martene &
Durand, vol. i. p. 873,-This revolution in pro-
perty occasioned a change corresponding to it in
political government; the great vasals of the
crown, as they acquired such extensive poflff-
sions, usurped a proportional degree of power,
depressed the jurisdiction of the crown, and tram-

pled

pled on the privileges of the people. It is on ac
count of this connexion, that it becomes an ob
ject of importance in history to trace the progrefi
of feudal property; for, upon discovering in whal
itate property was at any particular period, we
may determine with precision what was the degree
of power pofefied by the king or by the nobilityat
that jundure.

ONE circumitance more, with refpea to the

changes which property underwent, delerves atten.
tion. I have shewn, that when the various tribes
of barbarians divided their conquests in the fifth
and sixth centuries, the property which they ac-
quired was allodial; but in several parts of Eu.
rope, property had become almost entirely feudal
by the beginning of the tenth century. The for-
nier species of property seems to be so much bet-
ter and more desirable than the latter; that such a
change appears surprising, especially when we are
informed that allodial property was frequently
converted into feudal, by a voluntary deed of the
possessor. The motives which determined them
to a choice so repugnant to the ideas of modern
times concerning property, have been investigated
and explained by M. de Montesquieu, with his usual
difcernnent and accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. . The
most considerable is that of which we have an hint
in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce ,lodis. In those times ofanar-
chy and dibrder which became general in Europe
after the death of Charlemagne, when there was

scarcely

arcely any union among the different members
f the community, and individuals were exposed,
ile and undefended by government, to rapine
nd oppression, it became ncceffary for every man
have a powerful proteEtor, under whole banner
e might range hinmfelf, and obtain security
gainft enemies whom singly he could not op-
ofe. For this reason he relinquished his allodial
ndependence, and fubjeaed himlelf to the feudal
ervices, that he might find safety under the pa-
ronage of ome refpetable fupcrior. I-n some
arts of Europe, this change fiom allodial to
eudal property became so general, that he who
offcffed land had no longer any liberty of
hoice left. He was obliged to recognize some
iege lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beau-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Cler-
mont and Beauvois, if the lord or count disco-
vered any lands within his jurifdition, for which
no service was performed, and which paid to
him no taxes or cufloms, he might instantly
seize it as his own; for, fays he, according to
our culforn, no man can hold allodial property.
CouR. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the fame prin-
ciple is founded a maxim, which has at length
become general in the law of France, Nulle terre
fans Seigneur. In other provinces of France, al-
lodiia property seems to have remained longer
t"alicnated, and to have been more highly va-
lued. A great number of charters, containing
grants, or tales, or exchanges of allodial lands
i the province of Langucdoc, are published

HIilt.

Hist. gener. de Langued. par D. D. DeVic.
Vaifette, tom. ii. During the ninth, tenth an
great part of the eleventh century, the propert
in that province seems to have been entirelyal
lodial; and scarcely any mention of feudal te
nures occurs in the deeds of that country. The
slate of property, during these centuries, seem
to have been perfetly similar in Catalonia and
the country of Roufillon, as appears from the ori.
ginal charters published in the-Appendix to Petr,
de la Marca's treatise de marca five limite Hifpa.
nico. Allodial property seems to have continued
in the Low Countries, to a period fill later,
During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth cen.
turies, this species of property appears to have
been of considerable extent. Miraei opera diplom,
vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 817, 296, 842, 847, 573.
Some vestiges of allodial property appear there as
late as the fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. Several
fats which prove that allodial property subsisted
in different parts of Europe long after the intro-
duction of feudal tenures, and which tend to illus
trate the diftinclion between there two different
species of pofeffion, are produced by M. Houard,
Anciennes Loixdes Francois, conservees dans les
Coutumes Angloifes, vol. i. p. 192, &c. The
notions of men with refpeEt to property, vary ac
cording to the diversity of their underflandings,
and the caprice of their passions. At the fane
time that ome persons were fond of relinqtinsh
ing allodial property, in order to hold it by fudll
tenure, others seem to have been solicitous to con'

vcrt

rt their fiefs into allodial property. An in-
nce of this occurs in a charter of Louis le De-
nnaire, published by Eckhard, Commentarii
rebus Francise Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885.
nother occurs in the year 1299, Reliquia MSS.
nis aXvi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. 209; and even
eas late as the year 337, ibid. vol. vii. p. 40.
he fame thing took place in the Low Countries.
irai oper. i. 52.
IN tracing these various revolutions of property,
have hitherto chiefly confined myself to what hap-
ned in France, because the ancient monuments
that nation have either been more carefully pre-
ved, or have been more clearly illustrated than
ofe of any people in Europe.
IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in
operty, and succeeded each other in the fame
der. There is some ground, however, for con-
curing that allodial property continued longer
eifimation among the Italians, than among the
rench. It appears, that many of the charters
ranted by the emperors in the ninth century,
nveyed an allodial right to land. Murat.
ntiq. med. vi, v. i. p. 575, &c. But in the
eventh century we find some examples of per-
ns who resigned their allodial property, and
ceived it back as a feudal tenure. Id. p. 6o,
c. Muratori observes, that the word feudunm,
lich came to be substituted in place of benefi-
u)n, does not occur in any authentic charter pre-
,ousto the eleventh century. Id. 5 94. A charter of
i:g Robert of France, A. D. ooS, is the earliest
cd in which I have met with the word fe.idun.

Bouquet

Bouquet receuil des hiftoriens de Gaule & del
France, tom. x. p. 593, b. This word occursin
deed in an ediEt, A. D. 790, published by Bruffel
vol. i. p. 77. But the authenticity of that dee
has been called in question, and perhaps theftr
quent use of the word feudumn in it, is an addi
tional reason for doing so. The account whi
I have given of the nature both of allodial an
feudal possessions receives some confirmation fro
the etymology of the words themselves. AIl
or allodium is compounded of the German pa
tide an and lot, i. e. land obtained by lot. Wach
teri Gloffar. Germanicurn, voc. Allodium, p.
It appears from the authorities produced by hi
and by Du Cange, voc. fors, that the norther
nations divided the lands which they had con
quered in this manner. Feodum is compound
of d possession or eftare, and feo wages, pay
intimating that it was stipendiary, and granted
a recompence for service. Wachterus, ibid. vo
feodum, p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among th

Germans was perfectly similar to that which
have traced in France. But as the emperors
Germany, especially after the Imperial crow
pafled from the descendants of Charlemagne
the house of Saxony, were far superior to th
contemporary monarchs of France in abilities
the Imperial vasals did not aspire so earlytoin
dependence, nor did they so loon obtain the pr
vilege of poleiflng their benefices by heredital
right. According to the compilers of the Lib

I 1u

Feudorum, Conrad II. or the Salic, was the first
emperor who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i.
tit. i. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024. Lu-
dovicus Pius, under whose reign grants of heredi-
tary fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his
father A. D. 814. Not only was this innovation
so much later in being introduced among the vas-
fals of the German emperors, but even after
Conrad had eflablifhed it, the law continued fa-
vourable to the ancient pracice; and unless the
charter of the vassal bore expressly that the fief
descended to his heirs, it was presumed to be
granted only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even
after the alteration made by Conrad, it was not
uncommon in Germany to grant fiefs only for life;
a charter of this kind occurs as late as the year
1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud.
p. 361. The transmission of fiefs to collateral and
female heirs, took place very slowly among the
Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. 2o r,
conveying the right of succession to females, but
it is granted as an extraordinary mark of favour,
and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands con-
tinued to be allodial long after the feudal mode
of tenure was introduced. It appears from the
Codex Diplomaticus Monaterii Buch, that a great
part of the lands in the marquisate of Milnia was
still allodial as late as the thirteenth century.
N° 31, 36, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptores hist. Ger-
man. cura Schoetgenii & Kreyfigii. Altenb. 755.

vol.

vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property seems to have
been common in another diltriCt of the fame pro.
vince, during the fame period. Reliquixe Diplo.
matica Sanctimonial. Beutiz. N° 17, 36, 58. ibid.
374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p. 19. [I].

As I shall have occasion, in another Note, to

represent the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this
to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating
the ground during the ages under review may
be divided into three classes; I. Ser-vi or slaves.
This seems to have been the most numerous
class, and consisted either of captives taken in
war, or of persons, the property in whom was
acquired in some one of the various methods
enumerated by Du Cange, voc. fervus, v. 6.
p. 447. The wretched condition of this nu-
merous race of men will appear from several
circumstances. i. Their mailers had absolute
dominion over their persons. They had the
power of punishing their slaves capitally, with-
out the intervention of any judge. This dan-
gerous right they poffiffed not only in the more
early periods, when their manners were fierce,
but it continued as late as the twelfth century.
Joach. PotgieTfrus de ftatu fervorum. Lem-
gov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. i. § 4, o, 3, 24.
Even after this jurifdilion of mailers came to
he restrained, the life of a slave was deemed to

be

be of so little value, that a very flight compen-
fation atoned for taking it away. Idem, lib. iii.
c. 6. If mafiers had power over the lives of their
slaves, it is evident that almost no bounds would
be set to the rigour of the punishments which they
might inflit upon them. The codes of ancient
laws prescribed punishments for the crimes of
slaves different from those which were infliced on
free men. The latter paid only a fine or com-
penfation; the former were fubje&ed to corporal
punishments. The cruelty of there was in many
indances exceflive. Slaves might be put to the
rack on very flight occasions. The laws with
relpeft to there points are to be found in Potgi-
efferus, lib. iii. cap. 7. 2. and are shocking to
humanity. If the dominion of masters over the
lives and persons of their slaves was thus exten-
five, it was no less so over their ations and pro-
perty. They were not originally permitted to
marry. Male and female slaves were allowed,
and even encouraged, to cohabit together. But
this union was not confidered as a marriage, it
was called contubernium, not nuptixz or matrimo-
iiium. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. 2. § . This notion
was so much established, that, during several cen-
turies after the barbarous nations embraced the
Chriltian religion, slaves, who lived as husband and
wife, were not joined together by any religious
ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial bene-
diAlon0 from a priest. Ibid. § io, Ii. When this
conjunstion between slaves came to be confidered
AS a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to

VOL. I. T marry

marry without the consent of their malter, and
such as ventured to do so, without obtaining that,
were punished with great severity, and sometimes
were put to death. Potgieff. ibid. § I2, &c.
-Gregor. Turon. hist. lib. v. c. 3. When the
manners of the European nations became more
gentle, and their ideas more liberal, slaves who
married without their master's content were sub.
jected only to a fine. Potgieff. ibid. § 20. Du
Cange Glo. voc. Forfnmaritagium. 3. All the
children of slaves were in the fame condition with
their parents, and became the property of the
matter. Du Cange Gloss. voc. Servus, vol. vi. 450.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so
entirely the property of their masters, that they
could fell them at pleasure. While domeltic
slavery continued, property in a slave was fold
in the fame manner with that which a person had
in any other moveable. Afterwards slaves became
adfcripti glebe, and were conveyed by sale, to.
gether with the farm or estate to which they be.
longed. Potgiefferus has colleEted the laws and
charters which illustrate this well-known circum-
fiance in the condition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4.
5. Slaves had a title to nothing but subsistence
and clothes from their master; all the profits of
their labour accrued to him. If a master, from
indulgence, gave his slaves any peculium, or fixed
allowance for their subsistence, they had no right
of property in what they saved out of that. All
that they accumulated belonged to their maser.
Potgieff. lib. ii. c. o. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i.768'

Diu

Du Cange, voc. Servus, vol. vi. p. 451. Con-
formably to the fame principle, all the effeas of
slaves belonged to their master at their death, and
they could not dispose of them by testament. Pot-
gieff. lib. ii. c. i. 6. Slaves were distinguished
from free men by a peculiar dress. Among all
the barbarous nations, long hair was a mark of
dignity and of freedom; slaves were for that reason
obliged to have their heads; and by this diftinc-
tion, how indifferent soever it may be in its own
nature, they were reminded every moment of the
inferiority of their condition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4.
For the fame reason it was enacted in the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe, that no slave
Ihould be admitted to give evidence against a free
man in a court ofjuftice. Du Cange, voc. Servus,
vol. vi. p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

2. illani. They were likewise adfcripti glebw
or ville, from which they derived their name, and
were transferrable along with it. Du Cange, voc.
1illanus. But in this they differed from slaves, that
they paid a fixed rent to their master for the land
which they cultivated, and, after paying that, all
the fruits of their labour and industry belonged to
themselves in property. This diftinsion is mark-
ed by Pierre de Fontain's Confeil. Vie de St.
Louis par Joinville, p. 119. edit. de Du Cange.
Several cafes decided agreeably to !.this principle
are mentioned by Murat. ibid. p. 773.

3. TE last class of persons employed in agri-
tulture were free men. These are distinguished

T 2 by

by various names among the writers of the middle
ages, Jlrimanni, conditionales, originarii, tributales,
&c. These seem to have been persons who pof.
lefied ome small allodial property of their own,
and besides that, cultivated some farm belonging
to their more wealthy neighbours, for which they
paid a fixed rent; and bound themselves likewise
to perform several small services in prato vel in
mefe, in aratura vel in vinea, such as ploughing a
certain quantity of their landlord's ground, afilft.
ing him in harvest and vintage work, &c. The
clearest proof of this may be found in Muratori,
v. i. p. 72. and in Du Cange under the refpec-
tive words above mentioned. I have not been able
to discover whether these arimanni, &c. were re-
movable at pleasure, or held their farms by lease
for a certain number of years., The former, if
we may judge from the genius and maxims of
the age, seems to be most probable. These per.
sons, however, were confidered as free men in
the most honourable sense of the word; they
enjoyed all the privileges of that condition, and
were even called to serve in war; an honour to
which no slave was admitted. Murat. Antiq.
vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account of
the condition of there three different classes of
persons, will enable the reader to apprehend the
full force of an argument which I hall produce
in confirmation of what I have said in the text
concernin 'the wretched state of the people
during the middle ages. Notwithltanding the
immenli: diflfrence between the first of these
4clales and tihe third, lucll was the spirit ofty-

ranny

ranny which prevailed among the great propri-
etors of land, and so various their opportunities
of oppressing those who were fettled on their
estates, and of rendering their condition intole-
rable, that many free men, in despair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered them-
selves as slaves to their powerful maiters. This
they did, in order that their masters might become
more immediately interested to afford them pro-
tetion, together with the means of subsisting
themselves and their families. The forms of such
a surrender, or obnoxiatio, as it was then called,
are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and by
the anonymous author published by M. Bignon,
together with the colle&ion of formulae compiled
by Marculfus, c. 6. In both, the reason given
for the obnoxiatio, is the wretched and indigent
condition of the person who gives up his liberty.
It was still more common for free men to fur-
render their liberty to bishops or abbots, that
they might partake of the security which the
vassals and slaves of churches and monasteries
enjoyed, in consequence of the superstitious ve-
neration paid to the faint under whose immediate
protection they were supposed to be taken. Du
Cange, voc. Oblatus, vol. iv. p. 286. That con-
dition mull have been miserable indeed, which
could induce a free man voluntarily to renounce
his liberty, and to give up himself as a slave to
the disposal of another. The number of slaves
in every nation of Europe was immense. The
greater part of the inferior class of people in

T 3 F rancc

France were reduced to this state at the corn.
mencement of the third race of kings. L'Efpr.
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. . The fame was the cafe
in England. Brady Pref. to Gen. Hist. Many
curious fats, with refpet to the ancient slate of
villains, or slaves in England, are published in
Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more
ancient, third edit. p. 269, &c.

NOT E. X. SECT. I. p. 22. [K].

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be pro.

duced. Many charters, granted by persons of the
highest rank, are preserved, from which it appears
that they could not subscribe their name. It was
usual for persons, who could not write, to make
the sign of the cross in confirmation of a charter.
Several of these remain, where kings and persons
of great eminence affix fignum crucis manu propria
pro ignoratione literarum. Du Cange, voc. Crux,
vol. iii. p. I 91. From this is derived the phrase
of signing instead of subscribing a paper. In the
ninth century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though
supreme judge of the empire by virtue of his
office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau
Traite de Diplomatique par deux Benediins,
4to. tom. ii. p. 422. As late as the fourteenth
century, Du Guefclin, constable of France, the
greatest man in the slate, and one of the greatest
men of his age, could neither read nor write.
St. Palaye Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie,
tit. ii. p. 82. Nor was this ignorance confined
to laymen; the greater part of the clergy was

not

not many degrees fuperior'to them in science.
Many dignified ecclesiastics could not subscribe
the canons of those councils, in which they fat
as members. Nouv. Traite de Diplom. tom. ii.
p. 424. One of the questions appointed by the
canons to be put to persons who were candidates
for orders was this, ' Whether they could read
the gospels and epifltes, and explain the sense of
them, at least literally ?' Regino Prumienfis ap.
Bruck. Hist. Philof. v. iii. p. 631. Alfred the
Great complained, that from the Humber to the
Thames there was not a priest who understood
the liturgy in his mother-tongue, or who could
tranfate the easiest piece of Latin; and that
from the Thames to the ea, the ecclesiastics
were still more ignorant. Afferius de rebus geftis
Alfredi, ap. Camdeni Anglica, &c. p. 25. The
ignorance of the clergy is quaintly described by
an author of the dark ages: " Potius dediti
gula quam gloffi ; potius colligunt libras quam
legunt libros ; libentius intuentur Martham quam
Marcum; malunt legere in Salmone quam in
Solomone." Alanus de Art. Predicat. ap. Lebet!f
Dissert. tom. ii. p. 2I. To the obvious causes
of such universal ignorance, arising from the
state of government and manners, from the
seventh to the eleventh century, we may add the
scarcity of books during that period, and the
difficulty of rendering them more common. The
Kornans wrote their books either on parchment
or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.

T 4 The
41

The latter being the cheapest, was of courre
the most commonly used. But after the Sara.
cens conquered Egypt in the seventh century,
the communication between that country and
the people fettled in Italy, or in other parts of
Europe, was almost entirely broken off, and the
papyrus was no longer in use among them.
They were obliged, on that account, to write
all their books upon parchment, and, as the
price of that was high, books became extremely
rare and of great value. We may judge of the
scarcity of the materials for writing them from
one circumstance. There still remain several
manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and following
centuries, written on parchment, from which
tome former writing had been erased, in order
to substitute a new composition in its place. In
this manner it is probable that several works
of the ancients perished. A book of Livy orof
Tacitus might be erased, to make room for the
legendary tale of faint, or the superstitious
prayers of a missal. Murat. Antiq. ltal. v. iii.
p. 833. P. de MontfauQon affirms, that the greater
part of the manuscripts on parchment which he
has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are
written on parchment from which some former
treatise had been erased. Mem. de l'Acad. des
Infcript. torn. ix. p. 325. As the want of mate-
rials for writing is one reason why so many of the
works of the ancients have perished, it accounts
likewise for the small number of manuscripts of

any

anykind, previous to the eleventh century, when
they began to multiply from a cause which llall be
mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France, torn. vi. p. 6.
Many circumstances prove the scarcity of books
during there ages. Private persons seldom poflefted
any books whatever. Even monasteries of confi-
derable note had only one missal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferriers, in a
letter to the pope, A. D. 855, beseeches him to
lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore and Quin-
tiian's Institutions, " for," fays he, " although
we have parts of those books, there is no complete
copy of them in all France." Murat. Ant. v. iii.
p. 835. The price of books became so high, that
persons of a moderate fortune could not afford to
purchase them. The countess of Anjou paid for
a copy of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of
Halberftadt, two hundred heep, five quarters of
wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and millet.
Hiftoire Literaire de France par des Religieux Be-
nediains, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year
1471, when Louis XI. borrowed the works of
Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty
of medicine in Paris, he not only deposited in
pledge a conliderable quantity of plate, but was
obliged to procure a nobleman to join with him as
surety in a deed, binding himself under a great
forfeiture to rellore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a l'tif-
toire de Louys XI. par Comines, edit. de Frefioy,
torn. iv. p. 28I. Many curious circumstances,
with respect to the extravagant price of books in
the middle ages, are collected by that induftriou3

comn-

compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as
deem this small branch of literary history an objec
of curiosity. When any person made a present of
a book to a church or monastery, in which were
the only libraries during several ages, it was deemed
a donative of such value, that he offered it on the
altar pro remedio animaJfu, in order to obtain the
forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii..p. 836. Hit,
Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait.
du Diplomat. par deux BenediEtins, 4to, tom. i.
p. 481. In the eleventh century, the art of mak-
ing paper, in the manner now become universal,
was invented; by means of that, not only the num-
ber of manuscripts increased, but the itudy of the
sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib.
p. 87 I. The invention of the art of making paper,
and the invention of the art of printing, are two
considerable events in literary history. It is re-
markable that the former preceded the first dawn-
ing of letters and improvement in knowledge to-
wards the close of the eleventh century; the latter
ushered in the light which spread over Europe at
the ara of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT. I. P. 23. [L].

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. flhall produce one
remarkable testimony in confirmation of it, from
an author canonized by the church of Rome, St.
Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyon, in the seventh
century. " He is a good Christian who comes

frequently

frequently to church; who presents the oblation
which is offered to God upon the altar; who doth
not taste of the fruits of his own industry until he
has consecrated a part of them to God; who, when
the holy festivals approach, lives chastely even with
his own wife during several days, that with a safe
conscience he may'draw near the altar of God;
and who, in the last place, can repeat the Creed
and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your fouls
from deflruction, while you have he means in
your power; offer presents and tythes to church-
men; come more frequently to church; humbly
implore the patronage of the faints; for, if you
oblerve there things, you may come with security
in the day of retribution to the tribunal of the
eternal Judge, and fay, " Give to us, 0 Lord,
for we have given unto thee.' Dacherii Specile-
gium Vet. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and
judicious translator of Dr. Mofheim's Ecclefiafti-
cal History, to one of whose additional notes I am
indebted fr my knowledge of this paflage, sub-
joins a very proper reflection: " We fee here a
large and ample description of a good Chiiftian,
in which there is not the least mention of the love
of God, resignation to his will, obedience to his
laws, or of justice, benevolence, and charity to.
wards men." Mofh. Eccles. His. v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. P. 23. [M].

THAT infallibility in all its determinations, to
which the church of Rome pretends, has been at-
teldel with one unhappy consequence. As it is

7 impossible

impossible to relinquish any opinion, or to alter ani
practice which has been established by authorit)
that cannot err, all its inffitutions and ceremonie
must be immutable and everlasting, and the churc
muff continue to observe, in enlightened times,
those rites which were introduced during the agei
of darkness and credulity. What delighted and
edified the latter, must disgust and shock the for.
mer. Many of the rites observed in the Romish
church appear manifestly to have been introduced
by a fuperfiition of the lowest and mol illiberal
ipecies. Many of them were borrowed, with little
variation, from the religious ceremonies establish-
ed among the ancient Heathens. Some were so
ridiculous, that if every age did not furnilh in,
fiances of the fascinating influence of superstition
as well as of the whimsical forms which it assumes,
it must appear incredible that they should have
been ever received or tolerated. In several churches
of France, they celebrated a fetival in comme-
moration of the Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt.
It was called the Feast of the Ass. A young girl
richly dressed, with a child in her arms, was set
upon an ass superbly caparisoned. The ass was
led to the altar in solemn procession. High mars
was said with great pomp. The ass was taught
to kneel at proper places; a hymn no less childr
ilh than impious was sung in his praise; and
when the ceremony was ended, the priest, instead
of the usual words with which he difniffTed the
people, brayed three times like an ass; and the
people, initead of the usual response, We bles

the

the Lord, brayed three times in the fame manner.
)u Cange, voc. Fefum, v. iii. p. 424. This ridi-
culous ceremony was not, like the festival of fools,
and some other pageants of those ages, a mere
farcical entertainment exhibited in a church, and
mingled, as was then the custom, with an imitation
of some religious rites; it was an a of devotion,
performed by the ministers of religion, and by the
authority of the church. However, as this practice
did not prevail universally in the Catholic church,
its abliurdity contributed at last to abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. T. p. 29. [N].

As there is no event in the history of mankind
more singular than that of the Crusades, every
circumstance that tends to explain or to give any
rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of the
hunan mind is interesting. I have asserted in the
text, that the minds of men were prepared gra-
dually for the amazing effort which they made in
consequence of the exhortations of Peter the her-
tmit, by several occurrences previous to his time.
A more particular detail of this curious and ob-
i'nlre part of history, may perhaps appear to some
of my readers to be of importance. That the end
of the world was expeEted about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and
that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident
from the authors to whom I have referred in the
text. This belief was so universal and so strong,
that it mingled itself with civil tranfaEions. Many
charters, in the latter part of the tenth century,
begin in this manner: Appropinquante mundi

termlino,"

termino," &c. As the end of the world is nowa
hand, and by various calamities and judgment
the signs of its approach are now manifest. Hi-s
de Langued. par D. D. de Vic Vaiiette, torn. ii
Preuves, p. 86. 89, go. I 7. 58, &c. On
effect of this opinion was, that a great number o
pilgrims retorted to Jerusalem, with a refolutior
to die there, or to wait the coming of the Lordj
kings, earls, marquiffes, bishops, and even a greal
number of women, besides persons of inferior
rank, flocked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Rodulph,
H-ist. chez Bouquet Receuil, tom. x. p. 50. 52.
Another historian mentions a vast cavalcade of pil-
grims who accompanied the count of Angouleme
to Jerusalem in the year 1026. Chronic. Ademari,
ibid. p. 162. Upon their return, these pilgrims
filled Europe with lamentable accounts of the
state of Chrifians in the Holy Land. Willerm.
Tyr. Hist. ap. Guest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p. 636.
Guibert. Abbat. Hilf. ibid. vol. i. p. 476. Besides
this, it was usual for many of the Christian inha-
bitants of Jerusalem, as well as of other cities in
the East, to travel as mendicants through Europe;
and by describing the wretched condition of the
professors of the Chriflian faith under the dominion
of Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous
persons to make omne attempt in order to deliver
them from oppreflion. Baldrici Archiepifcopi
Hitlor. ap. Gefla Dei, &c. vol. i. p. 86. In the
year 9g6, Gerbert, archbishop of R.avenna, after-
wards Pope Silveller II. addressed a letter to all
Christians i the name of the church of Jeruflem.
It is eloquent and pathetic, and contains a formal

exhor-

exhortation to take arms against the Pagan opprel-
fors, in order to rescue the holy city from their
yoke. Gerberti Epiftole ap. Bouquet Receuil,
tom. x. p. 426. In consequence of this spirited
call, ome fubjets of the republic of Pisa equip-
ped a fleet, and invaded the territories of the Ma.
hornetans in Syria.-. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic.
vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East,
and an opinion prevailed, A. D. ioio, that all
the forces of Christendom were to unite, in order
to drive the Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron.
Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x. p. 152. It is evi-
dent from all there particulars, that the ideas which
led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enter-
prize did not arise, according to the description of
many authors, from a sudden fit of fianric enthu-
fiafm, but were gradually formed; io that the
universal concourse to the standard of the cross,
when ereEted by Urban II. will appear less fur-
prifing.

IF the various circumstances which I have enu-
merated in this note, as well as in the history, are
sufficient to account for the ardour with which
such vast numbers engaged in such a dangerous
undertaking, the extensive privileges and immu-
nities granted to the persons who assumed the
cross, serve to account for the long continuance
of this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempted
from prosecutions on account of debt, during the
time of their being engaged in this holy service.
I)u Cange, voc. Crucis privilegium, v. ii. p. I 1 94.
-2. They were exempted from paying interest
for the money which they had borrowed, in order

to

to fit them for this sacred warfare. Ibid.-3. The)
were exempted either entirely, or at least durine
a certain time, from the payment of taxes. Ibid,
Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 33
-4. They might alienate their lands without the
content of the superior lord of whom they held. Ib.
-5. Their persons and effects were taken under
the protetion of St. Peter, and the anathemasof
the church were denounced against all who hould
molest them, or carry on any quarrel or hotility
against them, during their absence, on accountof
the holy war. Du Cange, Ib. Guibertus Abbas
ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480. 482. -6. They enjoyed
all the privileges of ecclesiastics, and were not
bound to plead in any civil court, but were declar.
ed fubje& to the fpiritualjurifdidion alone. Du
Cange, Ib. Ordon. des Rois, tom. i. p. 34. 174.
-7. They obtained a plenary remission of all their
fins, and the gates of heaven were set open to them,
without requiring any other proof of their peni-
ttence, but their engaging in this expedition; and
thus, by gratifying their favourite palion, the love
of war, they secured to themselves civil rightsof
great value, and religious immunities, which were
not usually obtained, but by paying large fumrs of
money, or by undergoing painful penances. Guibert.
Abbas, p. 480. When we behold the civil and ec-
clefiaftical powers vying with each other, and Itrain-
ing their invention in order to devile expedients for
encouraging and addingfirength to the fpiritof super-
ttition, can we be furprized that it flould becomefo
general as to render it infamous, and a mark ofcow-
ardice, to decline engaging in the holy war ? Wil-

i lierni

lierm Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf. vol. ii. p. 64. The
histories of the Crusades, written by modern au-
thors, who are apt to fubftitue the ideas and max-
ims of their own age in the place of those which
influenced the persons whose actions they attempt
to relate, convey a very imperfect notion of the
spirit at that time predominant in Europe. The
original hitforians, who were animated themselves
with the fame passions which possessed their con-
temporaries, exhibit to us a more fsriking pieture
of the times and manners which they describe. The
enthusiastic rapture with which they account for the
effects of the pope's discourse in the council of
Clermont; the exultation with which they mention
the numbers who devoted themselves to this holy
warfare; the confidence with which they express
their reliance on the divine protection; the extacy
of joy with which they describe their taking pof-
feflion of the holy city, will enable us to conceive,
in some degree, the extravagance of that zeal which
agitated the minds of men with such violence,
and will suggest as many singular reflecions to a
philosopher, as any occurrence in the history of
mankind. Ic is unnecessary to select the particu-
lar passages in the several historians~ which confirm
this observation. But left those authors may be
fufpefted of adorning their narrative with any ex-
aggerated dcfcription, I flall appeal to one of the
leaders who conduced the enterprize. There is
extant a letter from Stephen, the earl of Chartres
and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he gives
her an account of the progress of the Crusaders.

VUL. I. U He

He describes the Crusaders as the chosen army of
Christ, as the servants and soldiers of God, as
men who marched under the immediate protec-
tion of the Almighty, being conduced by his
hand to victory and conquest. He speaks of the
Turks as acclirfed, sacrilegious, and devoted by
leaven to deftrution; and when he mentions
the soldiers in the Christian army, who had died,
or were killed, he is confident that their fouls
were admitted directly into the joys of Paradise.
Dacherii Spicelegium, vol. iv. p. 257.

THE' expence of conducting numerous bodies

of men from Europe to Asia, must have been ex-
ceffive, and the difficulty of railing the necessary
fums must have been proportionally great, during
ages when the public revenues in every nation of
Europe were extremely frnall. Some account is
preserved of the expedients employed by Hum-
bert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to levy the
money requisite towards equipping him for the
Crusade, A. D. 1346. These I flall mention, as
they tend to shew the considerable influence which
the Crusades had, both on the ifate of property,
and of civil government. i. He exposed to sale
part of his domains; and as the price was defined
for such a sacred service, he obtained the conlent
of the French king, of whom there lands were
held, ratifying the alienation. Iift. de Dauphinc,
tom. i. p. 332. 335.-2. He issued a proclamation,
in which he promised to grant new privileges to
the nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities
and towns, in his territories, in consideration of

certain

certain ums which they were instantly to pay on
that account. Ibid. torn. ii. p. 52. Many of the
charters of community, which I shall mention in
another Note, were obtained in this manner.-
3. Hle exacted a contribution towards defraying
the charges of the expedition from all his subje&s,
whether eccleGaftics or laymen, who did not ac-
company him in person to the Ealf. Ibid. tom. i.
p. 335.-4. He appropriated a considerable part
of his usual revenues for the support of the troops
to be employed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p.
518.-5. He exafted considerable furs not only
of the Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of
the Lombards and other bankers who had fixed
their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338. tom. ii.
528. Notwithstanding the variety of these refour-
ces, the dauphin was involved in such expence by
this expedition, that on his return he was obliged
to make new demands on his fubjeEts, and to pil-
lage the Jews by fresh exactions. Ibid. tom. i. p.
34¢. 347. When the count de Foix engaged in
the first Crusade, he railed the money necessary for
defiaying the expences of that expedition, by
alienating part of his territories. Hilt. de Lan-
gued. par D. D. de Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287.
In like manner, Baldwin, count of Hainaut, mort-
gaged or fold a considerable portion of his domi-
nions to the biffhop of Liege, A. D. o096. Du
Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later
period, Baldwin, count of Namur, fold part of
his estate to a monastery, when he intended to as-
fume the cross, A. D. 1239. Miraei Oper. i. 313.

U 2 NOTE

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. P. 34. [0].

THE usual method of forming an opinion con.

cerning the comparative state of manners in two
different nations, is by attending to the fals
which historians relate concerning each of them.
Various passages might be selected from the By.
zantin historians, describing the splendour and
magnificence of the Greek empire. P. deMont.
faucon has produced from the writings of St. Chry.
foftom a very full account of the elegance and lux-
ury of the Greeks in his age. That father in his
sermons enters into such minute details concerning
the manners and customs of his contemporaries,
as appear strange in discourses from the pulpit.
P. de Montfaucon has colleced there descriptions,
and ranged them under different heads. The
court of the more early Greek emperors seems to
have resembled those of Eastern monarchs, both
in magnificence and in corruption of manners.
The emperors in the eleventh century, though in,
ferior in power, did not yield to them in oftenta-
tion and splendour. Menoires de 'Acad. des In-
script. tom. xx. p. 197. But we may decide
concerning the comparative fRate of manners in
the Eastern empire, and among the nations in
the weft of Europe, by another method, which, if
not more certain, is at least more striking. As
Conflantinople was the place of rendezvous for
all the aries of the Crusaders, this brought to-
gether the people of the East and Weft as to one
great interview. There are extant several con-

7 temporary

temporary authors both among the Greeks and
Latins, who were witnesses of this singular con-
grefs of people, formerly firangers, in a great
measure, to each other. They describe, with fim-
plicity and candour, the imprefflon which that
new fpeAacle made upon their own minds. This
may be confidered as the most lively and just pic-
ture of the real character and manners of each
people. When the Greeks speak of the Franks,
they describe them as barbarians, fierce, illite-
rate, impetuous, and savage. They assume a
tone of superiority, as a more polished people,
acquainted with the arts both of government and
of elegance, of which the other was ignorant.
It is thus Anna Comnena describes the manners
of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231. 237. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. xi. She always views them with con-
tempt as a rude people, the very mention of
whose names was sufficient to contaminate the
beauty and elegance of history, p. 229. Nicetas
Choniatas inveighs against them with still more
violence, and gives an account of their ferocity
and devastations, in ternms not unlike those which
preceding historians had employed in describing
the incursions of the Goths and Vandals. Nicer.
Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 302, &c. But,
o0 the other hand, the Latin historians were
struck with aftoniflment at the magnificence,
wealth, and elegance which they discovered in the
l.afern empire. " 0 what a vast city is Con-
flantinople (exclaims Fulcherius Carnotenfis,
when he first beheld it), and how beautiful ! How

U 3 many

many monasteries are there in it, and how many
palaces built with wonderful art! How many
manufacures are there in the city amazing to be-
hold ! It would be aftonithing to relate how it
abounds with all good things, with gold, silver,
and fluffs of various kinds; for every hour hips
arrive in its port laden with all things necessary
for the use of man." Fulcher. ap. Bongarf. vol. i.
p. 386. Willermus archbishop of Tyre, the mori
intelligent historian of the Crusades, seems to be
fond on every occasion of deferibing the elegance
and splendour of the court of Constantinople, and
adds, that what he and his countrymen observed
there exceeded any idea which they could have
formed of it, noftrarum enim rerum modum &
dignitatem excedunt. Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong.
vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Benjamin the Jew, of Tu-
dela in Navarre, who began his travels A. D.
xi 73, appears to have been equally astonished
at the magnificence of that city, and gives a de-
scription of its splendour, in terms of high ad-
miration. Benj. Tudel. chez les Voyages faits
en 12, 13, &c. Siecles, par Bergeron, p. 10, &c.
Guntherus, a French monk, who wrote a history
of the conquest of Constantinople by the Cru-
faders in the thirteenth century, speaks of the
magnificence of that city in the fame tone of ad-
miration: " StrucRuram autem adificiorum in
corpore civitatis, in ecclefiis videlicet, & turri-
bus, & in dornibus magnatorum, vix ullus vel
defcriibere poteft, vel credere defcribenti, nifi qui
ea oculata ide cognoverit." I-ift. Conflantinop.

.ip,

ap. Canifii Leciones Antiquas, fol. Antw. 1725.
vol. iv. p. 14. Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a no-
bleman of high rank, and accustomed to all the
magnificence then known in the Weft, describes,
in similar terms, the atonifhment and admiration
of such of his fellow-foldiers as beheld Con-
flantinople for the first time: " They could not
have believed, fays he, that there was a city so
beautiful and so rich in the whole world. When
they viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its
rich palaces, its superb churches, all appeared so
great, that they could have formed no concep-
tion of this sovereign city, unless they had seen it
with their own eyes." Hiftoire de la Conquete
de Conftat. p. 49. From there undisguised re-
presentations of their own feelings, it is evident,
that to the Greeks, the Crusaders appeared to be a
race of rude, unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the
latter, how much soever they might contemn the
unwarlike character of the former, could not
help regarding them as far superior to themselves
in elegance and arts.-That the state of govern-
ment and manners was much more improved in
Italy than in the other countries of Europe, is
evident not only from the facts recorded in his-
tory, but it appears that the more intelligent
leaders of the Crusaders were (truck with the
dillerence. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French hisT
torian of the holy war, makes an elaborate pane-
gyric on the characler and manners of the Ita-
lilas. I-e views them as a more polished peo-
ple, and particularly celebrates them for their

U 4 love

love of liberty, and civil wisdom; c in confiliis
circumfpeti, in re fua publicas procuranda di-
ligentes & ftudiofi; fibi in pofterum providen.
tes; aliis fubjici renuentes; ante omnia liber-
tatem fibi defendentes; sub uno quem eligunt
capitaneo, communitati sus jura & inftituta
dictantes & fimriliter observantes." Hiftor. Hie-
rofol. ap. Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p.
1o85.

NOTE XV. SECT. I. p. 38 [P].

THE different steps taken by the cities of Italy

in order to extend their power and dominions are
remarkable. As oon as their liberties were efta-
blifhed, and they began to feel their own im-
portance, they endeavoured to render themselves
masters of the territory round their walls. Under
the Romans, when cities enjoyed municipal pri.
vileges and jurifidiion, the circumjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of
the community. But as it was not the genius of
the feudal policy to encourage cities, or to hew
any regard for their poffeflions and immunities,
these lands had been seized, and hared among
the conquerors. The barons to whom they were
granted, erected their cafles almost at the gates
of the city, and exercised their jurifdiiion there.
Under pretence of recovering their ancient pro.
perty, many of the cities in Italy attacked these
troublesome neighbours, and difpoffeffing them,
annexed their territories to the communities, and

nlade

made thereby a considerable addition to their
lower. Several instances of this occur in the
eleventh, and beginning of the twelfth centuries.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 59, &c. Their
ambition increasing together with their power, the
cities afterwards attacked several barons situated
at a greater distance from their walls, and obliged
them to engage that they would become members
f their community; that they would take the oath
of fidelity to their magifirates; that they would
fubje& their lands to all burdens and taxes im-
poled by common consent; that they would de-
fend the community against all its enemies; and
that they would reside within the city during a
certain specified time in each year. Murat.. ibid.
i63. This fubjecion of the nobility to the muni-
cipal government established in cities, became
almof universal, and was often extremely grievous
to persons accustomed to confider themselves as
independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus describes the
late of Italy under Frederick I. (' The cities so
much asset liberty, and are so solicitous to avoid
he insolence of power, that almost all of them
have thrown off every other authority, and are
governed by their own magistrates. Insomuch
that all that country is now filled with free cities,
mnoft of which have compelled their biffhops to
rcfide within their walls, and there is scarcely any
nobleman, how great soever his power may be,
vIho is not subjec to the laws and government
ofIome city." De Geftis Frider. I. Imp. lib. ii.
c ''3 P1. 453. In another place he observes of

the Marquis of Montserrat, that he was almot
the only Italian baron who had preserved hisin.
dependence, and had not become subjet to the
laws of any city. See allb Muratori Antichita
Eftenfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412. That state, into
which some of the nobles were compelled toenter,
others embraced from choice. They observed the
high degree of security, as well as of credit and
estimation, which the growing wealth and dominion
of the great communities procured to all the
members of them. They were desirous to partake
of these, and to put themselves under such power.
ful protection. With this view they voluntarily
became citizens of the towns to which their lands
were most contiguous; and, abandoning their an.
cient castles, took up their residence in the cities
at least during part of the year. Several deeds
are frill extant, by which some of the most illus.
trious families in Italy are associated as citizensof
different cities. Murat. ib. p. 165, &c. Acharter,
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a
citizen of Ofimo, A. D. 1198, in the Marchadi
Ancona, is frill extant. In this he flipulates, that
he will acknowledge himself to be a burgess of
that community; that he will to the utmost of
his power promote its honour and welfare; that
he will obey its magistrates; that he will enter
into no league with its enemies; that he will reside
in the town during two months in every year, or
for a longer time, if required by the magistrates
The community, on the other hand, take him, his
family, and friends, under their protection, and

ngage to defend him against every enemy. Fr.
Ant. Zacharias Anecdota medii iEvi. Aug. Taur.
1755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so
important, that not only laymen, but ecclesiastics
of the highest rank, condescended to be adopted
as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the safety and dignity which that con-
dition conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the
institution of communities, persons of noble birth
had no other residence but their castles. They
kept their petty courts there and the cities were
deserted, having hardly any inhabitants but slaves
or persons of low condition. But in consequence
of the pracice which I have mentioned, cities
not only became more populous, but were filled
with inhabitants of better rank, and a custom
which still subsists in Italy was then introduced,
that all families of diftination reside more con-
flantly in the great towns, than is usual in other
parts of Europe. As cities acquired new con-
lideration and dignity by the accefion of such
citizens, they became more Iblicitous to preserve
their liberty and independence. The emperors,
as sovereigns, had anciently a palace in almost
every great city of Italy; when they visited that
country they were accustomed to reside in these
palaces, and the troops which accompanied them
were quartered in the houses of the citizens.
j his the citizens deemed both ignominious and
dangerous. They could not help confidering it
as receiving a master and an enemy within their
a;lls. They laboured therefore to get free of

this

this fubjetion. Some cities prevailed on thi
emperors to engage that they would never ente,
their gates, but take up their residence withoul
the walls: Chart. HIen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24
Others obtained the Imperial licence to pull down
the palace situated within their liberties, on con.
dition that they built another in the suburbs for
the occasional reception of the emperor. Chart.
Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various en.
croachments of the Italian cities alarmed the em.
perors,. and put them on schemes for re-eftablilh.
ing the Imperial jurifdiaion over them on its
ancient footing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in
this enterprize with great ardour. The free cities
of Italy joined together in a general league, and
stood on their defence: and after a long contest,
carried on with alternate success, a solemn treaty
of peace was concluded at Constance, A. D. 1183,
by which all the privileges and immunities granted
by former emperors to the principal cities in
Italy were confirmed and ratified. Murat. Dissert,
XLVIII. This treaty of Confance was confi-
dered as such an important article in the jurif.
prudence of the middle ages, that it is usually
published together with the Libri Feudorum at
the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. The treaty
secured privileges of great importance to the cor
federate cities, and though it reserved a confider-
able degree of authority and jurifdiCdion to tie
empire, yet the cities persevered with such vigour
in their efforts in order to extend their immunities,
and the conjunctures in which they made them

were

were o favourable, that, before the conclusion of
the thirteenth century, most of the great cities i.n
Italy had haken off all marks of subjection to the
empire, and were become independent sovereign
republics. It is not requisite that I hould trace
the various fReps by which they advanced to this
high degree of power so fatal to the empire, and
so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy. Mu-
ratori, with his usual industry, has collected many
original papers which illustrate this curious and
little known part of history. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
Ditfert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanovae Hist.
Laudis Pompeii five Lodi, in Grav. Thef. Anti-
quit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. p. 40. [Q].
LONG before the institution of communities in
France, charters of immunity or franchise were
granted to some towns and villages by the lords
on whom they depended. But these are very dif-
ferent from such as became common in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. They did not erea there
towns into corporations; they did not eflablifl a
municipal government; they did not grant them.
the privilege of bearing arms. They contained
nothing more than a manumiflion of the inha-
bitants from the yoke of servitude; an exemption
fiom certain services which were oppressive and
ignominlious; and the eflabliflhment of a fixed
tax or rent which the citizens were to pay to
their lord in place of impositions which he could
formerly lay upon them at pleasure. Two char-

tcrs

ters of this kind to two villages in the countyc
Roufillon, one in A. D. 974, the other in A. D
1025, are still extant. Petr. de Marca, Mara
five Limes Hifpanicus, App. p. gog. o038. Sucl
concefflons, it is probable, were not unknown ii
other parts of Europe, and may be conrideret
as a ftep towards the more extensive privilege
conferred by Louis le Gros, on the towns withir
his domains. The communities in France nevei
aspired to the fame independence with those it
Italy. They acquired new privileges and immu.
nities, but the right of sovereignty remained en.
tire to the king or baron within whose territories
the refpetive cities were situated, and from
whom they receive the charter of their freedom.
A great number of there charters, granted both
by the kings of France, and by their great vassals,
are published by M. D'Achery in his Spicele.
gium, and many are found in the collection of
the Ordonnances des Rois de France. These
convey a very iriking representation of the
wretched condition of cities previous to the infti-
tution of communities, when they were fubjetto
the judges appointed by the superior lords of
whom they held, and who had scarcely any other
law but their will. Each conceflion in there
charters must be confidered as a grant of some
new privilege which the people did not formerly
enjoy, and each regulation as a method of re-
dressing some grievance under which the inha-
bitants of cities formerly laboured. The char-
ters of communities contain likewise the firstex

pedi.otr

pdients employed for the introdudion of equal
aws and regular government. On both there
accounts they merit particular attention, and
therefore, intead of referring my readers to the
many bulky volumes in which they are scattered,
I Ihall give them a view of some of the most im-
portant articles in there charters, ranged under two
general heads. I. Such as refpe& personal safety.
II. Such as respect the security of property.

I. DURING that Rate of turbulence and dif-
order which the corruption of the feudal govern-
ment introduced into Europe, personal safety was
the firit and great object of every individual;
and as the great military barons alone were able
to give sufficient protection to their vassals, this
was one great source of their power and authority.
But, by the institution of communities, effecual
provision was made for the safety of individuals,
independent of the nobles. For, . The fun-
damental article in every charter was, that all
the members of the community bound them-
selves by oath to assist, defend, and stand by
each other against all aggressors, and that they
fliould not susser any person to injure, dif-
trefs, or molest any of their fellow-citizens.
I'Acher. Spicel. x. 64o. xi. 34, &c.-2. WVho-
ever resided in any town, which was made free,
was obliged, under a revere penalty, to accede tCt
the community, and to take part in the mutual
defence of its members. I'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.
-3- T he communities had the privilege of car-
rying arms; of making war on their private ene-

iies ;

mies; and of executing by military force any
sentence which their magistrates pronounced,
D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi. 343.-4. The
pracice of making fatisfation by a pecuniary
compensation for murder, assault, or other as
of violence, most inconsistent with the order
of fociery, and the safety of individuals, was
abolished; and such as committed these crimes
were punished capitally, or with rigour adequate
to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Mirai Opera
Diplomatica, i. 292.-5. No member of a
community was bound to justify or defend him.
self by battle or combat; but, if he was charged
with any crime, he could be convieted only by
the evidence of witnesss, and the regular course
of legal proceedings. Miraus, ibid. D'Ach.
xi. 375. 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 265.-6. If any
mar. fufpeEted himself to be in danger from the
malice or enmity of another, upon his making
oath to that effect before a magistrate, the person
fufpeted was bound under a severe penalty to give
security for his peaceable behaviour. D'Ach. xi.
346. This is the fame species of security which is
still known in Scotland under the name of Law-
burrows. In France, it was first introduced
among the inhabitants of communities, and hav-
ing been found to contribute considerably towards
personal safety, it was extended to all the other
members of society. Eftabliffemens de St. Louis,
liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du Cange Vie de St. Louis,
p..
'5

II. TI'

II. THE provisions in the charters of commu-
nities concerning the security of property, are not
less considerable than those refpeting personal
safety. By the ancient law of France, no person
could be arrested or confined in prison on account
of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France,
tom. i. p. 72. 80. If any person was arrested
upon any pretext, but his having been guilty of a
capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of
the hands of the officers who had seized him.
Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from arrest, on account
of debt, seems likewise to have been enjoyed in
other countries. Gudenus Sylloge Diplom. 473.
In society, while it remained in its rudest and most
simple form, debt seems to have been confidered
as an obligation merely personal. Men had made
some progress towards refinement, before creditors
acquired a right of seizing the property of their
debtors in order to recover payment. The expe-
dients for this purpose were all introduced ori-
ginally in communities, and we can trace the
gradual progress of them. i. The simplest and
mol obvious species of security was, that the
person who fold any commodity hould receive a
pledge from him who bought it, which he re-
stored upon receiving payment. Of this custom
there are vestiges in several charters of community.
D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.-2. When no pledge
was given, and the debtor became refractory or
insolvent, the creditor was allowed to seize his
effefts with a itrong hand, and by his private
authority; the citizens of Paris are warranted by
the royal mandate, utiubicumque, et quocum-

VOL. I. X quo

que modo poterunt, tantum capiant, undepecu.
niam fibi debitam integre & plenari: habeant, &
inde fibi invicem adjutores exiftant." Ordon. &c
tom. i. p, 6. This rude pratice, suitable only
to the violence of that which has been called a
state of nature, was tolerated longer than one
can conceive o be pofible in any society where
laws and order were at all known. The ordo-
nance authorizing it was issued, A. D. 1134;
and that which correts the law, and prohibits
creditors from seizing the effects of their debtors,
unless by a warrant firom a magistrate, and under
his in.fpetion, was not published until the year
1351. Ordon. tonm. ii. p. 438. It is probable,
however, that men were taught, by observing
the disorders which the former mode of proceed-
ing occasioned, to correEt it in practice long
before a remedy was provide4 by a law to that
effe;. Every difcerndrg.reader will apply this
observation to many other customs and pracices
.which I have mentioned. New customs are not
always to be ascribed to the laws which authorize
them. Those st.atutes only give a legal fandion to
such things as the experience of mankind has pre
.vioufly found to be proper and beneficial.-- 3. As
soon as the interpQfition of the magistrate became
requisite, regular provision was made for attaching
or distraining the imoveable efftes of a debtor;
and if his moveables were not sufficient to discharge
the debt, his immoveable property or estate i
land, was liable to the fame distress,. and was s0o4
for the benefit of his creditor. D'Ach,. ix. p, 8
185. xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulatio aforded

the

the most complete security to the creditor, it was
confidered as so revere, that humanity pointed out
several limitations in the execution of it. Credi-
tors were prohibited from seizing the wearing
apparel of their debtors, their beds, the door of
their house, their infiruments of husbandry, &c.
D'Ach. ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon the fame prin-
ciples, when the power of distraining effects be-
came more general, the horse and arms of a
gentleman could not be seized. D'Ach. ix. J85.
As hunting was the favourite amusement of mar-
tial nobles, the emperor Lodovicus Pius prohi-
bited the seizing of a hawk on account of any
composition or debt. Capitul. lib. iv. § 2I. But
if the debtor had no other moveables, even these
privileged articles might be seized.-4. In order
to render the security of property complete within
a community, every person who was admitted a
member of it, was obliged to buy or build a
house, or to purchase lands within its precinEs,
or at least to bring into the town a considerable
portion of his moveables, per qua ejttficiari poit,
si quid forle in eum querele evenerit. D'Ach. xi.
326. Ordon. i. 367. Libertates S. Georgii de
Efperanchia. Hist. de Dauphine, torn. i. p. 26.
-5. That security might be as perfect as pof-
fible in ome towns, the members of the com-
munity seen to have been bound fr each other.
D'Ach. x. 644,-6. All questions with refpe to
property were tried within the community, by
magilrates and judges whom the citizens eleEted
or appointed. Their decisions were more equal
and fixed than the sentences which depended on

X 2 the

the capricious and arbitrary will of a baron, who
thought himlelf superior to all laws. D'Ach. x.
644. 646. xi. 344. & palfim. Ordon. iii. 204.-
7. No member of a community could be bur.
dened by any arbitrary tax; for the superior lord,
who granted the charter of community, accepted
of a fixed census or duty in lieu of all demands,
Ordon. toin. iii. 204. Libertates de CalmaHit,
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. I9. Libert. St. Georgii
de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could the
members of a community be difireffed by an un.
equal imposition of the um to be levied on the
community. Regulations are inserted in the
charters of some communities, concerning the
method of determining the quota of any tax to
be levied on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi. 350.
365. St. Louis publiflied an ordonance concern-
ing this matter which extended to all the commu.
nities. Ordon. tom. i. 86. These regulations
are extremely favourable to liberty, as they vest
the power of proportioning the taxes in a certain
nurnmer of citizens chosen out of each parish,
who were bound by solemn oath to decide ac.
cording to juftice.-Tha the more perfet fecu.
rity of property was one great object of those
who inffituted communities, we learn, not only
from the nature of the thing, but from the ex-
press words of several charters, of which I hall
only mention that granted by Alienor Queen of
England and Duchess of Guienne, to the com-
munity of Ploitiers, " ut fua propria melius de-
fendere poflint, & magis integre cuftbdire." Du
Cange, voc. Comm7wiunia, v. ii .
p. 86.-Such are

some of the capital regulations established in com-
munities during the twelfth and thirteenth cen-
turies. These may be confidered as the first ex-
pedients for the re-establishment of law and or-
der, and contributed greatly to introduce regular
government among all the members of society.
As soon as communities were instituted, high
sentiments of liberty began to manifest them-
selves. When Humbert lord of Beaujeu, upon
granting a charter of community to the town of
Belleville, exaaed of the inhabitants an oath of
fidelity to himself and successors, they stipulated,
on their part, that he should swear to maintain
their franchises and liberties; and, for their
greater security, they obliged him to bring twenty
gentlemen to take the fame oath, and to be
bound together with him. D'Ach. ix. 83. In
the fame manner the lord of Moriens in Dauphine
produced a certain number of persons as his sure-
ties for the observation of the articles contained
in the charter of community to that town. These
were bound to surrender themselves prisoners to
the inhabitants of Moriens, if their liege lord
should violate any of their franchises, and they
promised to remain in custody until he ffiould
grant the members of the community redress.
Hilt. de Dauphine, torn. i. p. 17. If the mayor
or chief magistrate of a town did any injury to a
citizen, he was obliged to give security for his
appearance in judgment in the fame manner as
a private person; and if cafe, was liable to the
fime penalty. D'Ach. ix. 18. These are ideas
Ofequality uncommon in the feudal times. Com-

X 3 munities

munities were so favourable to freedom, that
they were distinguished by the name of Libertates.
Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863. They were at first ex-
tremely odious to the nobles, who foresaw what
a check they must prove to their power and do.
mination. Guibert Abbot of Nogent calls them
execrable inventions, by which, contrary to law
and justice, slaves withdrew themselves from that
obedience which they owed to their masters. Du
Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which some of
the nobles and powerful ecclesiastics opposed the
eflablifhment of communities, and endeavoured
to circumscribe their privileges, was extraordi-
nary. A striking instance of this occurs in the
contests between the archbishop of Reirs, and the
inhabitants of that community. It was the chief
business of every archbilhop, during a confider-
able time, to abridge the rights and jurifdidion
of the community; and the great object of the ci-
tizens, especially when the fee was vacant, to main-
tain, to recover, and to extend their own jurifdic-
tion. Hifl:oire civile & politique de la Ville de
Reims, par M. Anquetil, torn. i. p. 287, &c.

T rI observations which I have made concerning

the low state of cities, and. the condition of their
inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable paflages
in the historians and laws of the middle ages, it
is not improbable, however, that ome cities of the
irnf- order were in a better fbate, and enjoyed a fu-
perior degree of liberty. Under the Roman go-
vernment, the municipal government eftabliflcd
in cities was extremely favourable to liberty. 1le
juridlil1ion of the ienate in each corporation, and

the

the privileges of the citizens, were both exten-
five. There is reason to believe, that some of the
greater cities which escaped the deftrussive rage
of the barbarous nations, still retained their an-
cient form of government, at least in a great
measure. They were governed by a council of
citizens, and by magistrates whom they them-
selves elected. Very strong presumptions in fa-
vour of this opinion are produced by M. I'Abbe
De Bos, Hilt. Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i.
p. 8, &c. tom. ii. p. 524. edit. 1742. It ap-
pears from some of the charters of community
to cities, granted in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, that these only confirm the privileges
possessed by the inhabitants previous to the efta-
blifhment of the community. D'Acher. Spicileg.
vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed their pri-
vileges, as having possessed them without inter-
ruption from the times of the Romans. Hist. Crit,
de la Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. BRut the num-
ber of cities which enjoyed such immunities was
so frall, as hardly in any degree to diminish the
force of my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECT. I. p. 40. [R].

HAVING given a full account of the establish-

ment as well as effects of communities in Italy and
France, it will be necefTary to inquire with ome
attention into the progress of cities and of muni-
cipal government in Germany. The ancient
(/i-marlns had no cities. Even in their hamlets
o' villages they did not build their houses conti-

X 4 guous

guous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ. cap. 16.
They confidered it as a badge of servitude to be
obliged to dwell in a city surrounded with walls.
When one of their tribes had shaken off the Ro-
man yoke, their countrymen required of them,
as an evidence of their having recovered liberty,
to demolinf the walls of a town which the Ro-
mans had built in their country. Even the
fiercest animals, said they, lose their spirit and
courage when they are confined. Tac. Hiflor.
lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built several
cities of note on the banks of the Rhine. But
in all the vast countries from that river to the
coasts of the Baltic, there was hardly one city
previous to the ninth century of the Christian
axra. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus Ger-
mania, Oper. vol. i. § 25. 27. 31, &c. Heinec.
cius differs from Conringius with refpea to this.
But even, after allowing to his arguments and
authorities their utmost force, they prove only,
that there were a few places in those extensive
regions on which some historians have, be.
flowed the name of towns. Elem. Jur. German.
lib. i. § 102. Under Charlemagne, and the
Emperors of his family, as the political state
of Germany began to improve, several cities
were founded, and nmn became accustomed to
afrociate and to live together in one place.
Charlemagne founded two archbishoprics and
nine bishoprics in the most considerable towns
of Germany. Aub. Mir.i Opera Diplomatica,
vol. i. p. 6. His fucceflbrs increased the num-
ber of thfel; and as biflops fixed their refG-

dence

ence in the chief town of their diocese, and per-
formed religious funtions there, that induced
many people to fettle in them. Conring. ibid. § 48.
But Henry, firnamed the Fowler, who began his
reign A. D. 920, must be confidered as the great
founder of cities in Germany. The empire was at
that time infested by the incursions of the Hun-
garians and other barbarous people. In order to
oppose them, Henry encouraged his fubjets to
fettle in cities which he surrounded with walls
strengthened by towers. He enjoined or persuaded
a certain proportion of the nobility to fix their re-
idence in the towns, and thus rendered the con-
dition of citizens more honourable than it had
been formerly. Wittikindus Annal. lib. i. ap.
Conring. § 82. From this period the number of
cities continued to increase, and they became more
populous and more wealthy. But cities in Ger-
many were still destitute of municipal liberty or
jurifdition. Such of them as were situated in the
Imperial demesnes, were subjeE to the Emperors.
Their Comites, Mii, and other judges presided in
them, and dispensed justice. Towns situated on
the estate of a baron, were part of his fief, and he
or his officers exercised a similar jurisdiction in
them. Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem.
Jur. Germ. lib. i. § 104. The Germans borrowed
the institution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Traaatus Politico-Hiftor. Jurid.
de Civitatum Imperialium Juribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5. No. 23. Frederick Barbarossa was the
firR Emperor who, from the fame political confi-

deration

deration that influenced Louis e Gros, multiplie
communities in order to abridge the power of th
nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hifloire & du Dro
Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297. From th
reign of Henry the Fowler, to the time when th
German cities acquired full possession of their im
munities, various circumstances contributed
their increase. The establishment of bishoprics (a
ready mentioned) and the building of cathedral
naturally induced many people to fettle near th
chief place ofworfhip. It became the custom to hol
councils and courts of judicature of every kind
ecclesiastical as well as civil, in cities. In theel
venth century, many slaves were enfranchised, th
greater part of whom fettled in cities. Sever
mines were discovered and wrought in differei
provinces, which drew together such a concour:
of people, as gave rife to several cities, and in
creased the number of inhabitants in others. Con
ring. § Io5. The cities began in the thirteent
century to form ]lagues for their mutual defenc
and for repressing the disorders occasioned byth
private wars among the barons, as well as by the
exactions. This rendered the condition of th
inhabitants of cities more secure than that of ar
other order of men, and allured many to becon
members of their communities. Conring. § 9
There were inhabitants of three different ranks
the towns of Germany: the nobles, or familih
the citizens, or liberi; and the artisans, who we
slaves, or homines proprii. Knipfchild. lib.
cap. 29. No. 3. Henry V. who began his reil

.D. iio6, enfranchised the slaves who were ar-
ifans or inhabitants in several towns, and gave them
he rank of citizens or liberi. Pfeffel, p. 254.
nipfch. lib. ii. c. 29. No. 113. II9. Though
he cities in Germany did not acquire liberty so
arly as those in France, they extended their pri-
ileges much farther. All the Imperial and free
ities, the number of which is considerable, ac-
uired the full right of being immediate; by which
erm, in the German jurisprudence, we are to un-
erdtand, that they are subjet to the empire alone,
nd poitefs within their own precincts all the rights
f complete and independent sovereignty. The
arious privileges of the Imperial cities, the great
uardians of the Germanic liberties, are enume-
aced by Knipfchild. lib. ii. The most important
aicles are generally known, and it would be im-
roper to enter into any disquisition concerning
inute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 40. [S].
THE Spanish historians are almost entirely silent
ncerning the origin and progress of communities
n that kingdom; so that 1 cannot fix, with any
egree of certainty, the time and manner of their
irft introduction there. It appears, however, from
Mariana, vol. ii. p. 221. fol. Hagae, 1736, that
in the year 1350, eighteen cities had obtained a
feat in the Cortes of Castile. From the account,
which will be given of their constitution and
pretenions, Set . II. of this volume, it appears
that their privileges and form of government were

the

the fame with those of the other feudal corpora.
tions; and this, as well as the perfet similarity
of political institutions and tranfaaions in all the
feudal kingdoms, may lead us to conclude that
communities were introduced there in the fame
manner, and probably about the fame time, as
in the other nations of Europe. In Aragon, as
I shall have occasion to observe in a subsequent
note, cities seem early to have acquired extensive
immunities, together with a share in the legifa.
ture. In the year i i8, the citizens of Saragofa
had not only attained Iplitical liberty, but they
were declared to be of equal rank with the nobles
of the second class; and many other immunities,
unknown to persons in their rank of life in other
parts of Europe, were conferred upon them.
Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In
England, the establishment of communities or
corporations was posterior to the conquest. The
practice was borrowed from France, and the pri-
vileges granted by the crown were perfectly fimi-
lar to those which I have enumerated. But as this
part of history is well known to molt of my read-
ers, I shall, without entering into any criticalor
minute discussion, refer them to authors who have
fully illustrated this interesting point in theEng-
lifh history. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox
Firma Burgi, cap. i. set. ix. Hume's HifRory
of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not
improbable that ome of the towns in England
were formed into corporations under the Saxon
Kings, and that the charters granted by the king'

of

of the Norman race were not charters of enfran-
chifement from a ate of slavery, but a confirma-
tion of privileges which they already enjoyed. See
Lord Lyttelton's History of Henry II. vol. ii.
p. 317. The English cities, however, were very
inconsiderable in the twelfth century. A clear
proof of this occurs in the history to which I lai
referred. Fitzftephen, a contemporary author,
gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of Henry II. and the terms in which he
speaks ofits trade, its wealth, and the plendour
of its inhabitants, would suggest no inadequate
idea of its state at present, when it is the greatest
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas
of grandeur and magnificence are merely compa-
rative; and every description of them in general
terms is very apt to deceive. It appears from
Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London, who flou-
ri(hed in the fame reign, and who had good op-
portunity of being well informed, that this city,
of which Fitzftephen gives such a pompous ac-
count, contained no more than forty thousand in-
habitants. Ibid. 315, 36. The other cities were
small in proportion, and were not in a condition
to extort any extensive privileges. That the con-
fitution of the boroughs in Scotland, in many cir-
cumftances, resembled that of the towns in France
and England, is manifest from the Leges Burgorum,
annexed to the Regiam Majeftatem.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 46. [T].

SOON after the introduction of the third estate
nto the national council, the fpiric of liberty

which

which that excited in France began to produce con.
fpicuous effets. In several provinces of France
the nobility and communities formed associations,
whereby they bound themselves to defend their
rights and privileges against the formidable and
arbitrary proceedings of the King. The Count
de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of
these associations, dated in the year I314, twelve
years after the admission of the deputies from
towns into the States General. Hiftoire de l'an.
cien Gouvernement de la France, tom. ii. p. 94,
The vigour with which the people asserted and pre.
pared to maintain their rights, obliged their fove.
reigns to refpet: them. Six years after this affo.
ciation, Philip the Long issued a writ of summons
to the community of Narbonne, in the following
terms; " Philip, by the grace, &c. to our welli
beloved, &c. As we desire with all our heart, and
above all other things, to govern our kingdom
and people in peace and tranquillity, by the help
of God; and to reform our said kingdom in lo
far as it stands in need thereof, for the public
good, and for the benefit of our subjects, who in
times past have been aggrieved and oppressed in
diverse manners by the malice of sundry persons
as we have learned by common report, as well as
by the information of good men worthy of credit,
and we having determined in our council which
we have called to meet in our good city, &c. to
give redress to the utmost of our power, by all
ways and means possible, according to reason and
justice, and willing that this should be done with
solemnity and deliberation by the advice of the

prelates

prelates, barons, and good towns of our realm,
and particularly of you, and that it should be
.tranfa5ed agreeably to the will of God, and for
the good of our people, therefore we command,"
&c. Mably, Obfervat. ii. App. p. 386. I shall
allow there to be only the formal words of a pub-
lic and legal style; but the ideas are singular,
and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could expeft in that age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly address himself to par-
liament, in terms more favourable to public
liberty. There occurs in the history of France a
firiking instance of the progress which the prin-
ciples of liberty had made in that kingdom, and
of the influence which the deputies of towns had
acquired in the States General. During the cala-
mities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the
States General made a bold effort to extend their
own privileges and jurifdition. The regulations
eltablifhed by the States, held A. D. 355, con-
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the admini-
itration of which they vested not in the. crown,
but in commissioners appointed by the States;
concerning the coining of money; concerning the
drells of the grievance of purveyance; concerning
the regular adminiflration of justice; are much
more suitable to the genius of a republican go,-
vernment than that of a feudal monarchy. This
curious flatute is publifled, Ordon. t. iii. p. 19.
Such as have not an opportunity to consult that
largc collecion, will find an abridgment of it in

2 lift.

Hifl. de France par Villaret, tom. ix. p. 30 or
in Hiftoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 213. The French
historians represent the bishop of Laon, and Mar.
cel Provost of the merchants of Paris, who had
the chief direction of this assembly, as seditious
tribunes, violent, interested, ambitious, and aim.
ing at innovations subversive of the constitution
and government of their country. That may have
been the cafe, but there men possessed the confi.
dence of the people; and the measures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable, as
well as most likely to increase their own influence,
plainly prove that the spirit of liberty had spread
wonderfully, and that the ideas which then pre.
vailed in France concerning government were ex-
tremely liberal. The States General held at Paris,
A. D. 355, confited of about eight hundred
members, and above one half of these were de-
puties from towns. M. Secouffe Pref. a Ordon
tor. iii. p. 48. It appears that in all the different
assemblies of the States, held during the reign of
John, the representatives of towns had greatin-
fluence, and in every refpet the third State was
confidered as co-ordinate and equal to either of
the other two. Ibid. passim. These spirited efforts
were made in France long before the House of
Commons in England acquired any considerable
influence in the legislature. As the feudal system
was carried to its utmost height in France sooner
than in England, so it began to decline foonerin
the former than in the latter kingdom. In Eng.
land, almost all attempts to eftablilh or to extend

the

the liberty of the people have been successful; in
France they have proved unfortunate. What were
the accidental events, or political causes, which
occasioned this difference, it is not my present
business to enquire.

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p. 48. [U].
IN a former Note, No. VIII. I have enquired
into the condition of that part of the people which
was employed in agriculture, and have repre-
sented the various hardships and calamities of their
situation. When charters of liberty or manu-
mifflon were granted to such persons, they con-
tained four concessions corresponding to the four
capital grievances to which men in a slate of ser-
vitude are fubjest. i. The right of disposing of
their persons by sale or grant was relinquished.
2. Power was given to them of conveying their
property and effeas by will or any other legal
deed. Or if they happened to die intestate, it
was provided that their property ihould go to
their lawful heirs in the fame manner as the pro-
perty of other persons. 3. The services and taxes
which they owed to their superior or liege lord,
which were formerly arbitrary and imposed at
pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are
allowed the privilege of marrying according to
their own inclination; formerly they could contra&t
no marriage without their lord's permission, and
with no person but one of his slaves. All there
particulars are found united in the charter granted
Habitatoribus Montis.Britonis, A. D. I376. Hiss.

VOL. I. y de

de Dauphins, tom. i. p. 8 . Many circumtances
concurred with those which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that
wretched state. The gentle spirit of the Chriflian
religion; the doEtrines which it teaches, concern.
ing the original equality of mankind; its tenets
with refpeft to the divine government, and the
impartial eye with which the Almighty regards
men of every condition, and admits them to a par.
ticipation of his benefits, are all inconfif'ent with
servitude. But in this, as in many other instances,
considerations of interest, and the maxims of false
policy, led men to a conduc inconsistent with their
principles. They were so sensible, however, of this
inconsistency, that to set their fellow-chriftians at
liberty fi-om servitude was deemed an at of piety
highly meritorious and acceptable to Heaven. The
humane spirit of the Christian religion struggled
long with the maxims and manners of the world,
and contributed more than any other circum-
flance to introduce the practice of manumission.
When Pope Gregory the Great, who flourished
toward the end of the sixth century, granted
liberty to ome of his slaves, he gives this reason
for it, " Cum Redemptor nofter, totius condi.
tor natur-e, ad hoc propitiatus humanam car-
nem voluerit affumere, ut divinitatis fuse gratia,
dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo, prif
tina: nos reftitueret libertati; falubritcr agitur, si
homines, quos ab initio liberos natura protulit, &
jus gentium jugo fubftituit fervitutis, in ea, qua
nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio, libcrtti

rti-

reddantur." Gregor. Magn. ap. Potgieff. lib. iv.
c. i. § 3. Several laws or charters founded on
reaSons similar to this, are produced by the ame
author. Accordingly, a great part of the charters
of manumission, previous to the reign of Louis X.
are granted pro amore Dei, pro remedio animae,
&pro mercede animae. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i.
p. 849, 85o. Du Cange, voc. Manumiio. The
formality of manumission was executed in a church,
as a religious solemnity. The person to be set
free was led round the great altar with a torch in
his hand, he took hold of the horns of the altar,
and there the solemn words conferring liberty were
pronounced. Du Cange, ib. vol. iv. p. 467. I
shall transcribe a part of a charter of manumission
granted A. D. o056; both as it contains a full
account of the ceremonies used in this form of
manumifflon, and as a specimen of the imperfect
knowledge of the Latin tongue in that'barbarous
age. It is granted by Willa the widow of Hugo
the Duke and Marquis, in favour of Clariza one
of her slaves. "t Et ideo nos Domine Wille inclite
comecife-libera et abfolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto
-pro timore omnipotentis Dei; & remedio lumi-
narie anime bone memorie quondam supra fcripto
Domini Ugo glorioffiffimo, ut quando ilium Do-
minus de hac vita migrare, juinerit, pars iniqua
non abeat poteftatem ullam, fed anguelus Domini
nofiri Jesu Chriffi colocare dignitur illum inter
fanos dileacos suos; & beatus Petrus princips
alPo'°lorum, qui habed poteftatem omnium ani-
Ialrurn ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi abfo!vat

Y 2 animae

animme ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad ilium janua
paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te
Benzo prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fan&i
Bartholomaei apoftoli; traad de tribus vicibus circa
altare ipfius ecclesia cum creo apprehenfum in
manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am-
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe devi.
duntur. Statimq; pro remedio luminarie anime
bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo
et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia, & dixit, Ecce
quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq; partem
tibi placuerit, tam fie supra fcripta Cleriza, qua
nofque tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati,
vel procreati fuerit utriufq; fexus, &c." Murat.
ib. p. 85 3. Many other charters might have been
feleced, which, in point of grammar or style, are
in no wife superior to this. Manumission was
frequently granted on death-bed or by latter-will.
As the minds of men are at that time awakened
to sentiments of humanity and piety, these deeds
proceeded from religious motives, and were grant-
ed pro redemptione anima, in order to obtain ac-
ceptance with God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470.
& voc. Servus, vol. vi. p. 451. Another method
of obtaining liberty was by entering into holy
orders, or taking the vow in a monastery. This
was permitted for some time; but so many slaves
escaped, by this means, out of the hands of their
matters, that the pracice was afterwards reitrained,
and at last prohibited by the laws of almost all
the nationsof Europe. Murat. ib. p. 842. Con-
formably to the fame principles, Princes, on the

7 birth

birth of a son, or upon any other agreeable event,
appointed a certain number of slaves to be en-
franchised, as a teftitnony of their gratitude to
God for that benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i.
cap. 39. There are several forms of manumission
publithed by Marculfus, and all of them are
founded on religious considerations, in order to
procure the favour of God, or to obtain the for-
givenefs of their fins. Lib. ii. c. 23. 33, 34. edit.
Baluz. The fame obervation holds with refpec
to the other collections of Formula annexed to
Marculfus. As sentiments of religion induced
some to grant liberty to their fellow-chriftians
who groaned under the yoke of fervituue; so
mistaken ideas concerning devotion led others to
relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived
an extraordinary respect for the faint who was
the patron of any church or monastery in which
he was accustomed to attend religious worship,
it was not unusual among men poffefied with an
excess of superstitious reverence, to give up them-
selves and their posterity to be the slaves of the
faint. Mabillon de Re Diplomat. lib. vi. 632.
The oblati or voluntary slaves of churches or mo-
nafteries were very numerous, and may be divided
into three different classes. The first were such
as put themselves and effets under the proteStion
of a particular church or monastery, binding
themselves to defend its privileges and property
against every aggressor. These were prompted to
do so not merely by devotion, but in order to
obtain that security which arose from the protec-

Y3 tion

tion of the church. They were rather vassals than
slaves, and sometimes persons of noble birth found
it prudent to secure the protection of the church
in this manner. Persons of the second class bound
themselves to pay an annual tax or quit-rent out
of their estates to a church or monastery. Betides
this, they sometimes engaged to perform certain
services. They were called cenfuales. The last
class consisted of such as atually renounced their
liberty, and became slaves in the ftriEt and proper
sense of the word. These were called ministeriales,
and enslaved their bodies, as some of the charters
bear, that they might procure the liberty of their
fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum, lib. i.
cap. i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were to
encourage the opinions which led to this praaice,
.will appear from a clause in a charter by which
one gives up himself as a slave to a monastery,
"' Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate generofius
extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium, scilicet
quod terrena nobilicas multos plerumq; vitiorum
servos facit, fervitus vero Chrifti nobiles virtuti-
bus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus vi-
tia comparaverit, claret pro certo eum effe gene-
rofiorem, qui fe Dei fervitio prabuerit proniorem.
Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens, &c." Another
charter is exprefTed in the following words:
( L:ligens magis effc fervus Dei quam libertus
feculi, firmiter credens & fciens, quod fervire
Deo, regnare eft, fummaque ingenuitas fit in qua
fervitus comparabatur Chdifti, &c." Du Cangc,
voc. Oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286, 287. G'et,

how-

however, as the power of religion was, it does
nor appear, that the enfranchisement of slaves
was a frequent practice while the feudal system
preserved its vigour. On the contrary, there
were laws which set bounds to it as detrimental
to society. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The in-
ferior order of men owed the recovery of their
liberty to the decline of that ariflocratical policy,
which lodged the most extensive power in the
hands of a few members of the society, and de-
pressed all the reft. When Louis X. ifrued his
ordonance, several slaves had been so long accuf-
tomed to servitude, and their minds were so much
debated by that unhappy situation, that they re-
fused to accept of the liberty which was offered
them. D'Ach. Spicel. vol. xi. p. 387. Long after
the reign of Louis X. several of the French no-
bility continued to assert their ancient dominion
over their slaves. It appears from an ordonance
of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin Constable of
France, that the custom of enfranchising them was
confidered as a pernicious innovation. Morice
Mem. pour fervir des preuves l'Hift. de Bret.
torn. ii. p. oo. In rome instances, when the pra-
dial laves were declared to be freemen, they were
till bound to perform certain services to their
ancient masters; and were kept in a slate different
from other fubjeas, being reftritled either fiom
purchasing land, or becoming members of a com-
munity within the precints of the manor to which
they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand.
lleslaui-. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, however,

Y 4 seems

seems not to have been common.-There is no
general law for the manumission of slaves in the
Statute-book of England, similar to that which
has been quoted from the Ordonances of the Kings
of France. Though the genius of the English
confitution seems early to have favoured personal
liberty, personal servitude, nevertheless, continued
long in England in rome particular places. In the
year 1514, we find a charter of Henry VIII. en-
franchising two slaves belonging to one of his ma-
nors. Rym. Feder. vol. xiii. p. 470. As late as
the year 1574, there is a commission from Queen
Elizabeth with refpecl to the manumission of cer-
tain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer, in Oh.
fervat. on the Statutes, &c. p. 251.

NOTE XXI. SECT. I. P. 56. [X].

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right of
so great importance, and prevailed so universally,
that the regulations concerning it occupy a con-
fiderable place in the system of laws during the
middle ages. M. de Montesquieu, who has un-
ravelled so many intricate points in feudal jurif-
prudence, and thrown light on so many cutoms
formerly obscure and unintelligible, was not led
by his subject to confider this. I hall therefore
give a more minute account of the customs and
regulations which direEted a praaice so contrary
to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. i. Among the ancient

Germans,

Germans, as well as other nations in a similar
state of society, the right of avenging injuries was
a private and personal right exercised by force
of arms, without any reference to an umpire, or
any appeal to a magistrate for decision. The
clearest proofs of this were produced, Note VI.
2. This practice subsisted among the barbarous
nations after their settlement in the provinces of
the Empire which they conquered; and as the
causes of dissension among them multiplied, their
family feuds and private wars became more fre-
quent. Proofs of this occur in their early hifto-
rians. Greg. Turon. Hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii.
c. 8. lib. x. c. 27. and likewise in the codes of
their laws. It was not only allowable for the
relations to avenge the injuries of their family,
but it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque here-
ditas terra pervenerit, ad ilium veftis bellica id eft
lorica & ultio proximi, et folatio leudis, debet
pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Saliq.
tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 4. § 10.--
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble
birth, had the right of private war. All disputes
between saves, villani, the inhabitants of towns,
and frecmen of inferior condition, were decided
in the courts of justice. All dilputes between
gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were ter-
minated in the tame manner. The right of pri-
vate war supposcd nobility of birth, and equality
of rank in both the contending parties. Beau-
manoii Couftumes de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300.
01don. des ois de France, tomr .
ii. 395. § xvii.

508.

o08. § xv. &c. The dignified ecclesiastics like.
wife claimed and exercised the right of private
war; but as it was not altogether decent for them
to prosecute quarrels in person, advocati or vi.
dames were chosen by the several monasteries and
bishoprics. These were commonly men of high
rank and reputation, who became the protedor
of the churches and convents by which they were
eleted; espoused their quarrels, and fought their
battles; armis omnia qua: erant ecclesias virilitel
defendebant, et vigilanter protegebant. Bruffel
Usage des Fiefs, tom i. p. I44. Du Cange, voc,

ddvocatus. On many occasions, the martial ideas
to which ecclesiastics of noble birth were ac-
customed, made them forget the pacific spirit o
their profefion, and led them into the field in
person at the head of their vassals, " flamma, ferro,
cade, pofflffiones ecclefiarum pralati defende-
bant." Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange, ib. p. 79.
-4. It was not every injury or trespass that gave
a gentleman a title to make war upon his adver-
firy. Atrocious as of violence, insults and
affionts publicly committed, were legal and per-
mitted motives for talking arms againit the au-
thors of them. Such crimes as are now punished
capitally in civilized nations, at that time jufti
fled private hofilities. Beauman. ch. lix. Du
Cange Dil'erit. xxix. fur Joinville, p. 33r. Bt
though the avenging of injuries w;s the only
motive that could legally authorise a private war,
yet disputes concerning civil property often gave
rile to hostilities, and were terminated by the
sword. ID) Cange Dissert. p. 332.-5. All pr

so

sons present when any quarrel arose, or any ac
of violence was committed, were included in the
war which it occasioned; for it was supposed to
be impoflible for any man in such a situation to
remain neuter, without taking fide with one or
other of the contending parties. Beauman. p. 300.
-". All the kindred of the two principals in the
war were included in it, and obliged to espouse
the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were
connected, Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded
on the maxim of the ancient Germans, " fufcipere
tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propinqui, quam
amicitias, nceffe eft ;" a maxim natural to all
rude nations, among which the form of society,
and political union, strengthen such a sentiment.
This obligation was enforced by legal authority.
If a person refused to take part in the quarrel of
his kinfinan, and to 'aid him against his adversary,
he was deemed to have renounced all the rights
and privileges of kindredfhip, and became inca-
pable of succeeding to any of his relations, or of de-
riving any benefit from any civil right or property
belonging to them. Du Cange Dissert. p. 333.
The method of ascertaining the degree of affinity
which obliged a person to take part in the quarrel
of a kinfiman, was curious. While the church
prohibited the marriage of persons within the
seventh degree of affinity, the vengeance of pri-
vate war extended as far as this absurd prohi-
bition, and all who had such a remote connection
With any of the principals, were involved in the
calamities of war. But when the church relaxed
fumevhat of its rigour, and did not extend its

prohi-

prohibition of marrying beyond the fourth de
gree of affinity, the fame reftrition took plac
in the conduEt of private war. Beauman. 303. Di
Cange Dissert. 333- 7. A private war could no
be carried on between two full brothers, becauf
both have the fame common kindred, and con.
fequently neither had any persons bound to flan
by him against the other, in the contest; but tw
brothers of the half blood might wage war, be.
cause each of them has a diftin& kindred. Beau.
man. p. 299.-8. The vanfals of each principal
in any private war were involved in the contest,
because by the feudal maxims they were bound
to take arms in defence of the chieftain of whom
they held, and to assist him in every quarrel. As
soon, therefore, as feudal tenures were introduced,
and this artificial conneEtion was eftablilhed be.
tween vaifals and the baron of whom they held,
vasals came to be confidered as in the fame fate
with relations. Beauman. 303.-9. Private wars
were very frequent for several centuries. Nothing
contributed more to increase those disorders in
government, or to encourage such ferocity of
manners as reduced the nations of Europe to that
wretched state which diftinguifled the period of
history which I am reviewing. Nothing was such
an obstacle to the introdution of a regular ad-
ministration of justice. Nothing could more es-
fectually discourage industry, or retard the pro-
grefs and cultivation of the arts of peace. Private
wars were carried on with all the deftrutive rage
which is to be dreaded from violent resentment
when armed with force, and authorised by law. It

appears

ppears from the statutes prohibiting or restrain-
ng the exercise of private hostilities, that the in-
afion of the most barbarous enemy could not
e more desolating to a country, or more fatal to
ts inhabitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon.
om. i. p. 701. tom. ii. p. 395. 408. 507, &c.
The contemporary hiitorians describe the excesses
ommitted in prosecution of these quarrels in such
terms as excite astonishment and horror. I shall
inention only one pafiage from the history of the
Holy War, by Guibert Abbot of Nogent: " Erat
eo tempore maximis ad invicem hoftilitatibus,
torius Francorum regni facQa turbatio; crebra
jbiq; latrocinia, viarum obfeffio; audiebantur
afim, im mo fiebant incendia infinita; nullis
)raxer sola & indomita cupiditate exiftentibus
:aufis extruebantur praelia; & ut brevi totum clau-
lam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum fubjacebat,
ufquam attendendo cujus effet, praede patebat."
Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus colleted the chief regulations
which cuPtom had eflablifhed concerning the right
nd exercise oF private war, I shall enumerate, in
hronological order, the various expedients em-
loyed to aboliflh or restrain this fatal custom.
. The first expedient employed by the civil ma-
irate, in order to set some bounds to the vio-
ence of private revenge, was the fixing by law
e fine or comporition to be paid for each dif-
rent crime. The injured person was originally
Iie ftle judge concerning the nature of the wrong
hlich lie had fufered, the degree of vengeance
lhich he flould exact, as well as the species of

atolement

atonement or reparation with which he might
reft satisfied. Resentment became of course as
implacable as it was fierce. It was often a point
of honour not to forgive, nor to be reconciled.
This made it necessary to fix those compositions
which make so great a figure in the laws of bar.
barous nations. The nature of crimes and of-
fences was eflimated by the magistrate, and the
fum due to the person offended was ascertained
with a minute and often a whimsical accuracy.
Rotharis, the legislator of the Lombards, who
reigned about the middle of the seventh century,
discovers his intention both in ascertaining the
composition to be paid by the offender, and in
increasing its value; it is, fays he, that the en.
mity may be extinguished, the prosecution may
cease, and peace may be restored. Leg. Langob.
lib. i. tit. 7. § 10.-2. About the beginning of
the ninth century, Charlemagne struck at the
root of the evil, and enacted, That when any
person had been guilty of a crime, or had com-
mitted an outrage, he should immediately submit
to the penance which the church imposed, and
offer to pay the composition which the law pre-
fcribed ; and if the injured person or his kindred
should refute to accept of this, and presume to
avenge themselves by force of arms, their lands
and properties flould be forfeited." Capitu
A. D. 802, edit. Baluz. vol. i. 371.-3. But in
this, as well as in other regulations, the ge1iu
of Charlemagne advanced before the pirit of is
age. The ideas of his contemporaries concern
ing regular government were too iiperfect, an

their

their manners too fierce to fubmic to this law,
Private wars, with all the calamities which they
occasioned, became more frequent than ever
after the death of that great monarch. His fuc-
ceffors were unable to restrain them. The church
found it necessary to interpose. The most early
ofthefe interpositions now extant, is towards the
end of the tenth century. In the year 990, fe-
veral bishops in the south of France assembled,
and published various regulations, in order to
set ome bounds to the violence and frequency
of private wars; if any person within their dio-
cefes should venture to transgress, they ordained
that he hould be excluded from all Christian
privileges during his life, and be denied Christian
burial after his death. Du Mont Corps Diplo-
matique, torn. i. p. 4I. These, however, were
only partial remedies; and therefore a council
was held at Limoges, A. D. 994. The bodies
of the faints, according to the custom of those
ages, were carried thither; and by these sacred
relics men were exhorted to lay down their arms,
to extinguish their animofities, and to swear that
they would not for the future violate the public
peace by their private hostilities. Bouquet Re-
cueil des Hiftor. vol. x. p. 49. I47. Several other
councils issued decrees to the fame effec. Du
Cange Dissert. 343.-4. But the authority of coun-
cils, how venerable soever in those ages, was not
sufficient to abolifi a custom which flattered the
pride of the nobles, and gratified their favourite
P;ilions. The evil grew so intolerable, that it
became necessary to employ supernatural means

for

for suppressing it. A bishop of Aquitaine,
A. D. I032, pretended that an angel had ap.
peared to him, and brought him a writing
from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their
hostilities, and to be reconciled to each other,
It was during a season of public calamity that
he published this revelation. The minds of men
were disposed to receive pious impressions, and
willing to perform any thing in order to avert
the wrath of heaven. A general peace and cef.
fation from hostilities took place, and continued
for seven years; and a resolution was formed,
that no man hould in times to come attack or
molest his adversaries during the seasons set apart
for celebrating the great festivals of the church,
or from the evening of Thursday in each week,
to the morning of Monday in the week ensuing,
the intervening days being confidered as parti-
cularly holy, our Lord's Passion having hap.
pened on one of there days, and his Refurrec-
tion on another. A change in the dispositions
of men so sudden, and which produced a refo-
lution so unexpe&cd-, was confidered as mira-
culous; and the reclpite from hostilities which
followed upon it, was called The iTruce of God.
Glaber. Rodulphus Hiflor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet,
vol. x. p. 59. This, from being a regulation
or concert in one kingdom, became a general
law in Chriflendom, was confirmed by the
authority of several Popes, and the violators
were fubje-ed to the penalty of excommu-
nication. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal. lib i
tit. 34. c. . Du Cange Gloffar. voc. 're'ga.

An

An a of the council of Toulujes in Rouflillon,
A. D. 1041, containing all the stipulations re-
quired by the truce of God, is published by Dom
deVic & Dom Vaifette, Hist. de Languedoc. tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 206. A cessation from hostilities
during three complete days in every week, allowed
iuch a considerable space for the passions of the
antagonists to cool, and for the people to enjoy a
respite from the calamities of war, as well as to
take measures for their own security, that, if this
truce of God had been exactly observed, it must
have gone far towards putting an end to private
wars. This, however, seems not to have been
the cafe; the nobles, disregarding the truce,
prosecuted their quarrels without interruption as
formerly. Qua nimirum tempeflate, univerfae
provincia adeo devaftationis continuae importu-
nitate inquietantur, ut ne ipfa, pro obferva-
tione divina pacis, profefa facramenta cuftodi-
antur. Abbas Ufpergenfis, apud Datt. de pace
imperil publica, p. 13. No. 35. The violent
spirit of the nobility could not be refrained by
any engagements. The complaints of this were
frequent; and bishops, in order to compel them
to renew their vows and promises of ceasing from
their private wars, were obliged to enjoin their
clergy to fullpend the performance of divine ser-
vice and the exercise of any religious funtion
within the parishes of such as were refraLtory and
obRinate. lHift. de Langued. par D D. de Vic &
Vaifette, torn. ii. Preuves, p. 118.- 5. The
PCo)ple, eager to obtain relief fiom their susser-
iags, called in a econd time revelation to their

VUL. I. Z aid.

aid. Towards the end of the twelfth century,
a carpenter in Guienne gave out, that Jesus
Christ, together with the blessed Virgin, had ap-
peared to him and having commanded him to
exhort mankind to peace, had given him, as a
proof of his miion, an image of the Virgin hold-
ing her son in her arms, with this inscription,
Lamb of God who takefl away the fins f the workd,
give us peace. This low fanatic addressed him.
self to an ignorant age, prone to credit what was
marvellous. He was received as an inspired mef.
fenger of God. Many prelates and barons as.
fembled at Puy, and took an oath, not only to
make peace with all their own enemies, but to
attack such as refused to lay down their arms,
and to be reconciled to their enemies. They
formed an association for this purpose, and as.
fumed the honourable name of the Brotherhood
of God. Robertus de Monte Michaele, ap. M.
de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Ordon. p. 29. But the
influence of this superstitious terror or devotion
was not of long continuance.-6. The civil ma-
giftrate was obliged to exert his authority in
order to check a custom which threatened the
dissolution of government. Philip Augustus, as
fume imagine, or St. Louis, as is more probable,
published an ordonance, A. D. I245, prohibiting
any person to commence hostilities against the
friends and vassals of his adversary, until forty
cays after the commission of the crime or offence
which gave rife to the quarrel ; decl:.ling, that
if any man presumed to transgress this ltuttite,
he ihould be confidered as guilty of a breach "

the public peace, and be tried and punished by
the judge ordinary as a traitor. Ordon. tom. i.
p. 56. This was called the Royal Truce, and
afforded time for the violence of resentment to
subside, as well as leisure for the good offices of
such as were willing to compose the difference.
The happy effects of this regulation seem to have
been considerable, if we may judge from the
solicitude of succeeding monarchs to enforce it.-
7. In order to restrain the exercise of private war
still farther, Philip the Fair, towards the close of
the fame century, A. D. 1296, published an or-
donance commanding all private hostilities to
cease, while he was engaged in war against the
enemies of the state. Ordon. tom. i. p. 328.
390. This regulation, which seems to be almost
elfential to the existence and preservation of so-
ciety, was often renewed by his successors, and
being enforced by the regal authority, proved a
considerable check to the deftruEtive contests of
the nobles. Both thee regulations, introduced
first in France, were adopted by the other nations
of Europe.-8. The evil, however, was so in-
veterate, that it did not yield to all these remedies.
No sooner was public peace established in any
kingdom, than the barons renewed their private
hoflilities. They not only struggled to maintain
this pernicious right, but to secure the excrcife
of it without any restraint. Upon the death of
Philip the Fair, the nobles of different provinces
in France formed aociations, and prefltnted re-
monllrances to his fucceflbr, demanding the
repeal of several laws, by which lie had abridged

Z 2 the

the privileges of their order. Among these, the
right of private war is always mentioned as one
of the most valuable; and they claim that the
retraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal
truce, as well as that arising from the ordonance
of the year 296, should be taken off. In some
inflances, the two sons of Philip, who mounted
the throne successively, eluded their demands;
in others, they were obliged to make conceflions.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 55'. 557. 561. 573. The ordo-
nances to which I here refer are of such length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extremely
curious, and may be peculiarly infirudive to an
English reader, as they throw considerable light
on that period of Englifl history, in which the
attempts to circumscribe the regal prerogative
were carried on, not by the people struggling for
liberty, but by the nobles contending for power.
It is not necessary to produce any evidence of the
continuance and frequency of private wars under
the successors of Philip the Fair.-9. A praice
brnewhat similar to the royal truce was intro-
duced, in order to trengthen and extend it.
Bonds of assurance, or mutual security, were de-
manded from the parties at variance, by which
they obliged themselves to abstain from all hofli-
lities, either during a time mentioned in the bond,
or for ever; and became fubje& to heavy pe-
nalties, if they violated this obligation. These
bonds were folnetimes granted voluntarily, but
more frequently exated by the authority of the
civil magiftratc. Upon a petition from the party
who felt himi'lf weakct, the magistrate b1m-

moned

moned his adversary to appear in court, and
obliged him to give a bond of assurance. If,
after that, he committed any farther hostilities,
he became fubjeft to all the penalties of treason.
This restraint on private war was known in the
age of St. Louis. Eftabliffemens, liv. i. c. 28.
It was frequent in Bretagne; and what is very
remarkable, such bonds of assurance were given
mutually between vassals and the lord of whom
they held. Oliver de Clifon grants one to the
Duke of Bretagne, his sovereign. Morice Mem.
pour fervir de preuves l'Hlitt. de Bret. tom. i.
p. 846. ii. p. 371. Many examples of bonds of
assurance in other provinces of France are col-
leEted by Bruffel, tom. ii. p. 856. The nobles
of Burgundy remonstrated against this practice,
and obtained exemption from it as an encroach-
ment on the privileges of their order. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 558. This mode of security was first
introduced in cities, and the good effeats of it
having been felt there, was extended to the nobles.
See Note XVI.-Io. The calamities occasioned
by private wars became at ome times so intole-
rable, that the nobles entered into voluntary affo-
ciations, binding themselves to refer all matters
in dispute, whether concerning civil property, or
points of honour, to the determination of the
majority of the associates. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a. l'Hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 728.
--1 . But all there expedients proving inel:Etual,
Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an ordonance
expressly prohibiting private wars on any pretext
whatiocver, with power to the judge ordinary o

Z 3 colll)el

compel all persons to comply with this injunc.
tion, and to puniih such as should prove refrac.
tory or disobedient, by imprisoning their persons,
seizing their goods, and appointing the officers of
justice, Mangeurs & GafJeurs, to live at free quar-
ters on their eLtate. If those who were disobedient
to this edict could not be personally arrested, he
appointed their friends and vassals to be seized,
and detained until they gave surety for keeping
the peace; and he abolished all laws, cufloms, or
privileges which might be pleaded in opposition
to this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138. How
flow is the progress of reason and of civil order!
Regulations which to us appear so equitable,
obvious, and simple, required the efforts of civil
and ecclesiastical authority, during several cen-
turies, to introduce and establish them. Even
poflerior to this period, Louis XI. was obliged
to abolish private wars in Dauphine, by a par-
ticular edict, A. D. I45. Du Cange Dissert.
p. 348.

THIS note would swell to a disproportionate

bulk, if I should attempt to enquire with the
fame minute attention into the progress of this
pernicious custom in the other countries of Eu-
rope. In England, the ideas of the Saxons con-
cerning personal revenge, the right of private
wars, and the composition due to the party of-
fended, seem to have been much the fame with
those which prevailed on the Continent. TIh
law of Ina de vindicantibus, in the eighth century,
Lamb. p. 3.; those of Edmund in the tenti
century, de homicidio, Lamb. p. 72. & de iimi'

tiis

tiis, p. 76.; and those of Edward the ConfefTor,
in the eleventh century, de temporibus & diebus
pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 126. are per-
sealy similar to the ordonances of the French
Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Ed-
ward, de pace regis, are fill more explicit an
those of the French monarchs, and, by several
provisions in them, discover that a more perfect
police was established in England at that pe-
riod. Lambard, p. 28. fol. verf. Even after
the conquest, private wars, and the regulations
for preventing them, were not altogether un-
known, as appears from Madox Formulare An-
glicanum, N° CXLV. and from the extracts from
Domesday Book, published by Gale Scriptores
Hilt. Britan. p. 759. 777. The well-known clause
in the form of an English indi&ment, which, as
an aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions
his having assaulted a person, who was in the
peace of God and of the King, seems to be bor-
rowed from the Treuga or Pax Dei, and the Pax
Regis, which I have explained. But after the
conquest, the mention of private wars among the
nobility occurs more rarely in the English his-
tory, than in that of any other European nation,
and no laws concerning them are to be found in
the body of their statutes. Such a change in
their own manners, and such a variation from
those of their neighbours, is remarkable. Is it
to be ascribed to the extraordinary power that
William the Norman acquired by right of con-
'1Uel, and tranfiritted to his fuccellurs, which

Z 4 rendered

rendered the execution of justice more vigorous
and decisive, and the jurifdiaion of the King's
court more extensive than under the Monarchs
on the Continent? Or, was it owing to te
settlement of the Normans in England, whc
haing never adopted the practice of private war
in their own country, abolished it in the king-
dom which they conquered ? It is afterted in an
ordonance of John King of France, that in all
times past, persons of every rank in Normandy
have been prohibited to wage private war, and
the practice has been deemed unlawful. Ordon,
tom. ii. p. 407. If this sac were certain, it
would go far towards explaining the peculiarity
which I have mentioned. But as there are some
English As of Parliament, which, according
to the remark of the learned author of the Obferv-
ations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, recite
falsehoods, it may be added, that this is not pe-
culiar to the laws of that country. Notwith-
standing the positive assertion contained in this
public law of France, there is good reason for
confidering it as a statute which recites a false-
hood. This, however, is not the place for dif-
cuffing that point. It is an inquiry not unworthy
the curiosity of an English antiquary.

IN Castile, the pernicious practice of private war

prevailed, and was authorised by the customs and
law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri, tit. 76, cum
commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 551. As the
Catilian nobles were no less turbulent than power-
ful, their quarrels and hoftililies involved their

country

country in many calamities. Innumerable proofs
of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the right
ofprivate revenge was likewise authorised by law;
exercised in its full extent, and accompanied with
'the 1ame unhappy consequences. Hieron. Blanca
Comment de Rebus Arag. ap. Schotti Hifpan.
illutrat. vol. iii. p. 733. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 247.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib.
ix. p. 18i. Several confederacies between the
Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for the reftor-
ing of peace, founded on the truce of God, are
still extant. Petr. de Marca, Marca five Limes His-
panic. App. 1303. I388. 428. As early as the
;year 1165, we find a combination of the King and
court of Aragon, in order to abolish the right of
private war, and to punish those who presumed to
claim that privilege. Anales de Aragon por Zu-
rita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so inveterate,
that as late as A. D. 5 9, Charles V. was obliged
to publish a law enforcing all former regulations
tending to suppress this praaice. Fueros et Ob-
fervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

Tin:l Lombards, and other northern nations
?io fettled in Italy, introduced the fame maxims
colnccrning the right of revenge into that country,
'and these were followed by the fame effi'es, As
the progrels of the evil was perfectly similar to
Wvhat happened in France, the expedients employ-
ed to check its career, or to extirpate it finally,
reemble(l those which I have enumerated. Mu-
rat. Ant. Iral. vol. ii. p. 306, &c.

1s

IN Germany, the disorders and calamities oc-

carloned by the right of private war were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country of
.Europe. The Imperial authority was so much
ihaken and enfeebled by the violence of the civil
wars, excited by the conteRts between the Popes
and the Emperors of the Eranconian and Suabian
lines, that not only the nobility but the cities
acquired almost independent power, and scorned
all subordination and obedience to the laws. The
frequency of thefefaide, or private wars, are often
mentioned in the Ger-man Annals, and the fatal
effects of them are most pathetically described,
Datt. de Pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. n30o
& passim. The Germans early adopted the Treuga
Dei, which was first eftablifled in France. This,
however, proved but a temporary and ineffefcual
remedy. The disorders multiplied so fall, and
grew to be so enormous, that they threatened the
dissolution of society, and compelled the Germans
to have recourse to the only remedy of the evil,
viz. an absolute prohibition of private wars. The
Emperor William published his edict to this
purpose, A. D. 255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Datt, lib. i. cap. 4. no o2. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to secure tile
oblervance of it. This gave rife to a practicein
Germany, which. conveys to us a striking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occasioned by
private wars, and of the feebleness of government
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Tle

C>0o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ cities

ties and nobles entered into alliances and affo-
iations, by which they bound themselves to main-
ain the public peace, and to make war on such
s hould violate it. This was the origin of the
eague of the Rhine, of Suabia, and of many
naller confederacies distinguished by various
lames. The rife, progress, and beneficial effets
of these associations are traced by Datt, with great
/accuracv. Whatever degree of public peace or
of regular administration was preserved in the
Empire from the beginning of the twelfth century
to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to
these leagues. During that period, political order,
|refpeL for the laws, together with the equal ad-
iiniftration of justice, made considerable progress
in Germany. But the final and perpetual abo-
lition of the right of private war was not accom-
plilhed until A. D. 1495. The Imperial authority
!was by that time more firmly established, the ideas
of men with refpe& to government and fubordi-
!nation were become more just. That barbarous
'and pernicious privilege of waging private war,
which the nobles had so long possessed, was de-
clared to be incompatible with the happiness and
exislence of society. In order to terminate any
differences which might arise among the vari-
ous members of the Germanic body, the Impe-
rial chamber was inflituted with supreme jurifdic-
tion, to judge without appeal in every queflion
brought before it. That court has subsisted since
that )period, forming a very refpedable tribunal,

2 of

of essential importance in the German conflitu
tion. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v. Pfeffel Abrege d
l'Hiftoire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. SECT. I. p. 67. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu.

merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which superstition introduced du.
ring the ages of ignorance. I ihall mention only
one, because we have an account of it in apla.
citum or trial in the presence of Charlemagne,
from which we may learn the imperfect manner
in which justice was administered even during his
reign. In the year 775, a contest arose between
the bishop of Paris and the abbot of St. Denys,
concerning the property of a finall abbey. Each
of them exhibited deeds and records, in orderto
prove the right to be in them. Instead of trying
the authenticity, or confidering the import of
these, the point was referred to thejudiciunm cruis.
Each produced a person, who, during the cele-
bration of mass, flood bfore the cross with his
arms expanded; and he, whose representative sirs
became weary, and altered his posture, loft the
cause. The person employed by the bishop on
this occasion had less firength or less spirit than
his adversary, and the question was decided in
favour of the abbot. Mabillon de Re Diplomat.
lib. vi. p. 498. If a Prince so enlightened as
Charlemagne countenanced such an absurd mode
of decision, it is no wonder that other monarcs'

n.~,,hl

ould tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu
as treated of the trial by judicial combat at con-
derable length. The two talents which diftin-
ui(h that illustrious author, induitry in tracing
the circumitances of ancient and obscure infti-
tions, and sagacity in penetrating into the causes
nd principles which contributed to etablifh them,
re equally conspicuous in his observations on this
bject. To these I refer the reader, as they con-
in most of the principles by which I have endea-
oured to explain this practice. De l'Efprit des
oix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be probable from
he remarks of M. de Montesquieu, as well as
om the fads produced by Muratori, tom. iii.
iffert. xxxviii. that appeals to the justice of God
ythe experiments with fire and water, &c. were
equent among the people who fettled in the dif-
erent provinces of the Roman Empire, before they
ad recourse to the judicial combat; and yet the
udicial combat seems to have been the most ancient
node of terminating any controversy among the
arbarous nations in their original settlements.
this is evident from Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii.
. 18. who informs us, that all questions which
ere decided among the Romans by legal trial,
ere terminated among the Germans by arms.
ihe fame thing appears in the ancient laws and
uftoms of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. 0. Stiern-
óok de jure Sueonum & Gothorum vetufto, 4to,
Holmiae x62, lib. i. c. 7. It is probable that
when the various tribes which invaded the Eni-

pire

pire were converted to Chriltianity, their ancies
custom of allowing judicial combats appeared i
glaringly repugnant to the precepts of religior
that, for some time, it was abolished, and by de
grees, several circumifances which I have men
tioned, led them to resume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable from a lay

quoted by Stiernh66k in the treatise which I havy
mentioned, that the judicial combat was originallj
permitted, in order to determine points refpeins
the personal character or reputation of individuals
and was afterwards extended not only to crimina
cafes, but to questions concerning property. The
words of the law are, " if any man shall fay t
another these reproachful words, "c you are not;
' man equal to other men," or, "c you have nol

the heart of a man," and the other ffiall reply

" I am a man as good as you," let ther meeton
the highway. If he who first gave offence appear,
and the person offended absent himself, let thelat.
ter be deemed a worse man even than he was calledi
let him not be admitted to give evidence in judg'
ment either for man or woman, and let him no1
have the privilege of making a testament. If he
who gave the offence be absent, and only the per'
son offended appear, let him call upon the otihe
thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark upon
the earth, and then let him who absented himCfll
be deemed infamous, because he uttered words
which he durfi not support. If both fliall appeal

pro

roperly armed, and the person offended hall fall
n the combat, let a half compensation be paid
or his death. But if the person who gave the
DFience hall fall, let it be imputed to his own
rashness. The petulance of his tongue hath been
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demanded for his death."
Lex Uplandica, ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people
were extremely delicate with respect to every thing
thataffeced their reputation as soldiers. By the
laws of the Salians, if any man called another
a bare, or accused him of having left his shield in
the field of battle, he was ordained to pay a large
fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4. 6. By the law
of the Lombards, if any one called another
arga, i. e. a good for, nothing fellow, he might
immediately challenge him to combat. Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. i. tit. v. § i. By the law of the Sa-
lians, if one called another cenitus, a term of
reproach equivalent to arga, he was bound to
pay a very high fine. Tit. xxxii. § i. Paulus
Diaconus relates the violent impreffton which this
reproachful expression made upon one of his coun-
trymen, and the fatal effects with which it was
attended. De Geftis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24.
Thus the ideas concerning the point of honour,
which we are apt to confider as a modern refine-
ment, as well as the practice of duelling, to which
it gave rife, are derived from the notions of our
"ncefto s, while in a state of bociety very little
improved.

As

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this subjed

did not lead him to confider every circumftanc
relative to judicial combats, I ihall mention some
particular fa&s necessary for the illustration ol
what I have said with refpe& to them. A remark.
able instance occurs of the decision of an abftrad
point of law by combat. A question arose in the
tenth century concerning the right of representation,
which was not then fixed, though now universally
established in every part of Europe. "( It was a
matter of dubt and dispute (faith the historian),
whether the sons of a son ought to be reckoned
among the children of the family, and succeed
equally with their uncles, if their father happened
to die while their grandfather was alive. An
afiembly was called to deliberate on this point,
and it was the general opinion that it ought to be
remitted to the examination and decision of judges.
But the Emperor following a better course, and
desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided by
battle between two champions. He wh9 appeared
in behalf of the right of children to represent
their deceased father was vic&orious; and itwas
established, by a perpetual decree, that they hould
hereafter share in the inheritance together with
their uncles." W ittickindus Corbienfis, lib. Annal.
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxii.
If we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men
to any ation more extravagant than this of lft-
tling a point in law by combat, it must be that of

Is,~~~~~ ~ refer-

referring the truth or falsehood of a religious opi-
nion to be decided in the fame manner. To the
disgrace of human reason, it has been capable even
of this extravagance. A question was agitated in
Spain in the eleventh century, whether the Mu-
farabic Liturgy and ritual which had been used
in the churches of Spain, or that approved of by
the See of Rome, Which differed in many parti-
culars from the other, contained the form of wor-
ship most acceptable to the Deity. The Spani-
ards contended zealously for the ritual of their
ancestors. The Popes urged them to receive that
to which they had given their infallible fanion.
A violent contefl arose. The nobles proposed to
decide the controversy by the sword. The King
approved of this method of decision. Two
knights in complete armour entered the lifts. John
Ruys de Matanca, the champion of the Mufarabic
Liturgy, was victorious. But the Queen and
Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, insisted on having the matter submitted to
another trial, and had interest enough to prevail
in a request, inconfiltent with the laws of combat,
which being confidered as an appeal to God, the
decision ought to have been acquiesced in as final.
A great fire was kindled. A copy of each Liturgy
was cast into the flames. It was agreed that the
book which flood this proof, and remained un-
touched, should be received in all the churches
of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed
lkewile in this trial, and if we may believe Rode-
VOL.. I. A a rigo

rigo de Toledo, remained unhurt by the fire, when
the other was reduced to ashes. The Queen and
Archbishop had power or art sufficient to elude
this decision also, and the use of the Mufarabic
form of devotion was permitted only in certain
churches. A determination no less extraordinary
than the whole tranfation. Roger de Toledo,
quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol. d'Efpagne,
torn. i. p. 417. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p.
378.-A remarkable proof of the general use of
trial by combat, and of the prediletion for that
mode of decision, occurs in the laws of the Lom-
bards. It was a custom in the middle ages, that
any person might signify publicly the law to which
he chose to be fubjeEted; and by the prescriptions
of that law he was obliged to regulate his tranf-
aftions, without being bound to comply with any
practice authorized by other codes of law. Per-
sons who had subjected themselves to the Roman
law, and adhered to the ancient jurisprudence,
as far as any knowledge of it was retained in those
ages of ignorance, were exempted from paying
any regard to the forms of proceedings eftablilhed
by the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and
other barbarous people. But the Emperor Otho,
in direct contradition to this received maxim,
ordained, "C That all persons, under whatever law
they lived, even although it were the Roman law,
flould be bound to conform to the edicts concern-
ing the trial by combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii
tit. 55. § 38. While the trial by judicial co'bat

fubfifled,

subsisted, proof by charters, contracts, or other
deeds, became ineffectual; and even this species
of written evidence, calculated to render the pro-
ceedings of courts certain and decisive, was eluded.
When a charter or other instrument was produced
by one of the parties, his opponent might challenge
it, affirm that it was false and forged, and offer to
prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34.
It is true, that among the reasons enumerated by
Beaumanoir, on account of which judges might
refute to permit a trial by combat, one is, " If the
point in contest can be clearly proved or ascertain-
ed by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv. ch. 63.
p. 323. But that regulation removed the evil
only a tingle ftep. For the party who suspected that
a witness was about to depose in a manner unfa-
vourable to his cause, might accuse him of being
suborned, give him the lie, and challenge him to
combat; if the witness was vanquished in battle,
no other evidence could be admitted, and the
party by whom he was summoned to appear loft his
cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 6. § 2. Leg. Burgund.
tit. 45. Beauman. ch. 6. p. 315. The reason
given for obliging a witness to accept of a defi-
ance, and to defend himself by combat, is remark-
able, and contains the fame idea which is frill the
foundation of what is called the point of honour;
" for it is just, that if any one affirms that he per-
seAly knows the truth of any thing, and offers to
give oath upon it, that he flould not hesitate to
maintain the veracity of his affirmation in com-
bat."' Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

A a 2 TIAT

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efa.

blifhed in every country of Europe, is a faEt well
known, and requires no proof. That this mode
of decision was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it, but
from the earliest writers concerning the prafice
of law in the different nations of Europe. They
treat of this custom at great length ; they enume.
rate the regulations concerning it with minute ac-
curacy; and explain them with much solicitude
It made a capital and extensive article in jurif-
prudence. There is not any one fubje& in their
system of law, which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or
the compilers of the Affifes de Jerusalem, seem to
have confidered as of greater importance; and
none upon which they have bestowed so much at-
tention. The fame observation will hold with re-
fpea to the early authors of other nations. It ap-
pears from Madox, that trials of this kind were so
frequent in England, that fines, paid on these occa-
sions, made no inconsiderable branch of the King's
revenue. Hist. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A
very curious account of a judicial combat between
Mefire Robert de Beaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre
Tournemine, in pretence of the duke of Bretagne,
A. D. 1385, is publifled by Morice, Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a l'Hift. de Bretagne, tom. II:
p. 498. All the formalities observed in such ex-
traordinary proceedings are there dcfcribed more
minutely, than in any ancient monument which
I have had an opportunity of confidering. . Tor-
ncrnill was accused by Beaumnanoir of having

murlcllcd

murdered his brother. The former was van-
quifhed, but was saved from being hanged upon
the spot, by the generous intercession of his anta-
gonifi. A good account of the origin of the laws
concerning judicial combat, is publilhed in the
history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8.
in Grav. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THIS mode of trial was so acceptable, that ec-
ldefaftics, notwithifanding the prohibitions of the
church, were constrained not only to connive at
the praftice, but to authorize it. A remarkable
instance of this is produced by Pafquier Recher-
ches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 350. The abbot Wittikin-
dus, whose words I have produced in this note,
confidered the determination of a point in law by
combat, as the best and most honourable mode
of decision. In the year 978, a judicial combat
was fought in the presence of the Emperor. The
archbishop Aldebert advised him to terminate a
contest which had arisen between two noblemen
of his court, by this mode of decision. The van-
quifhed combatant, though a person of high rank,
was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc.
Merfb. chez Bouquet Recueil des Hi-i. torn. x.
p. 12I. Qieftions concerning the property of
churches and monasteries, were decided by com-
bat. In the year 96 , a controversy concerning the
church of S. Medard, whether it belonged to the
abbey of Beaulieu or not, was terminated bv judi-
cial combat. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. ix.
P1 729. Ibid. p. 6 2, &c. The Emperor Heny I.

A a 3 declares,

declares, that this law, authorizing the pratice of
judicial combats, was enacted with consent and
applause of many faithful bishops. Ibid. p. 231.
So remarkably did the martial ideas of those ages
prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon
law, which in other inflances was in the highest
credit and authority with ecclesiastics. A judicial
combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles V.
A. D. 1522. The combatants fought in the Em-
peror's presence, and the battle was conduced
with all the rites prescribed by the ancient laws
of chivalry. The whole tranfation is described
at great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auitriac,
lib. viii. c. 17. p. 205.

THE last infRance which occurs in the hiftoryof

France, of a judicial combat authorized by the
magifrate, was the famous one between M. Jarnac
and M. de la Chaiftaignerie, A.D. I547. Atrial
by combat was appointed in England, A. D. 571,
under the infpetion of the judges in the court of
Common Pleas; and though it was not carried to
the fame extremity with the former, Queen Eliza-
beth having incerpofed her authority, and enjoined
the parties to compound the matter, yet, in order to
preserve their honour, the lifts were marked out,
and all the forms previous to the combat were ob-
served with much ceremony. Speli. Gloss. voc.
Campus, p. 1o3. In the year i 63r, ajudicial com-
bat was appointed between Donald Lord Rea, and
David Ramsay, Efq. by the authority of the Lord
high Constable, and Earl Marflial of Englandl bt,

that

that quarrel likewise terminated without blood-
thed, being accommodated by Charles I. Another
instance occurs seven years later. Rufhworth in
Observations on the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. SECT. I. p. 74. [Z].

THE text contains the great outlines which mark

the course of private and public jurifdiEtion in the
several nations of Europe. I flhall here follow
more minutely the various steps of this progress,
as the matter is curious and important enough to
merit this attention. The payment of a fine by
way of fatisfaaion to the person or family injured,
was the first device of a rude people, in order to
check the career of private resentment, and to ex-
tinguifh thofefaide, or deadly feuds, which were
prosecuted among them with the utmost violence.
This custom may be traced back to the ancient
Germans, Tacit. de Morib. Germ. c. 2 . and pre-
vailed among other uncivilized nations. Many
examples of this are collected by the ingenious and
learned author of Historical Law-Tracts, vol. i.
p. 4I. These fines were ascertained and levied in
three different manners. At irft they were fettled
by voluntary agreement between the parties at
variance. When their rage began to subside, and
they felt the bad effects of their continuing in cn-
mity, they came to terms of concord, and the fa-
tisfaaion made was called a comnpofitiol, implying
thlt it was fixed by mutual consent, De '1Efplrit
des Loix, lib. xxx. c. 9. It is apparent from ome

a 4 of

of the more ancient codes of laws, that at the time
when these were compiled, matters still remained
in that simple slate. In certain cafes, the person
who had committed an offence, was left exposed
to the resentment of those whom he had injured,
until he should recover their favour, quoquo modo
potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. ii. § I. The next
mode of levying these fines was by the fentenceof
arbiters. An arbiter is called in the Regiam Ma-
jeftatem amicabilis compositor, lib. xi. c. 4. § o.
He could etimate the degree of offence with more
impartiality than the parties interested, and deter-
mine with greater equity what fatisfation ought
to be demanded. It is difficult to bring an au-
thentic proof of a custom previous to the records
preserved in any nation of Europe. But one of
the Formule Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth
century, seems to allude to a tranfadion carried
on, not by the authority of a judge, but by the
mediation of arbiters chosen by mutual conent.
Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 566.
But as an arbiter wanted authority to enforce his
decisions, judges were appointed with compulsive
power to oblige both parties to acquiesce in their
decisions. Previous to this last fep, the expedient
of paying compositions was an imperfect remedy
against the pernicious effects of private resentment.
As oon as this important change was introduced,
the magiltrate, putting himself in place of tile
pcrlbn injured, ascertained the composition with
which lie ought to reft satisfied. Every poble

iljury

nury that could occur in the intercourse of civil
ciety was confidered and estimated, and the com-
fitions due to the person aggrieved were fixed
ith such minute attention, as discovers, in moif
ases, amazing discernment and delicacy; in some
ntances, unaccountable caprice. Besides the com-
fition payable to the private party, a certain fum
ailed afredumn, was paid to the King or State, as
'acitus exprels it, or to the fifcus, in the lan-
uage of the barbarous laws. Some authors,
lending the refined ideas of modern policy with
heir reasonings concerning ancient tranfadions,
ave imagined that the fredun was a compensation
ue to the community, on account of the violation
f the public peace. But it is manifeffly nothing
nore than the price paid to the magistrate for the
roteftion which he afforded against the violence
frefentment. The enacting of this was a confider-
ble ftep towards improvement in criminal jurif-
rudence. In some of the more ancient codes of
aws, the freda are altogether omitted, or so fel-
om mentioned, that it is evident they were but
ittle known. In the later codes, thefredum is as
recifely specified as the composition. In common
ales it was equal to the third part of the compo-
fition. Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some extraor-
dinary cales, where it was more difficult to protect
the perlOn who had committed violence, thefre-
di was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. 515.
Thlefcfreda made a considerable branch in the re-
Venes of the barons; and in whatever district

rritoial jurildiction was granted, the royal
judges were prohibited fiom levying any freda.

In

In explaining the nature of the fredum, I have fol
lowed, in a great measure, the opinion of M d
Montesquieu, though I know that several learner
antiquaries have taken the word in a differen
sense. De 'Esprit des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 20, &c
The great objet of judges was to compel the oni
party to give, and the other to accept, the fa
tisfation prescribed. They multiplied regu
lations to this purpose, and enforced them bI
grievous penalties. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit.g
§ 34. Ib. tit. 37. § I, 2. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371
§ 22. The person who received a compofitior
was obliged to cease from all farther hottility
and to confirm his reconciliation with the adverli
party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit.9
§ 8. As an additional and more permanentevi
dence of reconciliation, he was required to gran
a bond of security to the person from whom h
received a composition, absolving him from al
farther prosecution. Marculfus, and the othe
collectors of ancient writs, have preserved fevera
different forms of such bonds. Marc. lib. xi. § IS
Append. § 23. Form. Sirmondicoe, § 39 Th
Letters of Slanes, known in the law of Scotlan
are perfectly similar to these bonds of security. B
the letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of
person who had been murdered, bound themfelve
in consideration of an 4/Jythment or compofiti
paid to them, to forgive, pass over, and for evi
forget, and in oblivion inter, all rancour, malic
revenge, prejudice, grudge, and relentment, t;
they have or may conceive against the aggreflbrc
his posterity, for the crime which he had con"1

i / ? ^~~~~~

ed, and discharge him of all ation, civil or cri-
minal, against him or his estate, for now and ever."
yvrem of Stiles by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862.
n the ancient form of letters of Slanes, the pri-
vate party not only forgives and forgets, but par-
ons and grants remiiron of the crime. This
praftice, Dallas, reasoning according to the prin-
ciples of his own age, confiders as an encroach-
ment on the rights of sovereignty, as none, fays
he, could pardon a criminal but the king. Ibid.
But, in early and rude times, the prosecution, the
punifimnent, and the pardon of criminals, were
ail deeds of the private person who was injured.
Madox has published two writs, one in the reign
of Edward I. the other in the reign of Edward III.
by which private persons grant a release or par-
don of all trespasses, felonies, robberies, and
murders committed. Formul. Anglican. No. 702.
oS5. In the last of these instruments, some re-
gard feemrs to be paid to the rights of the fove-
reign, for the pardon is granted en quant que en
IOulS Js. Even after the authority of the magi-
ilratc was interposed in puniflhing crimes, the
punihment of criminals is long confidered chiefly
as a gratification to the refentmient of the persons
who have been injured. In Persia a murderer is
still delivered to the relations of the person whom
he has fain, who put him to death with their own
hands. If they refuse to accept of a furn of mo-
ney as a compensation, the sovereign, absolute as
he is, cannot pardon the murderer. Voyages de
ChardI;cin, iii . 47. edit. 1735, 4to. Voyages
tic Tavcrnier, liv. v. c, . io, Among the Ara-

bians,

bians, though one of the first polished people in
the East, the fame custom still subsists. Defcrip.
tion de l'Arabie par M. Niebuhr, p. 28. By a
law in the kingdom of Aragon, as late as the year

564, the punishment of one condemned to death
cannot be mitigated but by content of the parties
who have been injured. Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease fromen.

mity which I have mentioned, any person renewed
hostilities, and was guilty of any violence, either
towards the person from whom he had received a
composition, or towards his relations and heirs,
this was deemed a most heinous crime, and pu.
nifhed with extraordinary rigour. It was an at of
direct rebellion againfl the authority of the magi-
firate, and was repressed by the interposition ofall
his power. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8. 34
Capit. vol. i. p. 371. § 22. Thus the avengingof
injuries was taken out of private hands, a legal conm-
position was eilablifhed, and peace and amity were
restored, under the infpetion, and by the authority
of a judge. It is evident that at the time when
the barbarians fettled in the provinces of the Ro-
man Empire, they had fixed judges eablifled
among them with compulsive authority. Pcrflns
vcfted with this character are mentioned by the
carlieft hiflorians. Du Cange, voc. yudices. The
right of territorial jurifdiacion was not altogether
an ullrpation of the feudal barons, or an invasion
of the prerogative of the sovereign. '1hre is
good realon to believe, that the powerfil lcates,
who fcizcd dif'trciit diltriEis of the countries whicl

tlcy

ey conquered, and kept possession of them as
lodial property, assumed from the beginning the
ght of jurifdi&ion, and exercised it within their
wn territories. This jurifdiaion was supreme,
nd extended to all causes. The clearest proofs of
is are produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit pub-
que de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206, &c.
'he privilege of judging his own vassals, appears
o have been originally a right inherent in every
aron who held a fief. As far back as the archives
fnations can conducat us with any certainty, we
ndthe jurifdition and fief united. One of the
arlieft charters to a layman which I have met with,
s that of Ludovicus Pius, A. D. 814. And it
ntains the right of territorial jurifdition, in the
noft express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii.
I 1405. There are many charters to churches
nd monasteries of a more early date, containing
rants of a similar jurifdiaion, and prohibiting any
oyal judge to enter the territories of those churches
r onatteries, or to perform any aa of judicial
uthority there. Bouquet Recueil des I-ift. tom.
iv.p. 628. 631. 633. tom. v. p. 703. 710. 752.
702. Muratori has published many very ancient
charters containing the fame immunities. Antiq.
tal. Dissert. lxx. In mofl ofthee deeds, the royal
udge is prohibited from exacting the freda due to
tie puffefIor of territorial jurisdiction, which fliews
that they constituted a valuable part of the revenue
of each superior lord at that junCture. The cx-
pence of obtaining a sentence in a court of juflice
(uring the middle ages was so considerable, that
this circumlftance alone was fufficienc to render

men

men unwilling to decide any contest in judicial
form. It appears from a charter in the thirteenth
century, that the baron who had the right ofjuftice,
received the fifth part of the value of every sub.
jea, the property of which was tried and deter.
mined in his court. If, after the commencement
of a law-suit, the parties terminated the contelt
in an amicable manner, or by arbitration, they
were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth partof
the subject contested, to the court before which
the suit had been brought. Hilt. de Dauphine,
Geneve, 1722, torn. i. p. 22. Similar to this is
a regulation in the charter of liberty granted to
the town of Friburg A. D. 1120. If two of the
citizens flall quarrel, and if one of them shall
complain to the superior lord or to his judge,
and after commencing the suit, hall be privately
reconciled to his adversary, the judge, if hedoes
not approve of this reconciliation, may compel
him to go on with his law-suit; and all who were
present at the reconciliation flall forfeit the favour
of the superior lord. 1-liftoria Zaringo Badenfis
AuCtor. Jo. Dan Schoepflinus. Carolfr. 1765.40.
vol. v. p. 55.

WHATr was the extent of that jurifdi&ion which

thlole who held fiefs polfffed originally, we can-
not now determine with certainty. It is evident
tlat, during the diSorders which prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, the great vassals took ad'
vantage of the feeblenes of their monarchs, and
enlarged their jurifdlictions to the utmost. As
early as the tenth century, the more powerful
barons had ulirped the right of decidlig all

7 caufCes

aufes, whether civil or criminal. They had
cquired the High Justice as well as the Low.
ftabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their
ntences were final, and there lay no appeal from
hem to any superior court. Several firiking in-
ances of this are collected by Bruffel. Traite
es Fiefs, liv. iii. c. I I, 12, 13. Not satisfied
with this, the more potent barons got their terri-
tories erected into Regalities, with almost every
royal prerogative and jurifdidion. Instances of
ithefe were frequent in France. Bruff. ib. In Scot-
land, where the power of the feudal nobles became
exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical
Law Trats, vol. i. tract vi. Even in England,
though the authority of the Norman kings cir-
cumfcribed the jurisdiction of the barons within
more narrow limits than in any other feudal king-
dom, several counties palatine were erected, into
(which the king's judges could not enter, and no
iwrit could come in the King's name, until it re-
jceived the eal of the county palatine. Spelman.
!Gloss. voc. Comites Palatini; Blackflone's Con-
'mentaries on the laws of England, vol. iii. p. 78.
These lords of Regalities had a right to claim or
irefcue their vassals from the King's judges, it
'tIey aumed any jurifldiEion over them. Brufel,
'I ifupra. In the law of Scotland this privilege
was termed the right of repledgilng; and the fie-
Icuncy of it not only interrupted the courl of
j'lslice, but gave rife to great dillrders in tile
'exercifc of it. Hilt. Law Trafts, ib. The
jprifdiion of the counties palatiiin, 1icms to

have

have been productive of like inconvenienciesin
England.

THE remedies provided by princes againftt

bad effets of these usurpations of the nobles, or
inconsiderate grants of the crown, were various,
and gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and
his immediate descendants, the regal prerogative
still retained great vigour, and the Duces, Comies,
and Miffi Dominici, the former of whom were or.
dinary and fixed judges, the latter extraordinary
and itinerant judges, in the different provinces
of their extensive dominions, exercised a jurif.
dition co-ordinate with the barons in some cafes,
and superior to them in others. Du Cange, voc,
Dux, Comites, & Misi. Murat. Antiq. Dissert. viii.
& ix. But under the feeble race of monarchs
who succeeded them, the authority of the royal
judges declined, and the barons acquired that
unlimited jurisdiction which has been delcribed,
Louis VI. of France attempted to revive the
funtion of the Mifi Dominici under the title
of Juges des Exempts, but the baions were be-
come too powerful to bear such an encroachment
on their jurifdietion, and he was obliged to
desist from employing them. Henaut AbregC
Chron. tomi.ii. p. 730. His successor (as has
been observed) had recourse to expedients less
alarming. The appeal de defaule de droit, or
on account of the refusal of juflice, was the
firfl which was attended with any conidctrable
effea. According to the maxims of fetulal law,
if a baron had not as many vassals as enabled

2 hWim

him to try by their peers, the parties who offered
to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused
to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the superior lord of
wshol the baron held and tried there. De 'Es-
piitdes Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange, voc.
Defe'7us tJiitie. The number of Peers or aeffors
in the courts of Barons was frequently very con-
fiderable. It appears from a criminal trial in the
court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 1299,
that upwards of two hundred persons were pre-
sent, and assisted in the trial, and voted in passing
judgment. Hilt. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic
& Naifette, torn. iv. Preuves, p. i 4. But as the
right of jurifdition had been usurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to
hold courts. This gave frequent occasion to such
appeals, and rendered the practice familiar. By
degrees such appeals began to be made from
the courts of the more powerful barons, and it
is evident, from a decision recorded by Brufiel,
that the royal judges were willing to give counte-
nance to any pretext for them. Trait6 des Fiefs,
toml. i. p. 35. 2GI. This species of appeal had
lcs effeE in abridging the jurisdiction of the
nobles, than the appeal on account of the injutice
of the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges pofeTefd extensive au-
thority, such appeals fcem to have been frequetr.
Capitul.v . .

i.p. 175. 18o.; and they were made

in a manner tlltable to the rud:nels of a simple
ae. 1-he lperons aggrieved relbted to the palace
f their fovrceign, and with outcries and loud
Vo.. I. B b noise

have been produaive of like inconveniencies in
England.

THE remedies provided by princes againfthe

bad effects of these usurpations of the nobles, or
inconsiderate grants of the crown, were various
and gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and
his immediate descendants, the regal prerogative
still retained great vigour, and the Duces, Consit,
and Mi/i Dominici, the former of whom were or.
dinary and fixed judges, the latter extraordinary
and itinerant judges, in the different provinces
of their extensive dominions, exercised a jurif.
dition co-ordinate with the barons in ome cafes,
and superior to them in others. Du Cange, voc,
Dux, Comites, & Mifi. Murat. Antiq. Dissert. viii.
& ix. But under the feeble race of monarchs
who succeeded them, the authority of the royal
judges declined, and the barons acquired that
unlimited jurifdiRion which has been described,
Louis VI. of France attempted to revive the
function of the Mifi Dominici under the title
of uges des Exempts, but the barons were be-
come too powerful to bear such an encroachment
on their jurifdi&ion, and he was obliged to
desist from employing them. Henaut Abrege
Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His successor (as has
been observed) had recourse to expedients less
alarming. The appeal de defaute de droit, or
on account of the refusal of justice, was the
firfl which was attended with any conridelrable
effec. According to the maxims of fal law,
if a baron had not as many vassals as cnabled

- 2 him

him to try by their peers, the parties who offered
to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused
to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the superior lord of
whom the baron held and tried there. De I'Ef-
pit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange, voc.
Defi'tzs juftiti. The number of Peers or assessors
in the courts of Barons was frequently very con-
fiderable. It appears from a criminal trial in the
court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 1299,
that upwards of two hundred persons were pre-
fert, and assisted in the trial, and voted in passing
judgment. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic
& Naifette, tor. iv. Preuves, p. 1 I4. But as the
right of jurifdicEion had been usurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to
hold courts. This gave frequent occasion to such
appeals, and rendered the pradice familiar. By
degrees such appeals began to be made from
the courts of the more powerful barons, and it
is evident, from a decision recorded by BrufTil,
that the royal judges were willing to give counte-
nance to any pretext for them. Traitc des Fiefs,
torm. i. p. 235. 261. This species of appeal had
iefs effet in abridging the jurifdition of the
"nbles, than the appeal on account of the injustice
of the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges poflnefed extensive au-
thority, such appeals fem to have been frequetr.
Caipitul.vol. p. 175. i8o.; and they were made
ina manner liitable to the rudcnef of a simple
aC. lT he perons aggrieved rclorted to the palace
of their sovereign, and with outcries and loud

o01. I. B b noise

noise called to him for redress. Capitul. lib, iii
c. 59. Chronic. Lawterbergienfe ap. Mencken
Script. German. vol. ii. p. 284. b. In the king
dom of Aragon, the appeals to the ufiza o
supreme judge were taken in such a form as sup
posed the appellant to be in immediate danger o
death, or of some violent outrage; he rushed int(
the presence of the judge, crying with a loud voice
Avi, Avi, Fuerza, Fuerza, thus imploring (as i
were) the initant incerpofition of that fupremi
judge in order to save him. Hier. Blanca Corn
ment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic,
Pitorii, vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the
trial by combat facilitated the revival of appeal
of this kind. The effects of the fubordinatior
which appeals etablifhed, in introducing attention,
equity, and consistency of decision into courts o
judicature, were soon conspicuous; and almoftall
causes of importance were. carried to be finally
determined in the King's courts. Bruflel, tom. i
252. Various circumstances. which contributed
towards the introduction and frequency of such
appeals are enumerated De l'Efprit des Loix, liv.
xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of uch
effeEt as the attention which monarchs gave to the
constitution and dignity of their courts ofjufice
It was the ancient cultom for the feudal monarchs
to preside themnllves in their courts, and to ad
minifler justice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Dilfrrt. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst lie w'.
dreling;, iifed to call pal ti-s into his ''r '

ando i>t -~.'i~j'

, ),-ier, ;11( (t('I!.i],t:"!',':(! ;.i];'

'i..!r'! ,"
|.I.i' -,.~i.i;ji,, ' ;''c },l:.l~.'? rl'v.lt' (.I,). ''r lir ' it- "

artus, Vita Caroli Magni, cited by Madox, Hilt. of
xchequer, vol. i. p. g9. This trial and decision
fcaufes by the sovereigns themselves could not fail
f rendering their courts refpetable. St. Louis,
ho encouraged to the utmost the practice of
ppeals, revived this ancient custom, and admi-
iftered juilice in person with all the ancient fim-
licity. " I have often seen the faint," fays
oinville, "fit under the shade of an oak in the
ood of Vincennes, when all who had any com-
laint freely approached him. At other times he
ave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and
ating himself upon it, heard the causes that
ere brought before him." Hist. de St. Louis,
.13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior rank, who
offeffed the right of justice, sometimes dispensed
in person, and presided in their tribunals. Two
nfances of this occur with refpeft to the Dau-
hines of Vienne. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
18. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and Princes
ould not decide every cause in person, nor bring
hem all to be determined in the fame court;
hey appointed Baillis, with a right of jurifdiftion,
n different diftri&s of their kingdom. These
oTeffed powers somewhat similar to those of the
ncient Comiics. It was towards the end of the
welfth century and beginning of the thirteenth,
ht this oflice was first instituted in France.
rufle, liv. ii. c. 35. When the King had a court
.abliflhed in different quarters of his dominions,
his invited his fubjecs to have recourse to it.
t Was the private interell of the Baillis, as well as
n olbjei of public policy, to extend their jurif-

B b 2 clidion.

diction. They took advantage of every defecin
the rights of the barons, and of every error in
their proceedings, to remove causes out of their
courts, and to bring them under their own cog.
nizance. There was a distinction in the feudal
law, and an extremely ancient one, between the
high juflice and the low. Capitul. 3. A.D. 812
§ 4. A. D. 85. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, livi,
c. 40. Many barons poffefTed the latter jurifdic.
tion who had no title to the former. The for.
mer included the right of trying crimes of every
kind, even the highest; the latter was confinedto
petty trefpafles. This furnished endless pretexts,
for obstructing, ref-raining, and reviewing the
proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§ 25. 458. § 29.- A regulation of greater im.
portance succeeded the institution of Baillis. The
King's supreme court or parliament was rendered
fixed as to the place, and constant as to the time
of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of jutiicewas
originally ambulatory, followed the peribn of the
nmonarch, and was held only during some of the
great feflivals. Philip Augustus, A. D. 305,
rendered it stationary at Paris, and continuedits
terms during the greater part of the year. l'as.
quier Recherches, liv. ii. c. 2 & 3, &C. rdlon'
tom. i. p. 366. § 6.2. He and his fucccflors vcFtel
cxtenfive powers in that court; they gralnted ti"
members of it several privileges and c(iltini"t"
which it would be tedious to enumerate.
quier, ib. Velly lif-. ie France, tonl. vii. p. 3
Persons eminent for integrity and skill in lw wvLl

.l~,,0intc

ppointed judges there. Ib. By degrees the final
ecifion of all caules of importance was brought
to the parliament of Paris, and the other par-
amenrs, which administered justice in the King's
iame, in different provinces of the kingdom.
Fhis jurifdition, however, the parliament of Paris
icquird very slowly, and the great vafials of the
[rown made violent efforts in order to obftru&
[he attempts of that parliament to extend its au-
thority. Towards the close of the thirteenth cen-
ury, Philip the Fair was obliged to prohibit his
ailiament from taking cognizance of certain ap-
eals brought into it from the courts of the Count
)fBretagne, and to recognize and respect his right
Ds upreme and final jurisdiction. Memoires pour
Fervir de Preuves l'Hiftoire de Bretagne par
Morice, tom.. i .

p. 1037. 1074. Charles VI. at

the end of the following century was obliged to
confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in frill
more ample form. Ibid. tom. ii. p 58o, 58r.
So violent was the opposition of the barons to this
right of appeal, which they confidered as fatal to
their privileges and power, that the authors of the
Encyclopedie have mentioned several instances in
which barons put to death, or mutilated, such per-
sons as ventured to appeal from the sentences pro-
nounced in their courts, to the parliament of
Pais, tomn. xii. art. Parlement, p. 25.

Till progress of juifdiEion in the other feudal

kingoms was in a great meaflire similar to that
wllic we Ihavc traced in France. In England,
the ttrritorial jurisdiction of the barons was bot!

B b 3 ancient

ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons. No.
and 9. After the Norman conquest it became more
ftritlly feudal; and it is evident from faEts recorded
in the English history, as well as from the infitu.
tion of Counties Palatine, which I have already
mentioned, that the usurpations of the nobles in
Engiand were not less bold or extensive than those
of their contemporaries on the continent. Te
iame expedients, were employed to circumscribe
or abolish those dangerous jurifditions. William
the Conqueror established a constant court in the
hall of his palace; from which the four courts now
entrusted with the administration ofjuftice in Eng.
land took their rife. Henry II. divided his king.
dom into fix circuits, and sent itinerant judgesto
hold their courts in them at stated seasons. Black.
frone's Commentaries on the Laws of England,
vol. iii. 57. Jultices of the peace were appointed
in every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose
jurifdition the people gradually had recourse in
many civil causes. The privileges of the Coun-
ties Palatine were gradually limited; with refpe&
to ome points they were abolished; and the ad.
ministration of justice was brought into the King's
courts, or bfore judges of his appointment. he
several ifeps taken for this purpose are enumera-
ted in Dalrymple's Hiflory of Feudal Property,
chap. vii.

IN Scotland the ufrurpations of the nobility were

more exorbitant than in any other feudal king-
dom. The progress of their encroachments, and
the methods taken by the crown to limit or 'b
lilh their territorial and independent jurifdiio0l

2 both

both which I had occasion to confider and explain
in a former work, differed very little from those
Ds which I have now given the detail. History
Ds Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in the
labyrinth of German jurisprudence, if I were to
attempt to delineate the progress of jurifdition
in the Empire, with a minute accuracy. It is sus-
ficient to observe, that the authority which the
Aulic council and Imperial chamber now possess,
took its rife from the fame desire of redressing the
abuses of territorial jurifdition, and was acquired
in the fame manner that the royal courts attained
influence in other countries of Europe. All the
important facts with refpeó to both these parti-
culars, may be found in Phil. Datt, de pace pub-
lica Imperii, lib. iv. The capital articles are
pointed out in Pfeffcl Abrege de 'Hiftoire &
Droit publique d'Allemagne, p. 556. 581.; and
in Traite du Droit publique de l'Empire par M.
ie Coq. de V.illeray. The two last treatises are of
great authority, having been composed under the
eye of M. Schoepfin of Strafburg, one of the
ablest public lawyers in Germany.

NOTE XXIV. SECT. I. p. 78. [AA].
DIr is not easy to fix with precision the period at
which ecclesiastics first began to claim exemp-
tin from the civil jurisdiction. It is certain, that
(triLng the early and purest ages of the church,
they pretended to no such immunity. The au-

B b 4 thority

thority of the civil magistrate extended to all pr.
ions, and to all causes. This fat has not only
been clearly established by Protestant authors, but
is admitted by many Roman Catholics of emi.
nence, and particularly by the writers in defence
of the liberties of the Gallican church. There
are several original papers published by Muratori,
which hew that, in the ninth and tenth centuries,
causes of the greatest importance relating to ec.
clefiaftics were still determined by civil judges,
Antiq. Ital. vol. v. dissert. lxx. Proofs of this
are produced likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes
Loix des Francois, &c. vol. i. p. 209. Ecclefa.
aflics did not hake off all at once their fubjedtion
to civil courts. This privilege, like their other
uurpations, was acquired owly, and ftep by
flep. This exemption seems at firfi to have been
merely an a of coniplaifance, flowing from ve-
neration so r their character. Thus from a charter
of Charlelmagne in favour of the church of Mans,
A. I). 796, to which M. l'Abbe de Soy refers in
his Notice de iplomcs, torn. i. p. 2o0, that
monarch directs his judges, if any differcnce (hould
ariLe bctween the adminiifrators of the revenues
of that church and any person whatever, not to
fumlmon the adm(inistrators to appear in mallo
pub'!ico ; buc firlt of all ro nmect with them, and
t;) cniicavour to accommodate the difference in a
;amic:ible manner. hi ulenc e was in pro-
cil; o time improved into a legal exemptiol;
vllii i wa s tn toII ed on the il-mne fipcrlitious ll epecl

di clic .ry ior tlie clerical charater antd fnldtio

, re-

A remarkable instance of this occurs in a charter
of Frederic Barbarofa, A. D. 1172, to the mona-
fiery of Akenburg. He grants them judicium non
rantum fanguinolentis plagae, fed vitaz & mortis
he prohibits any of the royal judges from disturb-
ing their jurisdiction; and the reason which he gives
for this ample concefilon is, nam quorum, ex Dei
gratia, ratione divini minifierii onus leve eft, &
ugurm suave; nos penitus nolumus illos opprefli-
onis contumelia, vel manu Laica, fatigari. Menc-
ken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. Io67.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is con-
tained in the text, that I should describe the manner
in which the code of the canon law was compiled,
or hew that the do&trines in it most favourable
to the power of the clergy, are founded on igno-
rance, or supported by fraud and forgery. The
reader will find a full account of there in Gerard.
Van Maftricht. Hiftoria Juris Ecclefiaftici, & in
Science de Government par M. Rea], tom. vii.
c. I & 3. § 2, 3, &c. The history of the pro-
grefs and extent of ecclefaftical jurifdietion, with
an account of the arts which the clergy employed
in order to draw causes of every kind into the
fp;ritual courts, is no less curious, and would
throw great light upon many of the customs and
institutions of the dark ages; but it is likewise
foreign from the present fubje&. Du Cange in
his Glofrary, voc. Curia ChriJianitatis, has col-
]rced niofl- of the causes with rlpeiEt to which
tle clergy arrogated an exclusive jurifdidion, and

refers

refers to the authors, or original papers, which
confirm his observations. Giannone in his Civil
-iftory of Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged there
under proper heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions
of the church with his usual boldness and discern.
ment. M. Fleury observes, that the clergy multi.
plied the pretexts for extending the authority of
the ipitual courts with so much boldness, thatit
was loon in theil power to withdraw almost every
person and every cause fiomr the jurifdiaion of the
civil magillrate. Hiit. Eccles. tom. xix. Disc.
Prelin. 16. But how ill-founded soever thejurif.
diction of the clergy may have been, or whatever
might be the abuses to which their manner of ex.
ercifing it gave rife, the principles and formsof
their jurisprudence were far more perseet than
that which was known in the civil courts. It
teems to be certain that ecclesiastics never lub-
mitted, during any period in the middle ages, to
the lavs contained in the codes of the barbarous
nations, but were governed entirely by the Ro-
man law. They regulated all their tranfactins
by fich of its maxims as were preserved by tradi-
tion, or were contained in the Theodosian code,
and otiier books extant among them. This we
learn fomi a cuftomi which prevailed univerfilly
in thofie ages. Every perfun was permitted c
chule among the various codes of laws then in
force, that to which he was willing to conform
In any tranfalion of importance, it was uluali f
the persons contrating to mention the law
which they submitted that it might be knowr

ho

how any controversy that hould arise between
them was to be decided. Innumerable proofs of
this occur in the charters of the middle ages. But
the clergy confidered it as such a valuable privi-
lege of their order to be governed by the Roman
law, that when any person entered into holy or-
ders, it was usual for him to renounce the code of
laws to which he had been formerly subject, and to
declare that he now submitted to the Roman law.
Conftat me Johannem clericur, filium quondam
Verand;, qui profeffus fum, ex natione mea, lege
vivere Langobardorum, fed tamen, pro honore
ecclefiaftico, lege nunc videor vivere Romana.
Charta, A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui pro-
flirs lum, more facerdotii mei, lege vivere Ro-
mana. Charta, A. D. 1075. Muratori Antichita
Eftcnfi. vol. i. p. 78. See likewise Houard An-
ciennes Loix des Francois, &c. vol. i. p. 203.

THE code of the canon law began to be com-
piled early in the ninth century. Mem de l'Acad.
des Infcript. tor. xviii. p. 346, &c. It was above
two centuries after that before any collection was
nade of those cuftorns, which were the rule of
judgments in the courts of the barons. Spiritual
Judges decided, of course, according to written and
known laws: Lay judges, left without any fixed
gtidl, wre diree(ed by loose traditionary customs.
Bult bedlcs this general advantage of the canon
lw, its foIns and priciples were more consonant
to reabon, and more favourable to the equitable
decirion of every point in controversy, than those
lich prevailed in lay coults. It appears fi-om

Notes

Notes XXI. and XXIII. concerning private wars,
and the trial by combat, that the whole spirit of ec.
clefiaftical jurisprudence was adverse to thole fan.
guinary customs which were destruCtive of juitice;
and the whole force of ecclesiastical authority was
exerted to abolish them, and to substitute trials by
law and evidence in their room. Almost all the
forms in lay courts, which contribute to eftablilh,
and continue to preserve order in judicial proceed-
ings, are borrowed from the canon law. Fleury,
Inftit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St.
Louis, in his Eftabliflemens, confirms many of
his new regulations concerning property, and the
administration of justice by the authority of the
canon law, from which he borrowed them. Thus,
for instance, the fimft hint of attaching moveables
for the recovery of a debt, was taken from the
canon law. Eftab. liv. ii. c. 21 and 40. And
likewise the cefio bonorum, by a person who was
insolvent. Ibid. In the fame manner, he established
new regulations with refpet to the effecs of
persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89. These and
many other salutary regulations the Canonifls had
borrowed from the Roman law. Many other ex-
amples might be produced of more perfea juri-
prudence in the canon law than was known in lay
courts. For that reason it was deemed an high pri.
vilege to be subject to ecclesiastical jurifdicion.
Among the many immunities, by which men were
allured to engage in the dangerous expeditions for
the recovery of the Iholy Land, one of the molt
considerable was the declaring flclh as took the

'~~~~~~~~~~~rs

Cross to be subjet only to the spiritual courts, and
to the rules of decision obfcrved in them. See
'ore XIII. and Du Cange, voc. Crucis Privilegia.

NO TE XXV. SECT. I. p. 80. [BB.].
THE rapidity with which the knowledge and
study of the Roman law spread over Europe is
amazing. The copy of the Pandects was found
atAmalphi, A. D. I37. Irnerius opened a col-
lege of civil law at Bologna a few years after.
Giann. Hist. book xi. c. . It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century. V'ac-
carius gave lectures on the civil law at Oxford, as
early as the year 1147. A regular system of feu-
dal law, formed plainly in imitation of the Ro-
man code, was composed by two Milanese law-
yers about the year i x 0. Gratian published the
code of canon law, with large additions and emen-
dations, about the fame time. The earliest col-
leStion of those customs, which served as the rules
of decision in the courts of juflice, is the A.lses de
yelrufalem. They were compiled, as the preamble
informs us, in the year og99, and are called Jus
Confuetudinarium quo a-egebatur regnum orien-
tale. Willerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. 2. But peculiar
circumflances gave occasion to this early compilation.
The vicorious Crusaders fettled as a colony in a
foreign country, and adventurers from all the dif-
ferent nations of' Europe composed this new o-
cicty. I was neccflruy on that account to afcer-
t;'i t l: vs and customs which were to regulate

the

the tranfations of business, and the administration
of justice among them. But in no country of
Europe, was there, at that time, any collefion of
customs, nor had any attempt been made to render
law fixed. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his Tratatus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus An-
glie, composed about the year 8 . The Re-
giam Majeftatem in Scotland, acribed to David I.
seems to be an imitation, and a servile one, of
Glanville. Several Scottish Antiquaries, under
the influence of that pious credulity, which dif-
poses men to assent, without hesitation, to what-
ever they deem for the honour of their native coun-
try, contend zealously, that the Regiam Majefta-
tem is a produEtion prior to the treatise of Glan-
ville; and have brought themselves to believe,
that a nation, in a superior state' of improvement,
borrowed its laws and inffitutions from one con-
fiderably less advanced in its political progress.
The internal evidence (were it my province to ex-
amine it) by which this theory might be refuted,
is, in my opinion, decisive. The external circum-
stances which have reduced Scottish authors into
this mistake, have been explained with so much
precision and candour by Sir David Dalrymple,
in his examination of sone of the arguments for
the high antiquity of Regiam Majeflatem, Edin.
1769, 4to. that it is to be hoped the controversy
will not be again revived. Pierre de Fontaines,
who tells us, that he was the first who had at-
tempted such a work in France, composed his

ConLsil

Confeil, which contains an account of the cuffoms
of the country of Vermandois, in the reign of St.
Louis, which began A. D. 1226. Beautranoir,
the author of the Couflumes de BeauvoiJis, lived
about the fame time. The Effablifiemens of Sr.
Louis, containing a large colleEtion of the cuf-
toms which prevailed within the royal domains,
were publithed by the authority of that monarch.
As oon as men became acquainted with the ad-
vantages of having written customs and laws, tb
which they could have recourse on every occasion,
the practice of collecting them became common.
Charles VII. of France, by an ordonance A. 1D.
1453, appointed the customary laws in every pro-
vince of France to be colleEed and arranged.
Velley and Villaret, Hiftoire, tom. xvi. p. IIS.
His successor, Louis XI. renewed the injunriin.
But this salutary undertaking hath never been
fully executed, and the jurisprudence of the French
nation remains more obscure and uncertain than
it would have been if these prudent regulations of
their monarchs had taken effect. A mode of ju-
dicial determination was established in the middle
ages, which affords the clearest proof that judges,
While they had no other rule to direct their de-
crees but unwritten and traditionary customs,
"ere often at a loIs how to find out the fad-s and
principles, according to which they were bound
to Udcid. They were obliged, in dubious cafes,
to call a certain number of old men, and to lay
the calc before thezn, that they might inform them
wlilt va'S the practice or custom with regard to the

point.

point. This was called EnqueJfe par tourbe. Dr
Cange, voc. rTurba. The effecs of the revival o:
the Roman jurisprudence have been explained b1
M. de Montesquieu, liv. xxviii. c. 42. and by Mr
Hume, Hist. of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I have
adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend tc
review any subjea which such writers have con-
fidered, without receiving from them light and
information ? At the fame time I am convinced,
that the knowledge of the Roman law was not fc
entirely loft in Europe during the middle ages, a!
is commonly believed. My subjea does not re-
-quire me to examine this point. Many striking
sacs with regard to it are collected by Donato
Antonio d'Afti Dall' Ufo e autorita della regione
civile nelle provincie dell' Imperio Occidentale.
Nap. 175I. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately connected wit

the municipal jurisprudence in several countries
'Europe, is a faat so well known, that it needs n
illustration. Even in England, where the commo
law is supposed to form a system perfectly diftin
from the Roman code, and although such as a
ply in that country to the study of the comm
law boast of this diftindion with ome degree
affectation, it is evident that many of the ide
and maxims of the civil law are incorporated in
the English jurisprudence. This is well illuftr
ted by the ingenious and learned author of0
servations on the Statutes, chiefly the more
cient, 3d edit. p. 76, &c.

~~I NO

NOTE XXVI. SECT. I. p. 82. [CC].
THE whole history of the middle ages makes it
evident, that war was the sole pr6fefion of gen-
tiemen, and almost the only object attended to in
their education. Even after ome change in man-
ners began to take place, and the civil arts of life
had acquired some reputation, the ancient ideas with
respect to the accomplishments necessary for a per-
son of noble birch, continued long in force. In the
Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we have an ac-
count of the youthful exercises and occupations of
Francis I. and they were altogether martial and ath-
leic. That father of letters owed his relilh for
them, not to education, but to his own good sense
and good taste. The manners of the superior or-
derof ecclesiastics during the middle ages furnih
the frongeft proof that, in ome infiances, the di-
tinelion of profefions was not completely afcer-
tained in Europe. The functions and chara&er of
the clergy are obviously very different from those of
laymen; and among the inferior orders of church-
men, this constituted a diftinft chara&er separate
from that of other citizens. But the dignified
tcclefiafics, who were frequently of noble birth,
ere above such a diftintion; they retained the
idea of what belonged to them as gentlemen, and
ilpite of the decrees of Popes, or the canons of
touncils, they bore arms, led their vassals to the
sild, and fought at their head in battle. Among
thcn the priesthood was scarcely a separate pro-
frlun; the military accompliihiments which they
thouglt cflential to them as gentlemen, were cul-
tl"Itl the theological science, and pacific vir-
VOL. I. C c tues

tues suitable to their spiritual funcion, were neg.
leted and despised.

As soon as the science of law became a labo-

rious fludy, and the pratice of it a separate pro-
fcflion, such persons as rose to eminence in it ob-
tained honours which had formerly been appro.
priated to soldiers. Knighthood was the most il-
luf'rious mark of diftintion during several ages,
and conferred privileges to which rank or birth
alone were not entitled. To this high dignity per-
sons eminent for their knowledge of law were ad-
vanced, and. were thereby placed on a level with
those whom their military talents had rendered
conspicuous. Miles uJtitiee, Miles Literatus, be-
came common titles. Matthew Paris mentions
such knights as early as A. D. x125. If a judge
attained a certain rank in the courts ofjuftice, that
alone gave him a right to the honour of knight-
hood. Pafquier Recherches, liv. xi. c. 6. p. 130.
Dissertations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie, par Ho-
nore de Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c. A profession
that led to offices, which ennobled the persons
who held them, grew into credit, and the people
of Europe became accustomed to fee men rife to
eminence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 86. [DD].

THE chief intention of there notes, was to brint

at once under the view of my readers, such sac
and circlumatances as tend to illustrate or confirm
what is contained in that part of the hiflory
which they refer. When there lay scattered in man
different authors, and were taken from books no

gcnerall

generally known, or which many of my readers
might find it disagreeable to consult, I thought it
would be of advantage to collec: them together.
But when every thing necessary for- the proof or
illuf-ration of my narrative or reasoning may be
found in any one book which is generally known,
or deserves to be so, I shall satisfy myself with re-
ferring to it. This is the cafe with refped to Chi-
valry. Almost every fact which I have mentioned in
the text, together wi:h many other curious and in-
truative particulars concerning this singular inftitu-
tion, may be found in Memoires furl'ancienne Che-
valerie confideree comme une Eftabliffement politi-
que & militaire,. par M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. SECT. I. p. 91. [EE].
THE subject of my enquiries does not call me
to write a history of the progress of science. The
fads and observations which I have produced, are
sufficient to illustrate the effe&s of its progress
upon manners and the state of society. While
fcience'was altogether extinct in the western parts
ofEurope, it was cultivated in Constantinople and
other parts of the Grecian Empire. But the sub-
tile genius of the Greeks turned almost entirely
to theological disputation. The Latins borrowed
that spirit from them, and many of the controver-
tles which still occupy and divide theologians,
took their rife among the Greeks, firom whom the
Other Europeans derived a considerable part of
their knowledge. See the testimony of iEneas
Sylvius ap. Conringium de antiq. academicis,
P 43. Iliftoire literaire de France, tom. vii. p.

C 2 113,

I13, &c. tom. ix. p. S11, &c. Soon after the
Empire of the Caliphs was established in the East,
some illustrious princes arose among them, whc
encouraged science. But when the Arabians turn.
ed their attention to the literature cultivated bythe
ancient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and corre&t
taste of their works of genius appeared frigid and
unanimated to a people of a more warm imagina-
tion. Though they could not admire the poets
and historians of Greece, or of Rome, they were
sensible of the merit of their philosophers. The
operations of the intellect are more fixed and uni-
form than those of the fancy or taste. Truth makes
an impression nearly the fame in every place;
the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime,
vary in different climates. The Arabians, though
they neglected Homer, translated the most eminent
of the Greek philosophers into their own language;
and, guided by their precepts and discoveries,
applied themselves with great ardour to the tudy
of geometry, astronomy, medicine, dialectics, and
metaphysics. In the three former, they made
considerable and useful improvements, which have
contributed not a little to advance those sciences to
that high degree of perfecion which they have at-
tained. In the two latter, they chose Aristotle for
their guide, and refining on the subtle and diftin-
guifhing spirit which charaaerifes his philosophy,
they rendered it in a great degree frivolous or un-
intelligible. The schools etablifhed in the East
for teaching and cultivating there sciences were in
high reputation. They communicated their love
of science to their countrymen, who onquered

Africa

Africa and Spain; and the schools instituted there
were little inferior in fame to those in the East.
Many of the persons who distinguished themselves
by their proficiency in science during the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, were educated among the
Arabians. Bruckerus collects many instances of
this, Hiftor. Philof. v. iii. p. 68 , &c. Almost
all the men eminent for science during several
centuries, if they did not resort in person to the
schools in Africa and Spain, were instructed in the
philosophy of the Arabians. The first knowledge
of the Aristotelian philosophy in the middle ages
was acquired by translations of Aristotle's works
out of the Arabic. The Arabian commentators
were deemed the most skilful and authentic guides
in the study of his system. Conring. Antiq. Acad.
Diff. iii. p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Murat.
Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From them
the Schoolmen derived the genius and principles
of their philosophy, which contributed so much to
retard the progress of true science.

THE establishment of Colleges or Universities
is a remarkable era in literary history. The
schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined
themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar,
There were only one or two maiters employed in
that office. But in colleges, profefflrs were ap-
pointed to teach all the different parts of science.
The course or order of education was fixed. The
time that ought to be allotted to the study of each
science was ascertained. A regular form of trying
the proficiency of fiudents was prescribed; and
a"(le-icl titles and honours were conferred on

C c 3 filcl

113, &c. tom. ix. p. I51, &c. Soon after the
Empire of the Caliphs was established in the East,
some illustrious princes arose among them, who
encouraged science. But when the Arabians turn-
ed their attention to the literature cultivated bythe
ancient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and correct
taste of their works of genius appeared frigid and
unanimated to a people of a more warm imagina-
tion. Though they could not admire the poets
and historians of Greece, or of Rome, they were
sensible of the merit of their philosophers. The
operations of the intellect are more fixed and uni-
form than those of the fancy or taste. Truth makes
an impreflion nearly the fame in every place;
the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime,
vary in different climates. The Arabians, though
they neglected Homer, translated the most eminent
of the Greek philosophers into their own language;
and, guided by their precepts and discoveries,
applied themselves with great ardour to the study
of geometry, afronomy, medicine, dialectics, and
metaphysics. In the three former, they made
considerable and useful improvements, which have
contributed not a little to advance those sciences to
that high degree of perfecion which they have at-
tained. In the two latter, they chose Aristotle for
their guide, and refining on the subtle and diftin-
guifhing spirit which characterises his philosophy,
they rendered it in a great degree frivolous or un-
intelligible. The schools established in the East
for teaching and cultivating these sciences were in
high reputation. They communicated their love
of science to their countrymen, who conquered

Africa

Africa and Spain; and the schools instituted there
were little inferior in fame to those in the East.
Many of the persons who diftinguilhed themselves
by their proficiency in science during the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, were educated among the
Arabians. Bruckerus collects many instances of
this, Hiftor. Philof. v. iii. p. 68r, &c. Almost
all the men eminent for science during several
centuries, if they did not retort in person -to the
schools in Africa and Spain, were inftruEted in the
philosophy of the Arabians. The firfl knowledge
of the Aristotelian philosophy in the middle ages
was acquired by translations of Aristotle's works
out of the Arabic. The Arabian commentators
were deemed the most kilful and authentic guides
in the study of his system. Conring. Antiq. Acad.
Dif. iii. p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 24I, &c. Murat.
Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From them
the Schoolmen derived the genius and principles
of their philosophy, which contributed so much to
retard the progress of true science.

THE establishment of Colleges or Universities
is a remarkable era in literary history. The
schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined
themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar,
There were only one or two masters employed in
that office. But in colleges, professors were ap-
pointed to teach all the different parts of science.
The course or order of education was fixed. The
timle that ought to be allotted to the study of each
science was ascertained, A regular form of trying
the proficiency of students was prescribed; and
aedIleical titles and honours were conferred on

C c 3 fich

such as acquitted themselves with approbation. A
good account of the origin and nature of these is
given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiquitates Roftochi-
enses, five, -Hiftoria Urbis & Academie Roftoch.
ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per E. J. de
Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. 1743. The
first obscure mention of there academical degrees
in the university of Paris (from which the other
universities in Europe have borrowed most of their
customs and institutions) occurs A. D. 215. Cre-
vier. Hist. de 1'Univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c.
They were completely eftablilhed A. D. 1231. Ib.
248. It is unnecessary to enumerate the several
privileges to which bachelors, masters, and dotors
were entitled. One circumstance is sufficient to
demonstrate the high degree of eflimation in which
they were held. Doctors in the different facul-
ties contended with knights for precedence, and
the dispute was terminated in many instances
by advancing the former to the dignity of knight-
hood, the high prerogatives of which I have men-
tioned. It was even asserted, that a doctor had
a right to that title without creation. Bartolus
taught--doorem a&ualiter regentem in jure
civili per decennium effici militem ipso fado.
Honore de St. Marie Dissert. p. 165. This
was called Chevalerie de Leures, and the persons
advanced to that dignity, Milites Clerici. These
new establishments for education, together with the
extraordinary honours conferred on learned men,
greatly increased the number of scholars. In the
year 262, there were ten thousand students in
the university of Bologna; and it appears from

the

the history of that university, that law was the
only science taught in it at that time. In the year
134o, there were thirty thousand in the university
of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's Chro-
nol. Dedudion of Commerce, vol. i. p. 72. In
the fame century, ten thousand persons voted in a
question agitated in the university of Paris; and
as graduates alone were admitted to that privilege,
the number of students must have been very great.
Velly Hilt. de France, torn. xi. p. I47. There
were indeed few universities in Europe at that time;
but such a number of students may nevertheless
be produced as a proof of the extraordinary ardour
with which men applied to the study of science in
those ages; it hows likewise that they already began
to confider other professions beside that of a soldier
as honourable and useful.

N O T E XXIX. SECT. I. p. 93. [FS].

THE great variety of fubje&s'which I have en-
deavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this upon
which I now enter, will justify my adopting the
words of M. de Montesquieu, when'he begins to
treat of commerce. ,¢ The fubje& which follows
"would require to be discussed more at large;
" but the nature of this work does not permit it.
"I wifl to glide bn a tranquil stream; but I am
"hurried along by a torrent."

MANY proofs occur in hiflory of the little in-
tercourfe between nations during the middle ages.
Towards the close of the tenth century, Count
Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.

C c 4 Maur

Maur des Fosses near Paris, applied to an Abbot
of Clugny in Burgundy fmous for his fantity,
intreating him to conduct the monks th.ther. The
Janguage in which he addrefled that holy man is
singular: he tells him, that he had undertaken
the labour of such a great journey; that he was
fatigued with the length of it, therefore hoped to
obtain his request, and that his journey into such a
distant country should not be in vain. The an-
fwer of the abbot is fill more extraordinary: he
refused to comply with his desire, as it would be
extremely fatiguing to go along with him into a
strange and unknown region. Vita Burchardi
venerabilis Comitis ap. Bouquet Rec, des Hil.
vol. x. p. 35 . Even so late as the beginning of
the twelfth century, the monks of Ferrieres in the
diocese of Sens did not know that there was such
a city as Tournay in Slanders; and the monks
of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unac-
quainted with the situation of Ferrieres. A tranf-
adion in which they were both concerned made
it necessary for them to have fomne intercourse.
The mutual interest of both monasteries prompted
each to find out the situation of the other. After a
long search, which is particularly described, the
discovery was made by accident. Herimannus
Abbas de Reftauratione St. Martini Tornacenfis
ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The igno-
rance of the middle ages with refpe& to the fitua-
tion and geography of remote countries was still
more remarkable. The most ancient geographical
chart which now remains as a monument of the
ftace of that science in Europe during the middle

aes,

ages, is found in a manuscript of the Chronique
deSc. Denys. There the three parts of the earth
then known are so represented, that Jerusalem is
placed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de
I'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tom. xvi. p. 85.
There seems to have been no inns or houses of
entertainment for the reception'of travellers during
the middle ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii.
p,58i, &c. This is a proof of the little inter-
course which took place between different nations.
Among people whose manners are simple, and
who are seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is
avirtue of the first rank. This duty of hospitality
was so necessary in that state of society which took
place during the middle ages, that it was not
confidered as one of those virtues which men may
prahife or not, according to the temper of their
minds and the generosity of their hearts. Ho-
fpitality was enforced by statutes, and such as
negleced this duty were liable to punishment.
Qicunque hofpiti venienti ledum, aut focum
negaverit, trium folidorum inlatione iulEetur.
Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § , Si quis homini
aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
fexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul.
lib. vi. § 82. This increase of the penalty, at a
period so long after that in which the laws of the
Burgundians were published, and when the state
o society was much improved, is very remark-
able. Other laws of the fame purport are col-
leed by Jo. Fred. Polac. Syftema Jurifprud. Ger-

manica,

manice, Lips. 1733, p. 75. The laws of the
Slavi were more rigorous than any that he men.
tions; they o:dained, " that the moveables of an
inhospitable person should be confiscated, and his
house burnt.' They were even so solicitous for
the entertainment of rangers, that they permitted;
the landlord to steal for the support of his guet."
Quod nodu furatus fueris, cras appone, hofpiti.i
bus. Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo.i
Beehr. Lips. 1751, p. 50. In consequence of
these laws, or of the slate of society which made
it proper to enact them, hospitality abounded
while the intercourse among men was inconfider.!
able, and secured the stranger a kind reception
under every roof where he chore to take helter.
This, too, proves clearly, that the intercourse
among men was rare, for as soon as this became
frequent, what was a pleasure became a burden,
and the entertaining of travellers was converted
into a branch of commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

still more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tween different nations. The genius of the feudal
fyllem, as well as the spirit of jealousy which
always accompanies ignorance, concurred in dif-
couraging fcrangers from fettling in any new
country. If a person removed from one pro-
vince in a kingdom to another, he was bound
within a year and day to acknowledge himself
the vassal of the baron in whole estate he fettled;
if he negleded to do so, he became liable to a
penalty; and, if at his death he negleted to leave

a certain

a certain legacy to the baron within whose ter-
ritory he had resided, all his goods were con-
ficated. The hardships imposed on foreigners
fettling in a country, were frill more intolerable.
In more early times, the superior lord of any
territory in which a foreigner fettled, might seize
his person, and reduce him to servitude. Very
triking intances of this occur in the history of
the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the
Normans in the ninth century, obliged many
inhabitants of the maritime provinces of France
to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom.
But instead of being received with that huma-
nity to which their wretched condition intitled
them, they were reduced to a state of servitude.
Both the civil and ecclesiastical powers found it
neceflary to interpose in order to put a stop to
this barbarous pracice. Potgieffer. de Statu
Servor. lib. i. c. I. 6. In other countries, the
laws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime
provinces to reduce such as were shipwrecked on
their coafl to servitude. Ibid. § 17. This barba-
rous cuiom prevailed in many countries of Eu-
rope. The practice of seizing the goods of per-
fols who had been shipwrecked, and of confif-
c"ting them as the property of the lord on whose
manor they were thrown, seems to have been
universal. De Weftphalen Monum. inedita Rer.
Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange, voc.
Lagalu, Beehr. Rer. Macleb. lib. p. 5 12. Among
the ancient Wellh, three forts of persons, a mad-
nl"n, a stranger, and a leper, might be killed with
impuity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfcrvat.

7 on

on the statutes, chiefly the more ancient, p. 22,
M. de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds
which prove, that in different provinces of France
strangers became the slaves of the lord on whoft
lands they fettled. Gloffaire du Droit Fran~ois
art. Aubaine, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, ( that
there are keveral places in France, in which, if a
firanger fixes his residence for a year and day, he
becomes the slave of the lord of the manor." Couft,
de Beav. ch. 45. p. 254. As a practice so con-
trary to humanity could not subsist long, the fu.
perior lords found it necessary to reft satisfied,
instead of enslaving aliens, with levying certain
annual taxes upon them, or imposing upon them
some extraordinary duties or services. But when
any stranger died, he could not convey his effects
by will; and all his real as well as personal eflate,
fell to the king, or to the lord of the barony, to
the exclusion of his natural heirs. This is termed
in France Droit D'Aubaine. Pref. de Laurier.
Ordon. tom. i. p. I5. Bruffel. tom. ii. p. 944.
Du Cange, voc. Albani. Pafquier Recherches,
p. 367. This praaice of confiscating the effects
of strangers upon their death was very ancient.
It is mentioned, though very obscurely, in a law
of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul. Baluz.
P. 507- § 5. Not only persons who were born in
a foreign country were subject to the Droit D'Au-
baine, but in ome countries such as removed
from one diocese to another, or from the lands
of one baron to another. Brufiel. vol. ii. p. 947
949. It is hardly possible to conceive any law
more unfavourable to the intercourse between

naitions.

ations. Something firnilar to it, however, may
e found in the ancient laws of every kingdom
in Eurdpe. With refpet to Italy, fee Murat.
At. vol. iii p. 14. As nations advanced in
improvement, this praEtice was gradually abo-
lifed. It is no finall disgrace to the French
jurilprudence, that this barbarous, inhospitable
custom should have so long remained among a
people o highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded
under a feeble form of government, incapable of
framing or executing salutary laws, rendered the
communication between the different provinces
of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It
appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ser-
rieres, in the ninth century, that the highways
were o much infested by banditti, that it was
necessary for travellers to form themelves. into
companies or caravans, that they might be safe
from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Recueil
des Hilt. vol. vii. p. 5x5. The numerous regu-
lations published by Charles the Bald in the fame
century, discover the frequency of there dilbrders;
and fitch as of violence were become so com-
mon, that by many they were hardly confidered
ascriminal. For this reason the inferior judges,
called Centenarii, were required to take an oath,
that they would neither commit any robbery them-
elves, nor protea such as were guilty of that
crim. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63. 68.

le hilsorians of the ninth and tenth centuries

6 . give

give pathetic descriptions of there disorders. Sor
remarkable passages to this purpose are collea
by Mat. Jo. Beerh. Rer. Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 60
They became so frequent and audacious, that t
authority of the civil magistrate was unable tor
press them. The ecclesiastical jurifdicon w
called in to aid it. Councils were held wi
great solemnity, the bodies of the faints we
brought thither, and, in presence of their facr
reliques, anathemas were denounced against ro
bers, and other violaters of the public peac
Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. 360. 43:
536. One of there forms of excommunicatiol
issued A. D. 988, is still preserved, and is so fir
gular, and composed with eloquence of such
peculiar kind, that it will not perhaps be deeme
unworthy of a place here. After the usual ir
trodution, and mentioning the outrage whic
gave occasion to the anathema, it runs thus
"' Obtenebrefcant oculi veftri, qui concupiverunt
arefcant manus, que rapuerunt, debilitentu
omnia membra, qua: adjuverunt. Semper labc
retis, nec requiem inveniatis, fruEtuque vest
laboris privemini. Formidetis, & paveatis,
facie perfequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis, u
tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum Ju
da traditore Domini, in terra mortis et tenebra
rum; donec corda veftra ad fatisfaacionem ple
nam convertantur.-Ne ceffant a vobis ha ma
ledifiones, fcelerum veftrorum perfecutrices
quamdiu permanebitis in peccato pervafionil
Amen, Fiat, Iiat." Bouquet, lb. p. 517.

NOT

NOTE XXX. SECT. I. P. 98. [GG].
WITH refpe& to the progress of commerce
which I have described, p. 93, &c. it may be ob-
frved, that the Italian states carried on ome con-
merce with the cities of the Greek empire, as
early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of
theEat. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 882. In
the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a
rade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The in-
habitants of Amalphi and Pisa had likewise ex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. Ib.
p 884, 885. The effects of the Crusades in in-
creasing the wealth and commerce of the Italian
Rates, and particularly that which they carried
on with the East, I have explained, page 34th of
this volume. They not only imported the Indian
commodities from the East, but established manu-
fatures of curious fabric in their own country.
Several of these are enumerated by Muratori in his
Difertations concerning the arts and the weaving
ofthe middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p 349.
399. They made great progress, particularly in
the manufaaure of silk, which had long been
peculiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk

wuffs were of such high price in ancient Rome,

that only a few persons of the firit rank were able
tOpurchafe them. Uinder Aurelian, A. D. 270,
a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound of
gold. Abfit ut auro fila penfentur. Libra enim
auri tune libra ferici suit. Vopifcus in Aureliano.

Juflinian,

Justinian, in the sixth century, introduced the art
of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which rendered
the commodity foinewhat more plentiful, though
frill it was of such great value, as to remain an
article of luxury r magnificence, reserved only
for persons of the first order, or for public so.
lemnities. Roger I. king of Sicily, about the
year II30, carried off a number of artificers in
the silk trade from Athens, and fettling them in
Palermo, introduced the culture of silk into his
kingdom, from which it was communicated to
other parts of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples,
b. xi. c. 7. This seems to have rendered silk so
common, that, about the middle of the fourteenth
century, a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared iu
one procession clad in silk robes. Sugar is like-
wife a production of the East. Some plants of
the sugar-cane were brought from Asia; and the
first attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was made
about the middle of the twelfth century. From
thence they were transplanted into the southern
provinces of Spain. From Spain they were car-
ried to the Canary and, Madeira ifes, and at
length into the new world. Ludovico Guicciar-
dini, in enumerating the goods imported into
Antwerp about the year I5oo, mentions the sugar
which they received from Spain and Portugal as
a considerable article. He delcribes that sugar as
the product of the Madeira and Canary islands.
Defcritt. de Paefi Bassi, p. 180, 18I. The fu-
gar-cane was introduced into the Weft Indies
before that time, but the cultivation of it was

not

not so improved, or so extensive as to furnish an
article of much consequence in commerce. In
the middle ages though sugar was not raised in
such quantities, or employed for so many pur-
poses, as to become one of the common necef-
saries of life, it appears to have been a confider.
able article in the commerce of the Italian states.

THESE various commodities with which the Ita-
lians furnished the other nations of Europe, pro-
cured them a favourable reception in every king-
dom. They were established in France in the thir-
teenth century with most extensive immunities.
They not only obtained every indulgence favour-
able to their commerce, but personal rights and
privileges were granted to them, which the natives
of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By a special proviso, they were exempted
from the Droit d'Aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the
Lombards (a name frequently given to all Italian
merchants in many parts of Europe) engrossed the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled, they
became masters of its cash. Money of course was
in their hands not only a sign of the value of other
commodities, but became an object of commerce
itself. They dealt largely as bankers. In an or-
donance, A. D. 1295, we find them ftiled merca-
lores and camp/ores. They carried on this as well
as other branches of their commerce with somewhat
of that rapacious spirit which is natural to monopo-
lizers who are not restrained by the competition of
rival traders. An absurd opinion, which prevailed
illthe middle ages, was, however, in ome mea-
sure, the cause of their exorbitant demands, and
VOL. I. D d may

may be pleaded in apology for them. Trade can-
not be carried on with advantage, unless the
persons who lend a fum of money are allowed
a certain premium for the use of it, as a corn.
penfation for the risk which they run in per-
mitting another to traffic with their stock.
This premium is fixed by law in all commer.
cial countries, and is called the legal interest
of money. But the Fathers of the church had
preposterously applied the prohibitions of uury
in scripture to the payment of legal interest,
and condemned it as a fin. The fchoolmen,
misled by Aristotle, whose sentiments they fol-
lowed implicitly, and without examination, adopt-
ed the fame error, and enforced it. Black-
stone's Commentaries on the Laws of England,
vol. ii. p. 455. Thus the Lombards found them-
selves engaged in a traffic which was every where
deemed criminal and odious. They were liable
to punishment if deteEted. They were not fa-
tisfied, therefore, with that moderate premium,
which they might have claimed if their trade
had been open and authorised. by law. They
exaaed a fum proportional to the danger and
infamy of a discovery. Accordingly;' we find
that it was usual for them to demand twenty per
cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth cen-
tury. Murat. Antiq. ltal. vol. i. p. 893. About
the beginning of that century, the countess of
Slanders was obliged to borrow money in order to
pay her husband's ransom. She procured the fllin
requisite, either from Italian merchants or from
Jews. The lowell interest which fle paid to

thern

them was above twenty per cent. and foine of
them exacted near thirty. Martene and Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdotorum, vol. i. p. 886. In the
fourteenth century, A. D. 131 1, Philip IV. fixed'
the interest which might be legally exaced in the
fairs of Champagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan.
tom. i. p. 484. The interest of money in Aragon
was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. 1242, fixed
it by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca.
Marca five Limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as
the year I490, it appears that the interest of money
in Placentia was at the rate of forty per cent.
This is the more extraordinary, because at that
time the commerce of the Italian states was be-
come considerable. Memorie Storiche de Piacenza,
tom. viii. p. 104. Piac. 1760. It appears from
Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V. had fixed the
rate of interest in his dominions in the Low-
Countries at twelve per cent. and at the time when
he wrote, about the year 560, it was not uncom-
mon to exact more than that fum.- He complains
of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effets
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bassi, p. 172. This high interest of money
is alone a proof that the profits on commerce were
exorbitant; and that it was not carried on to great-
extent.-The Lombards were likewise established
in England in the thirteenth century, and a con-
fiderable itreet in the city of London frill bears
their name. They enjoyed great privileges, and
carried on an extensive commerce, particularly as
bankers. See Anderson's Chronol. Deduion.
vol. i. . 137. 16o. 204. 231. where the statutes

Dd 2 or

or other authorities which confirm this are quoted,
But the chief mart for Italian commodities was at
Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfect that
to fail from any port in the Baltic, and to return
again, was a voyage too great to. be performed in
o.ne summer. For that reaion a magazine or store-
house half-way:between the commercial cities in the
north, and those in Italy, became necessary. Bruges
was pitched upon as the mot convenient station.
That choice introduced vast wealth into the Low
Countries. Bruges was at once the itaple for Englilh
wool; for the woollen and linen manufacures of
the Netherlands; for the naval stores and other
bulky commodities of the North; and for the In-
dian commodities, as well as domestic producions
imported by the Italian States. The extent of its
commerce in Indian goods with Venice alone, ap-
pears from one fad. In the year 13X8, five Ve-
netian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities
arrived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their car-
goes at the fair. These galeaffes were vessels of
very considerable burden. L. Guic. Defcritt. di
Paefi Baffl, p. 74. Bruges was the greatest em-
porium in all Europe. Many proofs of this occur
in the historians and records of the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries. But, instead of multiply-
ing quotations, I shall refer my readers to An-
derfon, vol. i. p. 12. 137. 213. 246, &c. The
nature of this work prevents me from entering
into any more minute detail, but there are tome
detached faAs, which give an high idea of the
wealth both of the Flemilh and Italian commercial

itates.

fates. The Duke of Brabant contracted his daugh-
ter to the Black Prince, son of Edward III. of Eng-
land, A.D. 1339, and gave her a portion which
we may reckon to be of equal value with three
hundred thousand pounds of our present money.
Rymer's Foedera, vol. v. p. I 13. John Galeazzo
Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a treaty of
marriage between his daughter and Lionel Duke
of Clarence, Edward's third son, A. D. 1367,
and granted her a portion equal to two hundred
thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer's
Feder. vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant ums
so far exceeding what was then granted by the
mod powerful monarchs, and which appear ex-
traordinary even in the present age when the
wealth of Europe is so much increased, must
have arisen from the riches which flowed into
those countries from their extensive and lucrative
commerce. The first source of wealth to the
towns situated on the Baltic sea seems to have
been the herring fishery; the shoals of herrings
frequenting at that time the coasts of Sweden
and Denmark, in the fame manner as they now
resort to the British coafis. The effets of this
fiflery are thus described by an author of the
thirteenth century. The Danes, fays he, who
were formerly clad in the poor garb of ailors,
are now clothed in fcaclet, purple, and fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing fiom their
annual fishery on the coast of Schonen; so that
all nations retort to them; bringing their gold,
filvel, and precious commodities, that they may
purchase herrings, which the divine bounty be-

D d 3 sows

stows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Con-
ring. de Urbib. German. § 87.

THE Hanseatic league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the obje&s of its union, are described by
Knipfclhildt Trascatus Hiftorico-Politico Juri.
dicus de Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4.
Anderson has mentioned the chief sacs with re-
fpecft to their commercial progress, the extent of
the privileges which they obtained in different
countries, their successful wars with several mo-
narchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with which
they contended for those liberties and rights with-
out which it is impossible to carry on commerce
to advantage. The vigorous efforts of a society
of merchants attentive only to commercial ob-
jects, could not fail of diffusing new and more
liberal ideas concerning justice and order in every
country of Europe where they fettled.

IN England, the progress of commerce was ex-

tremely flow; and the causes of this are obvious.
During the Saxon heptarchy, England, split into
many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually at
variance with each other; exposed to the fierce in-
curfions of the Danes, and other northern pirates;
and funk in barbarity and ignorance, was in no
condition to cultivate commerce, or to pursue any
fylft-n of uftiful and salutary policy. When a
better prospect began to open by the union of the
kingdom under one monarch, the Norman conqteft
took place. 'This occasioned such a violent o(lc,
as well as fuchl a sudden and total revolution of

property,

property, that the nation did not recover-from it
during several reigns. By the time that the con-
ititution began to acquire some stability, and the
English had so incorporated with their conquerors
as to become one people, the nation engaged with
no les ardour than imprudence in support of the
pretensions of their sovereigns to the crown of
France, and long wafted its vigour and genius in
its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom. When
by ill success, and repeated disappointments, a
period was at last put to this fatal phrenzy, and the
nation beginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure
to breathe and to gather new strength, the de-
fructive wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster broke out, and involved the kingdom
in the worst of all calamities. Thus, besides the
common obftrustions of commerce occasioned by
the nature of the feudal government, and the
slate of manners during the middle ages, its pro-
grefs in England was retarded by peculiar causes.
Such a fucceflion of events adverse to the com-
mercial spirit was sufficient to have checked its
growth, although every other circumfiance had
favoured it. The English were accordingly one
of the last nations in Europe who availed them-
feves of those commercial advantages which
were natural or peculiar to their country. Be-
fore the reign of Edward III. all the wool of
England, except a finall quantity wrought into
coarse cloths for home conlumption, was fold to
the Flemings or Lombards, and manufadured
by them. T'hough Edward, A. ). I326, began
10 allure some of the F lemifl weavers to fcttle i.

]) d 4 EIngland3

England, it was long before the Englifi were ca-
pable of fabricating cloth for foreign markets, and
the export of unwrought wool still continued to be
the chief article of their commerce. Anderson
paffim.-All foreign commodities were brought
into England by the Lombard or Hanseatic mer-
chants. The English ports were frequented by
hips both from the north and south of Europe, and
they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the pro.
fits arising from the supply of their wants. The sirs
commercial treaty of England on record,- is that
with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. li17.
Anders, vol. i. p. ro8. But the English did not
venture to trade in their own hips to the Baltick
until the beginning of the fourteenth century.
lb. ri,. It was after the middle of the fifteenth,
before they sent any ship into the Mediterranean.
Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long before this period
that their vessEls began to visit the ports of Spain
or Portugal. But though I have pointed out
the flow progress of the English commerce as a
fat little attended to, and yet meriting confider-
ation; the concourse of foreigners to the ports
of England, together with the communication
among all the different countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of
the twelfth century, is sufficient to jufiify all the
observations and reasonings in the text concern,
ing the influence of commerce on the state of
manners and of society,

NOTE XXXI, SECT. III, p. I83. [HH]
I -AVE not been able to discover the precise
manner in which the Jultiza was appointed, Among

the claims of the junta or union formed againfE
James I. A. D. 1264, this was one; that the king
should not nominate any person to be Juftiza,
without the consent or approbation of the ricos-
hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
vol. i. p. 8o. But the king in his answer to their
remonstrance asserts, " that it was established by
immemorial practice, and was conformable to the
laws of the kingdom, that the King, in virtue of
his royal prerogative, should name the Juffiza."
Zurita, Ibid. 8I. Blanca, 656. From another
paflage in Zurita, it appears, that while the Ara-
gonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union, i. e. the
power of confederating against their sovereign as
often as they conceived that he had violated any
of their rights and immunities, the Juftiza was not
only nominated by the King, but held his office
during the King's pleasure. Nor was this practice
attended with any bad effects, as the privilege of
the union was a sufficient and effetual check to
any abuse of the royal prerogative, But when the
privilege of the union was abolished as dangerous
to the order and peace of society, it was agreed
that the Juftiza should continue in office during
life. Several Kings, however, attempted to re-
move Jufiizas who were obnoxious to them, and
they sometimes succeeded in the attempt. Ia
order to guard against this encroachment, which
would have destroyed the intention of the inti-
tution, and have rendered the Juftiza the depen-
dint aWd tool of the crown, instead of the guar-

dian

dian of the people, a law was enacted in the Cortes
A.D. 1442, ordaining that the Juftiza should con-
tinue in office during life, and hould not be re-
moved from it unless by the authority of the Cortes.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. 22. By former laws the person of the JufRiza
had been declared sacred, and he was responsible
only to the Cortes, Ibid. p. iS, b.' Zurita and
Blanca, who both published their histories while
the Juftiza of Aragon retained the full exercise of
his privileges and jurifdiation, have negleAted to
explain several circurnftances with regard to the
office of that refpeEtable magistrate, because they
addressed their works to their countrymen, who
were well acquainted with every particular con-
cerning the funtions of a judge, to whom they
looked up as to the guardian of their liberties. It
is vain to consult the later historians of Spain, about
any point with refpeft to which the excellent his-
torians whom I have named are silent. The an-
cient constitution of their country was overturned,
and despotism established on the ruin of its liber-
ties, when the writers of this and the preceding
century composed their histories, and on that ac-
count they had little curiosity to know the nature
of those inffitutions to which their ancestors owed
the enjoyment of fieedom, or they were afraid to
describe them with much accuracy. The spirit
with which Mariana, his continuator Miniana, and
Ferreras, write their histories, is very different frolm
that of the two historians of Aragon, fiom whoin

1 hl3VC

Ihave taken my account of the constitution of
that kingdom.

Two circumstances concerning the Juftiza, be-
fides those which I have mentioned in the text,
are worthy of observation: . None of the ricos-
hombres, or noblemen of the first order, could be
appointed Juftiza. He was taken out of the second
class of cavalleros, who seem to have been nearly
of the fame condition or rank with gentlemen or
commoners in Great Britain. Fueros & Obfervanc.
del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. 21, b. The reason was,
By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were
not fubjeft to capital punishment; but as it was
neceflary for the security of liberty, that the Jus-
tiza should be accountable for the manner in
which he executed the high trust reposed in him,
itwas a powerful restraint upon him to know that
he was liable to be punished capitally. Blanca,
p.657. 756. Zurita, tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Ob-
fervanc. lib. ix. p. 82. b. I83. It appears too
from many passages in Zurita, that the Juftiza was
appointed to check the domineering and oppressive
fpiric of the nobles, as well as to set bounds to the
power of the monarch, and therefore he was chosen
fron an order of citizens equally interested in
opposing both.

. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such extensive
power as the Juftiza, might have exercised them
n a manner pernicious to the state, if he himself
had been subjec to no controul. A constitutional

remedy

remedy was on that account provided against this
danger. Seventeen persons were chosen by lot in
each meeting of the Cortes. These formed a tri.
bunal called the court of inquisition into the office
of JuRtiza. This courtmet at three stated terms
in each year. Every person had liberty of con.
plaining to it of any iniquity or neglect of duty
in the Juftiza, or in the inferior judges, who ased
in his name. The J.uftiza and his deputies were
called to answer for their conduct. The members
of the court passed sentence by ballot. They
rMighit punish by degradation, confiscation of
goods, or even with death. The law which ere&ed
this court, and regulated the form of its proce-
dure, was enated A. D. I46ir Zurita Anales,
iv. 102. Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon, 770.
Previous to this period, inquiry was made into
the condu& of the Juftiza, though not with the
fame formality. He was, from the first infitution
of the office, subjec to the review of the Cortes.
The constant dread of such an impartial and
revere inquiry into his behaviour, was a powerful
motive to the vigilant and faithful discharge o
his duty. A remarkable instance of the authority
of the Juftiza when opposed to that of the King
occurs in the year 1386. By the conilitution Of
Aragon, the eldest son or heir apparent of the
crown possessed considerable power and jurildi&in
in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. del Reyno
de Arag. lib. i. p. 16. Peter IV. infigated bya
second wife, attempted to deprive his son of this,
and enjoined his bje4ts to yield him no ob

dience.

dience. The prince immediately applied to the
ufiiza; " the safeguard and defence, fays Zuri-
a, against all violence and opprefifon." The Jus-
iza granted him the firmo de drecho, the effe& of
hich was, that upon his giving surety to appear
injudgment, he could not be deprived of any im-
unity or privilege which he possessed, but in con-
quence of a legal trial before the Juftiza, and of
a sentence pronounced by him. This was pub-
ilhed throughout the kingdom, and notwithftand-
ing the proclamation in contradiction to this
which had been issued by the King, the Prince
continued in the exercise of all his rights, and his
authority was universally recognised. Zurita Ana-
lesde Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. Il p. i84. . [l].

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring tefi-
mony of many respectable authors, to mention
is as the constitutional form of the oath of alle-
giance, which the Aragonefe took to their fove-
reigns. I mufl acknowledge, however, that I have
not found this singular oath in any Spanifli author
whom I have had an opportunity of consulting.
Itis mentioned neither by Zurita, nor Blanca,

AorArgenfola, nor Sayas, who were all hiftorio-

graphers appointed by the Cortes of Aragon to
record the tranfaaions of the kingdom. All
these writers poflefs a merit, which is very rare
'"Ong historians. They are extremely accurate
I tracing the progress of the laws and conflitu-

tioll

tion of their country. Their silence with refped
to this, creates ome suspicion concerning the ge.
nuinenefs of the oath. But as it is mentioned by
so many authors, who produce the ancient Spanilh
words, in which it is expreflid, it is probable that
they have taken it from some writer of credit,
whose works have not fallen into my hands. The
spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the ge.
nits of the Aragonefe constitution. Since the pub.
lication of the first edition, the learned M. Totze,
Professor of History at Batzow in the dutchy of
Mecklenburgh, has been so good as to point out
to me a Spanish author of great authority, whoj
has published the words of this oath. It is Anto-
nio Perez, a native of Aragon, secretary toPhi-
lip II. The words of the oath are, " Nos, que va-
lemos tanto como vos, os hazemos nueftro Rey y
Segnor, con tal que nos guardeys nueftros fueros,
y libertades, y si No, No." Las Obras y Relacio-
nes de Ant. Perez. 8vo. par Juan de la Planche
i631. p. 143.

THE privilege of Union, which I have men-

tioned in the preceding note, and alluded to in
the text, is indeed one of the moit fingularwhich
could take place in a regular government, and
the oath that I have quoted expresses nothing
more than this constitutional privilege entitled the
Aragonefe to perform. If the king or his mini-
fiers violated any of the laws or immunities 0
the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate re
dress in consequence of their reprefcntations and

remon

remonitrances, the nobles of the first rank, or
Ricos-hblmbres de natura, & de mefnada, the equef-
trian order, or the nobility of the second class,
called Hidalgos & Infanciones, together with the ma-
gifrates of cities, might, either in the Cortes, or in
a voluntary assembly, join in union, and binding
themselves by mutual oaths and the exchange of
hostages to be faithful to each other, they might
require the King, in the name and by the autho-
rity of this body corporate, to grant them redress.
If the King refused to comply with their request,
or took arms in order to oppose them, they might,
in virtue of the privilege of union, instantly with-
draw their allegiance from the King, refute to
acknowledge him as their Sovereign, and proceed
to elet another monarch; nor did they incur any
guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that
account. Blanca Com. Rer. Arag. 66I. 669.
This union did not resemble the confederacies in
other feudal kingdoms. It was a constitutional
alociation, in which legal privileges were vested,
which issued its mandates under a common eal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular and
ascertained forms. This dangerous right was not
only claimed, but exercised. In the year 1287,
the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso III. and obliged that King not only to
comply with their demands, but to ratify a privi-
lege lo fatal to the power of the crown. Zurita
Anales, ton. i. p. 322. In the year 1347, an
union was formed against Peter IV. with equal

2 fucccfs,

success, and a new ratification of the privilege
was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202. But son
after, the King having defeated the leaders of the
union in battle, the privilege of union was finally
abrogated in the Cortes, and all the laws or re-
cords which contained any confirmation of it
were cancelled or destroyed. The King, in pre.
fence of the Cortes, called for the a whereby he
had ratified the union, and having wounded his
hand with his poinard, he held it above the re.
cord, " that privilege, fays he, which has been
c o fatal to the kingdom, and so injurious to
" royalty, should be effaced with the blood of a
-· King." Zurita, tom. ii. p. 229. The law abo.
lifling the union is published. Fueros & Obfer-
vanc. lib. ix, p. 178. From that period, the Jus-
tiza became the constitutional guardian of public
liberty, and his power and jurifdiion occasioned
none of thoife violent convulsions which the tu.
nultuary privilege of the union was apt to pro-
duce. The constitution of Aragon, however, ttill
remained extremely free. One source of this li-
berty arose from the early admifion of the repre-
fentatives of cities into the Cortes. It seems pro-
bable from Zurita, that burgesses were constituent
members of the Cortes fi-om its first inflitution.
He mentions a meeting of Cortes, A.D. I 133, i"
which the procuradores de las ciudadesy villas were
present. Tom. i. p. 5 . This is the conflitu-
tional language in which their presence is declared
in the Cortes, after the journals of that court

~~~~7 were

were regularly kept. It is probable, that an his-
torian-fo accurate as Zurita would not have used
there words, if he had not taken them from some
authentic record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of cities
formed a constituent part in the supreme aftem-
blies of the other European nations. The free
spirit of the Aragonefe government is conspicuous
in many particulars. The Cortes not only op-
posed the attempts of their Kings to increase their
revenue, or to extend their prerogative, but they
claimed rights and exercised powers wvhich will
appear extraordinary even in a country accustomed
to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year 286,
the Cortes claimed the privilege of naming the
members of the King's council and the officers of
his household, and they seem to have obtained it
for some time. Zurita, tom. i. p. 303. 307. It
was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers
who commanded the troops raised by their au-
thority. This seems to be evident from a passage
inZurica. When the Cortes, in the year 503,
railed a body of troops to be employed in Italy,
it pasfd an a empowering the King to name
the officers who should command them, Zurita,
tom. v. p. 274; which plainly implies that, without
this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue
of his prerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragon, two general declarations of
the rights and privileges of the Aragonefe are
publifnedl; the one, in the reign of Pedio I. A. D.
z283; the other, in that of James II. A. D. 325.
VOL. I. E e They

They are of such a length, that I cannot insert them.
but it is evident from these, that not only the
privileges of the nobility, but the rights of the
people, perional as well as political, were, at that
period, more extensive, and better understood than
in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7. 9. The
oath by which the king bound himself to obfervt
those rights and liberties of the people, was very
solemn. Ibid. p. 14, b. & p. 15. The Cortes
of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and
vigilance which are peculiar to free states, in
guarding the essential parts of the conftiution,
but they were scrupulously attentive to oblerve
the most minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed. According to the ea-
blifhed laws and customs of Aragon, no foreigner
had liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes
assembled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481, ap-
pointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the king.
dom, while he was absent during the course of the
campaign. The law required that a regent hould
take the oath of fidelity in preence of the Cortes;
but as Isabella was a foreigner, before he could
be admitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to
pass an aft authorizing the ferjeanc-porter to open
the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;
"so attentive were they (fays Zurita) to observe
" their laws and forms, even such as may seem
" most minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure
the personal rights of individuals, than to main-

tain

tain the freedom of the constitution; and the
spirit of their statutes with refpeft to both was
equally liberal. Two fads relative to this matter
merit obervation. By an express statute in the
year 335, it was declared to be unlawful to put
any native Aragonele to the torture. If he could
not be convited by the testimony of witnesses, he
was inflantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66.
Zurita records the regulation with the fatisfaion
natural to an historian, when he contemplates the
humanity of his countrymen. He compares the
laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both ex-
empted citizens and freemen from such igno-
minious and cruel treatment, and had recourse to
it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason
to bestow such an encomium on the laws of his
country. Torture was at that time permitted by
the laws of every other nation in Europe. Even
in England, from which the mild spirit of legis-
lation has long banished it, torture was not, at
that time, unknown. Observations on the Sta-
tutes, chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

THE other fad shows, that the fame spirit which
influenced the legislature prevailed among the
people. In the year 1485, the religious zeal of
Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. Though the
Aragonefe were no less fuperflitioufly attached
than the other, Spaniards to the Roman Catholic
faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds

Ee 2 of

of error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors
had scattered, yet they took arms against the in.
quilitors, murdered the chief inquisitor, and long
opposed the establishment of that tribunal. The
reason which they gave for their condu& was,
That the mode of trial in the-inquifition was in-
consistent with liberty. The criminal was not
confronted with the witnesses, he was not ac.
quainted with what they deposed against him, he
was fubjeEed to torture, and the goods of per-
sons condemned were confiscated. Zurita Anales,
torn. iv. p. 341.

THE form of government in the kingdom of

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like-
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Valen-
cians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame
manner with the Aragonefe. But they had no
magistrate resembling the Juftiza. The Catalo-
nians were no less jealous of their liberties than
the two other nations, and no less bold in asserting
them. But it is not necessary for illustrating the
following history to enter into any farther detail
concerning the peculiarities in the constitution of
these kingdoms.
-NOTE XXXIII. SECT. III. p. 185. [KK].

I HAVE searched in vain among the hiflorians

of Castile for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and governmnent

ill

in Castile, or to explain the nature of the confti-
tution with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith
I have described the political state of Aragon. It
is manifest not only from the historians of Castile,
but from its ancient laws, particularly the Fuero
Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally elective.
Ley, 2. 5. 8. They were chosen by the bishops, the
nobility, and the people, ibid. It appears from
the fame venerable code of laws, that the prero-
gative of the Castilian monarchs was extremely
limited. Villaldiego, in his commentary on the
Fuero Juzgo, produces many facts and authorities
in confirmation of both there particulars. Dr.
Geddes, who was well acquainted with Spanish
literature, complains that he could find no author
who gave a distinct account of the Cortes or fu-
preme assembly of the nation, or who described
the manner in hich it was held, or mentioned
the precise number of members who had a right
to fit in it. He produces, however, from Gil
Gonzales d'Avila, who published a history of
Henry II. the writ of summons to the town of
Abula, requiring it to chue representatives to ap-
pear in the Cortes which he called to meet A. D.
1390. From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes,
Marquiffes, the masters of the three military
orders, Condes and Ricos-hombres were required
to attend. TJiefe composed the bodies of eccle-
flaftics and nobles, which formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which ent members
to that meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight.
'lle number of representatives (for the cities had

e 3 right

right to chufe more or fewer according to their
refpedtive dignity) amounted to an hundred and
twenty-five. Geddes' Miscellaneous Trats, vol. i.
331. Zurita having occasion to mention the
Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro A. D. 505,
in order to secure for himself the government of
Castile after the death of Isabella, records, with
his usual accuracy, the names of the members
present, and of the cities which they represented.
From that lift it appears, that only eighteen cities
had deputies in this assembly. Anales de Aragon,
tom. vi. p. 3. What was the occasion of this
great difference in the number of cities represented
in thee two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable
to explain.

NOTE XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 187. [LL].
A. GREAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrossed by the nobility. L. Marinaus Siculus,
who composed his treatise De Rebus Hispania du-
ring the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue of
the Spanish nobility, together with the yearly rent
of their estates. According to his account, which
he affirms was as accurate as the nature of the
fubje& would admit, the fum total of the annual
revenue of their lands amounted to one million
four hundred and eighty-two thousand ducats. If
we make allowance for the great difference in the
value of money in the fifteenth century from that
which it now bears, and confider that the cata-
logue of Marinaus includes only the Titulados, or
nobility whose families were distinguished by so'ne

.*~~~~~7~ hono-

honorary title, their wealth must appear very great.
L. Marinaeus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan.
vol. i. p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their
contests with the crown, which I hall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the
nobility as extremely pernicious to the kingdom.
In one of their manifestoes they aert, that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Gallicia, which was an
hundred leagues, the crown did not possess more
than three villages. All the reft belonged to the
nobility, and could be fubjeted to no public
burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor Carl. V.
vol. i. p. 422. It appears from the testimony of
authors quoted by Bovadilla, that these extensive
poffeflions were bestowed upon the Ricos-hombres,
hidalgos, and cavalleros, by the Kings of Castile, in
reward for the assistance which they had received
from them in expelling the Moors. They like-
wife obtained by the fame means a considerable
influence in the cities, many of which anciently
depended upon the nobility. Politica para Cor-
regidores. Amb. 1750, fol. vol. i. 440. 442.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p. 190. [MMJ,

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain,
as I observed Note XVIII. with respect to the ori-
gin of communities or free cities in Spain. It is
probable, that as soon as the considerable towns
were recovered fiom the Moors, the inhabitants
who fixed their residence in them, being persons
of diffincion and credit, had all the privileges of

£ e 4 munli-

municipal government and jurifdition conferred
upon them. Many striking proofs occur of the
splendour, wealth, and power of the Spanish cities.
Hieronymus Paulus wrote a description of Barce.
lona in the year 1491, and compares the dimen.
sions of the town to that of Naples, and the ele-
gance of its buildings, the variety of its manufac.
tures, and the extent of its commerce, to Florence.
Hieron. Paulus ap. Schottum Script. Hifp. ii.
844. Marinaus describes Toledo as a large and
populous city. A great number of its inhabitants
were persons of quality and of illustrious rank.
Its commerce was great. It carried on with great
activity and success the manufactures of silk and
wool; and the number of inhabitants employed
in there two branches of trade, amounted nearly
to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 308. I know
no city, fays he, that I would prefer to Vallado-
lid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p. 312. We
may form some estimate of its populousness from
the following circumstances. The citizens having
taken arms in the year 1516, in order to oppose
a measure concerted by cardinal Ximenes, they
muflered in the city, and in the territory which
belonged to it, thirty thousand fighting men.
Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl. V. torn. i. p. 81.
The manufactures carried on in the towns of
Spain were not intended merely for home con-
fumption, they were exported to foreign countries,
and their commerce was a considerable source of
wealth to the inhabitants. The maritime laws
of Brcclona are the founation of mercantile

jurif-

jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges Rho-
dis were among the ancients. All the commercial
flates in Italy adopted there laws, and regulated
their trade according to them. Sandi Storia
Civile Veneziani, vol. ii. 865. It appears from
several ordonances of the Kings of France, that
the merchants of Aragon and Caifile were received
on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 35. iii. 166. 504. 635.
Cities in such a flouriflaing state became a refpea-
able part of the society, and were entitled to a
considerable share in the legislature. The magif-
trates of Barcelona aspircd to the highest honour a
Spanifli subjec can enjoy, that of being covered
in the presence of their sovereign, and of being
treated as grandees of the kingdom. Origin de
la ignidad de Grande de Castilla por don Alonfo
Carillo. Madr. 1657. p. I 8.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p. 193. [NN].
THE military order of St. Jago, the most ho-
nourable and opulent of the three Spanifl orders,
was instituted about the year 1 170. The bull of
confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A. D.
1176. At that time a considerable part of Spain
1 illremained under fubjecion to the Moors, and
the whole country was much exposed to depre-
dations not only of the enemy, but of banditti.
It is no wonder, then, that an institution, the
ObjeL of which was to oppose the enemies of the
Chrillian faith, ard to reltraim and punish those

who

who disturbed the public peace, should be ex.
tremely popular, and meet with general encou.
ragement. The wealth and power of the order
became so great, that according to one historian
the Grand Master of St. Jago was the person in
Spain of greatest power and dignity next to the
King. 2El. Anton. Nebriffenfis, ap. Schott.
Scrip. Hifp. i. 82. Another historian observes,
that the order poffefled every thing in Castile that
a King would most desire to obtain. Zurita
Anales, v. 22. The knights took the vows of
obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chafity.
By the former they were bound implicitly to obey
the commands of their grand malfer. The order
could bring into the field a thousand inen at arms.
.El. Ant. Nebref. p. 8I3. If, as we have eafon
to believe, these men at arms were accompanied,
as was usual in that age, this was a formidable
body of cavalry. There belonged to this order
eighty-four commanderies, and two hundred pri-
ories and other benefices. Differ ations fur la
Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p. 262. Itis
obvious how formidable to Iis sovereign the
command of these troops, the aclminiltration of
such revenues, and the dilpofal of so many offices,
must have rendered a fubje&. The other two
orders, though inferior to that of St. Jago in
power and wealth, were never'theless very con-
fiderable fraternities. When the conques of
Granada deprived the knights o:f St. Jago of those
enemies againfl whom their wseal was originally
direeted, fupeiflition found ouit a new obje, in

defellce

defence of which they engaged to employ their
courage. To their usual oath, they added the
following clause: " We do swear to believe, to
maintain, and to contend in public and in pri-
vate, that the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God,
our Lady, was conceived without the stain of ori-
ginal fin." This addition was made about the
middle of the seventeenth century. Honor de
St. Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 263.-Nor is such
a singular engagement peculiar to the order of
St. Jago. The members of the second military
order in Spain, that of Calatrava, equally zeal-
ous to employ their prowess in defence of the ho-
nours of the Blessed Virgin, have likewise pro-
serfed themselves her true knights. Their vow,
conceived in terms more theologically accurate
than that of St. Jago, may afford ome amuse-
ment to an English reader. C I vow to God, to
the Grand Master, and to you who here represent
his perfbn, that now, and for ever, I will main-
tain and contend, that the Virgin Mary, Mothier of
God, our Lady, was conceived without original
fin, and never incurred the pollution of it; but
that in the moment of her happy conception, and
of the union of her foul with her body, the Di
vine Grace prevented and preserved her from ori-
ginal guilt, by the merits of the paflion and death
ofChrift our Redeemer, her future son, foreseen
in the Divine Council, by which she was truly
redeemed, and by a more noble kind of redemp-
tion than any of the children of Adam. In the
belief of this truth, and in maintaining the ho-
nour of the lmof Holy Virgin, through the

Itrength

strength of Almighty God, I will live and will die."
Definiciones de la Orden de Calatrava, conforme
al Capitulo General en 1652, fol. Madr. 1748.
p. 153. Though the church of Rome hath pru-
dently avoided to give its fantion to the doc-
trine of the immaculate conception, and the two
great monaffic orders of St. Dominick and St.
Francis have espoused opposite opinions concern-
ing it, the Spaniards are such ardent champions
for the honour of the Virgin, that when the pre-
sent King of Spain instituted a new military order
in the year 177I, in commemoration of the birth
of his grandson, he put it under the immediate
protecion of the most Holy Mary in the mystery
of her immaculate conception.. Constitutiones de
]a Real y diftinguida Orden. Efpanola de Carlos
III. p. 7. To undertake the defence of the Virgin
Mary's honour, had such a resemblance to
that species of refined gallantry, which was the
original object of chivalry, that the zeal with which
the military orders bound themselves, by a solemn
vow, to defend it, was worthy of a true knight in
those ages, when the spirit of the institution sub,
sifted in full vigour. But in the present age, it
muff excite some surprise to fee the institution of
an illustrious order connected with a doctrine so
extravagant and destitute of any foundation in
scripture.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 196. [00].

I HAVE frequently had occasion to take notice

of the defers in police during the middle ages
occa!ioned by the feebleness of government, nd

the want of proper subordination among the dif-
ferent ranks of men. I have observed in a former
Note, that this greatly interrupted the intercourse
between nations, and even between different places
in the fame kingdom. The description which the
Spanish historians give of the frequency of rapine,
murder, and every aft of violence, in all the pro-
vinces of Spain, are amazing, and present to us
the idea of a society but little removed from the
disorder and turbulence of that which has been
called a slate of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i,
17r5. ]E. Ant. Nebrifenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar.
Hist. ap. Schottum, II. 849. Though the excess
ofthefe disorders rendered the institution of the
Santa Hermandad necessary, great care was taken
at first to avoid giving any offence or alarm to
the nobility. The jurifdition of the judges of'
theHermandad was expressly confined to crimes
which violated the public peace. All other of-
fences were left to the cognizance of the ordinary
judges. If a person was guilty of the most noto-
rious perjury, in any trial before a judge of the
Hermandad, he could not punish him, but was
obliged to remit the cafe to the ordinary judge
of the place. Commentaria in Regias Hifpan.
Conftitut. per Alph. de Azevedo, pars v. p. 220,
&c, fol. Duaci, 1612. Notwithstanding there
refritions, the barons were early sensible how
mnuch the etablifhment of the Hermandad would
encroach on their jurifdition. In Castile, some
Opposition was made to the institution; but Ser-
dinand had the address to obtain the content of

the

the Constable to the introdution of the Her
mandad into that part of the kingdom where hi
estate lay; and by that means, as well as the po
pularity of the institution, he surmounted ever]
obstacle that flood in its way. ,El. Ant. Ne
briffen. 851. In Ar-agon, the nobles combinec
againit it with greater spirit; and Ferdinand:
though he supported it with vigour, was obliged
to make some concessions, in order to reconcile
them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The
power and revenue of the Hermandad in Castile
seems to have been very great. Ferdinand, when
preparing for the war against the Moors-of Gra-
nada, required of the Hermandad to furnish him
sixteen thousand beasts of burden, cogether with
eight thousand men to conduct them, and he ob-
tained what he demanded. ElI. Ant. Nebriff. 881.
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much
use in preserving peace, and restraining or detect-
ing crimes, that it is frill continued in Spain; but
as it is no longer necessary either for moderating
the power of the nobility, or extending that of
the crown, the vigour and authority of the infti-
tution diminishes gradually.
NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. III. p. 199. [PP]

NOTHING is more common amongAntiquaries,

and there is not a more copious source of error,
than to decide concerning the institutions and
manners of past ages, by the forms and ideas
which prevail in their own times. The French
lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centU-

ricS,

lies, having found their sovereigns in polefllion
of absolute power, seem to think it a duty in-
cumbent on them, to maintain that such un-
bounded authority belonged to the crown in
every period of their monarchy. " The govern-
ment of France," fays M. de Real very gravely,
, is purely monarchical at this day, as it was
from the beginning. Our Kings were absolute
originally as they are at present." Science du
Government, tom. ii. p. -3I. It is impoflible,
however, to conceive two tates of civil society
more unlike to each other, than that of the French
nation under Clovis, and that under Louis XV.
Iris evident from the codes of laws of the various
tribes which fettled in Gaul and the countries
adjacent to it, as well as from the hitfory of Gre-
gory of Tours, and other early annalists, that
among all there people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they had
scarcely begun to acquire the first rudiments of
that order and police which are necessary in ex-
tensive societies. The King or leader had the com-
mand of soldiers or companions, who followed his
landard from choice, not by constraint. I have
produced the clearest evidence of this, Note VI.
An event related by Gregory of Tours, lib. iv.
c 14. affords the most firiking proof of the de-
pendance of the early French Kings on the senti-
ment and inclination of their people. Clota'ire I.
having marched at the head of his army, in the
year 553, against the Saxons, that people, inti-
midated at his approach, sued for peace, and

offcr'ed

offered to pay a large fum to the offended mo.
narch. Clotaire was willing to close with what
they proposed. But his army insisted to be led
forth to battle. The King employed all his
eloquence to persuade them to accept of what
the Saxons were ready to pay. The Saxons, in
order to ooth them, increased their original
offer. The King renewed his solicitations: But
the army, enraged, rushed upon the King, tore
his tent in pieces, dragged him out of it, and
would have slain him on the spot, if he had
not consented to lead 'them i'nstantly against the
enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France possessed such

limited authority, even while at the head of
their army, their prerogative during peace wil
be found to be fill more confined. They as-
cended the throne not by any hereditary right,
but in consequence of the eleeion of their sub-
jeds. In order to avoid an unnecessary number
of quotations, I refer my readers to Hotto
manni Franco-gallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. i573
where they will find the fullest proof of thisfrom
Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the mofR au
thentic historians of the Merovingian Kings
The effe of this eletion was not to inve
them with absolute power. Whatever related t(
the general welfare. of the nation, was fubmaitte
to public deliberation, and determined by th
suffrage of the people, in the annual gffemblie
called Les Champs de Mars and Les Champs de

Mai,

Mai. These alemblies were called Champs, be-
cause, according to the custom of all the barbarous
nations, they were held in the open air, in some
plain capable of containing the vast number of
persons who had a right to be present. Jo. Jac.
Sorberus de Cornitiis veterum Germanorum3
vol. i. § 9, &c. They were denominated
Champs de Mars and de Mai, from the months
in which they were held, Every freeman seems
to have had a right to be present in these assem-
blies. Sorberus, ibid. § 33, &c. The ancient
annals of the Franks describe the persons who
were present in the assembly held A. D. 788, in
there words: In placito Ingelheimenfi conveni-
unt pontifices, majores, minores, facerdotes, re-
guli, duces, corites, prmfeti, cives, oppidani3
Apud Sorber. § 304. There every thing that
concerned the happiness of their country, Lays an
ancient historian, every thing that could be of be-
nefit to the Franks, was confidered and enjoined.
Fredegarius ap. Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Campus
Martii. Chlotharius II. describes the business,
and acknowledges the authority of there aflem-
blies. They are called, fays he, that whatever
relates to the common safety may be confidered
and resolved by common deliberation; and what-
ever they determine, to that I will conform. Amoi-
nus de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Re-
cueil, iii. 116. The statutory clauses, or words of
legifative authority in the decrees iflued in there
aflemblies, run not in the name of the King alone,
"We have treated, fays Childebert, in a decree,
VOL. I. F f A.D.

A. D. 532, in the assembly of March, together
with our nobles, concerning some affairs, and we
now publish the conclusion, that it may come to
the knowledge of all." Childeb. Decret. ap.
Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 3. We
have agreed together with our vassals, Ibid. § 2,
It is agreed in the assembly in which we were all
united.. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws, the most ve.
nerable monument of French jurisprudence, were
enacted in the fame manner. Dietaverunt Salicamn
legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc temporis
apud ear erant Reeores. Sunt autem eleti de
pluribus viri quatuor-qui per tres Mallos conve-
nientes, omnes caufarum origines folicite difcur-
rendo, tradantes de fingulis judicium decreverunt
hoc modo. Pref. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid.
p. I 12. Hoc decretum eft apud regem & prin-
cipes ejus, & apud cunc&um populum chriltianum,
qui infra regnum Merwingorum confiftunt. Ibid.
p. 124. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings
- of the first race are careful to specify that they

were granted with the consent of their vassals. Ego
Childebertus Rex una cum confenfu & volun-
tate Francorum, &c. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid.
622. Chlotharius III. una cum patribus noftris
epifcopis, optimnatibus, czterifque palatii nofri
miniftris, A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu
fidelium nofirorum. Mably Obferv. tom. i.
P. 239. The historians likewise describe the
fiundions of the King in the national assemblies
in tilch terms as imply that his authority there
was extremely fiall, and that every thing de

pended

pended on the court itself. Ipfe Rex (fays the
author of the Annales Francorum, speaking of the
Field of March) fedebat in fella regia, circum-
flanre exercitu, pracipiebatque is, die illo, quic-
quid a Francis decretum erat. Bouquet Recueil,
tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT the general assemblies exercised supreme

jurifdidion over all persons, and with refpe& to all
causes, is so evident as to ltand in need of no proof.
The trial of Brunehaut, A. D. 613, how unjust
soever the sentence against her may be, as related
by Fredegarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet, ibid.
430, is in itself sufficient proof of this. The no-
torious violence and iniquity of the sentence, serve
to demonstrate the extent of jurifdidion which
this assembly possessed, as a Prince so sanguinary
as Clothaire II. thought the fanion of its autho-
rity would be sufficient to justify his rigorous
treatment of the mother and grandmother of so
many Kings.

WITH refpe&t to conferring donatives on the

Prince, we may observe, that among nations
whose manners and political institutions are
simple, the public, as well as individuals, hav-
ing few wants, they are little acquainted with
t.xcs, and siee uncivilised tribes disdain to sub-
mit to any stated imposition. This was remark-
ably the cafe of the Germans, and of all the va-
rious people that issued from that country. Ta-
citus pronounces two tribes not to be of German
O'igin, because they submitted to pay taxes. De

D f 2 Morib.

Morib. Germ.-c. 43. And speaking of another
tribe according to the ideas prevalent in Ger-
many, he fays, c' they were not degraded by the
imposition of taxes." Ibid. c. 29. Upon the
settlement of the Franks in Gaul, we may con.
clude, that while elated with the consciousness
of vitory, they would not renounce the high-
spirited ideas of their ancestors, or voluntarily
submit to a burden which they regarded as a
badge of servitude. The evidence of the earliei
records and historians jufiify this conclusion.
M. de Montesquieu, in the twelfth and fubfe.
quent chapters of the thirteenth book of l'Efprit
des Loix, and M. de Mably Obfervat. fur 'Hist.
de France, tom. i. p. 247, have inveRigated this
fat with great attention, and have proved clearly
that the property of freemen among the Franks
was not subjet to anyftated tax. That the state
required nothing from persons of this rank, but
military service at their own expence, and that
they hould entertain the King in their houses
when he was upon any progress through his do-
minions, or his officers when sent on any public
employment, furnifhirg them with carriages and
horses. Monarchs subsistec- almost entirely upon
the revenues of their own domains, and upon the
perquisites arising from the adrniniftration of
justice, together with a few small fines and for-
feitures exaEted from such as had been guilty of
certain trespasses. It is foreign from my subjea
to enumerate these. The reader may find them
in Obfervat. de M. de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

WVEN

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by

free men to their sovereign, it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May,
it was the custom to make the King a present of
money, of horses or arms; or of ome other thing
of value. This was an ancient cuftorn, and derived
from their ancestors the Germans. Mos.eft civi-
tatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus vel
armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honore accep-
tnm, etiam neceffitatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor.
Germ. c. 15. These gifts, if we may form a judg-
ment concerning them-from the general terms in
which they are mentioned by the ancient hifto-
rians, were considerable, and made no small part
of the royal revenue. Many pafages to this pur-
pose are produced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. fur
Joinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people
specified the gift which they bound themselves to
pay annually, and it was exacted as a debt if they
failed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid.
p. 155. It is probable, that the first ftep towards
taxation was to acertain the value of there gifts
which were originally gratuitous, and to compel
the people to pay the fum at which they were rated.
Still, however, some memory of their original
waspreferved, and the aids granted to monarchs
in all the kingdoms of Europe were termed be-
nevolences or free gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raised to the throne by the election of the people.
Iepinus Rex pius, fays an author who wrote a few

F f 3 years

years after the tranfafion which he records, per
authoritatem Papa, & unctionem fan&i chrifmatis
& electionem omnium Francorum in regni folio
fublimatus eft. Claufula de Pepini confecratione
ap. Bouq. Recueil. des Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At
the fame time, as the chief men of the nation had
transferred the crown from one family to another,
an oath was exafted of them, that they should
maintain on the throne the family which they had
now promoted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis
regem in avo praefumant eligere. Ibid. p. c.
This oath the nation faithfully observed during a
considerable space of time. The posterity of Pepin
kept poffeflion of the throne; but with refpe to
the manner of dividing their dominions among
their children, Princes were obliged to consult
the general afembly of the nation. Thus Pepin
himself, A. D. 768, appointed his two sons,
Charles and Carlomannus, to reign as joint fove-
reigns; but he did this, una cum confenfu Fran-
corum et procerum fuorum feu & epifcoporum,
before whom he laid the matter in their general
afembly. Conventus apud sanctum Dionyfium,
Capitular. vol. i . p. 87. This destination the
French confirmed in a subsequent assembly,
which was called upon the death of Pepin; for,
as Eginhart relates, they not only appointed them
Kings, but by their authority they regulated the
limits of their refpeaive territories. Vita Car.
Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. 90. In
the fame manner, it was by the authority of the
fupreae aflilnblies that any dispute which arose

among

I

among the descendants of the royal family was
determined. Charlemagne recognizes this im-
portant part of their jurifdiaion, and confirms it
in his charter concerning the partition of his do-
minions; for he appoints, that, in cafe of any
uncertainty with respect to the right of the several
competitors, he whom the people shall chufe, shall
succeed to the crown. Capitular. vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings the assembly
of the nation, distinguished by the name of Con-
ventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly assembled
once a year at least, and frequently twice in the
year. One of the most valuable monuments of
the history of France is the treatise of Hincmarus,
archbishop of Rheims, de ordine Palatii. He died
A. D. 882, only fixty-eight years after Charle-
magne, and he relates in that short discourse the
sacs which were communicated to him by Adal-
hardus, a minister and confident of Charlemagne.
From him we learn, that this great monarch never
failed to hold the general assembly of his fubjeas
every year. In quo placito generalitas univer-
forum majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum
conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii.
c. 29. 2 . In these assemblies, matters which
related to the general safety and slate of the king-
dom were always discussed, before they entered
upon any private or less important business. Ibid.
c. 33. p. 213. His immediate successors imitated
his example, and tranfated no affair of import-
ance without the advice of their great council,

F f4 UNNDER

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius ol

the French government continued to be in a good
measure democratical. The nobles, the dignified
ecclesiastics, and the great officers of the crown,
were not the only members of the national coun-
cil; the people, or the whole body of free-men,
either in person or by their representatives, had
a right to be present in it. Hincmarus, in de-
scribing the manner of holding the general assem-
blies, fays, that if the weather was favourable,
they met in the open air; but if otherwise, they
had different apartments allotted to them: so that
the dignified clergy were separated from the laity,
and the comites vel hujufmodi principes fibimet
honorificabiliter a catera multitudine fegregaren-
tur. Ibid. c. 35- P. I I4. Agobardus, archbilhop
of Lyons, thus describes a national council in the
year 833, wherein he was present. Qui ubique
conventus extitit ex reverehdiffimis epifcopis, &
magnificentiffimis viris illutribus, collegio quoque
abbatum & comitum, promifcuaque atatis et
dignitatis populo. The cetera multitudo of Hinc-
marus is the fame with the populus of Agobatdus,
and both describe the inferior order of free-men,
the fame who were afterwards known in France
by the name of the third estate, and in England
by the name of commons. The people, as well
as the members of higher dignity, were admitted
to a share of the egiflative power. Thus, by a
law, A. D. 803, it is ordained, S( that the question
iall be put to the people with relpect to every
pew law, and if they flall agree to it, they iall

o ^lirrl

confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol. i. 394.
There are two capitularia which convey to us a
full idea of the part which the people took in the
administration of government. When they. felt
the weight of any grievance, they had a right to
petition the sovereign for redress. One of there
petitions, in which they desire that ecclefiatics
might be exempted from bearing arms, and from
serving in person against the enemy, is Rill extant.
It is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D.803, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used
only by men conscious of liberty, and of the ex-
tensive privileges which they possessed. They con-
clude with requiring him to grant their demand,
if he wished that they hould any longer continue
faithful fubjeas to him. That great monarch,
inflead of being offended or surprised at the bold-
ness of their petition, received it in a most gracious
manner, and signified his willingness to comply
with it. But sensible that he himself did not
p0osess legislative authority, he promises to lay the
matter before the next general assembly, that such
hings as were of common concern to all might
be there confidered and eftablified by common
consent. Capitul. tom. . p. 405-409. As the
people by their petitions brought matters to be
proposed in the general assembly, we learn from
another capitulare the form in which they were
approved there, and enacted as laws. The pro-
POsitions were read aloud, and then the people
were required to declare whether they assented to
hem or not, They signified their assent by crying

$ three

three times, " We are satisfied,' and then the
capitulare was confirmed by the subscription ot
the monarch, the clergy, and the chief men of the
laity. Capitul. torn. i. p. 67. A. D. 822. It
seems probable from a capitulare of Carolus
Calvus, A. D. 851, that the sovereign could not
refute his assent to what was proposed and eta-
blifhed by his fubjeds in the general assembly.
Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is un.
necessary to multiply quotations concerning the
legislative power of the national assembly of France
under the econd race, or concerning its right to
determine with regard to peace and war. The
uniform style of the Capitularia is an abundant
confirmation of the former. The reader who de-
fires any farther information with respect to the
latter, may consult Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gou-
vernement de la France, &c. tom. iii. p. 87, &c.
What has been said with refpet to the admillion
of the people or their representatives into the fu.
preme assembly merits attention, not only in tracing
the progress of the French government, but on
account of the light which it throws upon a fimi-
lar question agitated in England, concerning the
time when the commons became part of the le-
gilative body in that kingdom.
NOTE XXXIX. Scr. III. p. 201. [QQj

THAT' important change which the constitution

of France underwent, when the legislative power
was transferred from the great' council of the
nation to the King, has been explained by the

I French

French antiquaries with less care than they
bellow in illurating other events in their history.
For that reason I have endeavoured with greater
attention to trace the steps which led to this me-
morable revolution. I shall here add ome par-
ticulars which tend to throw additional light upon
it. The Leges Salicea, the Leges Burgundio-
num, and other codes published by the several
tribes which Iettled in Gaul, were general laws
extending to every person, to every province and
diftrid where the authority of those tribes was ac-
knowledged. .But they seem to have become
obsolete; and the reason of their falling into dif-
use is very obvious. Almoff the whole property
of the nation was allodial when these laws were
framed. But when the feudal inflitutions be-
came general, and gave rife to an infinite variety
ofqueftions peculiar to that species of tenure, the
ancient codes were of no use in deciding with re-
gard to these, because they could not contain
regulations applicable to cafes which did not exist
at the time when they were compiled. This con-
fiderable change in the nature of property made.
it necessary to publish the new regulations con-
tained in the Capitularia. Many of these, as is.
evident from the perusal of them, were public.
laws extending to the whole French nation, in
the general assembly of which they were enacted.
The weakness of the greater part of the monarchs
ofthe second race, and the disorder into which
the nation was thrown by the depredations of the.
Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an in-

dependent

dependent power formerly. unknown in France.
The nature and extent of that jurisdiction which
they assumed I have formerly confidered. The
political union of the kingdom was at an end, its
ancient confticution was diflolved, and only a
feudal relation subsisted between the King and his
vassals. The regal jurifdition extended no fur-
ther than the domains of the. crown. Under the
last Kings of the second race, there were reduced
almost to nothing. Under the first Kings of the
third race, they comprehended little more than
the patrimonial estate of Hugh Caput, which he
annexed to the crown. Even with this acceflion,
they continued to be of small extent. Velley, Hist.
de France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of the most con-
fiderable provinces in France did not at first ac-
knowledge Hugh Caput as a lawful Monarch.
There are frill extant several charters, granted
during the first years of his reign, with this re-
markable clause in the form of dating the charter;
' Deo regnante, rege expeAante," regnante do-
mino noftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis autem contra
jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil, tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title
was thus openly disputed, was not in a condition
to assert the royal jurisdiction, or to limit that of
the barons.

ALL thee circumfRances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia became no
less obsolete than the ancient laws; local cuftonms

were

were every where introduced, and became the foe
rule by which all civil transactions were condu&ed,
and all causes were tried. The wonderful igno-
rance, which became general in France during
the ninth and tenth centuries contributed to the
introduction of customary law. Few persons, ex-
cept ecclefiafics, could read; and as it was not
in the power of such illiterate persons to have re-
course to written laws, either as their guide in
business, or their rule in administering justice, the
customary law, the knowledge of which was pre-
served by tradition, universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general assembly of
the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. Local
customs regulated and decided every thing. A
riking proof of this occurs in tracing the pro-
grefs of the French jurisprudence. The last of
the Capitularia colle&ted by M. Baluze, was issued
in the year 92r, by Charles the Simple. An
hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period
to the publication of the first ordonance of the
Kings of the third race, contained in the great
colleCtion of M. Lauriere, and the first ordonance
which appears to be an a& of legislation extend-
ing to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Au-
gufus, A. D. 90. Ordon. tom. i. p. I. 8.
During that long period of two hundred and sixty-
ine years, all tranfa&ions were directed by local
cutoms, and no addition was made to the ftatu-
tory law of France. The ordonances, previous to

the

the reign of Philip Augustus, contain regulations,
the authority of which did not extend beyond the
King's domains.

VARIOUS instances occur of the caution with

which the Kings of France ventured at first t
exercise legislative authority. M. 'Ab. de Mably
produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A.D.
1 206, concerning the Jews, who, in that age, were
in ome measure the property of the lord in whose
territories they resided. But it is rather atreaty
of the King with the countess of Champagne, and
the compte de Dampierre, than an a of royal
power; and the regulations in it seem to be efla
blifhed not so much by his authority, as by thei
content. Obfervat. fur 1' Hist. de France, ii. p. 35
In the fame manner an ordonance of Louis VIII
concerning the Jews, A.D. 1223, is a contra
between the King and his nobles, with refpet
their manner of treating that unhappy race o
men. Ordon. torn. i. p. 47. The Eftabliffemen
of St. Louis, though well adapted to serve as ge
neral laws to the whole kingdom, were not pub
lilhed as such, but only as a complete code
customary law, to be of authority within the King'
domains. The wisdom, the equity, and theorde
conspicuous in that code of St. Louis, procuredi
a favourable reception throughout the kingdom
The veneration due to the virtues and goodin
tentions of its author, contributed not a little t
reconcile the nation to that legislative authority
which the King began to aiume. Soon after I

reigl

reign of St. Louis, the idea of the King's posses-
sing supreme legislative power became common.
If, fays Beaumanoir, the King makes any eftabliih-
ment specially for his own domain, the barons
may nevertheless adhere to their ancient customs;
but if the establishment be general, it hall be
current throughout the whole kingdom, and we
ought to believe that such eftahlilhnaents are
made with mature deliberation, and -for the ge-
neral good. Count de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p.'265.
Though the Kings of the third race did not call
the general assembly of the nation, during the
long period from Hugh Caput to Philip the Fair,
yet they eem to have consulted the biflops and
barons who happened to be present in their court,
with refpeEt to any new law which they published.
Examples of this occur Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5.
This pradice seems to have continued as late as
the reign of St. Louis, when the legislative au-
thority of the crown was well eftabliliied. Ordon.
tonm. i. p. 58. A. D. 1246. This attention paid
to the barons facilitated the King's acqu;;ing such
full pofeffion of the legislative power, as enabled
them afterwards to exercise it without observing
that formality.

THE assemblies distinguished by the name of
the States General, were first called A. D. 1301.
and were held occasionally from that period to
the year 614, since which time they have not
been flnmmoned. These were very different from
the ancient assemblies of the French nation under

the

the Kings of the first and second race. There is
no point with refpe& to which the French anti-
quaries are more generally agreed, than in main-
taining that the States General had no suffrage in
the passing of laws, and pofefied no proper legis.
lative jurisdiction. The whole tenor of the French
hiltory confirms this opinion. The form of pro.
ceeding in the States General was this:-The King
addressed himself, at opening the meeting, to the
whole body assembled in one place, and laid be.
fore them the affairs on account of which he had
Summoned them. Then the deputies of each of
the three orders, of nobles, of clergy, and of the
third estate, met apart, and prepared their cahier
or memorial, containing their answer to the pro.
positions which had been made to them, together
with the representations which they thought pro-
per to lay before the King. These answers and re-
presentations were confidered by the King in his
council, and generally gave rife to an ordonance.
These ordonances were not addressed to the three
estates in common. Sometimes the King addressed
an ordonance to each of the estates in particular.
Sometimes he mentioned the assembly of the three
estates. Sometimes mention is made only of the
assembly of that estate to which the ordonance is
addressed. Sometimes no mention at all is made
of the assembly of estates, which suggested the
propriety of enacting the law. Preface au tom. 11
des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the States General had
only the privilege of advising and remontrating3
the legislative authority resided in the King alone.

NOTE

NOTE XL. SECT. III. p. 206. [RR].

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only
as the supreme court of juffice, every thing rela-
tive to its origin and jurifdition is clear and ob-
vious. It is the ancient court of the King's palace,
new-modelled, rendered stationary, and invested
with an extensive and acertained jurifdiion. The
power of this court, while employed in this part
of its functions,* is not the object of present con-
fideration. The pretensions of the parliament to
control the exercise of the legislative authority,
and its claim of a right to interpose with respect
to public affairs and the political adminiffration
of the kingdom, lead to inquiries attended'with
great difficulty. As the officers and members of
the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated
by the King, were paid by him, and on several
occasions were removed by him a pleasure (Chro-
nic. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. chez les Mem. de
Comines, torn. ii. p. 5i. Edit. de M. Lenglet de
Frefnoy), they cannot be confidered as represent-
atives of the people, nor could they claim any
share in the legislative power as acting in their
name. We must therefore search for ome other
source of this high privilege. The parliament was
Originally composed of the mofl eminent persons
In the kingdom. The peers of France, eccle-
fiaftics of the highest order, and noblemen of il-
lttrious birth, were members of it, to whom were
added ome clerks and counsellors learned in the
VOL. I. G g laws.

laws. Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Ency.
clopedie, tom. xii. Art. Parlement . 3. 5. A
court thus constituted was properly a committee
of the States General of the kingdom, and was
compored of those barons and fideles, whom the
Kings of France were accustomed to consult with
regard to every aft of jurifdiaion or legislative
authority. It was natural, therefore, during the
intervals between the meetings of the States Ge.
neral, or during those periods when that assembly
was not called, to consult the parliament, to lay
matters of public concern before it, and to ob.
tain its approbation and concurrence, before any
ordonance was published, to which the people
were required to conform. 2. Under the second
race of Kings, every new law was reduced into
proper form by the Chancellor of the kingdom,
was proposed by him to the people, and when
enaaced, was committed to him to be kept among
the public records, that he might give authentic
copies of it to all who should demand them.
Hincm. de Ord. Palat. c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv.
tit. xiv. § i. tit. xxxiii. The Chancellor presided
in the parliament of Paris at its first inflitution.
Encyclopedie, ton. iii. art. Chancelier, p. 88. It
was therefore natural for the King to continue to
employ him in his ancient functions of framig,
taking into his custody, and publishing the ordo-
nances which were issued. To an ancient copy
of the Capitularia of Charlemagne, the following
words are subjoined: Anno tertio cleilcntililni
domini noftri Caroli Augufti, sub ipso anno, h:tc

faaa Capitula funt, & confignata Stephano comi-
ti, t hlc manifefta faceret Parifiis mallo publico,
& illa legere faceret corarri Scabineis, quod ita
& fecir, & omnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipfi
voluifrent obfervare ufque in pofterum, etiam om-
nes Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Cornies, manu
propria fubter fignaveruntc Bouquet Recueil,
tom. v. p. 663. Mallus signifies not only the pub-
lic afembly of the nation, but the court ofjuftice
held by the Comes, or missus dominicus. Scabini
were the judges, or the assessors of the judges in
that court. Here then seems to be a very early
inifance, not only of laws being. published in a
court of justice, but of their being verified or
confirmed by the subscription of the judges. If
this was the common practice, it naturally intro-
duced the verifying of dicts in the parliament of
Paris. But this conjecture I propose with that
diffidence, which I have felt in all my reasonings
concerning the laws and infiitutions of foreign
nations. 3. This supreme court of jultice in
France was dignified with the appellation of par-
liament, the name by which the general afembly
of the nation was distinguished towards the close
of the second race of Kings; and men, both in
reasoning and in conduEt, are wonderfully influ-
enced by the similarity of names. The preserving
the ancient names of the magiltrates established
whlile the republican government fibfifted in
Rome, enabled Augustus and his successors to
aflume new powers with lels ob!ervation and
greater ealf. The bestowing the fame name in

G g 2 lrance

France upon two courts, which were extremely
different, contributed not a little to confound
their jurifdidtion and functions.

ALL there circumstances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the par-
liament of Paris, as the instrument of reconciling
the people to the exercise of legislative authority
by the Crown. The French, accustomed to fee
all new laws examined and authorised before they
were published, did not sufficiently distinguish be-
tween the effec of performing this in the national
afiembly, or in a court appointed by the King.
But as that court was composed of refpeaable
members, and who were well skilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edict received its
sanction, that was sufficient to dispose the people
to submit to it.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regiJterilg

the royal ediEts in the parliament of Paris became
common, the parliament contended that this was
neceflary in order to give them legal authority It
was eftablithed as a fundamental maxim in French
jurisprudence, that no law could be published in
any other manner; that without this formality no
ed(ii or ordonance could have any effect; that tle
people were not bound to obey it, and ought not
to confider it as an edict or ordonance until it was
verified in the supreme court, after free delibera-
tion. Roche-flavin des Parlemens de France, 4t0.
Gen. 6li. p. 921. The parliament, at different
times, hath, with great fortitude and integrityJ

opposed

opposed the will of their sovereigns; and, notwith-
rfanding repeated and peremptory requisitions and
commands of the crown, hath refused to verify and
publish such edits as it conceived to be oppressive
to the people, or subversive of the confiitution of
the kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons, that between
the year 1562 and the year 1589, the parliament
refused to verify more than a hundred edicts of
the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many inflances of the
spirit and constancy with which the parliaments of
France opposed pernicious laws, and asserted their
own privileges, are enumerated by Limneus in
his Notitiae Regni Francie, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain
and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to its
importance, or to the courage with which the mem-
bers afflrted it. When any monarch was deter-
mined that an ediEt should be carried into execu-
tion, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved
not to verify or publilh it, he c6uld easily supply
this defect by the plenitude of his regal power.
He repaired to the parliament in person, he took
pofleflion of his feat of justice, and commanded
the ediEt to be read, verified, registered, and pub-
ihed in his presence. Then, according to ano-
ther maxim of French law, the king himself being
prefcnt, neither the parliament, nor any magistrate
whatever, can exercise any authority, or perform
any funlion. Adveniente Principe, celfat magif-
tratus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Ency-
c0ol)iie, toln. ix. Art. Lit. de 7Jice, p. 58 .

G g 3 Roche-
* ~ ~

France upon two courts, which were extremely
different, contributed not a little to confound
their jurisdiction and functions.

ALL thee circumstances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the par-
liament of Paris, as the instrument of reconciling
the people to the exercise of legislative authority
by the Crown. The French, accutfomed to fee
all new laws.examined and authorised before they
were published, did not sufficiently distinguish be-
tween the effect of performing this in the national
assembly, or in a court appointed by the King.
But as that court was composed of refpe&able
members, and who were well skilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edict received its
fantion, that was sufficient to dispose the people
to submit to it.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regi/ering

the royal edicts in the parliament of Paris became
common, the parliament contended that this was
necessary in order to give them legal authority It
was established as a fundamental maxim in French
uriifprudence, that no law could be published in
any other manner; that without this formality no
e(ijt or ordonance could have any effect; that the
people were not bound to obey it, and ought not
to confider it as an edict or ordonance until it was
verified in the supreme court, after free delibera-
tion. Roche-favin des Parlemens de France, 4to.
Gen. 1621. p. 92I. The parliament, at different
times, hath, with great fortitude and integrity,

opposed

opposed the will of their sovereigns; and, notwith-
standing repeated and peremptory requisitions and
commands of the crown, hath refused to verify and
publish such edicts as it conceived to be oppressive
to the people, or subversive of the confticution of
the kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons, that between
the year 1562 and the year I589, the parliament
refused to verify more than a hundred edits of
the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many instances of the
spirit and constancy with which the parliaments of
France opposed pernicious laws, and aferted their
own privileges, are enumerated by Limnseus in
his Notitia Regni Franciae, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to its
importance, or to the courage with which the mem-
bers aflerted it. When any monarch was deter-
mined that an edit hould be carried into execu-
tion, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved
not to verify or publilh it, he culd easily supply
this defect by the plenitude of his regal power.
He repaired to the parliament in person, he took
poffeflion of his feat of justice, and commanded
the edict to be read, verified, registered, and pub-
lilhed in his pretence. Then, according to ano-
ther maxim of French law, the king himself being
present, neither the parliament, nor any magistrate
whatever, can exercise any authority, or perform
any funt-ion. Adveniente Principe, ceffat magif-
tratus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Ency-
clopedie, torn. ix. Art. Lit. de 7ujfice, p. 581.

G g 3 Roche-

Roche-flavin mentions several instances of Kings
who aually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the residue of the rights and liberties transmitted
to the French by their ancestors. Pafquier pro-
duces some instances of the fame kind. Rech.
p. 61. Limnaus enumerates many other instances,
but the length to which this note has swelled pre-
vents me from inserting them at length, though
they tend greatly to illustrate this important ar-
ticle in the French history, p. 245. Thus by an
exertion of prerogative, which, though violent,
seems to be constitutional, and is justified by in-
numerable precedents, all the efforts of the par-
liament to limit and control the King's legifla-
tive authority, are rendered ineffecEual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the conRitu-

tion or jurisdiction of any parliament in France
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that most ancient and refpetable tri-
bunal, and all my observations concerning it will
apply with full force to them.

NOTE XLI. SECT. III. p. 211. [SS].

THE humiliating posture in which a great Em-

peror implored absolution is an event so singular,
that the words in which Gregory himself describes
it merit a place here, and convey a striking pic-
ture of the arrogance of that Pontiff. Per triduum,
ante portam caftri, depofito omni regio cultu, mi-
firabiliter, utpote difcalceatus, & laneis indutus,

perfiftens,

perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu apoftolica-'
miferationis auxilium, & consolationem implorari
deftitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paffionis mifericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis
precibus & lacrymis intercedentes, omnes quidem
infolitam noftrs mentis duritiem mirarentur;
nonnulli vero in nobis non apoftolica fedis gra-
vitatem, fed quasi tyrannica feritatis crudelitatem
effe clamarunt. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della
Conteffa Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Luc-
ca, 756, vol. i. p. I74.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 222. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various steps in the progress of the conftitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculiari-
ties in its policy very fully, it is not necessary to
add much by way of illustration. What appears
to be of any importance, I shall range under dif-
tipnt heads.

I. WITH refpet to the power, jurifdition, and

revenue of the Emperors. A very just idea of
these may be formed by attending to the view
which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the Emperors
at two different periods. The first at the close of
the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, according to
his enumeration, were the right of conferring all
the great ecclcfiaftical benefices in Germany; of
Receiving the revenues of them during a vacancy;

G 4 of

Roche-flavin mentions several instances of Kings
who aually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the residue of the rights and liberties tranfiitted
to the French by their ancestors. Pafquier pro-
duces some instances of the fame kind. Rech.
p. 61. Limnaxus enumerates many other instances,
but the length to which this note has swelled pre-
vents me from inserting them at length, though
they tend greatly to illustrate this important ar-
ticle in the French history, p. 245. Thus by an
exertion of prerogative, which, though violent,
seems to be constitutional, and is justified by in-
numerable precedents, all the efforts of the par-
liameht to limit and control the King's legifla-
tive authority, are rendered ineffectual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the conftitu-

tion or jurifdition of any parliament in France
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that most ancient and refpe&able tri-
bunal, and all my observations concerning it will
apply with full force to them.

NOT XLI SECT.

S III. . 211. [SS].

THE humiliating posture in which a great Em-

peror implored absolution is an event so singular,
that the words in which Gregory himself describes
it merit a place here, and convey a triking pic-
ture of the arrogance of that Pontiff. Per triduum,
ante portam caftri, depofito omni regio cultu, mi-
fcrabiliter, utpote difcalceatus, & laneis indutus,

perfiftens,

perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu apoftolica-'
miferationis auxilium, & consolationem implorari
deftitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paflionis mifericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis
precibus & lacrymis intercedentes, omnes quidem
infolitam notr mentis duritiem mirarentur;
nonnulli vero in nobis non apoftolicae fedis gra-
vitatem, fed quasi tyrannics feritatis crudelitatem
effe clamarunt. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della
Conteffa Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Luc-
ca, 1756, vol. i. p. 74.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 222. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various steps in the progress of the conftitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculiari-
ties in its policy very fully, it is not necessary to
add much by way of illufiration. What appears
to be of any importance, I shall range under dif-
tipt heads.

I. WITH refpet to the power, jurifdition, and

revenue of the Emperors. A very just idea of
these may be formed by attending to the view
which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the Emperors
at two different periods. The first at the close of
the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, according to
his enumeration, were the right of conferring all
the great ecclesiastical benefices in Germany; of
receiving the revenues of them during a vacancy;

G g 4 of

of mortmain, or of ucceeding to the effects of
ecclesiastics who died intestate. The right of con-
firming or of annulling the elecions of the Popes.
The right of assembling councils, and of appoint-
ing them to decide concerning the affairs of the
church. The right of conferring the title of King
upon their valTals. The right, of granting vacant:
fess. The right of receiving the revenues of the:
Empire, whether arifing'from the Imperial do-
mains, froii imposts and tolls, from. gold or silver,
mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews, or from,
forfeitures. The right of governing Italy as its,
proper sovereigns. The right of ereEting free
cities, and of establishing fairs in them. The right
of assembling the diets of' the Empire, and of fix-
ing the time of their duration. The right of coin-
ing money, and of conferring that privilege on, the;
states of the Empire. The right of administering
both high and low justice within the territories of;
the different states. Abrege, p. i60. The other
period is at the extinction of the Emperors of. the
families of Luxemburg and Bavaria, A. .J43j7,
According to the fame author, the Imperial pre-
rogatives at that time were the right of conferring
all dignities and titles, except the privilege of
being a late of the Empire. The right of Pr.eces
primari e, or of appointing once during their reign
a dignitary in each chapter or religious house.
The right of granting dispensations with respect
to the age of majority. The right of erecting
cities, and of conferring the privilege of coining
money. The right of calling the meetings of the

diet,

diet, and of presiding in them. Abrege, &c.
p. 507. It were easy to show that Mr. Pfeffel is
well founded in all these assertions, and to con-
firm them by the testimony of the most refpe&t-
able authors. In the one period, the EmRerors
appear as mighty sovereigns with extensive pre-
rogatives; in the other, as the heads of a con-
federacy with very limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased till
more than their authority. The early Empe-rors,
and particularly those of the Saxon line, besides
their great patrimonial or hereditary territories,
pofeffed an extensive domain both in Italy and
Germany, which belonged to them as Emperors.
Italy belonged to the Emperors as their proper
kingdom, and the revenues which they drew
from it were very considerable. The first aliena-
tions of the Imperial revenue were made in that
country. The Italian cities havingacquired wealth;
and aspiring at independence, pirchafed their
liberty from different Emperors, as I have ob-
served, Note XV. The fums which they paid,
and the Emperors with whom: they concluded
these bargains, are mentioned by Cafp. Klockius
deArario Norimb. 1671, p. 85, &c. Charles IV.
and his son Wenceslaus, difipated all that re-
mained of the Italian branch of the domain. The
German domain lay chiefly upon the banks of the
Rhine, and was under the government of the
Counts Palatine. It is not easy to mark out the
boundaries, or to estimate the value of this an-
cient domain, which has been so long incorpo-

rated

rated with the territories of different 'Princes.
Some hints with refpe& to it may be found in the
glossary of Speidelius, which he has intitled Spe-
culum Juridico Philologico-politico Hiftoricum
Obfervationum, &c. Norimb. 1673, vol. i. 679.
1045. a more full account of it is given by Kloc-
kius de Erario, p. 84. Besides this, the Em-
perors possessed considerable diftrits of land ly-
ing intermixed with the estates of the dukes and
barons. They were accuftoned to visit these
frequently, and drew from their vassals in each
what was sufficient to support their court during
the time of their residence among them. Anna-
lifta. ap. Struv. tomr. i. 61I. A great part of
these detached pofeffions were seized by the
nobles during the long interregnum, or during
the wars occasioned by the contests between the
Emperors and the court of Rome. At the fame
time that such encroachments were made on the
fixed or territorial property of the Emperors, they
were robbed almost entirely of their casual reve-
nues. The Princes and barons appropriating to
themselves taxes and duties of every kind, which
had usually been paid to them. Pfeffel Abrege,
p. 374. The profuse and inconsiderate ambition
of Charles IV. squandered whatever remained of
the Imperial revenues after so many defalcations.
He, in the year 1376, in order to prevail with
the Electors to chufe his son Wenceslaus King of
the Romans, promised each of them a hundred
thousand crowns. But being unable to pay so
large a fmn, and eager to secure the election to
his son, he alienated to the three ecclesiastical

Elecors,

Eleftors, and to the Count Palatine, such coun-
tries as flill belonged to the Imperial domain on
the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over
to them all the taxes and tolls then levied by the
Emperors in that distriCt. Trithemius, and the
author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh, enu-
merate the territories and taxes which were thus
alienated, and represent this as the last and fatal
blow to the Imperial authority. Struv. Corp.
vol. i. p. 437. From that period the ihreds of
the ancient revenues possesseQ by the Emperors
have been so inconsiderable, that, in the opinion
of Speidelius, all that they yield would be so far
from defraying the expence of supporting their
houfchold, that they would not pay the charge of
maintaining the potls established in the Empire.
Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680. These
funds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to
decrease. Granvelle, the minister of Charles V,
aferted in the year 1546, in presence of several
of the German princes, that his mailer drew no
money at all from the Empire. Sleid. History of
the Reformation, Lond. 1689. p. 372. The fame
is the cafe at prefenr. Traire de droite publique
de l'Empire, par M. le Coq. de Villeray, p. 55.
From the reign of Charles IV. whom Maximi-
lian called the pelt of the Empire, the Emperors
have depended entirely on their hereditary do-
minions, as the chief, and almost the only
source of their power, and even of their sub-
liftence.

2. THt

^. THE ancient mode of eleting the Empe

rors, and the various changes which it underwent,
require rome illustration. The Imperial crown
was originally obtained by election, as well as
thdfe of most monarchies in Europe. An opinion
long prevailed among the antiquaries and public
lawyers of Germany, that the right of chunrig the
Emperors was vefed in the archbishops of Mentz,
Cologne, and Treves, the King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edic
of Otho III. confirmed by Gregory V. about the
year 996. But the whole tenor of hiflory contra-
di&s this opinion. It appears, that from the ear-
lieft period in the history of Germany, the person
who was to reign over all, was elected by the sus-
frage of all. Thus Conrad I. was ele6ted by all
the people of the Franks, fay ome annalists; by
all the princes- and chief men, fay others; by all
the nation, fay others. See their words, Struv.
Corp. 21x . Conringius de German. Imper. Repub.
Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 654. p. 103. In the
year 1024, posterior to the supposed regulations
of Otho III. Conrad II. was eleced by all the
chief men, and his election was approved and con-
firmed by the people, Struv: Corp. 284. At the
eleEcion ofLotharius II. A. D. I 125, sixty thou-
sand persons of all ranks were present. He was
named by the chief men, and their nomination was
approved by the people. Struv. ibid. p. 357. The
first author who mentions the even Elecors is
Martinus Polonus, who flourilhed in the reign of

Frederick

Frederick II. which ended A. D. 1250. We find
that in all the ancient elections to which I have
referred, the Princes of the greatest power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen to
name the person whom they wished to appoint
Emperor, and the people approved or disapproved
of their nomination. This privilege of voting firit
is called by the German lawyers the right of Pre-
taxation. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was the
firt origin of the exclusive right which the Elec-
tors acquired. The Eletors pofeffed the mos
extensive territories of any princes in the Empire;
all the great offices of the fate were in their hands
by hereditary right; as oon as they obtained or
engrosed so much influence in the election as to be
allowed the right of prataxation, it was vain to op-
poe their will, and it even became unnecessary for
the inferior ecclesiastics and barons to attend, when
they had no other fun&tion but that of confirm-
ing the deed of there more powerful Princes by
their assent. During times of turbulence, the
fuibordinate members of the Germanic body could
not retort to the place of election without a reti-
nue of armed vassals, the expence of which they
were obliged to defray out of their own revenues;
and finding their attendance to be unnecefl.ry,
they were unwilling to waste them to no purpose.
Therights of the seven Eletors were supported
by all the descendants and allies of their powerful
fanilies, who hared in the splendor and influ-
ence which they enjoyed by this diftinguilhing
privilege. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 376. The seven

I Electors

Ele&ors were confidered as the reprelentatives o
all the orders which composed the highest clafi
.of German nobility. There were three arch.
bishops, chancellors of the three great diftrtó;
into which the Empire was anciently divided; one
King, one Duke, one Marquis, and orie Count,
All there circumstances contributed to render the
introdution of this considerable innovation into
the constitution of the Germanic body extremely
easy. Every thing of importance, relating to this
branch of the political ate of the Empire is well
illustrated by Onuphrius Panvinius, an Augufti-
nian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of
Charles V. His treatise, if we make some allow-
ance for that partiality which he expresses in favour
of the powers which the Popes claimed in the
Empire, has the merit of being one of the first
works in which a controverted point in history is
examined with critical precision, and with a pro-
per attention to that evidence which is derived
from records, or the teffimony of contemporary
historians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his
Politica Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Ele&tors have engrossed the sole right

of chufing the Emperors, they have assumed like-
wife that of deposing them. This high power the
Electors have not only presumed to claim, but
have ventured, in more than one inflance, to exer-
cife. In the year 1298, a part of the Elecors de-
posed Adolphus of Nassau, and fubfticuted Albert
of Austria in his place. The reasons on which

they

they found their sentence, show that this deed
flowed from factious, not from public-fpirited
motives. Struv. Corp. vol. i. 540. In the first
year of the fifteenth century, the EleCtors deposed
Wenceslaus, and placed the Imperial crown on
the head of Rupert Elector Palatine. The aft of
deposition is frill extant. Goldafti Conftit. vol. i.
379. It is pronounced in the name and by -the
authority of the Elecors, and confirmed by several
prelates and barons of the Empire, who were
present. These exertions of the electoral power
demonitrate that the Imperial authority was funk
very low.

THE other privileges of the Electors, and the

rights of the electoral college, are explained by
the writers on the public law in Germany.

3. WITH refpea to the diets or general asem-

blies of the Empire, it would be necefary, if my
object were to write a particular history of Ger-
many, to enter into a minute detail, concerning
the forms of assembling it, the persons who have
right to be present, their division into several Col-
leges or Benches, the objects of their deliberation,
the mode in which they carry on their debates or
give their fuffirages, and the authority of their
decrees or recesses. But as my only object is to
give the outlines of the constitution of the Ger-
man Empire, it will be sufficient to observe, that,
originally, the diets of the Empire were exactly
the fame with the assemblies of March and of
May, held by the Kings of France. They met, at

Icat,

east, once a year. Every freeman had a right
to be present. They were assemblies, in which
a monarch deliberated with his subje&s, con-
cerning their common interest. Arumaus de Co-
mitiis Rom. German. Imperii, 4to. Jenhe, 66o,
cap. 7. N" 20, &c. But when the Princes, dig-
nified ecclesiastics, and barons, acquired terri-
torial and independent jurifdi&ion, the diet be-
came an assembly of the separate states, which
formed the confederacy of which the Emperor
was head. While the conffitution of the Empire
remained in its primitive form, attendance on
the diets was a duty, like the other services due
from feudal subje&s to their sovereign, which
the members were bound to perform in person;
and if any member who had a right to be present
in the diet, negleted to attend in person, he not
only loft his vote, but was liable to an heavy
penalty. Arumaeus deComir. c. 5. N°40. Where-
as, from the time that the members of the diet
became independent states, the right of suffrage
was annexed to the territory or dignity, not to
the person. The members, if they could not,
or would not attend in person, might fend their
deputies, as Princes fend ambassadors, and they
were entitled to exercise all the rights belonging
to their conffituents. Ibid. N° 42. 46. 49. By
degrees, and upon the fame principle of con-
fidering the diet as an assembly of independent
flates, in which each confederate had the right of
suffrage, if any member possessed more than one
of those states or characers which entitle to a feat

in

In the diet, he was allowed a proportional number
of fffrages. Pfeffel Abrege, 622. From the
fame cause the Imperial cities; as fobn as they
became free, and acquired supreme and independ-
ent jurisdiction within their own territories, were
received as members of the diet. The powers of
the diet extend to every thing relative to the com-
mon concern of the 'Germanic body, or that can
interest or assea it as a confederacy. The diet
takes no cognizance of the interior adminifrration
in the different states, unless that happens to disturb
the public peace, or to threaten the general safety.

4. WITH refpeEt to the Imperial chamber, the

jurifdiaion of which has been the great source of
order and tranquillity in Germany, it is neceflary
to observe, that this court was instituted in order
to put an end to the calamities occasioned by pri-
vate wars in Germany, I have already traced the
rife and progress of this praaice, and pointed out
its pernicious effets as fully as their extensive
influence during the middle ages required. In
Germany, private wars seem to have been more
frequent and produaive of worse consequences
than in the other countries of Europe. There are
obvious reasons for this. The nobility of Ger-
many were extremely numerous, and the caues
of their diflention multiplied in proportion. The
territorial jurifdition which the German nobles
acquired, was more complete than that poflhfled
by their order in other nations. They became, in
reality, independent powers, and they claimed all
the privileges of that character. The long inter-

Vo. I. H h regnum

regnum from A. D. 256. to A. D. 1273, accuf-
tomed them to an uncontrouled licence, and led
them to forget that subordination which is ne-
ceffary in order to maintain public tranquillity.
At the time when the other monarchs of Europe
began to acquire such an increase of power and
revenues as added new vigour to their govern-
ment, the authority and revenues of the Em-
perors continued gradually to decline. The diets
of the Empire, which alone had authority to judge
between such mighty barons, and power to en-
force its decisions, met very seldom. Conring.
Acroamata, p. 234. The diets, when they did
assemble, were often composed of several thou-
sand members, Chronic. Confat. ap. Struv.
Corp. i. p. 546, and were tumultuary assemblies,
ill qualified to decide concerning any question of
-right. The fefion of the diets continued only
two or three days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244: so
that they had no time to hear or discu's any cause
that was in the smallest degree intricate. Thus
Germany was left, in some measure, without any
court of judicature capable of deciding the con-
tests between its more powerful members, or of
reprefling the evils occasioned by their private
wars.

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe, in order to reitrain this
practice, and which I have described Note XXI.
were tried in Germany with little effeA. The
confederacies of the nobles and of the cities, and
the division of Germany into various circles, which

5 I mnen-

! mentioned in that Note, were found likewise
insufficient. As a last remedy, the Germans had
recourse to arbiters whom they called A4uj2rege.
The barons and tates .in different parts of Ger-
many joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all controveries that might
arise between them to the determination.of Auft-
rege, and to submit ito their sentences as finali
These arbiters are named sometimes in the treaty
of convention, an instance of which occurs in
Ludewig Reliqua: Manufcr. omnis xevi, vol. ii.
212; ometimes they were chosen by mutual con-
sent upon occasion of any contest that arose;
sometimes they were appointed by .neutral per-
sons; and ometimes the choice was left to be
decided by lot. Da.t. de Pace publica Imperii,
lib. i. cap. 27. No. 6o,&cc. Speidelius Speculum,
&c. voc. Auftrag. p. 95. Upon the introdu&tion
of this practice, the public tribunals of justice
became in a great measure useless, and were al-
most entirely deferced.

IN order to re-eftablilh the authority of go-

vernment, Maximilian I. instituted .the Imperial
chamber at the period which I have mentioned,
This tribunal confidted originally of a president
who was always a nobleman of the firs't orders
and of sixteen judges. The president was ap-
pointed by the Emperor, and the judges, partly
by him, and partly by the States$ according to
forms which it is unnecessary to describe. A
fium was imposed, with their own consent, on the

H h E States

States of the Empire, for paying the salaries of
the judges and officers in this court. The Im-
perial chamber was established first at Francfort
on the Maine. During the reign of Charles V.
it was removed to Spires, and continued in that
city above a century and a half. It is now fixed
at Wetzlar. This court takes cognizance of all
questions concerning civil right between the
States of the Empire, and passes judgment in the
last resort, and without appeal. To it belongs
likewise the privilege of judging in criminal
causes, which may be confidered as conneced
with the preservation of the public peace. Pfeffel
Abrege, 560.

ALL caures relating to points of feudal right or

jurifdiaion, together with such as refpet the terri-
tories which hold of the Empire in Italy, belong
properly to the jurifdition of the Aulic council.
This tribunal was formed upon the model of the
ancient court of the palace instituted by the Em-
perors of Germany. It depended not upon the
States of the Empire, but upon the Emperor; he
having the right of appointing at pleasure all the
judges of whom it is composed. Maximilian, in
order to procure ome compensation for the dimi-
nution of his authority, by the powers vested in
the Imperial chamber, prevailed on the diet, A. D.
I512, to give its consent to the eablifhment of
the Aulic council. Since that time it has been
a great object of policy in the court of Vienna to
extend thejurifdiAion, and support the authority

of

of the Aulic countil, and to circumscribe and
weaken those of the Imperial chamber. The
tedious forms and dilatory proceedings of the Im-
perial chamber have furnished the Emperors with
pretexts for doing so. Lites Spira, according to
the witticism of a German lawyer, spirant, fed
nunquam expirant. Such delays are unavoidable
in a court composed' of members named by many
different States, jealous of each other. Whereas
the judges of the Aulic council, depending
upon one master, and being responsible to him
alone, are more vigorous and decisive. Puffen-
dorf, de Statu Imper. German. cap. v. 20.
Pfeffl Abreg6, p. 58i.

NOTE XLIII. SECT. III. p. 225. [U].

THE description which I have given of the
Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who have
visited that empire. The count de Marfigli, in
his treatise concerning the military state of the
Turkish Empire, ch. vi. and the Author of Ob-
servations on the religion, laws, government, and
manners of the Turks, published at London 1768,
vol. i. p. 81. differ fiom other writers who have
described the political constitution of that power-
ful monarchy. As they had opportunity, during
their long residence in Turkey, to observe the
order and justice conspicuous in several depart-
ments of administration, they seem unwilling to

H h 3 admit

admit that it should be denominated a defpotifir,
But when the form of government in any country
is represented to be despotic, this does not sup.
pose that the power of the monarch is continu-
ally exerted in ats of violence, injustice, and
cruelty. Under political constitutions of every
species, unless when some frantic tyrant happens
to hold the scepter, the ordinary administration
of government must be conformable to the prin-
ciples of justice, and if not ative in promoting
the welfare of the people, cannot certainly have
their deftrution for its object. A tfate, in which
the sovereign possesses the -absolute command of
a vast military force, together with the disposal of
an extensive revenue; in which the people have
no privileges, and no part either immediate or
remote in legislation; in which there is no body
of hereditary nobility, jealous of their own rights
and diftinlltions, to stand as an intermediate
order between the Prince and the people, cannot
be distinguished by any name but that of a de-
fpotifm. The reitraints, however, which I have
mentioned, arising from the Capiculy, and fron)
religion, are powerful, But they are not such
as change the nature or denomination of the go-
vernment. When a despotic prince employs an
armed force to support his authority, he commits
the fpreme power to their hands. The Praeto
rian bands in Rome dethroned, murdered, and
exalted their Princes, in the fame wanton manner
with the oldiery of the Porte at Constantinople.

But

But notwithstanding this, the Roman Emperors
have been confidered by all political writers as
possessing de(potic power.

THE Author of Observations on the religion,

law, government, and manners of the Turks, in
a preface to the second edition of his work, hath
made some remarkson what is contained in this
Note, and in that part of the text to which it re-
sers. It is with diffidence I set my opinion in,
opposition to that of a person, who has observed
the government of the Turks with attention,
and has described it with abilities. But after a
careful review of the subjet, to me the Turkish
government still appears of such a species as can
be ranged in no class but that to which political
writers have given the .name of.defpotifm. There
is not in Turkey any constitutional restraint upon
the will of the sovereign,' or any barrier to cir-
cumfcribe the exercise of his power, but the two
which I have mentioned; one afforded by reli-
gion, the principle upon which the authority of
the Sultan is founded; the other by the army,
the instrument which he must employ to main-
tain his power. The Author represents the
Ulema, or body of the law, as an intermediate
order between the monarch and the people.
Pref. p. 30. But whatever restraint the authority
of the Ulema may impose upon the sovereign, is
derived from religion. The Moulahs, out of
whom the Mufti and other chief officers of the
law must be chosen, are ecclefiallics. It is as in-
terpreters of the Koran or Divine Will that they

I-- h 4 are

are objets of veneration. The check, then,
which they give to the exercise of arbitrary power
is not different from one of those of which I took
notice. Indeed, this restraint cannot be very con-
fiderable. The Mufti, who is the head of the
order, as well as every inferior officer of law, is
named by the Sultan, and is removable at his
pleasure. The strange means employed by the
Ulenma in 1746, to obtain the dismission of a mi-
nifter whom they hated, is a manifest proof that
they possess but little constitutional authority
which can serve as a restraint upon the will of the
sovereign. Obfervat. p. 92 of 2d edit. If the
author's idea be just, it is astonishing that the
body of the law. hould have no method of remon-
itrating against the errors of adminitration, but
by setting fire to the capital.

THE Author seems to confider the Capiculy or

soldiery of the Porte, neither as formidable inftru-
ments of the Sultan's power, nor as any restraint
upon the exercise of it. His reasons for this opi-
nion are, that the number of the Capiculy is finall
in proportion to the other troops which compos¢
the Turkilh armies, and that in time of peace
they are undisciplined. Pref. 2d edit, p. 23, &c.
But the troops Rationed in a capital, though their
number be not great, are always masters of the
sovereign's person and power. The praetorian
bands bore no proportion to the legionary troops
in the frontier provinces. The soldiery of the
Porte are more numerous, and must possess power
of the fame kind, and be equally formidable,

some-

sometimes to the sovereign, and ofteher to the
people. However much the discipline of the Ja-
nizaries may be neglected at present, it certainly
was not o in that age to which alone my defcrip-
tion of the Turkish government applies. -The
Author observes, Pref. p. 29. that the Janizaries
never deposed any Sultan of themselves, but that
some form of law, true or false, has been obferv-
ed, and that either the Mufti, or some other mi-
nifter of religion, has announced to the unhappy
prince the law which renders him unworthy of
the throne. Obferv. p. o02. This will always
happen. In every revolution, though brought
about by military power, the deeds of the soldiery
must be confirmed and carried into execution with
the civil and religious formalities peculiar to the
constitution,

THIS addition to the Note may serve as a fur-

ther illustration of my own sentiments, but is not
made with an intention of entering into any con-
troverfy with the Author of Observations, &c. to
whom I am indebted for the obliging terms in
which he has expressed his remarks upon what I
had advanced. Happy were it for such as ven-
ture to communicate their opinions to the world,
if every animadversion upon them were conveyed
with the fame candid and liberal spirit: In one
particular, however, he seems to have mifappre-
hended what I meant. Pref. p, 17. I certainly
did not mention his or count Marfigli's long refi-
dencc in Turkey, as a circumstance which lhould

detract

deract from the weight of their authority. I took
notice of it,. in justice to my readers, that they
might receive my opinion with distrust, as it dif-
sered from that of persons whose means of infor-
mation were so far superior to mine.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 227. [XX].
THE institution, the discipline, and privileges

of the Janizaries are described by all the authors
who give any account of the Turkish government.
The manner in which enthusiasm was employed
in order to inspire them with courage, is thus re-
lated by Prince Cantemir: " When Amurath I.
had formed them into a body, he sent them to
Haji Bektafh, a Turkilh Saint, famous for his mi-
racles and prophecies, desiring him to bestow on
them a banner, to pray to God for their success, and
to give them a name. The Saint, when they ap-
peared in his presence, put the sleeve of his gown
upon one of their heads, and said, Let them be
called Yengicheri. Let their countenance be ever
bright, their hands vicorious, their swords keen;
let their spear always hang over the heads of their
enemies, and wherever they go, may they return
with a hining face." History of the Ottoman
Empire, p. 38. The number of Janizaries, at
the first institution of the body, was not confider-
able. Under Solyman, in the year 1521, they
amounted to twelve thousand. Since that time
their number has greatly increased, Marfigli, Etat.
&c. ch. 16. p. 6. Though Solyman possesed
such abilities and authority as to reRfrain this for-

midable

midable body within the bounds of obedience, yet
its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans,
was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied
M. D'Aramon, ambassador from Henry II. of
France to Solyman, published an account of his
travels, in which he describes and celebrates the
discipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame time
predicts, that they would, one day, become formi-
dable to their masters, and at the fame part at
Conltantinople, as the Praetorian bands had done
at Rome. Collection of Voyages from the Earl
of Oxford's Library, vol. i, p. 599.

NOTE XLV. SECT. III. p. 229, [YY].
SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the Turiih
historians have given the firname of Canuni, or
instituter of rules, first brought the finances and
military establishment of the Turkish Empire into
a regular form. He divided the military force
into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Porte, which
was properly the standing army, and Serrataculy
or soldiers appointed to guard the frontiers. The
chiefftrength of the latter confidfed of those who
held Timariots and Ziams. These were portions
of land granted to certain persons for life, in
much the fame manner as the military fiefs among
the nations of Europe, in return for which mili-
tary service was performed. Solyman, in his
Canun-Name, or book of regulations, fixed with
great accuracy the extent of these lands in each
province of his Empire, appointed the precise

number

number of soldiers each person who held a Tima.
riot or a Ziam should bring into the field, and
established the pay which they should receive while
engaged in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul
Rycaut have given extracts from this book of re.
gulations, and it appears, that the ordinary efta-
blifhment of the Turkish army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When these were
added to. the soldiery of the Porte, they formed a
military power greatly fuperiorto what any Christian
state could command in the sixteenth century. Mar-
figli, Etat Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's Stateof
the Ottoman Empire, book iii. ch. ii. As Solyman,
during his aive reign, was engaged so constantly
in war, that his troops were always in the field, the
Serrataculy became almost equal to the Janizaries
themselves in discipline and valour.

IT is not surprising, then, that the authors of the

sixteenth century should represent the Turks as far
superior to the Christians, bbth in the knowledge
and in the pratice of the art of war. Guicciardini
informs us, that the Italians learned the art offorti-
fying townsfrom the Turks. Hiftor. lib. I5. p. 266.
Bufbequius, who was ambassador from the Em-
peror Ferdinand to Solyman, and who had oppor-
tunity to observe the state both of the Christian
and Turkilh armies, published a discourse con-
cerning the best manner of carrying on war against
the Turks, in which he points out at great length
the immense advantages which the Infidels pof-
sessed with respect to discipline, and military im-

provements

provements of every kind. Bufbequii opera, edit.
Elzevir, p. 393, &c. The testimony of other au-
thors might be added, if the matter were in any
degree doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illuftra-
tions, I ought to explain the reason of two omif-
sions in them; one of which it is necessary to,
mention on my own account, the other to obviate
an objection to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning
the progress of government, manners, literature,
and commerce, during the middle ages, as well
as in my delineations of the political constitution
of the different States of Europe at the opening of
the sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned
M. de Voltaire, who, in his Essay fur 'Hifoire
generale, has reviewed the fame period, and has
treated of all these subje&s. This does not pro-
ceed from inattention to the works of that extra-
ordinary man, whose genius, no less enterprising
than universal, has attempted almost every different
species of literary composition. In many of there
he excels. In all, if he had left religion untouched,
he is inftrutive and agreeable. But as he ieldom
imitates the example of modern historians in citing
the authors from whom they derived their infor-
mation, I could not, with propriety, appeal to his
authority in confirmation of any doubtful or un-
known fa6-. I have often, however, followed him
as my guide in these researches; and he has not

only

only pointed out the fa&s with refpe& to which it
was of importance to enquire, but the conlufions
which it was proper to draw from them. If he
had, at the fame time, mentioned the books which
relate there particulars, a great part of my labour
would have been unnecessary, and many of his
readers, who now confider him only as an enter-
taining and lively writer, would find that he is a
learned and' well-informed historian.

As to the other omission, every itelligent

reader must have observed, that I have not-entered
either in the historical part of this volume, or in
the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame detail
with refpet to the ancient laws and customs of the
British kingdoms, as.concerning those of-the other
European nations. As the capital fads with re-
gard to the progress of government and manners
in their own country are known to most of my
readers, such a detail appeared to me to be less
essential. Such fads and observations, however,
as were necessary towards completing my design in
this part of the work, I have mentioned under the
different articles which are the fubjets of my dif-
quifitions. The state of government, in all the
nations of Europe, having been nearly the fame
during several ages, nothing can tend more to il-
lustrate the progress of the Englifli constitution,
than a careful enquiry into the laws and customs of
the kingdoms on the Continent. This'fource of
information has been too much neglected by the
English antiquaries and lawyers. Filled with ad-

miration

miration of that happy conflitution now established
in Great Britain, they have been more attentive to
its forms and principles than to the condition and
ideas of remote times, which in almost every par-
ticular differ from the resent. While engaged
in perusing the laws, charters, and early historians
of the continental kingdoms, I have often been led
to think that an attempt to illustrate the progress
of Englih jurisprudence and policy, by a com-
parison with those of other kingdoms in a similar
situation, would be of great utility, and might
throw much light on some points which are now
obscure, and decide others, which have been long
controverted.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

I N D E

TO THE
IRST VO L U M E.

A

AFRICA, the shocking devastations made there by the Van-
I dals, 238.

Alanus, his charaEter of the clergy in his time, 279.
Alfred the Great, his complaint of the ignorance of the clergy,

279.
Allodial poffeflion of land, explained, z56. How such pofleffion

became subjeE to military service, ib. Diflinguifhed from be-
neficiary tenures, 257. How converted into feudal tenures,

265. Allodium, the etymology of that word, 270.

.dmmianus, his character of the Huns, z41. 47.
Amurath, Sultan, the body of Janizaries formed by him, 226.
Anathema, form of that denounced against robbers during the

middle ages, 398.

Arabia, the ancient Greek philosophy cultivated there, while loft

in Europe, 387, Nott xxviii. The progress of philosophy from
thence to Europe, 388.
Aragon, rife of the kingdom of, 175. Its union with Calile, i.

The con fitution and form of its government, 180. The pri-
vileges of its Cortes, ib. Office and jurifdition of the Juiliza,
182. The regal power very confined, 183. Form of the alle.
giance swore to the Kings of, ib. The power of the nobility to
controul the regal power, 416. Their privilege of union taken
away by Peter IV. i. The eltablilhment of the inquisition op-
posed there, 420o.
.rmies, anding, the rife of, traced, x t. By what means they

became more general in Europe, 134.
Arms, the profession of, the moll honourable in uncivilized nations,

80.
sis, an account of the ancient Romilh feall of, 284.
AJflmblies, legislative, how formed, 43.

- general, of France, their power under the firfi race of

Kings, 197. Under the second and third, 198. At what pe-
riod they loft their legislative authority, 199.
Atti/a, King of the Huns, account of his reception of the Roman

VOL. . 1 i ambaf-

ambafladors, 235, Note iii. Some account of his conquefs,
242.
Arila, an assembly of Castilian nobles there, solemnly try and de

pose Henry IV. their king, 179.

.ufria, the house of, by whom founded, 212.

Baillis, in the old French law, their office explained, 371.
Balance of power, the sirs rife of, in Europe, 133. The progress

of, 134.
Baltic, the firR source of wealth, to the towns situated on that

sea, 405.
Barcelona, its trade, riches, and privileges at the close of the sis.

teenth century, 424.
Barons, their independence, and mutual hostilities, under the feu-

dal system, 19. How affeced by the infranchifement of cities,
41. Acquire a participation in legislative government, 43.
Their private wars for redress ofperfonal injuries, 52. Methods
employed to abolish these contentions, 54- Origin of their fu-
preme and independent jurifdi&ion, 68. The had effets result-
ing from these privileges, 69. The fleps taken by princes to
reduce their courts, 7.. How obliged to relinquish their judi-
cial prerogatives, 81. Of Italy, fubjefed to municipal laws,
396, Note xv. Their right of territorial jurifdiion explained,
364. Their emoluments from causes decided in their courts,
366.
Benefices, under the feudal fyRfem, a history of, 260. When they

became hereditary, 263.
Bpoks, an enquiry into the materialsof the ancient ones, 280. The

los of old manuscripts accounted for, ib. The great prices they
fold for in ancient times, 281.
Boroughs, representatives of, how introduced into national coun-

cils, 44.
Britons, ancient, their diftrers and dejection when deserted by the

Romans, and arafled by the Pids and Caledonians, 233s
Note i.
Brotherhood of God, an account of that aflociation for extinguihing

private wars, 338.
Bruges, how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities du-

ring the middle ages, 404.
Burgundy, Mary, heiress of, the importance with which her choice

in a hulband was confidered by all Europe, 124. The treache-
rous views of Lewis XI. of France towards her, 127. Is mar-
ried to the archduke Maximilian, z.8. The influence of this
match on the ate of Europe, ib.

C¢,ar,

C
Cd/ar, his count of the ancient Germans, conpared with that

of Tacitus, 247.
Calatrazvd, military order of, in Spain, zealous to eploy their

prowess in defence of the honours of the Viigin Mary, 427.
The vow used by these knights, ib.
CambSay, treaty of, its bbjec, r4o. The confederacy di/olved,

142.

Cano Law, an inquiry into, 74. Progress of ecclesiastical ufurpo

ations, 7. The maxims of, more equitable than the civil courts
of the middle ages, 76.
Cafile, rife of the kingdom of, 175. Its union with Aragon, i.

Its king Henry IV. folennly tried and deposed in-an assembly
of the nobles, 179. The confiitution and government of that
kingdom, 184. A history of the Cortes of, and its privileges,
·i. The kingdom' originally eleaive, 421, Note xxxiii.
Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the people therein defence of

their rights, against thei lking, John II. of Aragon, 178.
Cn/uales, a species of the Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the obliga-

tions they entered into, described, 326.

Centenarii, or inferiorjudges in the middle ages, the extraordinary

oath required from them, 398.
Champs de Marr, and de Mai, account of those aflemblies of the

ancient Gauls, 433.
Charlkmagne, his law to prevent private wars for redress of perfbnal

injuries, 54. 334. State of Germany under his descendants,
207.

Charles IV. Emperor, dissipates the Imperial domains, 456.
---- V. Emperor, an emulator of the heroic condu& of his ri-

val, Francis 1. 86. His future grandeur founded on the nar-
riage of the archduke Maximilian with the heiress of Burgundy,
128.

VII. of France, the sirs who introduced ilanding armies

in Europe, itz.. His successful extension of the regal preroga-
tive, 115.

-- VIII. of France, his chara&er, 129. How induced to irn-

vade Italy, ib. His resources and preparations for this enter-
prize, 30. His rapid success, 131. A combination of the
Italian itates formed against him, 133. Is forced to return
back to France, ib. The diltrefled Itate of his revenues by this
expedition, 139.
Charlevoix, his account of the North American Indians, made ute

of in a comparison between them and the ancient Germans, 256.
Cbarters, of immunity or franchise, an inquiry into the nature of

thole granted by the barons of France to the towns under their
jurildidions, 301, Note xvi. Of conmunities, granted by the
kings of France, how they tended to etablillf regular govern.
menr, 39. 302.

I i z Oj/i'vtiiy,

Cbivalry, the origin of, 8z. Its beneficial effe&s on human man.

ners, 83. The enthusiasm of, distinguished from its salutary
consequences, 85.
CChriftiaity, corrupted when firit brought into Europe, 88. Its

influence in freeing mankind from the bondage of the feudal
policy, 321, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occasion of their being formed, 214.
Cities, the ancient flates of, under the feudal policy, 36. The

freedom of, where firt ellablifhed, 37. Charters of community,
why granted in France by Louis le Gros, 39. Obtain the like
all over Europe, 40. Acquire political consideration, 43. .
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, 75. Their plan ofjurif-

prudence more perfect than that of the civil courts in the middle
ages, 76. The great ignorance of, in the early feudal times of
Europe, 279.
Cliriza, slave to Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extrat from the

charter of manumiflion, granted to her, 323.
Clermont, council of, resolves on the holy war, 28. See Peter the

Hermit, and Crusades.
Clotaire 1. inilance of the small authority he had over his army,

431.
Clotbarius II. his account of the popular assemblies among the

ancient Gauls, 433.
Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, unable to retain a

sacred vase taken by his army, from being difiributed by lot
among the reft of the plunder, 254, Note vii.

Colleges, the firR eftablilhment of, in Europe, 389.
Combat, judicial, the prohibition of, an improvement in the ad-

ministration of juflice, 56. The foundation and universality of
this mode of trial, 6z. The pernicious effects of, 64. Various
expedients for abolishing this practice, 65. The ancient Swedilh
law of, for words of reproach, 350. Positive evidence, or points
of proof, rendered ineffecual by it, 3S- This mode of trial
authoriz'd by the ecclefiallics, 357. The lat inflances of, in
the histories of France and England, 358.
Commerce, the spirit of crusading how far favourable to, at that ear-

ly period, 34. ' The firRl eftabliihment of free corporations, 38.
Charters of community why granted by Louis le Gros, 39. The
like pracice obtains all over Europe, 40. The salutary effiets
of these infitutions, ib. The low laate of, during the middle
ages, gz. Causes contributing to its revival, 93. Promoted by
the lianfeatic league, 95. Is cultivated in the Netherlands, 96.
Is introduced into England by Edward 111. 97. The beneficial
consequences resulting from the revival of, ib. The early cul-
tivation of, in Italy, 399.
Common Law, the first compilation of, made in England by Lord

Chief Jutice Glanville, 3z.
Communities. See Charters, Cilics, Commerce, and Corporation$.

Cornenao,

Comntna, Anne, her characer of the Crusaders, 293.
Compaf/, mariner's, when invented, and its influence on the exten-

sion of commerce, 94.
Compoition for personal injuries, the motives for establishing, 334.

The custom of, deduced from the practice of the ancient Ger-
mans, 359.
Compurgators,. introduced as evidence in the jurisprudence of the

middle ages, 8.

Condottieri, in the Italian policy, what, 160.
Conrad, count'of Franconia, how he obtained election to the Em-

pire,. 207.
Conradin, the last rightful heir to the crown of Naples of the house

of Swabia, his unhappy fate, 166.
Constance, treaty of, between the-emperor Frederic Barbarofla and

the free cities of Italy, 300.
Confantinople, its flourishing state at the time of the Crusades, 30.

When first taken by the Turks, 223. The Crusaders how look-
ed upon there, 293. The account given of this city by the La-
tin writers, 294.

Confitutions, popular, how formed, 42.
Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdinand

of Aragon, 68.

Corporations, arid bodies politic, the eflablifhments of, how far fa-

vourable to the improvement of manners, 36. The privileges of,
how firlf claimed, 38. Charters of community, why granted by
Louis le Qros in France, 39. The institution of, obtains all
over Europe, 40. Their effecs, ib.
Cortes of Aragon, its contitution and privileges, 180. 417.
--- of Castile, a history of, and an account of its confliturion and

privileges, 184. The vigilance with which it guarded its pri-
vileges again t the encroachments of the regal power, 85.
Crusades, the first motives of undertaking, 26. The enthufiaRfic

zeal with which they were undertaken, 27. First promoted by
Peter the Hermit, 28. The success of them, 29. 'The con fe-
quences resulting from them, 30. Their effecs on manners, ib.
On property, 31. How advantageous to the enlargement of
the regal power of the European princes, 32. The commercial
effecs of, 34, 93. The universal frenzy for engaging in these
expeditions accounted for, 285. Note xiii. rhe privileges
granted to those who engaged in them, 287. Stephen earl of
Chartres and Blois, his account of them, 289. 'The expence
of conduting them, how raised, 299. Character given of the
Crusaders by the Greek writers, z93.

D

Dtbt, the first hint of attaching moveablei for the recovery of, de.
rived from the canon law, 380.

i 3 Dl or,

Debtors, how.confidered in the rude and imple Iate of t,

305.

Dicts of Germany, some account of, 463.
DoAors in the different faculties, dispute- prec edence with k, gt q,

390.
.EclefiaJical jurifprudene, more perfc i its plan than the civji

courts of the middle ages, 76.
Ecclefiafics, when, and by what degrees they claimed eemption

from civil jurifdi&ion, 376. ilirary talents cultivated ang 4X,
ercifed by those of the middle ages, 384.
Edgward III. of England, his endeavour4 tq introduce comerSg

into his kingdoms 96.

Eestors of Germany, the rife of their privileges, 219.
Eloy, St. his definition or description of a good CbriRftja,, 3,

Note xi.
Emperors of Germany, an inquiry into their power, jurifdiltiOg, apd

revenue, 455, Note xlii. The ancient mode of eleEtig them,
England, a summary view of the contefls between, and Fra!ce,

1oS. The consequences of its lolng its continental ppflsaioos,
o08. The ppoer of the crown, how extended, 1zZ See Hery
VI. Why so many marks of Saxon usages and languag, in
comparison w th'thofe of the Normans, to be found ip, g36,
Note iv. When corporations began to be eftablifihd ip, 316.
Instances of the long continuance of personal servitude tbhere, 37.
4nquiry into the Saxon laws for putting an end to private ivars,
340. The causes of the fp.edy decline of private wars tbhee,
proposed to the refearcbes of Antiqyarians, 344. The last in-
Stances of judicial combat rerde n the history of, 3? Te
territorial jutifiEtion of the barons how abolished, 374, Payfe
of the flow progress of commere there, 406. The firt con-
mercial treaty entered intp by, 408.

.yidencg, the mper(fe nature of that admitted in law-pra.eediigq
'during the nmiddle ages, 57 . Rendered ireffecual by hbe juii-
cial combat, 355.
Eurape, the alterations in, by the cooquefs of the Romans, z.

The improvements the nations of, received in exchag fpr the¢i
liberties,. ib. Its disadvantages under this change of circuPi-
Rlances, 3. Inquiry into the fippocfd populoufncfs f the ancient
northern nations, 5. The savage desolations xercijfd by the
Goths, Vandals, and Huns, . The univerlal change occa-
sioned by their irruptions and conquels, 12. The firit rudiments
of the present policy of, to be deduced from this period, 13.
prigin of the feudal fyllem, 14. Sec Fedal $ylew. The g0.
neral barbarism introduced with thi policy, z1. A't what time.

government

government and manners began to improve, z5. The causes and
events which contributed to this improvement, 26. See Cru-
fades, Corporations, People. The miseries occasioned by private
wars in, 53. Methods taken to suppress them, 54. Judicial
combats prohibited, 56. The defets of judicial proceedings
in the middle ages, 57. The influence of fuperfitiioo in these
proceedings, 59. The origin of the independent territorial ju-
rifditions of the barons, 67. The bad consequences of their
judicial power, 68. The fReps taken by princes to aboliih their
courts, 71. An inquiry into the canon law, .74. Revival of the
Roman law, 79. Effecs of the spirit of chivalry, 82. How
improved by the progress of science and cultivation of literature,
86. Christianity corrupted when firfR received in, 88. Scho-
laflic theology the firit objet of learning in, 89. Lowftate of
commerce in, during the middle ages, 92. Commerce revives
in Italy, 94. Is promoted by the Hanseatic league, 95. Is cul-
tivated in the Netherlands, 96. The effets of the progress of
commerce on the poliShing of manners, 97. The effets of the
marriage of the heiress of Burgundy with the archduke Maximi-
lian, on the slate of, r28. By what means anding forces be-
came general in, 134. Consequences of the league of Cambray
to, 140. A view of the political constitution of the several fates
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 146. Italy,
i48. The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 163. Naples,
164. Milan, 168. Spain, '172. France; 197. Germany,
o26. Turkey, 223. Intances of the- small intercourse among
nations in the middle ages, 392.

F

Ftodum, the etymology of that word, 271.
Firdinand, king of Ara'gon, unites the Spanish monarchy, by hip

marriage with Isabella of Caltile, 175. is schemes to exalt the
regal power, 190. Resumes former grants of land from his
barons, 19i. Unites to the crown the grand aflerlhips of the
three military orders, 19i. Why he patronized the association
called the Holy Brotbr/bood, againsl the barons, 195.
Feudal sysem, the origin of, deduced, 15. The primary objec of

this policy, 16. Its deficiencies for inferior government, 17.
Tenures of land, how eftablilhed under, ib. The rife of intefine
discords among the barons under, 18. The servile state of the
people, 9. The weak authority of the king, ib. Its influence
on the external operations of war, zo.' The general extintion
of all arts and ciences eeced by, 2a. Its operation on reli-
gion, 22. Its influence on the character of the human mind,
23. At what time government and manners began tobe im-
proved, 24. The causes and events which contributed to this

I i 4 improve-

improvement, 25. See Crusades. The ancient state of cities
under, 36. The frame of national councils under this policy,
43. How altered by the progress of civil liberty, 44. An in.
quiry into the administration ofjuftice under, 49. Private war,
56. Judicial combat, 7. The independent jurifdition of the
barons, 68. The diftin&ion between freemen and vassals an.
der, 258. How strangers were confidered and treated under,
395.
Fiefs, under the feudal fyfRem, a history of, z60. When they be-

came hereditary, 263.
FitgJIephens, observations on his account of the Rate of London, at

the time of Henry II. 317.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, a view of the conflitution of, at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, 163. The influence acquired by Cosmo
di Medici in, ib.
France, by what means the towns in, firll obtained charters of corn.

munity, 39. Ordinances of Louis X. and. his brother Philipin
favour of civil liberty, 48. Methods employed to suppress pri-
vate wars, 54. St. Louis attempts to discountenance judicial
combat, 65. A view of the contests between, and England,
106. The consequences of its recovering its provinces from
England, 18o. The monarchy of, how strengthened by this
event, ilo. The rife of sanding forces in, ilt. The regal
prerogative frengthened by this measure, 113. The extenconof
the regal prerogative vigorously pursued by Louis XI. 116. See
Louis XI. The effects of the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII.
z19. See Charles VIII. National infantry etablilhed in, 138.
League of Cambray formed against the Venetians, 141. Battle
of Ghiarradadda, 142. An inquiry into its ancient government
and laws, 197. The power of the general assemblies under the
firlt race of kings, ib. Under the second and third, 198. The
regal power confined to the king's own domains, 199. When
the general aflembly or flates general loft their legislative au-
thority, ib. When the kings began to assert their legislative
power, 201. When the government of, became purely monar-
chical, zoz. The regal power nevertheless restrained by the
privileges-of the nobility, ib. An inquiry into the jurifdicaion
of its parliaments, particularly that of Paris, 204. How the
allodial property of land there was altered into feudal, 267.
The progress of liberty in that kindom traced, 318, Noi xix,
The attempts to eflabliffi liberty there unfuccefbful, 320o. The
last instance of judicial combat recorded in the hiRfory of, 358.
The present government of, compared with that of ancient
Gaul, 430, Note xxxviii. The RIates general, when sirs aflem-
bled, 447.
Francis 1. of France, his charatecr influenced by the fpiritofchi-

valry, 85. Is emulated by the emperor Charles V. 86.

Fredericr

Frtdcric Barbarossa, Emperor, the free cities of Italy unite against

him, 300. Treaty of ConfRance with them, ib. Was the firIt
who granted privileges to the cities in Germany, 313.

Fredurn, in the ancient German usages explained, 361.
Freemen, how dillinguiihed from vaftals, under the feudal policy,

258. 75. Why often induced to surrender their freedom, and
become slaves, 77.
fulcherius Carnotenfis, his character of the city of Conflantinople,

294-
Gaul, how allodial property of land was changed into feudal

there, 267. The government of, compared with that of mo-
dern France, 430, Note xxxviii. The small authority the
Kings of, enjoyed over their armies, ill jfrated in an anecdote of
Clotaire I. 431. Account of the popular assemblies of, 432.
The Salic laws, how enacted, 434. Were not lubjea to taxa-
tion, 435. See France.
Geoffey de Villebardouin, his account of the magnificence of Con-

Itantinople at the time when taken by the Crusaders, 295.
Germans, ancient, an account of their usages and way of life, 247.

Their method of engaging in war, ib. A comparison between
them and the North American Indians, z5o. Why they had no
cities, 312, Note xvii. The practice of compounding for per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from their usages, 360.
Germany, little intereted in foreign concerns at the beginningof the

fifteenth century, 107. National infantry eablithed in, 137.
Stateof, under Charlemagne and his descendants, 206. Conrad,
count of Franconia, chosen Emperor, 207. His successors in the
Imperial dignity, ib. How the nobility of, acquired independ-
ent sovereign authority, 208. The fatal effeAs of aggrandizing
the clergy in, zog. The contest between the Emperor Henry
IV. and Pope Gregory VII. zlo. Rife of the faaions of Guelfs
and Ghibelines, zi1. Decline of the Imperial authority, ib.
The house ofAutiria, by whom founded, 212. A total change
in the political contitution of the Empire, ib. The llate of
anarchy in which it continued to the time of Maximilian, the im-
mediate predeceflor of Charles V. 213. Divided into circles,
214. The Imperial chamber inflituted, ib. The Aulic coun-
cil reformed, zig. A view of its political conflitution at the
commencement of the ensuing hillory, ib. Its defees pointed
out, 216. The Imperial dignity and power compared, 217.
Election of the Emperors, 219. The repugnant forms of civil
policy in the several States of> zzo. 'Ihe opposition between
the secular and eccleiaflical members of, 2a2. The united body
hence incapable of aing with vigour, 222. When cities firit
began to be built in, 311, Noe xvii. When ;he cities of, fir

acquired

aequired municipal privileges, 313. The artizans of, when in,
franchised, 314. Immediate cities in the German jurisprudence,
what, 315. The great calamities occasioned there by private
wars, 34ó. Origin of the league of the Rhine, 347. When
private wars were finally abolihed there, ib. Inquiry into the
power, jurifdiftion, and revenue of its Emperors, 453, Nots
xlii. The ancient mode of electing the Emperors, 459. Ac-
count of the diets, 463.

Ghibelines. See Guelfs.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, 142.
Glanwille, Lord Chief Julice, the first who compiled a body of

common law, in all Europe, 38z.
Gotbs, Vandals, and Huns, overrun the Roman empire, and pre-

cipitate its downfal, 4. The Rate of the countries from whence
they issued, 5. ' The motives of their first excursions, 6. How
they came to fettle in the countries they conquered, 7. A com-
parison drawn between them and the Romans, at the period of
their irruptions, 8, & seq. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, o. The desolations they occasioned in Europe, it. The
universal change made by them in the state of Europe, 2. The
principles on which they made their settlements, 14. Origin of
the feudal system, 15. See Feudal System. An inquiry into the
administration of juRice among, 50. Their private wars, 51.
Destroy the monuments of the Roman arts, 87. Their con-
tempt of the Romans, and hatred of their arts, 234, Not# ii.
Their aversion to literature, ib. No authentic account of their
origin, or ancient history existing, 235.
Government, how limited by the feudal policy, i8. The effcets

of the Crusades on, 33. How affeced by the infranchifement
of cities, 41. Legislative assemblies how formed, 43. Private
wars deftrudive to the authority of, 54. Methods employed to
abolish this hostile mode of redrefling injuries, 55. Ifow affeced
by the supreme independent jurifditions of the barons, 68. The
steps towards abolishing them, 71. The origin and growth of
royal Courts of Justice, 73. How influenced by the revival of
science and literature, 9 . A view of, at the beginnitg of the
fifteenth century, ioo. The power of Monarchs then very li-
mited, ot. ' Their revenues small, ib. Their armies unfit for
conquell, o12. The Princes hence incapable of extensive plans
of operation, o04. The kingdoms very rittle conneted with
each other, o15. How the efforts of, from this period became
more powerful and extensive, 1o8. The confequenecs of En-
land losing its provinces in France, og. The scheme of Louis
XI. of France to extend the regal power, Ix6. See Loui XI.
The power of the English crown enlarged, z. See Hcmy VII.
As also that of Spain, z3. Hlow the use of fRanding armies be-
sargc general, 134,. A view of the political conflitution of the

fgvereA

several ates of Europe, at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, I48. In what refpeds the charters of communities
granted by the Kings of France, tended to introduce a regular
form of, 33.

Greecr, the breeding of flk-worms, whep introduced there, 40,
Grfte Emperors, their wagnificence at Contiantinople, 293.
Gregory of Tours, remarks on the state of Europe.during the period

of which le wrote the history, 4,

--
- the Great, Pope, his reason for granting liberty to his

slaves, 3g.

VII. Pope, the foundation of his contest with Henry IV.

Emperor of Germany, gio. The mean submission he extorted
from Henry, gl . His own account of this affair, 454.

Guelf and Gbibelings, rife of those factions in Germany, 2 1.
(fuieciardini, the hiftprian, infiance of his fuperRitiogs reverealce

for Pope Clement VII. 159, Nvof.
Gwtktrwt, a MoPk, his characer of ConiatainopJe, at the time

when taken by the Crusaders, 394.

H

.ajfeati; league, when formed, and its influence on the extension
of commerce, 95. 406.
Hfery IV. of Catile, solemnly tried and deposed by an afliembly of

Cafilian nobles, 179.

- Emperor of.Germany, the humiliating Rate to which he

was reduced by Pope Gregory VII. z2o. 454, NVet xli.-
-- VII. of England, hisfituation at his acceliion to the crown,

122. Enables his barons to break their entails and fell their
estates, ib, Prohibits his barons keeping retainers, ib. Encou-
rages agriculture and commerce, ib.
Heretannum, the nature of this fine under the feudal policy, ex-

plained, 259,

Hermandad, Santa, account of that inflit.tion, 43Q.
Hjiory, the most calamitous period of, pointed out, 1.
Ioly Brotherhood, an afrociation in Spain under that name, on
what occasion formed, I95.

-- Land, the original inducements of the Chriflians to rescue it

from the hands of the Infidels,. 26. See CruJadet and Peter the
Hermit.
Honour, points of the ancient Swedill law for determining, 350.
Kos/pitality, enforced by flatutes during the middle ages, 393.
HunJ, instance of their cnchufiaftic palfion for war, a35, Note ii.
Some account of their policy and nianltcrs, 240. 247. See

yanizarie

I

Janizaries, origin, and formidable nature of those troops, 226.
Imnerial chamber of Germany infiituted, 14, The occasion of

its infitution, 425.
Indians, North American, a comparison drawn between thetm and

the ancient Germans, 250.
Indriirv, the spirit of, how excited by the infranchifements of

cities, 41.
Infantry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry, taught to the reR of

Europe by the Swiss, 137. National bodies of, eftablilhed in
Germany, ib. In France and Spain, ib.
Inheritance, and right of representation, between orphan grandsons

and their uncles, how decided in the tenth century, 352.
Interest of money, the necessity of admitting, in a commercial view,

40o. Preposterously condemned by the churchmen of the middle
ages, ib. The cause hence, of the exorbitant exacions of the
Lombard bankers, ib.
Italy, when the cities of, began to form themselves into bodies po-

litic, 38. Commerce firlf improved there, and the reasons of it,
93. The revolutions in Europe occasioned by he invasion of,
by Charles VIII. of France, 129. The ltate of, at the time of
this invasion, 130. The rapid success of Charles, 1a2. A
combination of the States of, drives Charles out of, and gives
birth to the balance of power in Europe, 133. The political
situation of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 148.
The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 163. Naples,
164. Milan, 168. Evidences of the desolation made thereby
the northern invaders of the Roman Empire, 242. How tha
cities of, obtained their municipal privileges, 296, Note xv.
State of, under Frederic I. 297. Treaty of Constance be.
tween the free cities of, and the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa,
300.
Judgment of God, modes of acquittal by, in the law proceedings

during the middle age., 9. 348, Note xxii.

yudicium Crucis, method of trial by, 34.8.
Yulius 1. Pope, forms a confederacy against the Venetians at Cam-

bray, 141. Seizes part of the Venetian territories, 142. The
confederacy dissolved, ib. Turns his schemes againit France,

143. 'turifprudenci, ecclesiastical, more perse& in its plan than the civil
courts of the middle ages, 55. See Law.
tiiiice,. an inquiry into the administration of, under the feudal
policy, 50. 'he fhps toward the improvement of, as civil i-
berry advanced, 5 . Redress chiefly pursued by privatewaros
52. Methods taken to suppress private wars, 54. Judicial
combats prohibited, 56. The defects of judicial proceed-
ings in the middle ages, ib. Compurgators, the nature of

thak

that kind of evidence, 58. Methods of trial by ordeal,. or ac;
quittal by Judgment of God, 59. Origin of the supreme inde-
pendentjurifdictions of the feudal barons, 68. The extent and
bad effecs of their privileges, 69. Thei eps taken by monarchs
to reduce the barons courts, 71. The growth of royal courts of
justice, 72. Inquiry into the canon law, 74. How improved by
the revival of the Roman law, 78. When the administration of,
became a diflinit profeflion, 81.
yuftlia, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privileges, 8 1.

An inquiry by whom this officer was elected, 409. Who was
eligible to this office, 41o. Nature of the tribunal appointed to
con troul his adminifiration, 412. Inflance of his extensive power,
ib.
King, his power how circumscribed by the barons, under the feudal

fyltem, 19. By what means the Crusades tended to enlarge the
regal authority, 33.
Koran, its influence in checking the Sultans of the Ottoman empire,

2z6.
Land, how held at the efiabliihment of the feudal fylRem, X7. See

Feudal System.
-- the property of, how confidered by the ancient barbarous
nations, 255, Note viii. Allodial pofleflion of, explained, z56.
The proprietors how fubjeted to military service, 257. Allodial
and beneficiary peffeion diRinguifhed, z58. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 266.

Law, when the fludy of it became a diftin& employment, 81.
- Canon, an inquiry into, 74. The maxims of, more equi-

table than the civil courts of the middle ages, 76. When firlt
compiled, 379.
- Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 78. Circumstances which

favoured the revival of it, 79. Its effe&s in improving the ad-
ninitfration ofjuftice, ib. Its rapid progress over Europe, 381,
Note xxv.

Laqvourrovus, in the Scottilh law, explained, 304.
Liberty, civil, the rie and progress of, traced, 38. I-ow favoured

by the ordinances of Louis X. of France, and his brother Philip,
48. The fpiritof, how excited in France, 317, Notexix. The
particulars included in the charters of, granted to hulbandmen,
321, Nvtexx. The influence of the Chriltlian religion in extend-
ing, 322. The several opportunities of obtaining, 336.
Limoges, council of, its endeavours to extinguith private wars,

235.

Lierature,

nations of Europe, 86. Why the first efforts of, il direeted, 87.
The good effecs neverthetefs of the pirit of, inquiry exerted;
89. How checked in its progress, 90. Its ifluence drt ntan.
ners and government, 91.
Liturgy, the preference between the Mufairabic and Romifih, how

ascertained in Spain, 3'3.
Lombards, the first bankers in Europe, 401. The motiveof their

exacting exorbitant interelt, 4.az.

London, its flourishing fate at the time of Henry l. 317.,
Loais le Gros, of France, his inducement to grant privileged to

towns within his own domains, 39. See Charters.
-- St. the great attention he paid to the adminillration ofjuftice,

in appeals which came before him, 371.
- X. of France, his ordinances in favour of civil liberty,

48.

XI. of France, his characer, 6. His schemes for de-

pressing the nobility, ib. Sows divisions among them, ri8.
Increases the handing forces, ib. Enlarges the revenues of the
-crown, 19. His address in overrnling the assembly of flates,
ib. Extends the bounds of the French monarchy, 120. The
activity of his external operations, szl. His treacherous base-
ness towards the heiress of Burgundy, sz6, 127. The effeas of
his conduct, 128.
-- XII. his hesitation in carrying on war against the Pope, rg9,

Note. Asserts his right to the dutchyof Milan, and retains Lu-
dovico Sforza in prison, 17f.

M

Mawfred, his struggles for the crown of Naples, 165.
Mainind, the most calamitous period in the history of, pointed out,

Ir.
Manners, the barbarity of, under the feudal eftablilhments, after

the overthrow of the Roman empire, 21. When they began to
improve, 24. Effets of the Crusades on, 30. How improved
by the infranchifement of cities, 42. How improved by the
ereEion of royal courts of justice, in opposition to the barons
courts, 73. Effects of the revival of the Roman law on, 7.
The beneficial tendency of the spirit of chivalry on, 82. How
influenced by the progress offcience, 86. 91. How polished by
the revival of commerce, 97.
Manumiio,, particulars included in the charters of, granted to

hufbandlmt:n or slaves, 321, Note xx. The form of, 323.
Maximilian, archduke of Austria, married to Mary heiress of Bur-

gundy, 1 28. 'IThe influence of this match on the slate of Eau
rope, ib.

! Maxiimlian

Maximilian, Emperor, inflitutes the Imperial chamber, 214. Re-

forms the Aulic council, ib.
Medici, Cosmo di, the first of the name, the influence he acquired

in Florence, 163.
Milan, the state of the dutchy of, at.the commencement of the fix-

teenth century, 168. Rife and progress of the disputes concern-
ing the fucceflon -to, 69.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the firRf efablihment of the

feudal policy in Europe, 24. The aera of its ultimate depression,
and commencement of its improvement, ib. The progress of its
operations, before the full exertion of it, 87.
Minifteriale, a class of the Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the pious

motives of the obligations they entered into, 326.
Moors, make a conquest of Spain, 173. By what means weakened

during their eltablilhment there, 174. Remarks on their con-
dut in Spain, 176.
Municipal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy, 296, Note

xv. Secured to them by the treaty of Conflance, 302. The
favourite slate of, under the Roman government, 311.

N:
Naples, a view of the constitution of that kingdom, at the com-

mencement of the sixteenth century, 164. The turbulent on-
fettled Rate of that kingdom, 165. State of the disputes con-
cerning the fucceflion of the crown of, i. The pretensions of
the French and Spanilh monarchs to the crown of, 167.
Narbonne, community of, preamble to the writ of summons of

Philip the Long to, 318, Note xix.
Navigation, proof of the imperfect ate of, during the middle

ages, 404.
Netherlands, vigorous prosecution of the manufac&ures of hemp and

flax there, on the revival-of commerce in Europe, 96.
Normans, why so few traces of their usages and language to be

found in England, in comparison with those of the Saxons, 236,
Note iv.

Oblati, or voluntary aves, the clafles of, pecified, 325.
Ordeal, methods of trial by, during the middle ages, 59. The

influence of fuperfition in ditating these means, 6o.
Otto, F ifingenfis, his account of the slate of Italy under Frederic I.

2)7

Ottomarn empire, the origin, and despotic nature of, 223. Bcomes
formidable to the Chriflian powers, z29.

Papacy.

P

Pappay. See Popedom.
Paper, when firit made of the present materials, z82.
Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurifdiaion of its parliament

over the other parliaments of France, 204. Its origin traced,
449. ANotexl. The royal edits registered by, before admitted
to be laws, 452.
Parliaments, or legifative assemblies, how formed under the feu-

dal policy, 43. How altered by the progress of civil liberty,
44.
People, their wretched servile Rate under the feudal system, 19. 46.

Released from their slavish Rate by the infranchifement of cities;
40. How they obtained a representation in national councils,
45. Those who lived in the country and cultivated the ground,
an inquiry into their condition under the feudal policy, 272,
Note ix.

Perfa, murder in, how punished there, 363.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European princes to undertake the

Holy War, z4.
--- IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders of the Aragonefe

union, and destroys the privilege of these associations, 416.
Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of summons to the commau

nity of Narbonne, 316, Notexix.
Philosophy, cultivated by the Arabians, when loft in Europe, 387,

Notexxviii. Its progress from them into Europe, 388.
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, when sirs undertaken, z6. See

Crusades, and Peter the Hermit.
Placentia, council of, the Holy War resolved on by, z8. See Peter

the Hermit, and Crusades.
Plunder, how divided among the ancient northern nations, i5. II-

lufRrated in an anecdote of Clovis, 254, Note vii.
Popedom, the highest dignity in Europe at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, 148. Origin and progress of the papal
power, 149. The territories of the Popes unequal to the sup-
port of their spiritual jurisdiction, 150. Their authority in their
own territories extremely limited, 15 1. The check they received
from the Roman barons, 152. Nicholas Rienzo attempts to eta-
blilh a democratical government in Rome, and to destroy the
papal jurifdition, 153. The papal authority considerably
firengthened by the -'opes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 154'
See Julits II. The permanent nature ofecclefiaitical dominion,
155. The civil adminifration of, not uniform or confitent, ib.
Rome the school of political intrigue during the sixteenth cen-
tury, 156. 'The advantages derived from the union of spiritual
and temporal authority, 157. A view of the concefis between
the opes and the Emperors of Germany, o210.

poulou/Htt

populoufnefr of the ancient northern nations, an inquiry inte, 5.
Prfifcu, extra& from his account of the Roman embalry to Attila

King of the Huns, 235, Note iii.
Procapium, his account of the cruel devastations made by the irrup-

tion of the northern nations, 236, Note v. 240, z41.

Pruperiy, the poflflion of, how secured by the French charters of

communities, 305.
Proveditori, in the Venetian policy, their office, 160.

R.

Religion, how corrupted by the northern nations eablilhed in

Europe under the feudal policy, zz. Its influence in freeing
mankind from the feudal ervitude, 322.
Repledging, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained, 267.
Reproacb, words of, the ancient Swedish law of fatisfaaion for, 350.
Revenues, royal, very small under the feudal policy, oz. By wh'at

means increased, 38.
Rhine, origin and intention of the league of, 347.
Rienzo, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue Rome from the Papal au-

thority, and eltabliflha democratical form of government there,
153.

Rcbhers, the anathema pronounced against them during the middle

ages, 398.
Rodulpb of Haplburgh, how he attained eletion to the Empire of

Germany, ziz.
Romans, an inquiry into those advantages which enabled them to
conquer the reft of Europe, 2. The improvements they commu-
nicated in return for their conqueits, ibid. The disadvantages
the provinces laboured under, from their dominion, 3. Their
Empire overturned by the irruption of the barbarous nations, 4.
The concurrent causes of their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn
between them and the northern nations, 9. All the civil arts
erablilled by them obliterated, 2t. The monuments of their
arts indultrioully destroyed by their barbarous invaders, 86.
RoIe, papal. See PopedorJ.
Royal uuce, an account of, 339.

S.

Sali laws, the manner in which they were enacted, 43 .
axon, why so many traces of their laws, language, anld cutoms,
to be found in England,2z36, Note iv. Inquiry into their laws
for putting an end to private wars, 342.
S c, the revival and progress of, how far instrumental in civil-
izing the nations of Europe, 87. A ummary view of the revi-
val and progress of, in Europe, 387, Note xxviii.
Ss/, Francis, the foundation of his pretenions to the dutchy of
Mlan, 170. Is murdered by his uncle Ludovico, id.
VOL. . K k Sferzs.

fdrma, Ludovico, his private views in engaging Charles ViI;. t
France to invade Italy, ag. See Charles VIII. Mtdes his
nephew Francis, and seizes Milan i.70. Is tripped of hisdo.
minions by Louis XII. of France, and dies in prison, 17i.
Ship 'wrecks, the right, lords of manors claim to, whence derived,

395.
Silk, the rarity of, and the high price it bore in ancient Rome,

remarked, 399: The breeding of silk-worms, when introduced
into Greece, 400.

Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland, what, 362.
Slaves, under thefeudal policy, their wretched Rate,: i70. Oblati,

or voluntary slaves, the several classes of, 325.
Society, civil, the rude state of, under the feudal etablifimenta

after the downfal of the Roman Empire, ax. The influenceof
the Crusades on, 3. How improved by the eftabliihment of
municipal communities, 35. The effet&s the enfranchisements
of the people had on, 49- Private wars how deftrutive to,
53. These intestine hoftiliies, how suppressed, 54. The ad.
ministration of justice improved by the prohibition of judicial
combats, 56. The growth of royal courts of justice, in op-
position to the barons courts, 71. How advanced by there.
vival of the Roman law, 78. The effe&s of the spirit of chi-
valry in improving, 8z. The revival of commerce and its in.
fluences, 93.

Solyman, Sultan, his chara&er, 228.
Spain, a summary view of its situation, at the commencement of

the fifteenth century, 86. The power of the crown of, how
extended by Ferdinand, 123. National infantry eftablifled in,
138. Is conquered by the Vandals, 172, and after by theMoors,
173. The empire of the Moors in, how weakened, 174. Rife
of the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, 75.. Their union into
the Spanifi monarchy, ibid. The ancient customs fill retained
amidst all its revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its conftitutionand
laws remarked, 177. See Aragon and Castile. Various causes
which contributed to limit the regal power in, I86. Thecities
of, how they attained their consideration and power, i88. The
chemnes of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt the regal power,
191. The grand materfhips of the three orders, annexed to the
crown, 92. The aflbciation of the Holy Brotherhood, on what
occasion formed, 195. The tendency of this afflociation to abridge
the territorial jurildictions of the barons, ib. The cruel devalta
tions made by the Vandals in the invasion of that province, 237.
When the cities of, acquired municipal privileges, 315, Nos*
xviii. The long continuance of the practice of private wars
there, 3.-4. The total annual revenue of the nobility, in te
tiiie of Charles V. 422. An inquiry into the origin ofcomniu'
nilib, or fice cities in, 423. '.

St. Jago, the military order of, when, and on what occasion in-

flituted, 425, Noti xxxvi.

Standing armies. See Armies.
State general of France, causes which rendered their authority

imperfe&, I99. When they lofl their legislative authority, ii.
When firfi assembled, 447. The form of proceeding in them,
i.
Stepbtn earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of the progress of

the Crusaders, 289.
StternhioiR, his account of the ancient Swedish law of fatisfaaion for,

words of reproach, 350o.
Strangrs, in what light confidered, and how treated during the

middle ages, and under the feudal policy, 394.
Sugar-canes, when sirs brought from Alia into Europe, and thence

carried to America, 4oo.
Sultans, Turkish, their despotic power, 225. How nevertheless

limited, zz6.
Superfiition, its influence in the legal proceedings during the middle

ages, 60.
Swif/, the superior discipline of their troops, in the fifteenth cen-

tury, 136. Teach other nations the advantages of infantry over
cavalry, i.

T.

Tacitus, his account of the ancient Germans compared with that of

Csfar, 246.
Tenures, feudal, the origin of, 17. See Feudal System, and Land.
Theology, scholastic, the firft-literary pursuits at the revival of learn-

ing in Europe, 88.
ruce ofGod, an account of, 336.
Turkey, origin of its government, 223. The despotic genius of

this government, 224. No hereditary nobility in, ib. The au-
thoritv of the Sultans, how checked, 226. Origin of the Janiza-
ties, ib. Becomes formidable to the Christian princes, 229.

V.

Sandals, their cruel devaflations in the invasion of Spain, 233.

The havoc made by them in Africa, 239. See Getars.
In/als under the feudal fyltem, a view of their laviih condition,

19. 6. How they obtained infranchifement, 47. How an-
ciently diflinguilhcd from freemen, z58. Their wretched ate
under their feudal maRiers, 270, Note ix.
'Yoic, the long duration of its civil conflitution, and its flourifling
llate at the time of the league of Cambray, 140. Its pofliffions
difinembered by the confederates, 141. iffolves the confede-
lacy, 142. Its rife and progress, 159. DefecAs in its conflitu-

tion,

tion, 16o. The excellency of its naval inRitutions, 161. Its
extensive commerce,- 162.

Vifionti, rife of the family of, in Milan, 169.
Union of the Aragonefe nobles to controul the undue exercise of

regal power, explained, 414. This privilege abrogated by Pc.

-, tr-IV. ,416.
- Uiveriiei, the sirs eRablifhment of, in Europe, 389.

W.
Wftr, a comparison between the manner of carrying on, by barba.

rous and by civilized nations, o. How rendered feeble in its
operations by the feudal policy, 19. The profeflion of arms, the
moR honourable in uncivilized nations, 8o. The rife of Hand-
ing armies traced, 1 1o. By what means sanding forces became
general, 134. The superiority of infantry in, how taught, 135.
Wars, private, for the redrefling personal injuries, under the feudal

policy, an inquiry into, 5 . Methods taken to abolish this holile
pratice, 54. Judicial combat prohibited, 6. Inquiry into the
sources of these customs, 328, Note xxi. Who entitled to the pri-
vileges of exercising, 329. On what occasions undertaken, 30.
Who included1 or bound to engage in these disputes, 33i. Who
excluded from undertaking, 332. The cruel manner of prose-
cuting them, ib. A chronological accountoftheexpedients made
use of to suppress them, 333. ruce of God, an account of, 336.
Broterboed of Gad, an account of, 338. Royal truce, what, 339
Saxon lawsof England, for putting an end to them, 342 The
obstinate attachment of the Spaniards to this pracice, 344 The
calamities occasioned in Germany by, 346.

WtlVb, ancient, strangers killed with impunity by them, 396.
Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extrac from her charter of manumif-

sion, granted to Cleriza, one of her slaves, 323.

Willerms, archbishop of Tyre, his account of Con Rantinople, 293.
Wittikinduc, abbot, his testimony in favour of the judicial combat,

357.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUMr.

B1 ITAN
'k JCVt.r,
