H

I

S
R

TH E

T O

OF THE
E

I G

R

N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

Y

V.
it'

AS

*

. I

', x-# 4

- a --

-
e -

y ,

rs" /
. W 4

HIST O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY in EUROPE1

From the Subversion of the ROMAN EMPIRE, to the

Beginning of the SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROB.ERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURoH, and HISTOa.IO

GRAPHLR to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VO L. I

LONDON:

Printed by W. and W. S T R A H A N,
For W. STRAIHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand; and J. BALFOUR,

at Edinburgh. MDCCLXIX.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

SIR,
I PRESUME to lay before Your Majefly the

History of a Period, which, if the abilities of

the Writer were equal to the dignity of the Subjec,
would not be unworthy the attention of a Monarch,
who is no less a Judge than a Patron of Literary
Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her prerogative to offer

inftrution to KINGS, as well as to their people..
What refletions the Reign of the Emperor

CHARLES,

'C.iARLES V. may fuggeff toYour Majesty, it becomes
not me to conjecure. But your Subjets cannot
observe the various calamities, which that Monarch's

ambition to be diflinguiihed as a Conqueror, brought
upon his dominions, without recollecting the felicity
of their own times, and looking up with gratitude
to their Sovereign, who, during the fervour of youth,
and amidst the career of vicory, poffefled such self-
command, and maturity of judgment, as to set bounds
to his own triumphs, and prefer the bleflings of peace
to the splendour of military glory.

Po s T E R I T Y will not only celebrate the Wisdom

of Your Majefly's choice, but will enumerate the
many Virtues, which render Your Reign conspicuous
for a sacred regard to all the duties, incumbent on
the Sovereign of a Free People.

1

Ir

IT is our happiness to feel the influence of

these Virtues; and to live under the dominion of
a Prince, who delights more in promoting the
Publick Welfare, than in receiving the just Praise of.
his royal beneficence. I am,,

SIR,

YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful Subjce,

And mofl dutiful Servant,
WILLIAM R 013J I, TSON.

# THE PREFACE.

THE

PREFACE.
TN O period in the history of ones own country can

be confidered as altogether uninteresting. Such

tranfaAions as tend to illustrate the progress of its

constitution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost atten-

tion. Even remote and minute events are obje&ts of

a curiosity, which, being natural to the human mind,
the gratification of it is attended with pleasure.

BuT, with refpet to the hiflory of foreign States,

we mutl set other bounds to our desire of information.

The universal progress of fcicncc during the two last

centuries, the art of printing, and other obvious caufcs,
havc filled Europe with such a multiplicity of histories,
and with such vast collctions of historical materials,

that the term of human life is too short for the Rfudy
or even the pcrufal of them. It is ncceffary, then,

VOL. I. a not

not only for those who are called to condu& the affairs

of nations, but for such as inquire and reason concern-
ing them, to rerimain satisfied with a general knowledge
of distant events, and to confine their fludy of history in
detail chiefly to that period, in which the several States
of Europe having become intimately connected, the
operations of one power are so felt by all, as to in-
fluence their councils, and to regulate their mea-
fures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed in order to

separate there periods. An xara should be pointed out,
prior to which, each country, little connected with
those around it, may trace its own history apart; after
which, the tranfations of every considerable nation in
Europe become interesting and inffrudive to all.
With this intention I undertook to write the hiflory of
the Emperor CHARLES V. It was during his admini-
flration that the powers of Europe were formed into

one great political system, in which each took a fla-

tion, wherein it has since remained with less varia-
tion, than could have been cxpctcd after the flocks

~* ~ occasioned
x

occasioned by so many. internal revolutions, and /1'
many foreign wars. The great events which hap-
pened then have not hitherto spent their force. The
political principles and maxims, then established, still
continue to operate. The ideas concerning the ba-
lance of p6wer, then introduced or rendered generali
tffil influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore be confidered

as the period at which the political state of Europe
began to assume a new form. I have endeavoured to

render my account of it, an introduCtion to the history
of Europe subsequent to his reign. While his nume-
rous Biographers describe his personal qualities and

actions; while the historians of different countries

relate occurrences the confequcnces of which were
local or transient, it hath been my purpose to record

only those great transactions in his reign, the effects
of which were univcrfal, or continue to be perma-
nent.

As my readers could derive little inftrution from
such a history of the reign of CHARLES V. without

a 2 some

some information concerning the slate of Europe
previous to the sixteenth century, my desire of
supplying this has produced a preliminary volume,
in which I have attempted to point out and explain

the great causes and events, to whose operation all
the improvements in the political siate of Europe,
from the subversion of the Roman Empire to the be-

ginning of the sixteenth century, must be ascribed. t
have exhibited a view of the progress of society in

Europe, not only with refpet to interior government,
laws and manners, but with refpec to the command of

the national force requisite in foreign operations; and
I have described the political constitution of the prin-

cipal flates in Europe at the time when Charles V.
began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led into several

critical difqluifitions, which belong more properly to the
province of the lawyer or antiquary, than to that of the
historian. These I have placed at the end of the first
volume, under the title of Proofs and Illustrations.
Many of my readers will, probably, give little attention

to

to such researches. To some they may, perhaps, appear
the most curious and interesting part of the work. I

have carefully pointed out the sources from which I

have derived information, and have cited the writers on

whose authority I rely with a minute exaanefs, which
might appear to border upon ostentation, if it were pof-
fible to be vain of having read books, many of which

nothing but the duty of examining with accuracy what-
ever I laid before the publick, could have induced me to
open. As my inquiries conducted me often into paths

which were obscure or little frequented, such constant

recourse to the authors who have been my guides, was
not only necessary for authenticating the facts which
are the foundations of my rcafonings, but may be useful

in pointing out the way to such as shall hereafter hold
the fame course, and in enabling them to carry on their
researches with greater facility and success.

EVERY intelligent reader will obfcrve one omission in

my work, the reason of which it is ncceflary to explain.
I have given no account of the conquests of Mexico and
Peru, or of the establishment of the Spanish colonies in
the continent and islands of America. The hiflory of

thcfe

these events I originally intended to have related at con-
fiderable length. But upon a nearer and more attentive

consideration of this part of my plan, I found that the
discovery of the new world; the state of society among
its ancient inhabitants; their charater, manners, and
arts; the genius of the European settlements in its
various provinces, together with the influence of these
upon the systems of policy or commerce in Europe,
were fubjets so splendid and important, that a super-
ficial view of them could afford little satisfaction; to

treat of them as extensively as they merited, must pro-
duce an episode, disproportionate to the principal work.

I have therefore reserved these for a separate hiitory;
which, if the performance now offered to the publick
ihall receive its approbation, I propose to undertake.

THOUGr, by omitting such considerable but detached

articles in the reign of Charles V. I have circumscribed

my narration within more narrow limits, I am yet per-

ifuaded, from this view of the intention and nature of

the work which I thought it necefltry to lay before
my readers, that the plan must still appear to them
too extcnfive, and the undertaking too arduous. I

have

have often felt them to be so. But my conviction of

the utility of such a history prompted me to persevere.
With what success I have executed it, the publick must
now judge. I wait, in follicitude, for its decision; to
which I shall submit with a refpeaful silence.

A VIi.W

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

A
I E

OF THE
PROGRESS

OF SOCIETY

I N
E U R O P

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION

I.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with refpes to

interior Government, Laws and Manners.
T\WO great revolutions have happened in the political

slate, and in the manners of the European nations.
The first was occasioned by the progress of the

Roman power; the second by the fubverfio, of the Rpaian Em-
pire. When the spirit of conquest led the armies of Rome

VOL. I. B beyond

SECT. r.

The efieis of
the Roman
power on tbw
ltate of
Europe.
V

W

1

SECT. I. beyond the Alps, they found all the countries which they invaded,

inhabited by people whom they denominated barbarians, but
who were nevertheless brave and independant. These defended
their ancient possessions with obstinate valour. It was by the
superiority of their discipline, rather than of their courage, that
the Romans gained any advantage over them. A single battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, decide the
fate of a ifate. The vanquished people resumed their arms
with fresh spirit, and their unditciplined valour, animated by the
love of liberty, supplied the want of conduc as well as of union.

The defla- During there long and fierce struggles for dominion or indepen-
tion whi:. it
occalioned. dance, the countries of Europe were successively laid waste, a

great part of their inhabitants perished in the field, many were
carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant, incapable of further
resistance, submitted to the Roman power.

The'mprovc- TiHE Romans having thus desolated Europe, set themselves
mn:it which
it introduceJ. to civilize it. The form of government which they eflablifhed

in the conquered provinces, though revere, was regular, and
prcferved public tranquility. As a consolation for the loss of
liberty, they communicated their arts, fcicnces, language, and
manners, to their new subjects. Europe began to breathe, and
to recover strength after the calamities which it had undergone;
agriculture was encouraged; population encreafed; the ruined
cities were rebuilt; new towns were founded; an appearance of
prosperity succeeded, and rcpaircd, in some degree, the havock
of war.

The bad con- TIIS Rfate, however, was far from being happy, or favour-
tequenci of able to the improvement of the human mind. The vanqulifhed
ngln. nations were disarmcd by their conquerors, and overawed by

fidldicrs
2

soldiers kept in pay to restrain them. They were given up as SECT. I.
a prey to rapacious governors, who plundered them with impu- -"
nity; and were drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes,
imposed with so little attention to the situation of the provinces,
that the impositions were generally encreafed in proportion to
their inability to support them. They were deprived of their most
enterprizing citizens, who resorted to a.diftant capital in quest of
preferment, or of riches; and were accustomed in all their acions
to look up to a superior, and tamely to receive his commands.
Under all these depressing circumitances, it was impossible that
they could retain vigour or generosity of mind. The martial
and independant spirit, which had distinguished their ancestors,
became extinct among all the people fubjeaed to the Roman
yoke; they loft not only the habit but even the capacity of
deciding for themselves, or of aEting from the impulse of their
own minds; and the dominion of the Romans, like that of
all great Empires, degraded and debased the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not subsist long. There were Theirruption

of the barbar.

defeds in the Roman government, even in its molt perfec form, ous nations.
which threatened its dissolution. Time ripened these original
feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders. A
constitution, uniound, and worn out, must have fallen in pieces of
itfclf, without any external shock. The violent irruption of the
Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other barbarians hastened this
event, and precipitated the downfal of the Empire. New na-
tions seemed to arise, and to rufli from unknown regions in
order to take vengeance on the Romans for the calamities which
they had infliaed on mankind. These fierce tribes either inha-
bited the various provinces in Germany which had never been

[A] NOTE I.

B 2 ft')lducd

tubdued by the Aomans, or were scattered over the vast coiun-
tries in the north of Europe, and noith-weft of Asia, which are
Aow occupied by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the subje&s
of the fruffian empire, and the Tartars. Their condition, and
tranfaAions previous to their invasion of the Empire are but
little known. All our information with refped to these is
derived from the Romans; and as they did not penetrate far
into countries which were at that time uncultivated and unin-
viting, the accounts of their original state given by them are
extremely imperfect. The rude inhabitants themselves, destitute
of (cience, and of records, without leisure, or curiosity to enquire
into remote events, retained, perhaps, some indiftind memory
of recent occurrences, but beyond these, all was buried in obli-
vion, or involved in darkness, and in fable [B].

THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon the Empire

from the beginning of the fourth century to the final extinction
of the Roman power, have given rife to an opinion that the
countries whence they issued were crowded with inhabitants;
and various theories have been formed to account for such art
extraordinary degree of population as hath procured these
countries the appellation of The Storehouse of Nations. But
if we confider that the countries possessed by the people who.
invaded the inpire were of vast extent; that a great part of
thlcfe was covered with woods and marshes; that some of the
inoft considerable of the barbarous nations subsisted entirely by
hunting or pafluragc, in both which flates of society large tracts
of land are rc(juircd for maintaining a few inhabitants; and
that all of them were firangcrs to the arts, and indufiry, with-
olut whih population cannot incrife to any great degree, it is,

[B] NOTE II.

evident,,

SEEL. I.

State of the
countries
from which
they iflled.

evident, that these countries could not be.b populous in;ancent 'SECT. I.
times as they are at present, when they fill continue to bec '&es "'
peopled than any other part of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if these circumstances prevented the barbarous nations The peope

fit for daring

from becoming populous, they contributed to inspire, or to e.crprizec.
strengthen the martial spirit by which they were distinguished.
Inured by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of their
foil, to hardships which rendered their bodies firm, and their
minds vigorous; accustomed to a course of life which was a
continual preparation for ascion; and disdaining every occupa-
tion but that of war; they undertook, and prosecuted their
military enterprizes with an ardour and impetuosity, of which
men softened by the refinements of more polished times, can
scarce form any idea [C].

THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceeded rather from The motives.

the love of plunder, than from the desire of new settlements. excursions.
Roused to arms by some enterprizing or popular leader, they
sallied out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier provinces
with irresistible violence; put all who opposed them to the
sword; carried off the most valuable effets of the inhabitants;
dragged along multitudes of captives in chains; wafted all be-
fore them with fire or sword; and returned in triumph to their
wilds and fafineffes. Their fucccfs, together with the accounts
which they gave of the unknown conveniencies and luxuries that
abounded in countries better cultivated, or bicifed with a milder
climate than their own, excited new adventurers, and exposcd
the frontier to new devastations.

[C] NOTE Ill.

s

A VIEW OF THE

SECT. I. WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the adjacent provinces
T- - ..-i ravaged by frequent incursions, they marched farther from
Their reason.
for fettlingin home, and finding it difficult, or dangerous to return, they
thecohunties began to fettle in the countries which they had subdued. The
conquered. sudden and short excursions in quetl of booty, which had

alarmed, and disquieted the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful
calamity impended. Great bodies of armed men with their
wives and children, and slaves and flocks, issued forth, like re-
gular colonies, in quest of new- settlements. People who had
no cities, and seldom any fixed habitation, were so little at-
tached to their native foil, that they migrated without reluc-
tance from one place to another. New adventurers followed
them. The lands which they deserted were occupied by more

The extent of remote tribes of barbarians. These, in their turn, pushed for-
t elr fctde-.
nenlits. ward into more fertile countries, and like a torrent continually

increasing, rolled on, and swept every thing before them. In
less than two centuries from their first irruption, barbarians of
various names and lineage, plundered and took possession of
Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy,
and Rome itfclf. The vast fabrick of the Roman power which
it had been the work of ages to perfct, was in that short period
ovcrturned from the foundation.

'he crcIm- MANY concurring causes prepared the way for this great
flances wiich
occafon, revolution, and cnfuircd fucccfs to the nations which invaded
the dowivf' l
nftl h( I:omnii the Emipire. The Roman commonwealth had conquered the

1nsi"w. orld by the wisd(om of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its

military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the former
were forgotten or despiscd, and the latter was gradually relaxed.
Tl'h armiks of the Empirc in the fourth and fifth centuries bore

*;t; ~i'~fcarce

7

scarce any resemblance to those invincible legions which had
been viCtorious wherever they marched. Instead of freemen,
who voluntarily took arms from the love of glory, or of their
country, provincials and barbarians were bribed or forced into
service. They were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the
fatigue of military duty. They even complained of the weight
of their defensive armour, as intolerable, and laid it aside. In-
fantry, from which the armies of ancient Rome derived their
vigour and flability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and un-
disciplined soldiers of later times could scarce be brought to
venture into the field but on horseback. These wretched troops,
however, were the only guardians of the Empire. Thejealoufy
of despotism had deprived the people of the use of arms; and
fubjeds oppressed and rendered incapable of defending them-
selves, had neither spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders,
from whom they had little to fear, because they could scarce
make their condition more unhappy. As the martial spirit
became extinc, the revenues of the Empire gradually dimi-
nithed. The taste for the luxuries of the East increascd to such
a pitch in the Imperial court, that great films were carried into
India, from which money never returns. By the valf subsidies
paid to the barbarous nations a fill greater quantity of species
was withdrawn from circulation. The frontier provinces wafted
by frequent incursions became unable to pay the customary
tribute; and the wealth of the world, which had long centered
in the capital of the Empire, ceascd to flow thither in the fame
abundance, or was diverted into other channels. The limits of
the Empire continued to be as cxtenfive as ever, while the
spirit requisite for its defence declined, and its resources were
cxhaufted. A vast body, languid, and almost unanimated, be-

came

SECT. I.

SECT. I.

The circum-
fiances -which
contributedto
the fuccef- of
the barbarous
nation.

came incapable of any effort to save itself, and was easily over-
powered. The Emperors, who had the absolute direction of
this disordered system, funk in the softness of Eastern luxury,
ihut up within the walls of a palace, ignorant of war, unac-
quainted with affairs, and governed entirely by women and
eunuchs, or by ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the
approach of danger, and under circumstances which called for
the utmost vigour in counsel as well as in ation, discovered all
the impotent irresolution of fear, and of folly.

IN every refped, the condition of the barbarous nations was

the reverse of that of the Romans. Among them, the martial
spirit was in full vigour; their leaders were hardy and enter-
prizing; the arts which had enervated the Romans were un-
known among them; and such wa's the nature of their military
institutions, that they brought forces into the field without any
trouble, and supportcd them at little expence. The mercenary
and effeminate troops flationed on the frontier, astonished at
their fierceness, either fled at their approach, or were routed in
the first onset. The feeble expedient to which the Emperors
had recourse, of taking large bodies of the barbarians into pay,
and of employing them to repel new invaders, instead of re-
tarding, hastened the deftrution of the Empire. They soon
turned their arms againf. their masters, and with greater ad-
vantage than ever: for, by serving in the Roman armies, they
had acquired all the discipline, or skill in war, which the Ro-
mans still retained; and upon adding these to their native
ferocity, they became altogether irrcfiftible.

t

B U T1
8

BUT though from there, and many other causes, the progress

and conquests of the nations which over-ran the Empire, be-
came so extremely rapid, they were accompanied with hor-
rible devastations, and an incredible deftrution of the human
ipecies. Civilized nations which take arms upon cool refletion,
from motives of policy or prudence, with a view to guard
againftR ome distant danger, or to prevent some remote con-
tingency, carry on their hostilities with so little rancour, or
animosity, that war among them is disarmed of half its
terrors. Barbarians are strangers to such refinements. They
ruih into war with impetuosity, and prosecute it with vio-
lence. Their sole object is to make their enemies feel the
weight of their vengeance, nor does their rage subside until it
be satiated with inflicting on them every possible calamity. It
is with such a spirit that the savage tribes in America carry on
their petty wars. It was with the fame spirit that the more
powerful and no less fierce barbarians in the north of Europe,
and of Asia, fell upon the Roman Empire.

WHEREVER they marched, their rout was marked with

blood. They ravaged or deflroyed all around them. They
made no diflintion between what was sacred, and what was
profane. They rcfpctQed no age, or sex, or rank. What
escaped the fury of the firfi inundation perished in those which
followed it. The most fertile and populous provinces were
converted into deserts, in which were scattered the ruins of
villages and cities, that afforded shelter to a few miserable inha-
bitants whom chance had preserved, or the sword of the enemy,
wearied will destroying, had sparcd. The conquerors who
firfl fettled in the countries which they had wafted were cxpcl-

VOL. 1. C led

SECT. I.

The spirit
with which
they carried
on war.

The defola.
tion which
they brought
upon Europe.

9

SECT. I. led or exterminated by new invaders, who coming from regions

- ~ farther removed from the civilized parts of the world, were

fill more fierce and rapacious. This brought new calamities
upon mankind, which did not cease until the north, by pour-
ing forth successive swarms, was drained of people, and could
no longer furnish infiruments of deRrudion. Famine and pes-
tilence, which always march in the train of war, when it
ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every part of
Europe, and compleated its sufferings. If a man were called
to fix upon the period in the hiflory of the world, during
which the condition of the human race was most calamitous
and afflided, he would without hesitation, name that which
elapsed from the death of Theodosius the Great, to the efa-
blifhment of the Lombards in Italy '. The contemporary au-
thors who beheld that scene of desolation, labour and are at a
loss for expressions to describe the horror of it. Thefcourge of
God, The destroyer of nations, are the dreadful epithets by which
they diflinguifh the most noted of the barbarous leaders; and
they compare the ruin which they had brought on the world,
to the havock occasioned by earthquakes, conflagrations, or
deluges, the most formidable and fatal calamities which the
imagination of man can conceive.

'The univeral BUT no exprefflons can convey so perfet an idea of the
change wvh ch
(hey occafinl- clcftrucivc progress of the barbarians as that which must strike
( d In the II lte
of Europe. an attentive observer, when he contemplates the total change,

which he will discover in the state of Europe when it began to
recover some degree of tranquillity towards the close of the sixth

a Thcodofius did A. D. 3)5. The reign of Alboinus in Lombardy, began
A. D. 571, bo that this period was 176 years.

century.
IO

century. The Saxons were by that time masters of the south-
ern, and more fertile provinces of Britain; the Franks of Gaul;
the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the Goths and
Lombards of Italy and the adjacent provinces. Scarce any
vestige of the Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature,
remained. New forms of government, new laws, new man-
ners, new dresses, new languages, and new names of men and
countries, were every where introduced. To make a great or
suddei. alteration with refpet to any of these, unless where the
ancient inhabitants of a country have been almost totally exter-
minated, has proved an undertaking beyond the power of the
greatest conquerors [D]. The totalchange which the settlement
of the barbarous nations occasioned in the state of Europe, may,
therefore, be confidered as a more decisive proof, than even the
testimony of contemporary historians, of the deftruaive vio-
lence with which they carried on their conquests, and of the
havock which they had made from one extremity of this quarter
of the globe to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this general wreck

of nations, we must search for the feeds of order, and endea-
vour to discover the first rudiments of the policy and laws now
cflablifhled in Europe. To this source, the historians of its
different kingdoms, have attempted, though with less attention
and induflry than the importance of the enquiry merits, to trace
back the institutions, and customs peculiar to their countrynen.
It is not my province to givc a minute detail of the progress of
government and manners in each particular nation, whose

[D] NOTE IV.

C 2

SECT. I.

From this
tlate of di'or-
der the laws
of govern-
nient now
eltablifhed
muRf be
traced.
[E] NOTE V.

tranfadions

II

SECT. I.

The princi-
ples on which
the northern
nations made
their fettle-
tnents in
Europe.

tranfaotins are the obje& of the following history. But in order
to exhibit a just view of the state of'Europe at the opening of
the sixteenth century, it is necessary to look back, and to con-
template the condition of the northern nations upon their first
settlement in those countries which they occupied. It is necef-
fary to mark the great feps by which they advanced from bar-
barifm to refinement, and to point out those general principles
and events which by their uniform as well as extensive operation
condu&ed all of them to that degree of improvement in policy
and in manners which they had attained at the period when
Charles V. began his reign.

WHEN nations subjed to despotic government make con-

quefrs, there serve only to extend the dominion and the power
of their master. But armies composed of freemen conquer for
themselves, not for their leaders. The people who overturned
the Roman Empire, and fettled in its various provinces, were
of the latter class. Not only the different nations that iTfued
from the north of Europe, which has always been confidered
as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and Alans who in-
habited part of tlofe countries which have been marked out
as the peculiar region of servitude ', enjoyed freedom and
independance to such a high degree as seems to be scarce
compatible with a Rate of social union, or with the sub-
ordination necessary to maintain it. They followed the chief-
tain who led them forth in quest of new settlements, not by
constraint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom he could
order to march, but as volunteers who offered to accompany

D De L'cfprit des luix, liv. 17. ch. 3.

Iliin.
12

him [F]. They confidered their conquests as a common property,
in which all had a title to share, as all had contributed to ac-
quire them [G]. In what manner, or by what principles, they
divided among them the lands which they seized, we cannot
now determine with any certainty. There is no nation in
Europe whose records reach back to this remote period; and
there is little information to be got from the uninfirudive
and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers ignorant of the
true end, and unacquainted with the proper objeas of history.

THIS new division of property, however, together with the

maxims and manners to which it gave rife, gradually introduced
a ipecies of government formerly unknown. This singular in-
flitution is now distinguished by the name of the FeudalJfiyem :
and though the barbarous nations which framed it, fettled in
their new territories at different times, came from different
countries, spoke various languages, and were under the com-
mand of separate leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were efla-
blifhed, with little variation, in every kingdom of Europe.
This amazing uniformity hath induced foine authors ' to believe
that all these nations, notwithflanding so many apparent cir-
cumftances of diftintion, were originally the fame people. But
it may be ascribed with greater probability to the similar slate
of focicty and of manners to which they were accuftomncd in
their native countries, and to the similar lituation in which they
found themselves on taking poffeflion of their new domains.

SECT. L.

The feudal
government
gradually eltablifhed
among them.

[F] NOTE VI. [G] NOTE VII.
' Procop. de Bcllo Vandal. ap. Script. Byz. edit. Vei. vol. i. p. 345.

It

SECT. I.

National de-
fence the
great objeCt
of feudal
p(,li y.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acquisitions to main-

tain, not only againfR such of the ancient inhabitants as they
had spared, but againRf the more formidable inroads of new in-
vaders, felf-defence was their chief care, and seems to have
been the sole obje¢t of their first inRitution and policy. In-
stead of those loose associations, which, though they scarce
diminished their personal independance, had been sufficient for
their security while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the neceflity of confederating more closely together,
and of relinquishing some of their private rights in order to
attain publick safety. Every freeman, upon receiving a portion
of the lands which were divided, bound himself to appear in
arms against the enemies of the community. This military
service was the condition upon which he received and held his
lands, and as they were exempted from every other burden,
that tenure, among a warlike people, was deemed both easy
and honourable. The King or general, who led them to con-
quest, continuing still to be the head of the colony, had, of
course, the largest portion allotted to him. Having thus acquir-
ed the means of rewarding past services, as well as of gaining
new adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this view, bind-
ing those on whom they were beltowed, to follow his flandard
with a number of men in proportion to the extent of the territory,
which they received, and to bear arms in his defence. His chief
officers imitated the example of the ibvercign, and in distributing
portions of their lands among their dependants, annexed the fame
condition to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom resembled a mili-
tary etfablilhment, rather than a civil intfitution. The vicorious
army cantoned out in the country w;ich it had seized, continued
ranged under its proper officers, and subordinate to military

IJt~~ ~~~command.
r4

command. The names of a soldier and of a freeman were fyno-
nimous'. Every proprietor of land, girt with a sword, was
ready to march at the summons of his superior, and to take the
field against the common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so admirably cal-

culated for defence against the assaults of any foreign power, its
provisions for the interior order and tranquility of society were
extremely defective. The principles of disorder and corruption
are discernable in that constitution under its best and most per-
fed form. They soon unfolded themselves, and spreading with
rapidity through every part of the system, produced the most
fatal effects. The bond of political union was extremely feeble;
the sources of anarchy were innumerable. The monarchical and
ariftocratical parts of the constitution, having no intermediate
power to balance them, were perpetually at variance, and
juftling with each other. The powerful vassals of the crown
soon extorted a confirmation for life of those grants of land,
which being at first purely gratuitous, had been beflowed only
during pleasure. Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to have
them converted into hereditary poffeflions. One ftep more com-
pleated their usurpations, and rendered them unalienable [H].
With an ambition no less enterprizing, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour, as well as
offices of power or trust. These personal marks of difltindion,
which the publick admiration bestows on illustrious merit, or
which the publick confidence confers on extraordinary abilities,
were annexed to certain families, and transmitted like fiefs, from

A Du Cangc Gloflar. voc. Mils.

SECT. I.

The feudal
government
defective in
its provision3
for interior
order in si.,
ciety.
[H] NOTE VIII.

father

father to son by hereditary right. The crown vaflals hav-
ing thus secured the pofieffion of their lands and dignities,
the nature of the Feudal infiitutions, which though founded
in subordination, verged to independance, led them to new,
and still more dangerous encroachments on the prerogatives
of the sovereign. They obtained the power of supreme
jurifdiCion both civil and criminal within their own terri-
tories; the right of coining money; together with the pri-
vilege of carrying on war against their private enemies in their
own name, and by their own authority. The ideas of political
fubje&ion were almost entirely loft, and frequently scarce any
appearance of feudal subordination remained. Nobles who had
acquired such enormous power, scorned to confider themselves
as fubjeds. They aspired openly at being independant: the
bonds which connected the principal members of the conftitu-
tion with the crown, were dissolved. A kingdom considerable
in name and in extent, was broken into as many separate prin-
cipalities as it contained powerful barons. A thousand causes
of jealousy and discord subsisted among them, and gave rife to
as many wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or kept in
continual alarm during these endless contests, was filled with
cafles and places of firength, ereced for the security of the
inhabitants, not against foreign force, but against internal
hostilitics. An univcrfal anarchy, detrudive, in a great mca-
sure, of all the advantages which men expeCt to derive fiom
society, prevailed. The people, the most numerous as well
as the nolt useful part of the community, were either re-
duced to a state of acual servitude, or treated with the fame
infolcnce and rigour as if they lhld been degraded into that
wretched condition [I]. The King, firipped of almost every
prerogative, and without authority to cnad or to execute falu-

[I] NOTE IX.

tary

SECT. I.
<-v--
16

tary laws, could neither protect the innocent, nor punish the
guilty. The nobles, superior to all restraint, harraffed each other
with perpetual wars, oppressed their fellow fubjets and hum-
bled or insulted their sovereign. To crown all, time gradually
fixed, and rendered venerable this pernicious system, which
violence had etablifhed.

Scli was the Rate of Europe with refpea to the interior

adminiltration of government from the seventh to the eleventh
century. All the external operations of its various fRates,
during this period, were, of course, extremely feeble. A
kingdom dismembered, and torn with dissention, without any
common interest to rouze, or any common head to conduct its
force, was incapable of acting with vigour. Almost all the
wars in Europe, during the ages which I have mentioned,
were trifling, indecisive, and productive of no confiderabl event.
They resembled the short incursions of pirates or banditti,
rather than the feady operations of a regular army. Every
baron at the head of his vassals, carried on some petty enter-
prize to which he was prompted by his own ambition, or
revenge. The frate itself, dcflitute of union, either remained
altogether inaCtive, or if it attempted to make any effort, that
served only to discover its impotence. The filperior genius of
Charlemagne, it is true, unied all these disjointed and difcor-
dant members, and forming them again into one body, restorcd
that degree of activity to government which diftinguifl his
reign, and render the tranfadions of it, objects not only of
attention but of admiration to more enlightened times. But
this fiate of union and vigour not being natural to the feudal
government, was of short duration. Immediately upon his
death, the spirit which animated and fiuflained the vast ytflem

VOL. I. D which

SECT. L

It prevented
nati ns like-
wife fiom
acting with
vigour in'their
external ope-
rations.

SECT. I. which he had eftabliffied, being withdrawn, it broke into pieces..

All the calamities which flow from anarchy and discord, re-
turning with additional force, affliced the different kingdoms
into which his Empire was split. From that time to the eleventh
century, a succession of unintcrefling events; a series of wars,
the motives as well as the consequences of which were equally
ninlportant, fill and deform the annals of all the nations in.
lurope.

f ot this I To these pernicious effes of the feudal anarchy, may be
;..te of cicty added its fatal influence on the character and improvement of

s(,:i fL;Cl.'3
,An arts; the human mind. If men do not enjoy the protecion of regular

government, together with the certainty of personal security
which naturally flows from it, they never attempt to make pro--
grefs in science, nor aim at attaining refinement in taste, or inl
manners. That period of turbulence, oppression, and rapine,
which I have described, was ill suited to favour improvement
in any of there. In less than a century after the barbarous
nations fettled in their new conquefs, almost all the effets
of the knowledge and civility which the Romans had spread,
through Europe disappearcd. Not only the arts of elegance
which miniftcr to luxury, and are supported by it, but many
of the ufcful arts, without which life can scarce be confidercd
as comfortablc, were neglected or loft. Literature, fcicnce,.
tafce, were words scarce in ufc during the agcs we are con-
tcinplating; or if they occur at any time, eminence in them
i.t afcii)bcdt to person3 and produdions si) contemlptible that
it appears their true import was little undcrflood. Persons
of tie highest rank, and in tle most eminent flations could
iot read or write. Many of the clergy did not undcrftand

thle

'9

the breviary which they were obliged daily to recite; some of
them could scarce read it [K]. All memory of past transactions
was loft, or preservcd in annals filled with trifling events, or le-
gendary tales.' Even the codes of laws published by the several
nations which eflablifhed themselves in the different countries of
Europe, fell into disuse, while in their place, cultoms, vague
and capricious, were substituted. The human mind neglected,
uncultivated, and depressed, funk into the molt profound igno-
rance. Europe did not produce, during four centuries, one
author who merits to be read, either on account of the elegance
of his composition, or the justness and novelty of his fentimcnts.
There is icarce one invention useful or ornamental to society
of which that long period can boast.

EVEN the Christian religion, though its precepts are delivered,

and its inffitutions are fixed in scripture with a precision which
should have exempted them from being misinterpreted or cor-
rupted, degenerated during those ages of darkness into an
illiberal fuperffition. The barbarous nations when converted
to Christianity changed the object, not the spirit of their reli-
gioue worship. They endeavoured to conciliate the favour of
the true God by means not unlike to those which they had em-
ployed in order to appease their false deities. Inflead of aspiring to
fandity and virtue, which alone can render men acceptable to
the great author of order and of excellence, they imagined that
they satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous obfcr-
vancc of external ceremonies [L]. Religion, according to their
conccption of it, comprchended nothing clfe; and the rites, by
which they pcrfuaded tlhenfelves that they could gain the

[K] NOTE X.

SECT. I,

Upon rdi-
gion;
[L] NOTE XI.

favour
D 2

SECT. I.

U pon the cha-
ratler and
virtues of the
human mind.

favour of heaven, were of such a nature as might have been ex-
peded from the rude ideas of the ages which devised and intro-
duced them. They were either so unmeaning as to be altogether
unworthy of the Being to whose honour they were consecrated;
or so absurd as to be a disgrace to reason and humanity [M]. Char-
lemagne in France, and Alfred the Great in England, endea-
voured to dispel this darkness, and gave their fubjeds a flort
glimpse of light and knowledge. But the ignorance of the age
was too powerful for their efforts and institutions. The dark-
ness returned, and fettled over Europe more thick and heavy
than formerly.

As the inhabitants of Europe during these centuries were

firangers to the arts which embellish a polished age, they were
destitute of the virtues which abound among people who con-
tinue in a simple state. Force of mind, a sense of personal
dignity, gallantry in enterprize, invincible perseverance in exe-
cution, and contempt of danger and of death, are the charac-
teriftic virtues of uncivilized nations. But these are all the
offspring of equality and independence, both which the feudal
institutions had destroyed. The spirit of domination corrupted
the nobles; the yoke of servitude depressed the people; the
generous sentiments inspired by a sense of equality were extin-
guifhed, and nothing remained to be a check on ferocity and
violence. Human society is in its most corrupted fiate at that
period when men have loft their originalindependence and fimpli-
city of manners, but have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a sense of decoruln and of propriety in con-
tO0, as a restraint on those paflions which lead to heinous crimes.

[M] NOTE XII.

Accordingly.
20

Accordingly, a greater number of those atrocious actions which
fill the mind of man with astonishment and horror, occur in the
history of the centuries under review, than in that of any period
of the fame extent in the annals of Europe. If we open the
history of Gregory of Tours, or of any contemporary author,
we meet with a series of deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge,
so wild and enormous as almost to, exceed belief.

BUT, according to the observation of an elegant and pro-

found historian', there is an ultimate point of depression, as
well as of exaltation, from which human affairs naturally re-
turn in a contrary progress, and beyond which they seldom
pass either in their advancement or decline. When defects,
either in the form, or in the administration of government,
occasion such disorders in society as are exceflive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and to apply such
remedies as will most effectually remove them. Slight incon-
veniencies may be long overlooked or endured, but when
abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society must go to ruin, or must
attempt to reform them. The disorders in the feudal system,
together with the corruption of taste and manners consequent
upon these, which had gone on increasing during a long course
of years, seem to have attained their utmofl point of excess to-
wards the close of the eleventh century. From that era, we
may date the return of government and manners iir a contrary
diredion, and can trace a fucceflion of caufis and events which
contributed, some with a nearer and more powcrful, others with
a more remote and lcf perceptible influence, to abolifl con-

' Hume's Hiflory of EnglanJ, vol. ii. p. 441.'

fufiota

SECT. IL

From the be-
ginning of the
eleventh cen-
tury govern-
ment and
manners
begin to im-
prove.

zt

SECT. I.

NecefTary to
point out the
caules and
evcnt, which
contribute to-
wards this
iniprovemcnt.

Tte tendency
oftheCrufades
to introduce a
change in go-
vernment and

manners.

The more re.

rnote causes
of these cxpc-
ditions.

fusion and barbarism, and to introduce order, regularity, and
refinement.

IN pointing out and explaining these causes and events, it is

not necessary to observe the order of time with a chronological
accuracy; it is of more importance to keep in view their mutual
connecion and dependance, and to show how the operation of
one event, or of one cause, prepared the way for another, and
augmented its influence. We have hitherto been contemplat-
ing the progress of that darkness which spread over Europe from
its firfi approach, to the period of greatest obscuration; a more
pleasant exercise begins here, to observe the first dawnings of
returning light, to mark the various acceflions by which it gra-
dually increased and advanced towards the full splendor of day.

I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order to rescue the Holy

Land out of the hands of Infidels, seem to be the first event that
rouzed Europe from the lethargy in which it had been long
funk, and that tended to introduce any change in government,
or in manners. It is natural to the human mind to view those
places which have been distinguished by being the residence of
any illuflrious perfonagc, or the scene of any great tranfacion,
with some degree of delight and veneration. From this prin-
ciplc flowed the fupcrflitious devotion with which Chriffians,
from the carlieit ages of the church, were accuft6lncd to visit
lthat country which the Almighty had fclcede as the inheritance
of his favourite people, and in which the son of God had ac-
complifhcd the redemption of mankind. As this liflant pilgri-
mage could not be performed without confideralle expencc,
fatigue, and danger, it appeared the more meritorious, and came
·to be .confidercd as an expiation for almofl every crime. An

opinion

opinion which spread with rapidity over Europe about the close SECT. L
of the tenth and beginning of the eleventh century, and which ' - -
gained universal credit, wonderfully augmented the number of
there credulous pilgrims, and increased the ardour with which
they undertook this useless voyage. The thousand years men-
tioned by St. John' were supposed to be accomplished, and the
end of the world to be at hand. A general consternation
seized mankind; many relinquished their possessions; and
abandoning their friends and families, hurried with precipita-
tion to the Holy Land, where they imagined that Christ would
quickly appear to judge the world u. While Palestine continued
subjed to the Caliphs, they had encouraged the resort of pil-
grims to Jerusalem; and confidered this as a beneficial species of
commerce, which brought into their dominions gold and silver,
and carried nothing out of them but relics and consecrated trin-
kets. But the Turks having conquered Syria about the middle
of the eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed to outrages
of every kind from these fierce barbarians. This change
happening precisely at the juncture when the panic terror
which I have mentioned rendered pilgrimages most frequent,
filled Europe with alarm and indignation. Every person who
returned from Palefline related the dangers which he had en-
countered, in visiting the holy city, and described with exagge-
ration the cruelty and vexations of the Turks..

WI1h'N the minds of men were thus prepared, the zeal of a The imnei-
fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of leading all the forces a"'', oc ; a

0tf theCII.

Revel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
C" hronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Rccuicil dcs Hifiditlns de Fr.nce.

tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p. 332. Chronic. S. Pint;lconis ;ip.
Lci:ard. Corp. Script. medii ,evi, vAl. i. 'p. 909. Annialifa S;xo, ibiJ. 576.

t ~~~~~of
.t

of

SECT. I of Christendom against the infidels, and of driving them oeit

* of the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to give a begin-

ning to that wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that was
the name of this martial apostle, run from province to province
with a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes and people to this
Holy war, and wherever he came kindled the fame enthusiastic
ardour for it with which he himfclf was animated. The council
of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand persons were
assembled, pronounced the scheme to have been fuggcfted by
the immediate inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
frill more numerous, as soon as the measure was proposed, all
cried out with one voice, " It is the will of God." Persons of
all ranks were smitten with the contagion; not only the gallant
nobles of that age, with their martial followers, whom the
boldness of a romantic enterprize might have been apt to allure,
but men in the more humble and pacific stations of life; eccle-
fLaftics of every order, and even women and children engaged
with emulation in an undertaking which was deemed sacred
and meritorious. If we may believe the concurring testimony
of contemporary authors, fix millions of persons aflumed the
cross ", which was the badge that distinguished such as de-
voted themselves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the
Princess Anna Comnena, torn up from the foundation, seemed
ready to precipitate itself in one united body upon Asia Y. Nor
did the fumes of this cnthufiaftic zeal evaporate at once: the
frenzy was as lasting, as it was extravagant. During two
centuries, Europe seems to have had no objet but to recover,

x Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gefia Dci per Francos, vol. i. 387.
edit. Han. 1611.

Y Alexias. lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 224.

t or

or keep possession of the Holy Land, and through that period, SECT. I.
vast armies continued to march thither [N].

TH E first efforts of valour animated by enthusiasm were irre- The ruccefs of

fiftible; part %f the lesser Asia, all Syria and Palestine were te rads
wrested from the infidels; the banner of the cross was dilplayed
on Mourn Sion; Conitantinople the capital of the Christian
empire in the East, was seized by a body of these adventurers,
who had taken arms against the Mahometans, and an Earl of
Slanders, and his descendants, kept pofleffion of the Imperial
throne during half a century. But though the first impression
of the Crusaders was so unexpected that they madc their con-
quests with great ease, they found infinite difficulty in prefer-
ving them. Establishments so distant from Europe, surrounded
by warlike nations, animated with fanatical zeal scarce infe.ior
to that of the Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in danger
of being overturned. Bcforc the expiration of the thirteenth A. D. 1291.
century, the Christians were driven out of all their Asiatic pof-
feflions, in acquiring of which incredible numbers of men had
perished, and immense fums of money had been w:lPed. The
only common enterprize in which the Europcan nations ever
engaged, and which all undertook with equal ardour, remains
a singular monument of human folly.

BUT from these expeditions, extravagant as they were, be- Thebeneficial

efifeds of the

ncficial consequences followed, which had neither been foreseen Crusades on
nor expeced. In their progress towards the Holy Land, the manner.
followers of the cross marched through countries better culti-

[N] NOTE XIII.

E
VOL. I.

*ated,

Sr CT. I. vated and more civilized than their own. Their frft rendezvous

was commonly in Italy, in which Venice, Genoa, Pisa and other
cities had begun to apply themselves to commerce, and had made
some advances towards wealth as well as refinement. They em-
barked there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued their route by
land to Constantinople. Though the military spirit had been
long extinc in the eastern Empire, and a despotism of the
worst species had annihilated almofl every publick virtue,
yet Constantinople having never felt the defirudive rage of the
barbarous nations, was the greatest, as well as the most beautiful
city in Europe, and the only one in which there remained
any image of the ancient elegance in manners, and arts. The
naval power of the eastern Empire was considerable. Manu-
fadtures of the most curious fabrick were carried on in its domi-
nions. Conflantinople was the only mart in Europe for the
commodities of the East Indies. Although the Saracens and
Turks had torn from the Empire many us its richest provinces,
and had reduced it within very narrow bounds, yet great
wealth flowed into the capital from these various sources,
which not only cherished such a taste for magnificence but
kept alive such a relish for the sciences as appear confider-
able when compared with what was known in other parts of
Europe. Even in Asia, the Europeans who had affuned the
cross found the remains of the knowledge and arts which the
example and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused through
their empire. Although the attention of the historians of the
Cruzades was fixed on other objeds than the state of society and
manners among the nations which they invaded, although
most of them had ncithcr tafce nor difcernimcnt enough to de-
fcribc them, they relate, however, such signal ads of humanity

and
r

and generosity in the conduc of Saladin as well as sone other
leaders of the Mahometans, as give us a very high idea of
their manners. It was not possible for the Crusaders to travel
through so many countries, and to behold their various customs
and institutions without acquiring information and improve-
ment. Their views enlarged; their prejudices wore off; new
ideas crowded into their minds; and they must have been fen-
fible on many occasions of the rufiicity of their own manners
when compared with those of a more polished people. These im-
pressions were not so flight as to be effaced upon their return to
their native countries. A close intercourse subsisted between the
East and Weft during two centuries; new armies were con-
tinually marching from Europe to Asia, while former adven-
turers returned home and imported many of the customs to
which they had been familiarized by a long residence abroad.
Accordingly, we discover, soon after the commencement of the
Crusades, greater splendour in the courts of Princes, greater
pomp in publick ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasure
and amusements, together with a more romantic spirit of enter-
prize spreading gradually over Europe; and to these wild ex-
peditions, the effe& of superstition or folly, we owe the first
gleams of light which tended to dispel barbarity and ignorance.

BUT these beneficial confcquences of the Crusades took place

slowly; their influence upon the state of property, and confe-
qucntly of power, in the different kingdoms of Europe, was
more immediate as well as discernible. The nobles who assumed
the cross, and blound tlicmfelvcs to march to the IIoly Land,
soon perceived that great tilms wcre icccffiry towards dcfray-

E e ing

SECT. I

Their influ-
ence on the
slate ofpio-
perty.

27

ing the cxpcnces of such a distant expedition, and enabling
them to appear with flitable dignity at the head of their vassals.
But the genius of the feudal system was averse to the imposition
of extraordinary taxes; and fubjets in that age were unaccuf-
toined to pay them. No expedient remained for levying the
fuils rcquifite, but the sale of their possessions. As men were in-
flamcd with romantic cxpeetations of the fplcrdid conquests which.
they hoped to make in Asia, and possessed with such zeal for reco-
vering the Holy Land as swallowed up every other passion, they
rclinquiflhcd their an:ient inheritances without any reluctance,
and for prices far below their value, that they might rally forth
as adventurers in quest of new settlements in unknown coun-
tries. The Monarchs of the different kingdoms, none of whom
had engaged in the first Crusade, eagerly seized this oppor-
tuniry of annexing considerable territories to thcir crowns at
fnall expence '. Besides this, several great barons who perished
in the Holy war, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted of course
to their refpcaive sovereigns, and by these acceflions of property
as well as power taken from the one scale and thrown into
the other, the regal authority incrcafed in proportion as that of
the Aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of many potent vas-
ils, accustomed to controul and give law to their fovcreigns,
afforded them an opportunity of extending their prerogative,
and of acquiring a degree of weight in the conflitution which
they did not formerly ponffs. To these circumilances, we may
add, that as all wlio alrumcd the cross, were taken tinder the
immediate protedion of the church, and its hcavieft anathemas
were denounced againflt filch as Ihould difquict or annoy those

Willcl i). Mja'mfbui. (;,tIbrt. Abbas. ap. BoIgarL vol. i. 48r.

who .

SECT. I.

_ .--_l
28

who had devoted themselves to this service; the private quar-
rels and hostilities which banished tranquillity from a feudal
kingdom were suspended or extinguished; a more general and
steady administration of justice began to be introduced, and
some advances were made towards the establishment of regular
government in the several kingdoms of Europe b [0].

THE commercial effecs of the Crusades were not less con-

fiderable than those which I have already mentioned. The
firfr armies under the tfandard of the cross which Peter the
hermit and Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the length of
the march, as well as the fierceness of the barbarous people who
inhabited those countries, that it deterred others from taking the
fame route; so that rather than encounter so many dangers, they
chore to go by sea. Venice, Genoa, and Pisa furnished the
transports on which they embarked. The fum which these
cities received merely for freight from such numerous armies
was immense d. This, however, was but a small part of what
they gained by the expeditions to the Holy Land; the Crufa-
ders contraced with them, for military fiorcs and provisions;
their fleets kept on the coafl as the army advanced by land ; and
fuipplying them with whatever was wanting, engrofled all the
profits of that lucrative brancl of commcrce. The success
which attended the arms of the Crufadcrs was produtive of
advantages still more permanent. There arc chartcrs yet extant,

' I)u Cange Gloffar. voc. Cruce fignatus. Guil. Abbas ap. Bongars. vol. i.
489, 482.

[0] NOTE XIV.
. Muratori Antiquit. Italic. mcdii. xavi, vol. ii. 9c5.

SECT. I..

Their comr
mercial effet.

29:

SECT. I. containing grants to the Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese of the

'" *i·moft extensive immunities in the several settlements which the

Christians made in Asia. All the commodities which they im-
ported or exported are thereby exempted from every impofi-
tion; the property of entire suburbs in some of the maritime
towns, and of large streets and houses in others, is vefled in them;
and all queflions arising among persons fettled within their
precirins, or who traded under their protection, are appointed to
be tried by their own laws and by judges of their own appoint-
ment '. When the Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed
one of their own number on the Imperial throne, the Italian
States were likewise gainers by that event. The Venetians
who had planned the enterprize, and took a considerable part
in carrying it into execution, did not neglea to secure to them-
selves the chief advantages redounding from its success. They
made themselves masters of part of the ancient Peleponnefuis in
Greece, together with some of the most fertile islands in the
Archipelago. Many valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were transferred to Venice,
Genoa, or I'ifa. Thus a succession of events occasioned by the
Holy war, opened various sources, from which wealth flowed
in such abundance into these cities f, as enabled them, in con-
currcnce with another institution which liall be immediatcly
mentioned, to secure their own liberty and independancc.

'lc calb'ilh- II. TiHE inflitution to which I alluded was the forming of
nutif

, cor- cities into communities, corporations, or bodies politick, and

voirtal)l to granting them the privilege of municipal jurifdidtiou, which
govclnmc nt
and ortlcr.

c Murat. ibid. 9g6, &c.
Villchardouin hilt. dc Contfant. fous I'Elmpercurs Francois, 105, &c.

contributed

contributed more, perhaps, than any other cause to intro-
duce regular government, police and arts, and to diffuse them
over Europe. The feudal government had degenerated into a
system of oppression. The usurpations of the nobles were be-
come unbounded and intolerable: they had reduced the great
body of the people into a slate of actual servitude: the condition
of those dignified with the name of freemen, was often little pre-
ferable to that of the other. Nor was such oppression the portion
of those alone who dwelt in the country, and were employed in
cultivating the estate of their master. The cities and villages
held of some great lord, on whom they depended for pro-
teion, and were no less subjed to his arbitrary jurifdidion.
The inhabitants were deprived of the natural, and molt unalicn-
able rights of humanity. They could not dispose of the
effects which their own industry had acquired, either by a
latter will, or by any deed executed during their life L. They
had no right to appoint guardians for their children, during
their minority. They were not permitted to marry without
purchasing the content of the lord on whom they depended h.
If once they had commenced a law suit, they.durft not termi-
nate it by an accommodation, because that would have deprived
the lord in whose court they pleaded, of the perquisites due to
him on paling sentence'. Services of various kinds, no lcfs
disgraceful than oppressive, were exaded from them without
mercy or moderation. The spirit of industry was choakcd in
some cities by abfilrd regulations, and in Qthers by unreatonable

SECT. I..

The ancient
fIat: of oitics.

g Dacherii Spicelcg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Ordonances des Rois
deFrance, tom. iii. 20. . N°. 2. 6.

I ()rdonanccs dcs Rois de'Fraiicc, tom. i. p. 22. tom. iii. 203. N '. I. Murat.
Anti(l. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dachcr. Spiccl. vol. xi. 325, 341.

1 Dachcr. Spiccl, vol. ix. 182.

e xadions

31

SECT. I.

The freedom
(if cities si a
eflablihed in
Italy.

exacions: nor would the narrow and oppressive maxims of a
military ariflocracy have permitted it ever to.rife to any degree
of height or vigour .

BUTT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn their atten-

tion towards commerce, and to conceive some idea of the
advantages which they might derive from it, they became im-
patient to shake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and to efta-
blifh among themselves such a free and equal government as
would render property secure, and industry flourishing. The
German Emperors, elpecially those of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, as the feat of their government was far distant
from Italy, possessed a feeble and imperfect jurifdidion in that
country. Their perpetual quarrels either with the Popes or
with their own turbulent vassals diverted their attention from
the interior police of Italy, and gave constant employment to
their arms. These circumstances encouraged the inhabitants
of some of the Italian cities, towards the beginning of the
eleventh century, to assume new privileges, to unite together
more closely, and to form themselves into bodies politick
governed by laws cflablifhed by common content'. The
rights, which many cities acquired by bold or fortunate ufur-
pations, others purchased from the Emperors, who deemed
themselves gainers when they received large fums for im-
munities which they were no longer able to withhold; and
rome cities obtained them gratuitously from the gencrofity or
facility of the Princes on whom they depended. The great
incrcaet of wealth wlicl the Crufadcs brought into Italy, occa-
sioned a new kind of fermentation and activity in the minds of the

k M. I'Abb; Mably obfervat. fur 1'hifl. de France, tom. ii. p. 2. 96.
' urat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.

people,

people, and excited such a general paflion for liberty and inde-
pendance, that before the conclusion of the last Crusade all the
considerable cities in that country had either purchased or had
extorted large immunities from the Emperors [P].

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy before it made

its way into France. Louis the Gross, in order to create some
power that might counterbalance those potent vassals who con-
trouled, or gave law to the crown, first adopted the plan of
conferring new privileges on the towns situated within his own
domaine. These privileges were called charters of community,
by which he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolished all marks
of servitude, and formed them into corporations or bodies poli-
tick, to be governed by a council and magistrates of their own
nomination. These magistrates had the right of adminiftring
juflice within their own precirins, of lcy ingtaxes, of embodying
and training to arms the militia of the town, which took the field
when required by the sovereign, under the command of officers
appointed by the community. The great barons imitated the ex-
ample of their monarch, and granted like immunities to the towns
within their territories. They had wafted such great films in
their expeditions to the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay
hold on this new expedient for raising money, by the sale of
there charters of liberty. Though the institution of communities
was as repugnant to their maxims of policy, as it was advcrfe
to their power, they disregarded remote consequences, in order
to obtain present relief. In less than two centuries fcrvitude
was abolished in most of the towns in France, and they bccalne
free corporations, inftcad of dependant villages without jurif-

[P] NOTE XV.

F

SECT. L

Is introduced
into France
and into other
countries of
Europe.
A. D. iots
-1137.

33
VOL. I.

diClion

SECT. I. dition or privileges [Q ]. Much about the fame period, the great

' cities in Germany began to acquire like immunities, and laid

the foundation of their present liberty and independance [R].
The practice spread quickly over Europe, and was adopted in
Germany, Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other feudal
kingdoms [S].

Its happy Ti E good effets of this new infitittion were immediately
effctli upon
the condition felt, and its influence on government as well as manners was no
cfthe inhab- less extensive than salutary. A great body of the people was re-

leafed from servitude, and from all the arbitrary and grievous
impositions to which that wretched condition had fubjeced them.
Towns, upo,, acquiring the right of community, became so many
little republicks, governed by known and equal laws; and
liberty was deemed such an essential and charaderiftic part in
their constitution, that if any lave took refuge in one of them,
and resided there during a year without being claimed, he was
inflantly declared a freeman, and admitted as a member of the
community q.

Upon thie As one part of the people owed their liberty to the ereciorn
powver of the
mobility; of communities, another was indebted to them for their security.

Such had been the fate of Europe during fevcral centuries, that
felf-prefervation obliged every man to court the patronage of
some powerful baron, and in times of danger his caffle was the
place to which all resorted for lafety. But towns surroundcd
with walls, whose inhabitants were regularly trained to arms,

[Q] NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVI. [S] NOTE XVIII.
q Statut. Humberti Bellojoci Dachcr, Spiccl, vol. ix. 182, 185. Charta
Comit. Forcnf. ibid. 193.

and
34

and bound by intereR, as well as by the most solemn engagements,
reciprocally to defend each other, afforded a more commodious
and secure retreat. The nobles began to be confidered as of less
importance, when they ceased to be the sole guardians to whom
the people could look up for protection against violence.

IF the nobility suffered tome diminution of their credit and

power by the privileges granted to the cities, the crown acquired
an increase of both. As there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the Monarch could bring no
army into the field but what was composed of soldiers furnished
by the crown-vaffals, always jealous of the regal authority, and
often in rebellion against it; nor had he any funds for carry-
ing on the publick service, but such as they granted him with
a very sparing hand. But when the members of communities
were permitted to bear arms, and were trained to the use of
these, this in some degree supplied the first defect, and gave
the crown the command of a body of men independant of its
great vassals. The attachment of the cities to their sovereigns,
whom they refpeded as the first authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court as the protectors of their im-
munities against the domineering spirit of the nobles, con-
tributed somewhat towards removing the second evil, as it
frequently engaged them to grant the crown such supplies of
money as added new force to governmentr.

SECT. I.

Upon the
power of the
crown ;

THIE acquisition of liberty made filch a happy change in the Upon the in.
condition of all the members of communities, as roused them creafiofin-

dullry.
r Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. 602, 785. tom. ii. 318. 422.

IF froml

SECT. I.

The inlabi-
tan's of cities
acquire poli-
tical power ;is
menmbers of
the conflitu-
ion.

from that stupidity and ina&ion into which they had been funk
by the wretchedness of their former state. The spirit of in-
duftry revived. Commerce became an object of attention, and
began to flourish. Population increased. Independance was
established; and wealth flowed into cities which had long been
the feat of poverty and oppression. Wealth was accompanied
by its usual attendants, orientation and luxury; and though
the former was inelegant and cumbersome, and the latter
indelicate, they led gradually to greater refinement in man-
ners, and in the habits of life. Together with this improve-
ment in manners, a more regular species of government and
police was introduced. As cities grew to be more populous,
and the occasions of intercourse among men increased, flatutes
and regulations multiplied of course, and all became sensible
that their common safety depended on observing them with
exadnefs, and on punishing such as violated them, with promp-
titude and rigour. Laws and subordination, as well as polished
manners, took their rife in cities, and diffused themselves insen-
sibly through the reft of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained personal freedom

and municipal jurifdition, soon acquired civil liberty and political
power. It was a fundamental principle in the feudal fyftcm of
policy, that no freeman could be governed or taxed unlcfs by
his own consent. Inconsequence of this, the vassals of every baron
were called to his court, in which they cltabliflcd by mutual
conlent such regulations as they deemed inoll beneficial to their
(mall society, and granted their fulpcrior such supplics of money
as were proportional to their abilities, or to his wants. The
barons thcmfelves, conformably to the fame maxim, were ad-

mittCed
36

37

mitted into the supreme aflembly of the nation, and concurred
with the sovereign in enacing laws, or in imposing taxes. As
the superior lord, according to the original plan of feudal po-
licy, retained the direc property of those lands which he
granted, in temporary possession, to his vassals, the law, even
after fiefs became hereditary, still supposed this original practice
to subsist, and a baron continued to be confidered as the guardian
of all who resided within his territories. The great council of
each nation, whether diflinguifhed by the name of a parliament,
a diet, the Cortes, or the states general, was coinpofed entirely
of such barons, and dignified ecclefiaflicks, as held immediately
of the crown. Towns, whether situated within the royal do-
maine, or on the lands of a subject, depended for protection on
the lord of whom they held. They had no legal name, no
political existence, which could entitle them to be admitted into
the legislative aflembly, or could give them any authority there.
But as soon as they were enfranchised, and formed into Bodies
Corporate, they became legal and independant members of the
eonftitution, and acquired all the rights essential to freemen.
Amongst these, the most valuable, was the privilege of a dcci-
five voice in enacting laws, and in granting full)fidics. It was
natural for cities, accuflomed to a form of municipal govern-
ment, according to which no regulation could be eflabliflcd,
and no money could be raised without their own content, to
claim this privilege. The wealth, the power and consideration
which they acquired on recovering their liberty added weight
to their claim ; and favourable events happened, or fortunate
conjunctures occurred in the different kingdoms of Europe,
which facilitated or forwarded their obtaining poffefion of
this important right. In England, one of the firit countries inl

t' wivIicl

SECT. I.
'_ , -

SECT. I. which the representatives of boroughs were admitted into the

great council of the nation, the barons who took arms againfi
A.D. 1265. Henry II. summoned them to attend parliament in order to

add greater popularity to their party, and to firengthen the
barrier against the encroachment of regal power. In France,
Philip the Fair, a Monarch no less sagacious than enterprizing,
confidered them as instruments which might be employed with
equal advantage to extend the royal prerogative, to counterba-
lance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and to facilitate the
imposition of new taxes. With these views, he introduced the
deputies of such towns as were formed into communities into
the flates general of tle nation'. In the Empire, the wealth
and immunities of the Imperial cities placed them on a level
with the most confiderabie members of the Germanic body.
Conscious of their own power and dignity, they pretended
A. D. 1293. to the privilege of forming a separate bench in the diet; and

made good their pretension '.

The happy B u T in what way soever the representatives of cities first gained
effec1s of this
upon govern- a place in the legislature, that event had great influence on the
ment. form and genius of government. It tempered the rigour of

ariftocratical opprcffion, with a proper mixture of popular li-
berty: It secured to the great body of the people, who had
formerly no representatives, active and powerful guardians of
their rights and privileges: It cftabllihed an intermediate power
between the King and nobles, to which each had rccourfc al-
tcrnatcly, and which at foinn times oppos'cd the usurpations of
the former, on other occasions checked the encroachments of

Parquier Rechcrchcs dc la France, p. 81. edit. Par. 1633.
' Pfcfcl Abrcgc dc I'hiftoiic & droit d'Allnmagic, p. 408. 451.

the

the latter. As soon as the representatives of communities gained
any degree of credit and influence in the legislature, the spirit
of laws became different from what it had formerly been; it
flowed from new principles; it was direEted towards new objects;
equality, order, the publick good, and the redress of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into use, and which grew to
be familiar in the statutes and jurisprudence of the European
nations. Almost all the efforts in favour of liberty in every
country of Europe have been made by this new power in the
legislature. In proportion as it rose to consideration and in-
fluence, the severity of the ariftocratical spirit decreased; and
the privileges of the people became gradually more extensive
as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdition of the nobles was
abridged [T].

IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been declared free

by the charters of communities, that part of the people
which resided in the country, and was employed in agri-
culture, began to recover liberty by enfranchisement. Dur-
ing the rigour of feudal government, as hath been already
observed, the great body of the lower people was reduced
to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the foil which they
cultivated, and together with it were transferred from
one proprietor to another, by tale, or by conveyance. The
ipirit of feudal policy did not favour the enfranchisement of
that order of men. It was an established maxim that no vassal
could legally diminifil tie value of a fief, to the detriment of
the lord troni whonm he had received it. In consequence of this,
iallnlllmiiorn by the authority of the immediate nafler was not
vallild; alltd lcfI it was confirmed by the fitlprior lord of whom

SECT. I.

' -,- _r

The people
acquire liber-
ty by enfran-
chifement.
['I'] NOTE XIX.

39

S ECT. I.

'1I!,e nioti.'es

ii 1 progress

<it till.

A. D. 1j3i.
and 1318.

he held, saves of this species did not acquire a compleat right
to their liberty. Thus it became necessary to ascend through
all the gradations of feudal holding to the King, the lord Para-
mount". A form of procedure so tedious and troublesome dif-
couraged the pracice of manumission. Domestic or personal
slaves often obtained liberty from the humanity or beneficence
of their matiers, to whom they belonged in absolute property.
The condition of slaves fixed to the foil was much more un-
alterable.

BUT the freedom and independance which one part of the

people had obtained by the institution of communities, inspired
the other with the most ardent desire of acquiring the fame pri-
vileges; and their superiors, sensible of the benefits which they
themselves had derived from former concessions, were less unwil-
ling to gratify them by the grant of new immunities. The
enfranchisement of slaves became more frequent; and the
Monarchs of France, prompted by necessity, no less than by
their inclination to reduce the power of the nobles, endeavoured
to render it general. Louis X. and his brother Philip issued
ordinances, declaring, " That as all men were by nature free-
born, and as their kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks,
they determined that it should be so in reality as well as in name;
therefore they appointed that enfranchisements should be granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and reasonable condi-
tions Y." The edits were carried into immediate execution
within the royal domaine. The example of their sovereigns,
togcther with the expecation of the considerable fumns which

Etabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. tom. i. 283. not. (a).
I Ordon. tom. i. p. 583, 653.

they

they might raise by this expedient, led many of the nobles to let
their dependants at liberty; and servitude was gradually abo-
lifhed in almost every province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy, the
establishment of republican government in their great cities, the
genius and maxims of which were extremely different from those
of the feudal policy, together with the ideas of equality which the
progress of commerce had rendered familiar, gradually introduced
the pradice of enfranchising the ancient predial slaves. In
some provinces of Germany, the persons who had been subjed
to this species of bondage, were released; in others, the rigour of
their state was mitigated. In England, as the spirit of liberty
gained ground, the very name and idea of personal servitude,
without any formal interposition of the legislature to prohibit it,
was totally banished.

THE effeas of such a remarkable change in the condition of

so great a part of the people, could not fail of being confidcra-
ble and extenfivc. The husbandman, makter of his own industry,
and secure of reaping for himself the fruits of his labour, became
the farmer of the fame fields where he had formerly been com-
pelled to toil for the benefit of another. The odious names of
mailer and of flavc, the most mortifying and deprcfling of ;all
diftindions to human nature, were aboliflhed. New pr-ofpcls
opened, and new incitements to ingenuity and cnterprize prefcntcd
themselves, to those who were emancipated. The expectation of
bettering their fortune, as well as that of raiTing tlicinfclvcs to a
more honourable condition, conlcurred in calling forth their
acivity and genius; and ai numernius class of Imen, who for-
merly had no political exiftcncc, and were cmploycd mcrcly as

[U] NOTE XX.

C(

SECT. I.

The effeas of
this upon the
iinprovumelnt
offociety.

4'

iiftrtu-
VOL. I

SI.CT. I. infiruments of labour, became useful citizens, and contributed

~' " ' towards augmenting the force or riches of the society, which

adopted them as members.

The intri- V. THIE various expedients which were employed in order to
dution of a
mar: regular introduce a more regular, equal, and vigorous adminifiration of
ationf ,fij'ice justice, contributed greatly towards the improvement of society.
controbutes to What was the particular mode of dispensing justice in the feve-
the improve-
mtnn ot ral barbarous nations which over-ran the Roman Empire, and
oci'ety. took possession of its different provinces, cannot now be deter-

mined with certainty. We may conclude from the form of
government cfiablifhcd among them, as well as from their
ideas concerning the nature of society, that the authority of the
magistrate was extremely limited, and the independance of in-
dividuals proportionally great. Hiflory and records, as far as
they reach back, justify this conclusion, and represent the ideas
and exercise of justice in all the countries of Europe, as little dif-
ferent from those which must take place in a state of nature. To
maintain the order and tranquillity of society by the regular.
execution of known laws; to inflic vengeance on crimes de-
firudtive of the peace and safety of individuals,. by a prosecution
carried on in the name, and by the authority of the community;
to confider the puniflment of criminals as a public example to
deter others from violating the laws; were objeCts of govern-
ment little understood in theory, and less regarded in practice.
The magistrate could scarce be said to. hold the sword of juflice;
it was left in the hands of private persons. Resentment was
almost the sole motive for prosecuting crimes; and to gratify
that passion, was the end and rule in punifluing them. He who
fufftrcd the wrong, was; the only person who had a right to pur-

fut
42

rue the aggreflbr, and to exad or to remit the punishment. SECT. I.
From a fyflem of judicial procedure, so crude and defecive as
seems to be scarce compatible with the fubfiflence of civil society,
disorder and anarchy flowed. SuperRfition concurred with this
ignorance concerning the nature of government, in obftrucing
the administration of justice, or in rendering it capricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for these evils, so as to give a
more regular course to justice, was, during several centuries, one
great object of political wisdom. The regulations for this pur-
pose, may be reduced to three general heads: To explain these,
and to point out the manner in which they operated is an im-
portant article in the history of society among the nations of
Europe.

i. THE first considerable ftep towards establishing an equal Thiseffeted

by abolishing

administration ofjuftice, was the abolishment of the right which the praCtic¢
individuals claimed of waging war with each other, in their of private
own name, and by their own authority. To repel injuries, and
to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man than to cultivate
friendship; and while society remains in its most simple slate, Original
the former is confidered as a personal right no less unalienable cidnneornin
than the latter. Nor do men in this fit'iation deem that they juaice.
have a title to redrefatheir own wrongs alone; they are touched
with the injuries of those with whom they are conneted, or in
whose honour they are interefled; and are no less prompt to
avenge them. The savage, how imperfectly foevcr he may
comprehend the principles of political union, fcels warmly the
sentiments of social affeCtion, and the obligations arising from
the ties of blood. On the appearance of an injury or affront
offered to his faimily or tribe, lie kindles into rage, and pursues
the authors of it with the keenest resentment. Iie confiders it

G 23 a

43

SECT. I.

Thre lead to
the practice
of private
"war.

as cowardly to expe& redrefe from any arm but his own, and as
infamous to give up to another the right of determining what
reparation he Ihould accept, or with what vengeance he should
reft satisfied.

TuE maxims and pracice of all uncivilized nations, with

refped to the prosecution and punishment of offenders, particu-
larly those of the ancient Germans, and other Barbarians who
invaded the Roman Empire, are perfecly conformable to these
ideas'. While they retained their native simplicity of manners,
and continued to be divided into small tribes or societies, the
defeds in this imperfect fyflem of criminal jurisprudence (if it
merits that name) were less sensibly felt. When they came to
fettle in the extensive provinces which they had conquered, and
to form themselves into great monarchies; when new objeds of
ambition prcfenting themselves, increased both the number and
the violence of their distensions, they ought to have adopted new
maxims concerning the redress of injuries, and to have regulated
by general and cqual laws, that which they formerly left to be
dirccctd lby the caprice of private paflron. But fierce and haughty
chieftains, accustomed to avenge themselves on such as had
injured them, did not think of relinquifhinlg a right which they
confidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark of their inde-
pcndance. Iaws enforced by the authority of Princes and.
Magiitrates who possessed little power, commanded no great
dcgree of reverence. The adminifiration of jufiice among
rude illiterate people, was not so accurate or decisive, or uni-
form, ;a; to in(ldce me:: to fiubmit implicitly to its determina-
tions. Fvcl officndtd baron buckled on his armour, and fought

* l'icit. dc Mor. Germai. cap. 21. Voll. Paterc. lib. ii. c. i8.

tedrelf
44

redress at the head of his vassals. His adversary met him in
like hostile array. Neither o£them appealed to impotent laws
which could afford them no protedion. Neither of them would
submit points, in which their passions were warmly interested`,
to the flow determination of a judicial enquiry. Both trusted
to their swords for the decision of the contelt. The kindred.
and dependants of the aggressor, as well as of the defender,
were involved in the quarrel. They had not even the liberty of
remaining neutral. Such as refused to at in concert with the
party to which they belonged, were not only exposed to infamy.
but fubjeaed to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn and afilided,

during several centuries, by interline wars, excited by private
animofities, and carried on with all the rage natural to men of
fierce manners, and of violent paflions. The estate of every
baron was a kind of independent territory, disjoined from those
around it, and the hostilities betwecn them were perpetual.
The evil became so inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and
laws of private war were ascertaincd, and regulations concern-
ing it made a part in the system ofjurifprudence", in the fame
manner as if this pradice had been founded in omne natural
right of humanity, or in the original constitution of civil so-
ciety..

So great was the disorder, and such the calamities which

these perpetual hofilitics occasioned, that various efforts were
made to wrest from the nobles.this pernicious privilege which

SECT. I.

T1le peri -
cioub
ofit.

Varintin me-
thods err-
rI.,yy-d in
or 'cr to
abul,.sl it.

" Bclumanoir Couflumcs de Beauvoifis, ch. 59, et lek notes de Tliiumltrlicre,
P. 447.

,j. 0 GICY~~~~~~~~~~~~tiu

45-

.ECT.. I. they claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign to abofifh

n practice which almost annihilated his authority. Charlemagne
prohibited it by an express law, as an invention of the devil to
destroy the order and happiness of society c; but the reign of
one Monarch, however vigorous and acive, was too short to
extirpate a cuflom so firmly eflablifhed. Inflead of enforcing
this prohibition, his feeble successors durst venture on nothing
more than to apply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for
any person to commence war, until he had Cent a formal defi-
rnce to the kindred and dependants of his adversary; they
ordained that, after the commiflion of the trespass or crime
which gave rife to a private war, forty days must elapse before
the person injured hould attack the vassals of his adversary;
they enjoined all persons to suspend their private animofities,
and to cease from hostilities when the King was engaged in any
war against the enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil magifirate, and interposed its authority in order
to extirpate a practice To repugnant to the spirit of Christianity.
Various councils issued decrees, prohibiting all private wars;
and denounced the heaviest anathemas against such as should
diflurb the tranquillity of society, by claiming or exercising that
barbarous right. The aid of religion was called in to combat
and subdue the ferocity of the times. The Almighty was said
to have manifetled, by visions and revelations to different per-
sons, his disapprobation of that spirit of revenge, which armed
one part of his creatures against the other. Men were required,
in the name of God, to sheath their swords, and to remember
the sacred ties which united them as Chriflians, and as members
of the fame society. But this juncion of civil and ecclesiastic

' Capitul. A. D. 80. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 371.

7

authority,
46

authority, though strengthened by every thing most apt.to alarm
and to over-awe the credulous spirit of those ages, produced no
other effe& than some temporary suspensions of hostilities, and
a cessation from war on certain days and seasons consecrated to
the more solemn ads of devotion. The nobles continued to
assert this dangerous privilege; they refused to obey some of
the laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they eluded
others; they petitioned; they remonfirated; they struggled for
the right of private war as the highest and most honourable
difintion of their order. Even so late as the fourteenth cen-
tury, we find the nobles in several provinces of France contend-
ing for their ancient method of terminating their differences by
the sword, in preference to that of submitting them to the deci-
sion of any judge. The final abolition of this pratice in that
kingdom, and the other countries in which it prevailed, is not to
be ascribed so much to the force offtatutes and decrees, as to the
gradual increase of the royal authority, and to the imperceptible
progress ofjufter sentiments concerning government, order, and
public security [X].

2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by judicial combat,

was another considerable ftep towards the introduction of filch
regular government as secured publick order and private tran-
quillity. As the right of private war left many of the quarrels
among individuals to be decided, like those between nations, by
arms; the form of trial byjudicial combat, which was established
in every country of Europe, banished equity from courts of
juflice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of their deter.
minations. In civilized nations, all tranfadions of any impor-.

SECT. L

The proliihi-
tion cf tri;;l
by judicial
c,,mbat, ano-
ther improk c-
mcnt in the
adniiniflra-
lion ofjiifice.
[X] NOTE XXI.

lance

47

4SECT. . tance are concluded in writing. The exhibition of the deed

or instrument is full evidence of the fa&, and ascertains with

DefeCts in the
jtldicial pro- precision what each party has stipulated to perform. But among
.eedings . f
the middle a rude people, when the arts of reading and writing were such

a2. 'uncommon attainments, that to be master of either, intitlcd a

person to the appellation of a clerk or learned man, scarce any
thing was conmitted to writing but treaties between Princes,
their grants and charters to their fubjets, or such tranfadions
'between private parties as were of extraordinary consequence,
or had an extensive effec. The greater part of affairs in com-
mon life and business were carried on by verbal contracs or pro-
mises. This, in many civil questions, not only made it difficult
to bring proof sufficient to eftablifi any claim, but encouraged
falsehood and fraud, by rendering them extremely easy. Even
in criminal cafc5, where a particular fad must be ascertained, or
an accusation be disprovcd, the nature and effec of legal evi-
dence was little undcrltood by barbarous nations. To define
with accuracy that Ipccies of evidence which a court had reason
to expc2; to determine when it ought to insist on pofitivc proof,
and when it ihould be satisfied with a proof from circumfiances;
to compare the teftiiiony of discordant witnesses; and to fix the
degree of credit due to each; were discussions too intricate and
subtile for the jurifprudencc of ignorant ages. In order to avoid
cncumlbeing ticrnfclvcs with thcfe, a more simple form of pro-
ccurc ;was; illrolldccd into courtsas well civil as criminal. In all
calc's, where tlh notoriety of thle fat did not fiirnill the clearct[
and oll l (lirccd evidcnce, the pcrln accuflcd, or lh againfl whom
an aition was blrought, was called legally, or offered volunta-

8 rily
.8

.49

rily to purge himself by oath; and upon his declaring his inno- SECT. I.
cence, he was instantly acquitted'. This absurd pracice effec- '
tually screened guilt and fraud from detection or punish-
mcnt, by rendering the temptation to perjury so powerful,
that it was not easy to resist it. The pernicious effets of it
were sensibly felt; and in order to guard against them, the
laws ordained that oaths flould be administered with great
solemnity, and accompanied with every circuinitance which
could infpirc religious reverence, or superstitious terror'. This,
however, proved a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites be-
came familiar, and their impression on the imagination gradually
diminished; men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to ltartle at the folemnities of an oath. Their obferva-
tion of this, put legislators upon devising a new expedient for
rendering the purgation by oath more certain and fatisfadory.
They required the person accused to appear with a certain num-
ber of freemen, his neighbours or relations, who corroborated
the oath which he took, by swearing that they believed all that
he had uttered to be true. These were called Compurgators, and
their number varied according to the importance of the subjed
in dispute, or the nature of the crime with which a person was
chargedg. In some cafes, the concurrence of no less than
three hundred of these auxiliary witnesses was requisite to acquit
the person accufedl. But even this device was found to be
ineffectual. It was a point of honour with every man in Europe,
during fcveral ages, not to desert the chief on whom he depended,

Leg. Burgund. Tit. 8, &45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. 89. Leg. Baiwar. Tit.

8. § 5. 2. &c. I)u Cange Gloffar. voc. Juramnenitun, vol. iii. p. 1607.
Edit. Benedi&t. g Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1599. h Spclnan
(;lofrar. voc. 4Jath. Gregor. Turon. Hilt. lib. viii. c. 9.

VOL. I. H and

SECT. I. and to fland by those with whom the ties of blood connected

him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate the laws, was
sure of devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager to serve
him in whatever manner he required. The formality of calling
Compurgators, proved an apparent, not a real security, against
falsehood and perjury; and the sentences of courts, while they
continued to refer every point in question to the oath of the
defendant, became so flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal
indignation against this method of procedure'.

TJcse inero- SENSIBLE of these defets, but itrangers to the manner of
uLiced the
FrrPicc of corrcting them, or of introducing a more proper form, our an-
appealirg to
I eaven: ceftors, as an infallible method ofdifcovering truth, and ofguarding,

against deception, appealed to Heaven, and referred every point in
dispute to be determined, ab they imagined, by the decisions ofun-
erring wisdom and impartial justice. The perobn accused, in order to
prove his innocence, submitted, in some cafes, to trial, by plung-
ing his arm in boiling water; by lifting a red-hot iron with his
naked hand; by walking bare-foot over burning plough-shares;

Particulrly or by other experiments equally perilous and formidable. On
by judicial other occasions, he challenged his accufcr to fight him in tingle
conbat.

combat. All these various forms of trial were conducted with
many devout ceremonies; the ministers of religion were em-
ployed, the Almighty was called upon to interpose for the mani-
feftation of guilt, and for the protection of innocence; and who
ever escaped unhurt, or came off victorious, was pronounced to be
acquitted by the judgmcgnt of God k

Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 34,
k Murat. Dillertatio dc judiciis Dei. Antiquit. Italic. vol. iii, p. 6i2.

AMONG
50

AMONG all the whimsical and absurd institutions which owe

their existence to the weakness of human reason, this, which
submitted questions that affeaed the property, the reputation,
-and the lives of men, to the determination of chance, or of bodily
strength and address, appears to be the most extravagant and
preposterous. There were circumstances, however, which led
the nations of Europe to confider this equivocal mode of decid-
ing any point in contest, as a direc appeal to heaven, and a cer-
tain method of discovering its will. As men are unable to com-
prehend the manner in which the Almighty carries on the
government of the universe, by equal, fixed, and general laws,
they are apt to imagine that in every cafe which their passions
or interest render important in their own eyes, the Supreme
Ruler of all ought visibly to display his power, in vindicating
innocence and punishing vice. It requires no inconsiderable
degree of science and philosophy to corret this popular error.
But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the dark ages, in-
itead of correcting, strengthened it. Religion, for several centuries,
consisted chiefly in believing the legendary hifiory of those faints
whose names crovwd and disgrace the Romih calendar. The fabu-
lous tales concerning their miracles, had been declared authen-
tic by the bulls of Popes, and the decrees of councils; they male
the great subjeE of the inftrudions which the clergy offered to
the people, and were received by them with implicit credulity
and admiration. By these, men were accustomed to believe
that the cflablifhed laws of nature might be violated on the
most frivolous occasions, and were taught to look rather for
particular and extraordinary acs of power under the divine
adniniftration, than to contemplate the regular progress and
execution of a general plan. One superstition prepared the way
for another; and whoevcr believed that the Supreme Being had

II z inter-

SECT. I.

'1 he intro-
dution es
this praFiice
favoured by
tLe fuperfLi.
tion of the
middle a es,

I1

interposed miraculously on
ed in legends, could not but
ters of greater importance,
decision.

those trivial occasions mention--
expet his intervention in mar-
when solemnly referred to his

A n likewise
by ticir mar-
tial spirit.

WIT H this superstitious opinion, the martial spirit of Europe,

during the middle ages, concurred in eftablifling the mode of
trial by judicial combat. To be ready to maintain with his
sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first maxim of
honour with every gentleman. To assert their own rights by
force of arms, to inflict vengeance on those who had in-
jured or affronted them, were the diftindion and pride of
high-fpirited nobles. The form of trial by combat coin-
ciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified these passions.
Every man was the guardian of his own honour, and of his own
life; the justice of his cause, as well as his future reputation,
depended on his own courage and prowess. This mode of deci-
sion was confidered, accordingly, as one of the happiest efforts of
wife policy; and as soon as it was introduced, all the forms of
trial by fire or water, and other superstitious experiments, fell
into disuse, or were employed only in controversies between
persons of inferior rank. The trial by combat was authorized
over all Europe, and received in every country with equal satis-
fadion. Not only questions concerning uncertain or contclted
facts, but general and abftrad points in law were determined by
the issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a method of
discovering truth more liberal as well as more fatisfadory, than
that by examination and argument. Not only might parties,
whose minds were exasperated by the eagerness and the hostility of
opposition, defy their antagonif, and require him to make good

his

SECT. I.
I E

_
52

his charge, or to prove his innocence, with his sword; but wit-
neffes, who had no interest in the issue of the question, though
called to declare the truth by laws which ought to have afforded
them proteacion, were equally exposed to the danger of a chal-
lenge, and equally bound to assert the veracity of their evidence
by dint of arms. To complete the absurdities of this military
jurisprudence, eventhe chara&er-f a judge was not sacred from
its violence. Any one of the parties might interrupt a judge
when about to deliver his opinion; might accuse him of iniquity
and corruption in the most reproachful terms, and throwing
down his gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his integrity
in the field; nor could he, without infamy, refuse to accept the
defiance, or decline to enter the lifts against such an adversary.

THius the form of trial by combat, like other abuses, spread

gradually, and extended to all persons and almost to all cafes.
Ecclesiastics, women, minors, superannuated and infirm persons,
who could not with decency or justice be compelled to take
arms, and to maintain their own cause, were obliged to produce
champions, whom they engaged by affetion or rewards, to fight
their battles. The folemnities of a judicial combat were such
as were natural in an acion, which was confidered both as a
formal appeal to God, and as the final decision of queflions
of the highest moment. Every circumfiance relating to them
was regulated by the edids of Princes, and explained in the
comments of lawyers, with a minute and even fuperititious accu-
racy. Skill in these laws and rites was the only science of
which warlike nobles boafRed, or which they were ambitious to
attain '.

' Sec a curious discourse conccrning the laws of judicial combat, by Thomas

of Woodflock, Duke of Glouceftcr, uncle to Richard II. in Slpclmani' Gloffar.
voc. (Cmpus.

BY

5$3

SECT. L

It becomes
universal.

SECT. I.

The pcrni.
ciuu~ effiets
. of it.

Various ex-
pedients for
abolilhing
tllis pradice.

BY this barbarous custom the natural course of proceed-

ing, both in civil and criminal questions, was entirely per-
verted. Force usurped the place of equity in courts of judi-
.caturc, and justice was banished from her proper mansion. Dif-
cernment, learning, integrity, were qualities less neceflary to
a judge than bodily strength, and dexterity in the use of
arms. Daring courage, and superior vigour or address, were of
more moment towards securing the favourable issue of a suit,
than the equity of a cause, or the clearness of the evidence.
Men, of course, applied themselves to cultivate the talents which
they found to be of greatest utility. As strength of body and
address in arms were no less requisite in those liss which they
were obliged to enter in defence of their private rights, than in
'the field of battle, where they met the enemies of their country,
the great objce of education, it became the chief employment
in life, as well as to acquire these martial accomplishments. The
adminifiration of justice, instead of accustoming men to liften
to the voice of equity, or to reverence the decisions of law,
added to the ferocity of their manners, and taught them to con-
.fider force as the great arbiter of right and wrong.

THESE pernicious effeds of the trial by combat were so ob-

vious, that they did not altogether cfcape the view of the unob-
serving age in which it was introduced. The clergy, from the
beginning, remonstrated againfi it as repugnant to the ipirit of
Christianity, and subversive of justice and order . But the
maxims and passions which favoured it, had taken filch hold of
the minds of men, that they disregarded admonitions and cen-

Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Duellum, vol. ii. p. 1675.

fures,
54

f/res, which, on other occasions, would have firuck them with SECT. I.
terror. The evil was too great and inveterate to yield to that '
remedy, and continuing to increase, the civil power at length
found it necessary to interpose. Conscious, however, of their own
limited authority, monarchs proceeded with caution, and their
first attempts to restrain, or to set any bounds to this practice,
were extremely feeble. One of the earliest reftritions of this
practice which occurs in the history of Europe, is that of
Henry I. of England. It extended no farther than to pro-
hibit the trial by combat in questions concerning property of
small value . Louis VII. of France imitated his example, and
issued an edic to the fame effe&t. St. Louis, whose ideas as a
legislator, were far superior to those of his age, ende'avoured to
introduce a more perfea jurisprudence, and to substitute the trial
by evidence, in place of that by combat. But his regulations,
with refpedt to this, were confined to his own domains; for the
great vassals of the crown, possessed such independant authority,
and were so fondly attached to the ancient practice, that he durst
not venture to extend it to the whole kingdom. Some barons
voluntarily adopted his regulations. The spirit of courts of
justice became averse to the mode of decision by combat, and
discouraged it on every occasion. The nobles, nevertheless,
thought it so honourable to depend for the security of their
lives and fortunes on their own courage alone, and contended
with so much vehemence for the preservation of this favourite
privilege of their order, that the successors of St. Louis, unable
to oppose, and afraid of offending such powerful fubjeCs, were
obliged not enly to tolerate, but to authorize the pra&ice which .

* Brufnel Ufagc des Fiefs. vol. ii. p. 96a.

6

o Ordon. tom. i. p. x6.

hc

55

he had attempted to abolifhP. In other countries of Europe,
efforts equally zealous were employed to maintain the established
custom; and similar concessions were extorted from their refpcc-
tive sovereigns. It continued, however, to be an objec of
policy with every monarch of abilities or vigour, to explode
the tial by combat; and various edicts were issued for
this purpose. But the observation which was made concern-
ing the right of private war, is equally applicable to the
Inode of trial under review. No custom, how absurd soever it
may be, if it has fubfifled long, or derives its force from the
manners and prejudices of the age in which it prevails, was ever
abolished by the bare promulgation of laws and tfatutes. The fen-
timents of.the people must change, or some new power sufficient
to counteract it 'must be introduced. Such a change, accord-
ingly, took place in Europe, as science gradually increased, and
society advanced towards more perfect order. In proportion as
the prerogative of Princes extended, and came to acquire new
force, a power, interested in suppressing every practice favourable
to the independance of the nobles, was introduced. The firuggle,
nevertheless, sublisted for fevcral cclturies; fumletiictms tie new
regulations and ideas feelned to gain ground; sometimes ancient
habits recurred; and though, upon the whole, the trial by
combat went more and more into disuse, yet instances of it
occur, as late as the fixtcenth century, in the history both
of France and of England. In proportion as it declined, the
regular administration ofjuftice was restored, the proceedings of
courts were directed by known laws, the fludy of these became
an object of attention to judges, and the people of Europe ad-
vanced fast towards civility, when this great cause of the fero-
city of their manners was removed [Y].

P Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 390, 435. [Y] NO TE XXII.

SECT. I.
v, _l-,_
56

3. BY
S

57

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from tihe courts of SECT. I.
the Barons to those of the King, and fubjeding the decisions of "--'

TIe privil'rge

the former to the review of the latter, a new flep, not less con- of app ling
fiderable than these which I have already mentioned, was taken ourts of t.he
towards establishing the regular, consistent, and vigorous admini- baroitS, aic,-

ther great
firation of justice. Among all the encroachments of the feudal impr, emnent

in the -d iii-

nobles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their usurping the nifcation of
administration of justice with supreme authority, both in civil and ju'l"e.
criminal causes, within the precincts of their own eflates, was
the most singular. In other nations, fubjeds have contended
with their Princes, and have endeavoured to extend their own
power and privileges; but in the history of their firuggles and
pretensions, we discover nothing similar to this right which
the feudal barons claimed, and acquired. It must have been ';riginofthe

r.~~~~~

. 'in j~~~f~prer-'" a.i ;d

something peculiar in their genius and manners that fuggefled ,dot
this idea, and prompted them to insist on such a claim. Among , ,h
the rude people who conquered the various provinces of the °,o'lt'.
Roman Empire, and establishcd new kingdoms there, the pas-
sion of reientment, too impetuous to bear controul, was permit-
ted to remain almost unrestrained by the authority of laws. The
person offended, as has been observed, retained not only the right
of prosecuting but of punishing his advcrfary. To him it be-
longed to inflic fiuch vengeance as satiated his rage, or to accept
of such fatisfadion as appeased it. But while fierce barbarians
continued to b)c the sole judges in their own caufc, their enmities
were implacable, and immortal; they set no bounds either to
the degree of their vengeance, or to the duration of their resent-
mcnt. The excesses which this occasioncd, proved io deftruc-
tive of peace and order in focicty, as forced them to think of
some remedy. At first, arbiters intcrpofed, and by perfuafitn

VOL. I. 1 Or

SECT. I.

The Cx!211t
It(lts of tlij

ilgc

A VIEW OF THE

or intreaty prevailed on the party offended to accept of a fine
or composition from the aggreflor, and to drop all farther prose-
cution. But as submission to persons who had no legal or magi-
fterial authority, was altogether voluntary, it became necessary
to establish judges with power sufficient to enforce their own
decisions. The leader whom they were accustomed to follow
and to obey, whose courage they refpeded, and in whose inte-
grity they placed confidence, was the person to whom a martial
people naturally committed this important prerogative. Every
chieftain was the commander of his tribe in war, and their
judge in peace. Every baron led his vassals to the field, and
administered justice to them in his hall. Their high-fpirited de-
pendants would not have recognized any other authority, or
have submitted to any other jurifdidion. But in times of tur-
bulence and violence, the exercise of this new function was
attended not only with trouble, but with danger. No person
could assume the charader of a judge, if he did not possess power
sufficient to protet the one party from the violence of private
revenge, and to compel the other to accept of such reparation
as he enjoined. In consideration of the extraordinary efforts
which this office required, judges, besides the fine which they
appointed to be paid as a compensation to the person or family
who had been injured, levied an additional fum as a recompence
for their own labour; and in all the feudal kingdoms the latter
was as precisely ascertained, and as regularly cxated, as the
formcr.

T' u s, bly the natural operation ofcircumftances peculiar to the

manners or political state of the fudlal nations, separate and territo-
rialjurifdidions came not only to be cfabliihcd in every kingdom,

but

but were established in such a way, that the interest of the
barons concurred with their ambition in maintaining and ex-
tending them. It was not merely a point of honour with the
feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vassals; but from the
exercise of that power arose one capital branch of their revenue;
and the emoluments of their courts were frequently the main sup-
port of their dignity. It was with infinite zeal that they asserted and
defended this high privilege of their order. By this inflitution,
however, every kingdom in Europe was split into as many fepa-
rate principalities as it contained powerful barons. Their vas-
fals, whether in peace or in war, were scarce sensible of any au-
thority, but that of their superior lord. They felt themselves
subjea to no other command. They were amenable to no other
jurifdicion. The ties which linked together these smaller con-
federacies became close and firm; the bonds of public union
relaxed, or were dissolved. The nobles strained their invention
in devising regulations that tended to ascertain and perpetuate
this diftinaion. In order to guard against any appearance of
subordination in their courts to those of the crown, they con-
firained their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from enter-
ing their territories, or from claiming any jurifdidion there;
and if, either through mistake, or from the spirit of encroach-
ment, any royal judge ventured to extend his authority to the
vaflals of a baron, they might plead their right of exemption,
and the lord of whom they held could not only refcuc them out
of his hands, but was entitled to legal reparation for the injury
and affront offered to him. Tic jurif(liclion of the royal judges
scarce reacced beyond the narrow limnits of the King's lcmneihes.
Inficad of a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledging the
authority of the fame general laws, and looking up to these as

I 2 the

SECT I.

--__-

59

A VIEW OF THE
SECT. I. the guides of their decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom

a thousand independant tribunals, the proceedings of which
were directed by local customs and contraditory forms. The
collision of jurifdliion between these numerous courts, often,
retarded the execution of juflice: The variety and caprice of
their modes of procedure must have for ever kept the admini-
firation of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or per-
fcdion.

Px,'ir.t3 ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these encroachments

enmiipovcd in
or((r to limit on their jurifdidion, and bore them with impatience. But the

uurpations of the nobles were so firmly eflablifhed, and the dan-
ger of endeavouring to overturn them by open force was so ma-
nifecl, that they were obliged to remain satisfied with attempts
to undermine them. Various expedients were employed for this
purpose; each of vhich merit attention, as they mark the progrcfs
of law and equity in the fcveral kingdoms of Europe. At first,
Princes endeavoured to circumscribe thej urifdidion of the barons,
by permitting them to take cognizance only of finallcr offences,
rcferving those of greater moment, under the appellation of
Picas f' the (Croe'n,l and Royal Callss, to be tried in the King's
courts. This affetced only the barons of inferior note; the
more powerful nobles scorncd such a diflindion, and not only
claimed unlimited jurif(lidion, but obligcd their fovcrcigns to
grant them charters, conveying or rccognizing this privilege in
the most ample form. The attempt, ncvcrthclefs, was produc-
tive of TIIme good confrquences, and paved the way for more.
It turned the attention of men towards a jurifdldion difindc
from1 that of the baron wlofe vaflials they were; it acculltomed
them to the pretensions of fltperiority which the crown claimed
over territorial judges; an.d taught themi, when oppreincfd by their

t'} own

own superior lord, to look up to their sovereign as their pro- SECT. r.
teator. This facilitated the introduction of appeals, by which --
Princes brought the decisions of the baron's courts under the
review of the royal judges. While trial by combat subsisted in
full vigour, no point decided according to that mode, could be
brought under the review of another court. It had been refer-
red to the judgment of God; the issue of battle had declared his
will; and it would have been impious to have called in queflion
the equity of the divine decision. But as soon as that barbarous
cuflom began to fall into disuse, Princes encouraged the vaflals
of the barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the royal courts.
The progress, however, of this practice, was flow and gradual.
The firit inflances of appeals were on account of the delay, or the
refitfl ofjjflice in the baron's court; and as these were counte-
nanced by the ideas of subordination in the feudal constitution,
the nobles allowed them to be introduced without much oppofi-
tion. But when these were followed by appeals on account of
the injilice or iniquity of the sentence, the nobles then began to
be sensible, that if this innovation became general, the shadow of
power alone would remain in their hands, and all real authority
and jurifdifdion would center in tlofe courts which pofll('ed the
right of review. They instantly took the alarm, rcmonfirated
against the encroachment, and contended boldly for their ancient
privileges. But the monarchs in the differcnt kingdoms of Eu-
rope puliued their plan with flcadincfs and prudence. Though
forced to liifipendl their operations, on foimc occafiois, an(l fccning-
ly to )yikld w hen any formidable confederacy or'their valfals united
againfl them, they refulned their mcafurcs, as sion as they obli rvcd
the nolblcs to be rcmils or feeblle, and puflhcd them witll vigour.
'Ihey appointed ilc royal courts, which originally wcre anmbu-

latory,

SEcT. I.

'I lh rgul.a-
t loll (it the
c ll n la~v
lrrniiir)rc a
zia( r, pci fed
tion.

latory, and irregular with refpet to their times of meeting, to
be held in a fixed place, and at stated seasons. They were folli-
citous to name judges of more diflinguifhed abilities than such
as presided in the courts of the barons. They added dignity
ito their character, and splendour to their assemblies. They
laboured to render their forms regular, and their decrees con-
fitlent. Such judicatories became, of course, the objets of pub-
lic confidence as well as veneration. The people, relinquishing
the partial tribunals of their lords, were eager to bring every sub-
jea of contefl under the more equal and discerning eye of those
whom their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in his
name. Thus Kings became once more the heads of the
community, and the dispensers of justice to their fubjeds.
The barons, in some kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of
jurifdidtion, bccaufe it funk into contempt; in others, it was cir-
cumfcribed by such regulations as rendered it innocent, or it was
entirely aboliflled by express statutes. Thus the adminiitration of
juflice taking its rife from one source, and following one direc-
tion, hcld its course in every state with more uniformity, and
with greater force [Z].

VI. TIIF forms and maxims of the canon law, which were

become univcrfally rcfp)ctable from their authority in the fpiri-
tual courts, contributed not a little towards thece improvements
in jurifprudcnc which I have enumerated. If the canon law
be confidlrcd politically, cithcr as a fyncm framed on purpoif
to atfilt tli clergy in ufilrping powers and jurimldidion no less
rcpugnanlt to the nature of their fintdion, than inconlfifltlt with
the order of government ; or as the chief infnrument in eflab-
ifhling the dominion of the Popes which lhook the throne, and
r(danglcrcd the liberties of every kingdom in Europe, we must

[Z1 NOTE XXIII.

pronounllce
62

pronounce it one of the most formidable engines ever formed SECT. A.
againfi the happiness of civil society. But if we contemplate it v
merely as a code of laws refpeding the rights and property of
individuals, and attend only to the civil effects of its decisions
concerning these, we must view it in a different, and a much The progreis

f eccleliafli-

more favourable light. In ages of ignorance and credulity, the cal ufrrpation,
ministers of religion are the objects of fuperfiitious veneration.
When the barbarians who over-ran the Empire first embraced
the Christian faith, they found the clergy in pofflefion of con-
fiderable power; and they naturally transferred to these new
guides the profound submission and reverence which they were
accustomed to yield to the priefis of that religion which they had
forsaken. They deemed their persons to be as sacred as their func-
tion; and would have confidered it as impious to subjed them
to the profane jurifdition of the laity. The clergy were not
blind to the advantages which the weakness of mankind afforded
them. They eflablifhed courts, in which every queflion relating
to their own character, their function, or their property, was
tried. They pleaded, and obtained an almost total exemption
from the authority of civil judges. Upon different pretexts,
and by a multiplicity of artifices, they communicated this privi-
lege to so many persons, and extended their jurisdiction to such
a variety of cafes, that the greater part of those affairs which
give rife to contest and litigation, was drawn under the cogni-
zance of the spiritual courts.

BUT in order to clifpofc the laity to susser thefi usurpations with- The plan of:

ecclefialtica l

out murmuring or oppolition, it was necessary to convince themn, jucifpiu'incc
that the adminiifiration of juflice would be rendered more )prfic: "")re prlCtt

than thatin

by the cflablifhlnent of this new jurifdition. This was nota diffi. the (ivIl
cult undertaking, at tihe period when the clergy carried on their

8 cncroach-

SECT. I.

The good
eft cts of imi-
tatiln and
adopting it.

encroachments with the greatest success. That scanty portion
of science which served to guide men in the ages of darkness,
was wholly engrossed by the clergy. They alone were accustomed
to read, to enquire, and to reason. Whatever knowledge of
ancient jurisprudence had been prefcrvcd, either by tradition, 9r
in such books as had escaped the defirucive rage of barbarians,
was pofleffcd only by them. Upon the maxims of that excel-
lent fyficin, they founded a code of laws consonant to the great
principles of equity. Being direced by fixed and known rules,
the forms of their courts were ascertained, and their decisions
became uniform and consistent. Nor did they want authority
sufficient to enforce their sentences. Excommunication and
other ecclcfiaftical censures, were punishments more formi-
dable than any that civil judges could inflict in support of their
decrees.

IT is not furprizing, then, that ecclcfiaflical jurisprudence

llould become such an object of admiration and refpce; that
exemption from civil jurifdicion was courted as a privilege,
and conferred as a reward. It is not furprizing that even to
rude people, the maxims of the canon law should appear more
equal and just than that ill-digefted jurifprudcnce which directed
all proceedings in the civil courts. According to the latter, the
diflcrcinccs between contendling barons were terminated, as in a
slate of nature, ly the sword; according to the former, every
matter was fubijceecd to the eccifion of laws. The one, by per-
mitting judicial combats, left chance and force to be arbiters of
right or wrong, of truth or falfihood; the other, pailed judg-
ment with relpect to thefc by the maxims of equity, and the
tefliimony of witncfies. Any error or iniquity in a sentence pro-

nounced
64

65

nounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdidion belonged, was SECT. T.
irremediable, because originally it was fubje6 to the review of no.
superior tribunal; the ecclesiastical law efablilhed a regular grada-
tion ofcourts, through all which a cause might be carried by ap-
peal, until it was determined by that authority which was held to
be supreme in the church. Thus the genius and principles of the
canon law prepared men for approving these three great altera-
tions in the feudal jurisprudence which I have mentioned. But it
was not with refped to there points alone that the canon law fug-
gefled improvements beneficial to society. Many of the regula-
tions, now deemed the barriers of personal security, or the safe-
guards of private property, are contrary to the spirit, and
repugnant to the maxims of the civil jurisprudence, known in
Europe during several centuries, and were borrowed from the
rules and practice of the ecclesiastical courts. By observing the
wisdom and equity of the decisions in these courts, men began
to perceive the necessity either of deserting the martial tribunals
of the barons, or of attempting to reform them [AA].

VII. Ti E revival of the knowledge and fludy of the Roman

law, co-operated with the causes which I have mentioned, in
introducing more just and liberal ideas concerning the nature of
government, and the administration ofjuftice. Among the cala-
mities which the devastations of the barbarians who broke in
upon the Empire brought upon mankind, one of the greatest
was their overturning the system of Roman jurisprudence, the
noblecf monument of the wisdom of that great people, formed
to subdue and to govern the world. The laws and regulations
of a civilized community, were altogether repugnant to the Iman-

[AA] NOTE XXIV.
VOL. I. K liers

The revival
of the Roman
law contri-
butes more
liberal ideas
concerning
justice and
order.

The circum-
laance,, from
which the
Roman law
fell into
oblivion.

SECT. I.

C;rcumnlan-
eeb which fa-
voured the re.
rival of it.

The effete of
this upon the
ideas of men,
and ihe dil-
penfition of
juflice.

ners and ideas of these fierce invaders. They had refpe& to
objecs, of which a rude people had no conception; and were
adapted to a slate of society with which they were entirely
unacquainted. For this reason, wherever they fettled, the Ro-
man jurisprudence soon funk into oblivion; and lay buried for
some centuries under the load of those institutions which'the
inhabitants of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But
towards the middle of the twelfth century, a copy of Justinian's
Pandets was accidentally discovered in Italy. By that time,
the state of society was so far advanced, and the ideas of men so
much enlarged and improved by the occurrences of several
centuries, during which they had continued in political union,
that they were itruck with admiration of a fyflem which their
ancestors could not comprehend. Though they had not hitherto
attained such a degree of refinement, as to catch from the ancients.
a relish for true philosophy, or speculative science; though they
were still insensible to the beauty and elegance of classical compo-
fition; they were sufficiently qualified to judge with refpea to
the merit of their system of laws, in which all the points most
interesting to mankind, and the chief objects of their attention
in every age, were fettled with discernment, precision and equity.
All men of letters studied this new science with eagerness;
and within a few years after the discovery of the Pandets, pro-
fefrors of civil law were appointed, who taught it publickly in
most countries of Europe.

TIE effects of having such a perfet model to Rfudy and to

imitate were soon manifcft. Men, as soon as they were ac-
(luainted with fixed and general laws, perceived the advantage
of them, and became impatient to ascertain the principles and

t1 form,
66

forms by which judges should regulate their decisions. Such
was the ardour with which they carried on an undertaking of
so great importance to society, that before the close of the twelfth
century, the feudal law was reduced into a regular fyffem; the
code of canon-law was enlarged and methodized; and the loose
uncertain customs of different provinces or kingdoms, were
colleced and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired from
the knowledge of Roman jurisprudence. In some cbuntries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as subsidiary to their own
municipal law; and all cafes to which the latter did not extend,
were decided according to the principles of tle former. In
others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman jurisprudence
mingled imperceptibly with the laws of the country, and had
a powerful, though less sensible, influence, in improving and
perfeding them [BB].

THESE various improvements in the system of jurifpru-

dence, and administration of juflice, occasioned a change in
manners of great importance, and of extensive effet. They
gave rife to a diftindion of professions; they obliged men to cul-
tivate different talents, and to aim at different accomplishments,
in order to qualify themselves for the various departments and
funcions which became necessary in society'. Among uncivi-
lized nations, there is but one profefflon honourable, that of
arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of the human mind are
exerted in acquiring military ikill, or address. The functions
of peace are few and simple; and require no particular course of
education or of study, as a preparation for discharging them.

[BB] NOTE XXV.
' Dr. Ferguson's E(fay on the History of Civil Society, part iv. fcet. I.

K 2 This

SECT. I

From all
these arose a
diflindion in
profrffions.

67

SECT. I.

The effecas of
thisonfociety.

This was the state of Europe during several centuries. Every
gentleman, born a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he
was taught no science but that of war; even his exercises and
pafftimes were feats of martial prowess. Nor did the judicial
charaaer, which persons of noble birth were alone entitled to
assume, demand any degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers possessed. To recollea a few traditionary
customs which time had confirmed, and rendered refpecable;
to mark out the lifts of battle with due formality; to observe the
issue of the combat; and to pronounce whether it had been con-
duaed according to the laws of arms; included every thing that
a baron who ated as a judge, found it necessary to underhand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were fixed, when

the rules of decision were committed to writing, and colleced
into a body, law became a science, the knowledge of which requi-
red a regular course of study, together with long attention to the
practice of courts. Martial and illiterate nobles, had neither lei-
sure nor inclination to undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so
foreign from all the occupations which they deemed entertain-
ing, or suitable to their rank. They gradually relinquished their
places in courts of justice, where their ignorance exposed them
to contempt. They became weary of attending to the difcuflion
of cafes, which grew too intricate for them to comprehend. Not
only the judicial determination of points which were the fubje&
of controversy, but the condut of all legal bufincfs and tranfac-
tions was committed to persons trained by previous fiudy and ap-
plication to the knowledge of law. An order of men, to whom their
fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice, and to whom they
looked up for decision in their most important concerns, natu-
rally acquired consideration and influence in society. They

9 were

were advanced to honours which had been confidered as the
peculiar rewards of military virtue. They were entrusted with
offices of the highest dignity, and most extensive power. Thus,
another profession than that of arms, came to be introduced
among the laity, and was reputed honourable. The functions
of civil life were attended to. The talents requisite for difcharg-
ing them were cultivated. A new road was opened to wealth
and eminence. The arts and virtues of peace were placed in their
proper rank, and received their due recompence [CC].

VIII. WHILE improvements so important with refpea to the

ltate of society, and the administration ofjuftice, gradually made
progress in Europe, sentiments more liberal and generous had
begun to animate the nobles. These were inspired by the spirit
of Chivalry, which, though confidered, commonly, as a wild
intfitution, the effec of caprice, and the source of extravagance,
arose naturally from the slate of society at that period, and had
a very serious influence in refining the manners of the European
nations. The feudal state was a slate of perpetual war, rapine,
and anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed were exposed
every moment to insults or injuries. The power of the fove-
rcign was too limited to prevent these wrongs; and the admini-
firation ofjuftice too feeble to redress them. There was scarce
any protection against violence and oppression, but what the
valour and generosity of private persons afforded. The fame
spirit of entcrprize which had prompted so many gentlemen
to take arms in defence of the opprcffed pilgrims in Palc-
ftine, incited others to declare themtfilvcs the patrons and aven-
gers of injured innocence at lome. When the final redustion.

[CC] NOTE XXVIL

of

SECT. I.

The fpiritof '
chivalry in-
troduces more
liberal senti-
ments, and
more gene-
rous manners.

Origin of
chivalry.

69

SECT. I. of the Holy Land under the dominion of Infidels put an end to

'-
-' these foreign expeditions, the latter was the only employment

left for the acivity and courage of adventurers. To check the
insolence of overgrown oppressors; to succour the distressed; to
rescue the helpless from captivity; to protect, or to avenge
women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could not bear arms in
their own defence; to redress wrongs, and to remove grievances;
were deemed ads of the highest prowess and merit. Valour,
humanity, courtesy, justice, honour, were the charaderiflic qua-
lities of chivalry. To these were added religion, which mingled
itself with every passion and institution during the middle ages,
and by infusing a large proportion of enthusiastic zeal, gave
them such force, as carried them to romantic excess. Men were
trained to knighthood by a long previous discipline; they were
admitted into the order by folemnities no less devout than pom-
pous; every person of noble birth courted that honour; it was
deemed a diftindion superior to royalty; and monarchs were
proud to receive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

Its tbcneficial
clwesCts.

THIS singular inititution, in which valour, gallantry, and

religion, were so strangely blended, was wonderfully adapted to
the taste and genius of martial nobles; and its effects were soon
visible in their manners. War was carried on with less ferocity,
when humanity came to be deemed the ornament of knighthood
no less than courage. More gentle and polifhled manners were
introduced, when courtesy was recommended as the most amiable
of knightly virtues. Violence and opprcflion decreased, when
it was reckoned meritorious to check and to punish them. A
fcrrpulous adherence to truth, with the molt religious attention
to fulfil every engagement, became the ditfinguifhing charac-

terific

terifRic of a gentleman, because chivalry was regarded as the school
of honour, and inculcated the most delicate sensibility with refpea
to that point. The admiration of these qualities, together with
the high diftinaions and prerogatives conferred on knighthood
in every part of Europe, inspired persons of noble birth on some
occasions with a species of military fanaticism, and led them to
extravagant enterprizes. But they imprinted deeply in their
minds the principles of generosity and honour. These were
strengthened by every thing that can assed the senses, or touch
the heart. The wild exploits of those romantic knights who
sallied forth in quest of adventures, are well known, and have
been treated with proper ridicule. The political and permanent
effecs of the spirit of chivalry have been less observed. Per-
haps, the humanity which accompanies all the operations of
war, the refinements of gallantry, and the point of honour, the
three chief circumstances which distinguish modern from ancient
manners, may be ascribed in a great measure to this whimsical i nfi-
tution, seemingly of little benefit to mankind. The sentiments
which chivalry inspired, had a wonderful influence on manners and
condut during the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
centuries. They were so deeply rooted, that they continued to
operate after the vigour and reputation of the institution itself
began to decline. Some considerable tranfadions, recorded in the
following history, rcfemble the adventurous exploits of chivalry,
rather than the well regulated operations of found policy.
Some of the most eminent personages, whose characters will
be delineated, were strongly tinctured with this romantic
spirit. Francis I. was ambitious to diftinguifl himself by all
the qualities of an accomplifled knight, and endeavoured to
imitate the cltcerprizing genius of chivalry in war, as well as its

po01mp

S CCr. L.

7V

SECT. I.

The progress
of science has
great irflu-
ence on tte
manners and
charater of

men.

Ignorance of
the middle
ages.

pomp and courtesy during peace. The fame which he acquired
by these splendid a&ions, so far dazzled his more temperate
rival, that he departed on some occasions from his usual pru-
dence and moderation, and emulated Francis in deeds of prowess,
or of gallantry [DD].

IX. THE progress of science, and the cultivation of litera-

ture, had considerable effec in changing the manners of the
European nations, and introducing that civility and refinement
by which they are now distinguished. At the time when their
Empire was overturned, the Romans, though they had loft that
corret taste which has rendered the productions of their ancef-
tors the standards of excellence, and models for imitation to fuc-
ceeding ages, still preserved their love of letters, and cultivated
the arts with great ardour. But rude barbarians were so far
from being struck with any admiration of rhefe unknown accom-
plifhments, that they despised them. They were not arrived at
that state of society, in which those faculties of the human mind,
that have beauty and elegance for their objeCts, begin to unfold
themselves. They were strangers to all those wants and desires
which are the parents of ingenious invention; and as they did
not comprehend either the merit or utility of the Roman arts,
they dcftroyed the monuments of them, with industry not inferior
to that with which their posterity have since studied to prcfcrve,
or to recover them. The convulsions occasioned by their fettle-
ment in the Empire; the frequent as well as violent revolutions
in every kingdom which they established; together with the inte-
rior defcds in the form of government which they introduced,
banished security and Icifiurc; prevented the growth of taste, or

rDD] NOTE XXVII.

the
72

73

the culture of science; and kept Europe, during several centu-
ries, in that slate of ignorance which has been already described.
But the events and institutions which I have enumerated, pro-
duced great alterations in society. As soon as their operation,
in restoring liberty and independance to one part of the commu-
nity, began to be felt; as soon as they began to communicate to
all the members of society some tafle of the advantages arising
from commerce, from public order, and from personal security,
the human mind became conscious of powers which it did not
formerly perceive, and fond of occupations or pursuits- of which
it was formerly incapable. Towards the beginning of the twelfth
century, we discern the first symptoms of its awakening from
that lethargy in which it had long been funk, and observe it
turning with curiosity and attention towards new objects.

TIE first literary efforts, however, of the European na-

tions in the middle ages, were extremely ill-directed. Among
nations, as well as individuals, the powers of imagination
attain some degree of vigour before the intcllectual faculties
are much excrcit(l il speculative or abl)radt difqluifition. Men
are poets before they are philosophers. They feel with fenfili-
lity, anl describe with force, when they have made but little
progress in invefigation or reasoning. The age of Iomer and of
Hesiod long prcccdcd that of Thalcs, or of Socrates. But, un-
happily for literature, our anceflors deviating from this course
which nature points out, plunged at once into the dep1ths of
abl)friif and mietaplhyfical inquiry. They had bcen converted
to the Chriflian faithl, soon after they fettled in their new
conq1uefls. But they dlidl not receive it pure. The pre-
illnlption of men had added to the imiple and innflrucivc doc-

TVOL. I. L trines

SEC T. L

The firfl liie-
rary efforts
ill diresled,
and the
causes cf this.

trines of Chriffianity, the theories of a vain philooiphy, that
attempted to penetrate into mysteries, and to decide questions
which the limited faculties of the human mind are unable to
comprehend, or to resolve. These over-curious speculations
were incorporated with the system of religion, and came to be
confidered as the most essential part of it. As soon, then, as
curiosity prompted men to inquire and to reason, these were the
fubjeds which first presented themselves, and engaged their atten-
tion. The scholastic theology, with its infinite train of bold difqui-
fitions, and subtile diflindions concerning points which are not
the objeCt of human reason, was the first production of the spirit
of enquiry after it began to resume some degree of activity and
vigour in Europe. It was not this circumstance alone that gave
such a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they began again
to exercise talents which they had so long neglected. Most of
the persons who attempted to revive literature in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received infirudion, or derived their
principles of fcicnce from the Greeks in the eastern Empire, or
from the Arabians in Spain and Africa. Both these people,
acute and inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences which
they cultivated. The former rendered theology a system of
ipcculative refinement, or of endless controversy. The latter
colmmunicated to philosophy a spirit of metaphysical and frivo-
lous ubltlety. Misced by thcfe guides, the persons who first
applied to licnccc wvcrc involved in a maze of intricate inquiries.
Inllcad of allowing tlicr flancy to take its natural range, and to
prodtucc fui wcll v, of' invention as might have improved their
talk', and refined their licntirncnts; inflead of cultivating those
:r-ts which cinblcllifll Iluman life, and render it comfortable; they
v! rc fcttcrcd )by authority, they were led affray by example, and.

wafted.

SECT. L
I __
74

75

wafted the whole force of their genius in speculations as unavail- SECT. I.
ing as they were difficult.

BUT fruitless and ill-dircted as thelf speculations were, They had,

their novelty rouzed, and their boldncfs intercfted the hu- however,
man mind. The ardour with which men pursued these unin- efifcts.
viting fludies, was aflonifhing. Genuine philosophy was nevcr
cultivated, in any enlightened age, with greater zeal. Schools,
upon the model of these instituted by Charlemagne, were opened
in every cathedral, and almost in every monastery of note. Col-
leges and universities were ereted, and formed into communi-
ties or corporations, governed by their own laws, and invested
with separate and extenfivejurifdiCion over their own members.
A regular course of fludies was planned. Privileges of great
value were conferred on masters and scholars. Academical
titles and honours of various kinds were invented, as a re-
compence for both. Nor was it in' the schools alone that
superiority in science led to reputation and authority; it became
the object of refped in life, and advanced such as acquired it to
a rank of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured by all these ad-
vantages, an incredible number of fhudents relorted to these new
feats of learning; and crowded with eagcrnefs into that new path
which was opened to fame and diltinCdion.

BI3uT how confidcrable focvcr tlefe fi!fl efforts may appcear, A crcini-

thcrc was one circumnilance which prevented the effled of tlhen lSrevenwied
from being as extensive as they ought to ha;ve been. All the their being

mnore exten-

languages in Europe, during the period under review, were Iivc.
barbarous. They were dcflituite of elegance, of force, and even.
of pcrfpicuity. No attemnl)t liad been hitherto made to ilmprove

1, 2 or

SECT. I.

Its inflcence

on marnrrs
Werits atten-

lion.

The progrce(
of conmlmerCe
lud grcat

influence on
Inanners and
1 nvcriru enL

or to polish them. The Latin tongue was consecrated by the
church to religion. Custom, with authority scarce less sacred,
had appropriated it to literature. All the sciences cultivated in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were taught in Latin. All
books with refpea to them were written in that language. To
have treated of any important subjea in a modern language,
would have been deemed a degradation of it. This confined
science within a very narrow circle. The learned alone were ad-
mitted into the temple of knowledge; the gate was shut against
all others, who were allowed to remain involved in their former
darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, during several

ages, from diffusing itself through society, and its influence
was circumscribed; the progress of it may be mentioned,
nevertheless, among the great causes which contributed to intro-
duce a change of manners into Europe. That ardent, though
ill-judged spirit of enquiry which I have described, occasioned a
fermentation of mind which put ingenuity and invention in
motion, and gave them vigour. It led men to a new employ-
ment of their faculties, which they found to be agreeable as well
as illterclling. It accuflomcd them to exercises and occupations
which tended to soften their manners, and to give them rome
relish for those gentle virtues, which are peculiar to nations
among whom fcicnce hath been cultivated with success[EE].

X. TiE progrcfs of commerce had considerable influence in

polishing the manners of the European nations, and in leading
them to order, equal laws, and humanity. The wants of mcn,

[EE NOTE XXVIII.

ia
76

in the original and most simple state of society, are so few, and
their desires so limited, that they reft contented with the natural
producions of their climate and foil, or with what they can add
to these by their own rude indufiry. They have no superfluities
to dispose of, and few necessities that demand a supply. Every
little community subsisting on its own domeftick flock, and
satisfied with it, is either unacquainted with the states around it,
or at variance with them. Society and manners must be confi-
derably improved, and many provisions mutl be made for pub-
lic order and personal security, before a liberal intercourse can
take place between different nations. We find, accordingly,
that the first effect of the settlement of the barbarians in the
Empire, was to divide those nations which the Roman power
had united. Europe was broken into many separate commu-
nities. The communication between these divided flates ceased
almost totally during several centuries. Navigation was dange-
rous in seas infefled by pirates; nor could strangers trust to a
friendly reception in the ports of uncivilized nations. Even be-
tween diflant parts of the fame kingdom, the intercourse was rare
and difficult. The lawless rapine of banditti, together with the
avowed exactions of the nobles, scarce less formidable and op-
preffive, rendered a journey of any length a perilous enterprize.
Fixed to the spot in which they rcfidcd, the greater part of the
inhabitants of Europe loft, in a great mcafurc, the knowledge of
remote regions, and were unacquainted with their names, their
situations, their climates, and their commodities.

SECT. I.

Low fate of
commerce ia
the middle
ages.

VAx IOUS cauflis, contributed to revive the spirit of commerce, Caues orits

and to renew in folme dcgree the intcrc)urfic Ibetween differecnt
nations. The Italians, by their connlcion with Conllantinople

and

77

SECT. I. and other cities of the Greek empire, preserved in their own

country some relish for the precious commodities, and curious
manufactures of the East. They communicated some know-
ledge of these to the countries contiguous to Italy. This com-
merce, however, was extremely limited, nor was the inter-
course considerable which it occasioned between different nations.
The Crusades, by leading multitudes from every corner of Europe
into Asia, opened a more extensive communication between the
Eafi and Weft, which subsisted for two centuries; and though
the objec of these expeditions was conquest and not commerce;
though the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the motives
for undertaking them were wild and enthusiastic, their com-
mercial effcdts, as hath been shewn, were both beneficial and
permanent. During the continuance of the Crusades, the great
cities in Italy and in other countries of Europe acquired liberty,
and together with it such privileges as rendered them re-
fpecablc and independant communities. Thus, in every state
there was formed a new order of citizens, to whom commerce
pre'ented itself as their proper objea, and opened to them a
certain path to wealth and dignity. Soon after the close of the
Holy war, the mariner's compass was invented, which, by
rendering navigation more secure as well as more adventrous,
facilitated the communication between remote nations, and
brought them nearer to each other.

Firfl among THE Italian States, during the fame period, eflablifhed a
IheItlian5. regular commerce with the East in the ports of Egypt, and

drew from thence all the rich producs of the Indies. They
introduced into their own territories manufadulres of various
kinds, and carried them on with great ingenuity and vigour.

Thecy
78

They attempted new arts; and transplanted from warmer dimates,
to which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar, several natu-
ral productions which now furnish the materials of a lucrative
and extended commerce. All these commodities, whether im-
ported from Asia, or produced by their own (kill, they disposed
of to great advantage among the other people of Europe, who,
began to acquire some taste of elegance unknown to their an-
ceftors, or despised by them. During the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, the commerce of Europe was almost entirely in the
hands of the Italians, more commonly known in those ages by
the name of Lombards. Companies or societies of Lombard
merchants fettled in every different kingdom. They were taken
under the immediate protetion of the several governments.
They enjoyed extensive privileges and immunities. The opera-
tion of the ancient barbarous laws concerning firangers was
suspended with refpea to them. They became the carriers,
the manufacturers, and the bankers of all Europe.

WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, cultivated

trade with such induflry and success, the commercial spirit
awakened in the north, towards the middle of the thirteenth
century. As the nations around the Baltick were, at that time,
extremely barbarous, and infcfled that fca with their piracies,
this obliged the cities of Lubcck and [lamburgh, soon after they
began to open some trade with tllefe people, to enter into a
league of mutual defence. They derived fulch advantages from
this union, that other towns acceded to their confederacy, and,
in a fliort time, eighty of the moil (liiderable cities scattered
through those vast countries which firetch from the bottom of

the
4:

SECT. I

Then by
means of the
Hanfeatick.

SECT. I.

Commerce
nimkcs pro-
gres in the
Ncihcrland s.

the Baltick to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the famous
Hanfeatick league, which became foformidable, that its alliance
was courted, and its enmity was dreaded by the greatest mo-
narchs. The members of this powerful association formed the
first fyftematick plan of commerce known in the middle ages,
and conduced it by common laws enacted in their general
assemblies. They supplied the ref of Europe with naval stores,
and pitched on different towns, the most eminent of which
was Bruges in Slanders, where they established staples in which
their commerce was regularly carried on. Thither the Lombards
brought the producions of India, together with the manufactures
of Italy, and exchanged them for the more bulky, but not less
useful commodities of the North. The Hanfeatick merchants
disposed of the cargoes which they received from the Lombards,
in the ports of the Baltick, or carried them up the great rivers
into the interior parts of Germany.

T i r s regular intercourse opened between the North and South

of Europe made them sensible of their mutual wants, and created
such new and vast demands for commodities of every kind, that
it excited among the ilnhabitants of the Netherlands a more
vigorous spirit in carrying on the two great manufactures of
wool and flax, which fcem to have been considerable in that
country a.; far back as the age of Charlemagne. As Brugcs
bhcarne the centre of colmunicatio betwn etwecn thle Loml)ard
and Ilanfeatick mcrchants, the Flcmings tradetd with hoth in that
city to such extent as well as advantage as firea(l among them a
general lalbit of induflry, which long rendered Slanders and the

* ladjacent

adjacent provinces the most opulent, the most populous, and bet SE C T. I.
cultivated countries in Europe,

STRUCK with theflouriihing state of these provinces, of which And in Eng.

he discerned the true cause, Edward III. of England, endeavour- land.
ed to excite a spirit of industry among his own fubjeas, who,
blind to the advantages of their situation, and ignorant of the
source from which opulence was destined to flow into their
country, totally neglected commerce, and did not even attempt
those manufactures, the materials of which they furnishcd to
foreigners. By alluring Flemish artisans to fettle in his domi-
nions, as well as by many wife laws for the encouragement and
regulation of trade, he gave a beginning to the woolen manu-
factures of England, and firit turned the adive and enterprizing
genius of his people towards those arts which have raised the
English to the highest rank among commercial nations.

TolIs increase of commerce, and of intercourse between na- ThebeneScial

tions, how inconsiderable soever it may appear in refped of effcas of this.
their rapid and extensive progress during the last and present
age, Iecms vast, when we compare it with the state of both ill
lEurope previous to the twelfth century. It did not fail of
producing great cffeds. Commerce tends to wcar off tliole
prejudices which maintain difiindion and nanimolity .cbtween
nations. It softens and polifllcs the manners (:f men. It unites
them, by one of the strongest of all tics, the dctre of fillplying
their nmtual wants. It difpof(s them to peace, by cflbiihlling
in every 1Rate an order of citizens b;ound by their intcrfct to
be the guardians of publick tranquillity. As soon as the com-

YtO. I. M mercial

8I

mercial spirit begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an ascendant
in any society, we discover a new genius in its policy, its al-
liances, its wars, and its negociations. Conspicuous proofs of
this occur in the history of the Italian States, of the Hanfeatick
league, and the cities of the Netherlands during the period
under review. In proportion as comumerce made its way into
the different countries of Europe, they fucceflively turned their
attention to those objets, and adopted those manners, which
occupy and diftinguili polished nations [FS].

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

A VIEW
SECT. I.

.-,-I

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national sorce requisite in foreign operations.

A
V

I

E

W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E U R O P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION

II.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with refpet to the

commnand of the national force requisite in foreign operations.
SUCH are the events and inflitutions, which by their power-

ful operation contributed, gradually, to introduce more

regular government and more poliflied manners into the various
nations of Europe. Wlen we survey the slate of society, or
the characdr of individuals, at tile opening of tile fifteenth
century, and then turn back to view tle condition of both at

NI z the

SECT. II.

State of so-
ciety greatly
improved at
the beginning
of the sis-
teenth cen-
tury.

SECT. II. the time when the barbarous tribes which overturned the Ro-

man power completed their settlement in their new conquests,
the progress which mankind had made towards order and re-
finement will appear immense.

Still defecive GOVERNIMENT, however, was still farfrom having attained
with refire that state, in which extensive monarchies ad with united
to the com-
mand of the vigour, or carry on great undertakings with perseverance
national force.

and success. Small tribes or communities, even in their
rudest fiatc, may operate in concert, and exert their utmost
force. They are excited to ad not by the diflant objeas, and
fubtilc speculations, which interest or assec men in polished
societies, but by their present feelings. The insults of an
enemy kindle resentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation; there paifions communicate from breast to breast,,
and all the members of the community, with united ardour,,
rush into the field in order to gratify their revenge, or to=
acquire difiindion. But in widely extended flates, such as the
great kingdoms of Europe at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, where there is little intercourse between the distant
memlbers of the community, and where every great enterprize
requires previous concert and long preparation, nothing can
route and call forth their united strength, but the absolute com-
mand of a Despot, or the powerful influence of regular policy.
Of the former the vas Empires in the East are an example; the
irrefiflibIc mandate of the Sovereign reaches the most remote'
provinces of his dominions, and compels whatever numbcr of
his fuijces lie is pleated to tiummon, to follow his standard.
'hie kingdomts of Europe, in the prcfcnt age, are an instance
of the latter; the Prince, by the lcfs violent, but no Ic's ctfedual

A'\1~~~~ ~

~ ~operation,
84

operation of laws and a well regulated government, is enabled SECT. II.
to avail himself of the whole force of his state, and to employ ' --
it in enterprizes which require strenuous and persevering efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, the political Thepower of

constitution in all the kingdoms of Europe was very different very limited.
from either of there states of government. The several mo-
narchs, though they had somewhat enlarged the boundaries of
prerogative by successful encroachments on the immunities and
privileges of the nobility, were possesed of an authority ex-
tremely limited. The laws and interior police of kingdoms,
though much improved by the various events and regulations
which I have enumerated, were still feeble and imperfec. In
every country, a numerous body of nobles; fsill formidable not-
withstanding the various expedients employed to depress them,
watched all the motions of their sovereign with a jealous atten-
tion, which set bounds to his ambition, and either prevented
his forming ichemcs of extensive enterprize, or thwarted the
execution of them.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so extremely Therre.

small as to be inadequate to any great undertaking. He de- nue finall.
pended for extraordinary supplics on the good will of his sub-
jecs, who granted them often with a reluctant and always
with a sparing hand.

A s the revenues of Princes were inconfiderablc, the armies Their armics

which they could bring into the field were tnfit for long and unfit so con-
effedual fervicc. Inficad of being alle to employ troops trained
to ikill in arms, and to military subordination, by regular dif-

cipline,

:SECT. II.

cipline, Monarchs were obliged to depend on such forces as
their vassals conlduted to their standard in consequence of their
military tenures. These, as they were bound to remain under
arms only for a short time, could not march far from their
usual place of residence, and being more attached to the lord
of whom they held, than to the Sovereign whom they served,
were often as much disposed to counteract as to forward
his fchincms. Nor were they, even if they had been more
f;'ljcd to the command of the monarch, proper instruments
to carry into execution any great and arduous enterprize.
The firength of an army formed either for conquest or defence
lies in infantry. To the stability and discipline of their legions,
consisting chiefly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their viCories; and when
their descendants, forgetting the institutions which had led them
to universal dominion, so far altered their military system as to
place their principal confidence in a numerous cavalry, the un-
disciplined impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought
mostly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already observed, to
overcome them. Thcfe nations soon after they fettled in their
new conquefis, uninflrudcd by the fatal error of the Romans,
rclin(lqilhcd tlc cufloims of their ancctfors and converted the
chief force of their armies into cavalry. Among the Romans
this change was occationed by the effeminacy of their troops,
wlio could not lndure the fatigues of fervicc, which their
moreC virtuous and hardy anccflors f;ftained witli eati. A-
mong tllc people wlio cfiabl)illcd the new monarchies into
wich Europe was divided, tlis innovation in military (lifci-
pline fccms to have llowcd fiomn the lrile of the nobles, who
icor.ing to mingle with pcrlfos of infllrior rank, aimed at

8 being
26

being distinguished from them in the field as well as during SECT. II.
peace. The institution of chivalry, and the frequency of Tour- L"---
naments, in which knights, in complete armour, entered the
lifts on horseback with extraordinary splendour, displaying
amazing address, and force, and valour, brought cavalry into
fiill greater esteem. The fondness for that service incrcaf'd to
such a degree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies, the armies of Europe were composed almost entirely of
cavalry. No gentleman wouldc appear in the field but on
horseback. To 'erve in any other manner he would have
deemed derogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of dif-
tindion, was called, The battle, and on it alone depended the
fate of every acion. The infantry, colleced from the dregs
and refuse of the people, ill armed and worse disciplined,
was of no account..

As these circumstances rendered the operations of particular They are

kingdoms less considerable and less vigorous, so they lonT kept 'cnpbif'
the Princes of Europe from giving such attention to the fchcencs pel'ral cr ex-

t. i!:vr plan o.f;

and tranfations of their neighbours, as led them to form any oLeciacion.
regular system ofpublick security. They prevented them from
uniting in confederacy, or from acting with concert, in order
to eflablith iluchl a dittribution and balance of power, as fioul1l
hinder any flatc from riling to a fupcriority, which min;ht en-
danger the general liberty and inlcpcndancc. Duri,;g 'i.vcral
centirics, the nations of Flurope appear to have concll rc
thenmflves as fcparate iocietics, scarce conne&cd tocther by
any comnIno inltercft, and little concerned in cacli h liers ;lt:lir3.
or operations. An cxtcnfivc commerce (li not asord tlhit
an opportunity of obfcrving and penctratilg iltotl I.!Cl:ICL.

oL'

87

SECT. II. of every different state. They had not ambassadors residing con-

ftantly in every court to watch and give early intelligence of all
its motions. The expetation of remote advantages, or the pro.
fpe& of diflant and contingent evils were not sufficient to excite
nations to take arms. They only, who were within the sphere of
immediate danger, and unavoidably exposed to injury or insult,
thought themselves interefled in any contest, or bound to take
precautions for their own safety.

They were WHOEVER records the tranfa&ions of any of the more con-
little connec.
ted with each fiderable European states during the two last centuries, must
other. write the hiflory of Europe. Its various kingdoms, throughout

that period, have been formed into one great system, so closely
united, that each holding a determinate station, the operations
of one are so felt by all, as to influence their counsels and regu-
late their measures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unless when vicinity of territory rendered the occasions of dif-
cord frequent and unavoidable, or when national emulation
fomented or embittered the spirit of hostility, the affairs of
different countries are fcldom interwoven. In each kingdom
of Europe great events and revolutions happened, which the
other powers beheld with the fame indifference as if they had
been uninterested fpcctators, to whom the effect of these tranf-
a.tions could never extend.

A confirma- DURIN(; the violent firuggles between France and England,
tfr'niolf- and notwithstanding the alarming progress which was made
fairs (f towards rcndering one Prince the mafler of both tlefe king-
IFrance.

(ldons, hardly one mcafure which can be confidcred as the result
of a lagacious and prudent policy, was formed in order to guard

againfl
88

against an event so fatal to Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy
and Bretagne, whom their situation would not permit to remain
neutral, engaged, it is true, in the contest; but they more
frequently took the part to which their passions prompted them,
than that which a just discernment of the danger which threat-
ened themselves and the tranquillity of Europe should have
pointed out. The other Princes, seemingly unaffected by the at-
ternate successes of the contending parties, left them to decide
the quarrel, or interposed only by feeble and ineffetual nego-
ciations.

NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities in which the

various kingdoms of Spain were engaged during several cen-
turies, and the successive occurrences which visibly tended to
unite that part of the continent into one great monarchy, the
Princes of Europe scarce took a tingle ftep, which discovers that
they gave any attention to that important event. They per-
mitted a power to arise imperceptibly, and to acquire strength
there, which soon became formidable to all its neighbours.

AMIDST the violent convulsions with which the spirit of

domination in the See of Rome, and the turbulent ambition of
the German nobles, agitated the Empire, neither the authority
of the Popes, seconded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor
the follicitations of the Emperors, could induce any of the
powerful monarchs in Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to
avail themselves of many favourable opportunities of interpof-
ing with effeC and advantage.

89

SECT. II.

From those of
Spaia.

From thore of
Germany.
VOL. I.

N

TilIs

SECT. II. THIS amazing inativity, during tranfadions so interest-
ThiS iiv- ing, is not to be imputed to any incapacity of discerning their
ty occafiroed political consequences. The power of judging with sagacity,
enirelyby the
slate of go. and of ading with vigour, is the portion of men in every age.
tetnlmen'. The Monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms of Europe

during several centuries were not blind to their particular in-
terest, negligent of the publick safety, or strangers to the me-
thod of securing both. If they did not adopt that salutary
system, which teaches modern politicians to take the alarm at
the profped of ditant dangers, which prompts them to check
the first encroachments of any formidable power, and which
renders each slate the guardian, in. some degree, of the rights
and Midependance of all its neighbours, this was owing entirely
to the imperfelions and disorders in the civil government of
each country, which made it impossible for sovereigns to a&
suitably to those ideas which the posture of affairs, and their
own obfervatioa must have suggested.

Ivent hap- BUT during the course of the fifteenth century, various events
pened during happened, which, by giving Princes more entire command of
the i5th cen.
bi-y which the force in their refpeaive dominions, rendered their operations
render the cf-
forts of na- more vigorous and extensive. In consequence of this, the affairs
evenS more
terftol mand of different kingdoms becoming more frequently as well as
*tcnfive. more intimately connected, they were gradually accustomed to

adt in concert and confederacy, and were insensibly prepared for
forming a fyfiem of policy, in order to establish or to preserve-
such a balance of power as was moit consistent with the general
security. It was during the reign of Charles the fifth, that
the ideas, on which this fyflem is founded, first came to be
fully underflood. It was then, that the maxims by which it

ha,
90

.has been uniformly maintained since that aera were universally
adopted. On this account, a view of the causes and events
which contributed to establish a plan of policy more salutary
and extensive than any that has taken place in the conduc of
human affairs, is not only a necessary introdution to the fol-
lowing work, but is a capital objed in the hiitory of Europe.

The first event, that occasioned any considerable alteration in

the arrangement of affairs in Europe, was the annexation of
the extensive territories, which England pofleffed on the con-
tinent, to the crown of France. While the English were maC-
ters of several of the most fertile and opulent provinces in
France, and a great part of its most martial inhabitants were
bound to follow their flandard, their monarchs confidered them-
selves rather as the rivals, than as the vassals of the sovereign of
whom they held. The Kings of France, circumscribed and
thwarted in their schemes and operations by an adversary no left
jealous than formidable, durst not venture upon any enterprize
of importance or of difficulty. The English were always at
hand, ready to oppose them. They disputed even their right
to their crown, and being able to penetrate, with ease, into the
heart of the kingdom, could arm against them those very hands
which ought to have been employed in their defence. Timid
counsels, and feeble efforts were natural to monarchs in such
a situation. France, difmembred and over-awed, could not
attain its proper station in the fyflem of Europe. But the death
of Henry of England, happily for France, and not unfortu-
nately for his own country, delivered the French from the
calamity of having a foreign master scated on their throne. The

N z weakness

SECT. IL

The fit of
theft was the
depriving the
English of
their territ -
ries on the
continet.

SECT. II.
'_I
;- -- !

'7 Ie effcef of
thls on in-
creasing the
power of the
French mo-
narchy.

On the Rate
of the milita-
vy force in
the nsation.

A VIEW OF THE

weakness of a long minority, the dissensions in the-Englifh court,
together with the unsteady and languid conduct which these occa-
sioned, afforded the French a favourable opportunity of recovering
the territories which theyhadloft. The nativevalourof the nobi-
lity of France, heightened to an enthufiaftick confidence, by a
supposed interposition of heaven in their behalf; conduced in
the field by ikilful leaders; and dire&ed in the cabinet by a pru--
dent monarch; was exerted with such vigour and success, during
this favourable jundure, as not only wrested from the English
their new conquests, but fiript them of their ancient possessions,
and reduced them within the narrow precints of Calais, and its
petty territory.

As soon as so many considerable provinces were re-united to

their dominions, the Kings of France, conscious of this acqui-
fition of strength, began to form bolder schemes of interior po-
licy, as well as of foreign operations. They immediately became
formidable to their neighbours, who began to fix their attention on
their measures and motions, the importance of which they fully
perceived. From this :ra, France, possessed of the advantages
which it derives from the situation and contiguity of its territo-
rics, as well as from the number and valour of its people, rose
to new influence in Europe, and was the first power in a condi-
tion to give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the states around it.

NoR was France indebted for this increase of importance merely

to the re-union of the provinces which had been torn from it. A
circumnlancc attended the recovery of there, which, though less
considerable, and less observed, contributed not a little to give
ad(ritional vigour and decision to all the efforts of that monarchy.
During the obftinatc firuggles between France and England, all

the

93,

the defe&s of the military system under the feudal government SECT- II
were sensibly felt. A war of long continuance languished, when '
carried on by troops bound and accustomed to keep the field
nnly for a few weeks. Armies, composed chiefly of heavy
armed cavalry, were unfit either for the attack or the defence of
the many towns and castles, which it became necessary to guard
or to reduce. In order to obtain such permanent and effective
force, as became requisite during these lengthened contests, the
Kings of France took into their pay considerable bands of mer-
cenary soldiers, levied sometimes among their own fubjeds, and
sometimes in foreign countries. But as the feudal policy pro-
vided no sufficient fund for such extraordinary service, these ad-
venturers were dismissed at the close of every campaign, or upon
any profpet of accommodation; and having been little accuf-
tomed to the restraints of discipline, they frequently turned their
arms against the country which they had been hired to defend,
and desolated it with no lets cruelty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept constantly on foot, and regularly t occasions

trained to military Subordination, would have supplied what was the introdac-
wanting in the feudal confsitution, and have furnished Princes ing armies.
with the means of executing enterprizes, to which they were
then unequal. Such an establishment, however, was so repug-
nant to the genius of feudal policy, and so incompatible with
the privileges and pretensions of the nobles, that during fevcral
centuries no monarch was either so bold, or so powerful, as to
venture on any ftep towards introducing it. At lafi, Charles VII.
availing himfelfof the reputation which he had acquired by his
fucccffes against the Englith, and taking advantage of the im-
prcfions of terror which such a formidable enemy had left uron
the minds of his fubjcels, executed that which his prcdcceflrs.

dtlrft

I,'

SECT. Il.
A. D. 144.

durst not attempt. Under pretence of keeping always on foot a
force fuffictent to defend the kingdom against any sudden inva-
sion of the English, he, at the time when he disbanded his other
troops, retained under arms a body of nine thousand cavalry, and
of sixteen thousand infantry. He appropriated funds for the
regular payment of there; he flationed them in different places
of the kingdom, according to his pleasure; and appointed the
officers, who commanded and disciplined them. The prime
nobility courted this service, in which they were taught to de-
pend on their sovereign, to execute his orders, and to look up to
him as the judge and rewarder of their merit. The feudal mi-
litia, composed of the vaflals whom the nobles could call out to
follow their flandard, as it was in no degree comparable to a
body of soldiers regularly trained to war, funk gradually in repu-
tation. The strength of armies came to be estimated only by
the number of disciplined men which they contained. In
less than a century, the nobles and their military tenants, though
sometimes summoned to the field, according to ancient form,
were confidered as an incumbrance upon the troops with which
they aaed; and were viewed with contempt by soldiers accuf-
tomed to the vigorous and fleady operations of regular service.

The effrcft THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, by establishing
n£ thli. the first ltanding army known in Europe, occasioned an impor-

tant revolution in its affairs and policy. By depriving the
nobles of that direcion of the military force of the fiate, which
had raised them to such high authority and importance, it gave
a deep wound to the feudal aristocracy, in that part where its
power seemed to be most complete.

PRANCE,

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular troops, at a time

when there was scarce a squadron or company kept in constant
pay.in any other part of Europe, acquired such advantages, ei-
ther for attack or defence, over its neighbours, that felf-prefer-
vation made it necessary for them to imitate its example. Mer-
cenary troops were introduced into all the considerable kingdoms
on the continent. Theygraduallybecame the only military force
that was employed or trusted. It has long been the chief ob-
ject of policy to increase and to support them, and the great aim
of Princes or ministers to discredit and to annihilate all other.
means of national activity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the start of other powers in efta--

blifhing in their dominions a military force, which enabled them
to carry on. foreign operations with more vigour, and to greater
extent, so they were the firit who effetually broke the feudal
aristocracy, and humbled the great vassals of the crowns who by
their exorbitant power had long circumforibed the royal prero-
gative within very narrow limits, and had rendered' all the-
efforts of the monarchs of Europe inconsiderable. Many things
concurred to undermine, gradually, the power of the feudal'
aristocracy in France. The wealth and property of the nobility
were greatly impaired during the long wars, which the king-
dom was obliged to maintain with the English. The extraordi--
aary zeal with which they exerted themselves in defence of their
country against its ancient enemies, exhausted the fortunes
of some great families. As almost every province in the king-
dom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands of others were
exposed to the depredations of the enemy, were ravaged by the
mercenary troops which their sovereigns hired occasionally, but

7 cou4.

SECT. IL

The mo-
narchs of
France en.
couraged to
extend theirr
prerogative.

95

SECT. IL could not pay, or were desolated with rage till more deftrudive

- - l by the peasants, in their different infurre&ions. At the fame

time, the necessities of government having forced their Kings
upon the desperate expedient of making great and sudden alte-
rations in the current coin of the kingdom, the fines, quit-
rents, and other payments, fixed by ancient custom, funk much
in value, and the revenues of a fief were reduced far below
the fum which it had once yielded. During their contests with
the English, in which a generous nobility courted every flation
where danger appeared, or honour could be gained, many fami-
lies of note became extinc, and their fiefs were reunited to the
crown. Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell to female
heirs, and were divided among them; were diminithed by pro-
fuse donations to the church, or were broken and split by the
succession of remote collateral heirs'.

Tbe progress ENCOURA ED by these manifest symptoms of decline in that
of the royal
pomcr under body which hb wished to depress, Charles VII. during the first
chloe Vl!. interval ofpeace.with Englnd, made several efforts towards efta-

blifhing the regal prerogative on the ruins of the aristocracy.
But his obligations to the nobles were so many, as well as recent,
and their services in recovering the kingdom so splendid, as made
it neceflary.for him to proceed with moderation and caution.
Such, however, was the authority which the crown had
acquired by the progress of its arms against the Englilh, and
so much was the power of the nobility diminished, that, without
any opposition, he soon made innovations of great consequence in
the constitution. He notonly eftabliihed that formidable body of
regular troops, which has been mentioned, but he was the firRt

, Boulainvilliers Hiftoire de Government de Frajce, Lcttre xii.

monarch
96

monarch of France who, by his royal edid, without the concur- SECT. If.-
rence of the States-general of the kingdom, levied an extraor- A. D. .440.
dinary subsidy on his people. He prevailed likewise with his
fubjets, to render several taxes perpetual, which had formerly
been imposed occasionally, and exated during a short time. By
means of all there, he acquired such an increase of power, and
extended his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits, that,
from being the most dependant Prince who had ever fat upon
the throne of France, he came to possess, during the latter years
of his reign, a degree of authority which none of his predecessors
had enjoyed for several ages b

THAT plan of humbling the nobility which Charles formed, Under

his son Louis XI. carried on with a bolder spirit, and with Lis l
greater success. Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant;
and at whatever period he had been called to ascend the throne,
his reign must have abounded with schemes to oppress his
people, and to render his own power absolute. Subtle, unfeel-
ing, cruel; a stranger to every principle of integrity, and regard-
less of decency, he scorned all the reflraints which a sense of
honour, or the desire of fame, iinpofe even on ambitious men.
Sagacious, at the fame time, to discern his true interest, and in-
fluenced by that alone, he was capable ofpurfuiing it with a per-
fevering industry, and of adhering to it with a systematic spirit
from which no objec could divert, and no danger could deter him.

TilE maxims of llis administration were as profound as they His mcnrires

were~ fatal to the lpforrivileges

of the nobihulied all the dc- ng
wcrc fatal to the privileges of the nobility. He filled all the de- the nobility.

b Hlifoir cdc France par Vclly & Villarct,tom. xv. 331, &c. 389. tom.xvi. 324.
Vnli;tions de la Monarchie Francoise, tom. iii. 162.

VOL. I. ) partmcnts

97'

SECT, II,

partments of government with new men, and often with persons,
whom he called from the lowest as well as most despised func-
tions in life, and raised at pleasure to stations of great power or trust.
These were his only confidents, whom he consulted in forming
his plans, and to whom he committed the execution of them:
While the nobles, accustomed to be the companions, the favou-
rites, and the ministers of their sovereigns, were treated with
such studied and mortifying neglect, that if they would not sub-
mit to follow a court, in which they appeared without any
shadow of their ancient power, they were obliged to retire to
their castles, where they remained unemployed and for-
gotten. Not satisfied with having rendered the nobles of less
consideration, by taking out of their hands the sole direcion of
affairs, Louis added insult to neglet; and by violating their most
valuable privileges, endeavoured to degrade the order, and to
reduce the members of it to the fame level with other fubjeCs.
Persons of the highest rank among them, if so bold as to oppose
his schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken thejealoufy of his ca-
pricious temper, were prosecuted with rigour, from which all who
belonged to the order of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they
were tried by judges who had no right to take cognizance of their
aaions; and were fubjeded to torture, orcondemned to an infa-
inous death, without regard to their birth or condition. The
people, accuflomed to fee the blood of the most illustrious perfo-
nages flied by the hands of the common executioner, to behold
them ihut up in dungeons, and carried about in cages of iron, be-
gan to view the nobility with less reverence than formerly, and
looked up with terror to the royal authority, which seemed to
have humbled or annihilated every other power in the kingdom.

AT
98

AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that opposition might

rouze the nobles, whom the rigour ofhis government had intimi-
dated, or that felf-prefervation might teach them, at last, to unite,
dexterously scattered among them the feeds of discord; and in-
duifrioufly fomented those ancient animofities between the great
families, which the spirit ofjealoufy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and still kept alive.
To accomplish this, all the arts of intrigue, all the mysteries
and refinements of his fraudulent policy were employed, and with
such success, that at a juncure which required the molt firenuous
efforts, as well as the most perfect union, the nobles never ated,
except during one short sally of resentment at the beginning of
his reign, either with vigour or with concert.

As he stripped the nobility of their privileges, he added to the

power and prerogative of the crown. In order to have at com-
mand such a body of soldiers as might be sufficient to crush any
force that his difaffeded fubjeets could draw together, he not
only kept on foot the regular troops which his father had
raised, but took into his pay fix thousand Swiss, the befl dif-
ciplined and most formidable infantry, at that time, in Europe .
From the jealousy natural to tyrants, he confided in these foreign
mercenaries, as the most devoted instruments of oppression, and
the most faithful guardians of the power which he had acquired.

GREAT finds were rcquifitc, not only to defray the cxpence

of this additional eftal)lifhmcnt, but to supply the funs employed
in tlie various cntcrprizes which the rcfllcl adivity of llis ge-
nius prompted him to undertake. But the iprcrogative that his

SECT. II.

And of di-
viding them.

He adds to
the number of
flanding
forces.

Iie augments
ti;e revcnues
ot the crovn.
`MCm. de Comilestom. i. 367. 1).tn. H ils. dJc LI VI-e I[rincoif.,torn, i. 182.

U I sathlicr

99

SecT. TI.

L - -L

Tlis addrers
in managing
%ihe arembly
.f I4 CS.

father had aflumed of levying taxes, without dte concurrence of
the flates-general, which he was careful not oaly to retain but
to extend, enabled him to provide in some measure for the in-
creasing charges of government.

WiI AT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could not furnifi,

his address procured. He was the first monarch in Europe who
discovered the method of managing those great assemblies, in
which the feudal policy had veiled the power of granting subsidies
and of imposing taxes. He first taught other Princes the fatal
art of beginning their attack on publick liberty, by corrupting
the source from which it flould flow. By exerting all his
power and address in influencing the eletion of representatives,
by bribing or overawing the members, and by various changes
which he artfully made in the form of their deliberations, Louis
acquired such entire direction of these assemblies, that, from
being the vigilant guardians of the privileges and property of
the people, he rendered them tamely subservient, in promoting
the most odious measures of his reign d. As no power remained
to set bounds to his exaaions, he not only continued all. the
taxes imposed by his father, but made immense additions to
them, which amounted to a fum that appeared astonishing to
his contemporaries . *

d Mem. dc Comin. tom.. i. 136. Chron. Scardal. ibid. tom. ii. p. 71.

c Mem. de Corn. tom. i. 334.
* Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of i,8oo,ooo francs; Louis XL

raiscd 4,700,000. The former had in pay 9coo cavalry and 16,ooo infantry..
The latter augmented the cavalry to 15,ooo, and the infantry to 5,000ooo. Mem.
de Comines, i. 384. During the latter years of his reign, he kept the grcater
part of there encamped in one place, and ready to march on the fiortcft warning,
Ibid. 381.

* NONR
'100

NoR was it the power alone or wealth of the crown that Louis SECT. II.

increased; he extended its territories by acquisitions of various He enlarge~
kinds. He got possession of Roufillon by purchase; Provence the bounds
was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de Anjou; and upon monarchy.
-the death of Charles the Bold, he seized with a firong hand Bur-
gundy and Artois, which had belonged to that Prince. Thus,
-during the course of a single reign, France was formed into one
compadt kingdom, and the Rfeady unrelenting policy of Louis
XI. not only subdued the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles,
but established a species of government, scarce less absolute,
or less terrible, than eastern despotism.

BUT fatal as his administration was to the liberties of his sub- By all theCe

the French

jeds, the authority which he acquired, the resources of which 'governeent
he became master, and his freedom from restraint both in con- iend ted

more assive
certing his plans and in executing them, rendered his reign and enter-

prizing.

active and enterprizing. Louis negociated in all the courts of P
Europe; he observed the motions of all his neighbours; he en-
gaged, either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great
tranfadion; his resolutions were prompt; .his operations vigo-
rous; and upon every emergence he could call forth into action
the whole force of his kingdom. From the era of his reign,
inflead of the feeble efforts of monarchs fettered and circum-
fcribed by a jealous nobility, the Kings of France, more mailers
at home, have exerted themselves more abroad, have formed
more cxtenfivc schemes of foreign conqucfis, and have carried
on war with a spirit and vigour long unknown in Europe.

THE example which Louis set was too inviting not to be S'epi taken

toward. c x-
imitated by other Princes. Henry VII. as soon as he was tendig,,gtli

ifatcd power of the

crown in
l:.nllal ,d.

SECT. II. feated on the throne of England, formed the plan of enlarging

^-- his own prerogative, by breaking the power of the nobility.

The circumstances under which he undertook to execute it, were
less favourable than those under which Charles VII. had
made the fame attempt; and the spirit with which he conduted
it, was very different from that of Louis XI. Charles, by
the success of his arms against the English, by the merit of
having expelled them out of so many provinces, had established
himself so firmly in the confidence of his people, as encouraged
him to make bold encroachments on the ancient constitution.
The daring genius of Louis broke through every barrier, and
endeavoured to overturn or to remove every obstacle that stood
in his way. But Henry held the sceptre by a disputed title; a
popular facion was ready every moment to take arms against
him; and after long civil wars, during which the nobility had
often displayed their power in creating and deposing Kings, he felt
that the regal authority had been so much relaxed, and that he
entered into poffcffion of a prerogative so much abridged, as made
it neccflary to carry on his measures deliberately, and without
any violent exertion. He endeavoured to undermine that for-
midable firuturc, which he durfl not attack with open force.
His schemes, though cautious and flow in their operation, were
prudent, and producive in the end of great effets. By his laws,
permitting the barons to break the entails of their eflates, and to
expofc thcin to sale; by his regulations to prevent the nobility
from keeping in their service those numerous bands of retainers,
which rcndered them formidable, and turbulent; by encouraging
population, agriculture and commerce; by securing to his sub-
jcds, during a long reign, the enjoyment of the bleifings which
flow from the arts of peace; by accufloming them to an adlmi-

niltration
1021

niftration of government, under which the laws were executed SECT. IL
with steadiness and vigour; he made imperceptibly such altera- '-
tions in the English constitution, that he transmitted to his fuc-
ceflor authority so extensive, as rendered him one of the most
absolute Monarchs in Europe, and capable of the greatest and
most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the marriage of Ser- And in Spains

dinand and Isabella; the glory that they acquired by the con-
quest of Granada, which brought the odious dominion of the
Moors to a period; the command of the great armies which it
had been necessary to keep constantly on foot, in order to accom-
plifh this; the wisdom and steadiness of their administration;
and the address with which they availed themselves of every
incident to humble the nobility, and to extend their own prero-
gative, conspired in raising these monarchs to such eminence and
authority, as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed.
Though several causes, which shall be explained in another
place, prevented their attaining the fame extensive powers with
the Kings of France and England, and preserved the feudal con-
ftitution in Spain longer entire, their great abilities supplied the
defeds of their prerogative, and improved with such dexterity
all the advantages which they possessed, that Ferdinand carried
on all his foreign operations, which were very extensive, with
extraordinary vigour and effct.

WHIILE these Princes were thus enlarging the boundaries of Event hPch

prerogative, and taking such steps towards rendering their king- called the fm -
doms capable of ading with union and with force, events occur- arhis to exert

the new powo
red, which called them forth to exert the new powers which crs which

they hid ac-
I they quircd.

103,

SECT. II.

The sirs of
there events
was the mar-
riage of the
heiress of the
house of Bur-
gundy.

they had acquired. These engaged them in such a series of en
terprizes and negociations, that the affairs of all the considerable
nations in Europe came to be insensibly interwoven with each
other; and a great political system was gradually formed, which
grew to be an obje& of universal attention.

THE sirs event which merits notice, on account of its influ-

ence in producing this change in the ilate of Europe, was the
marriage of the daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress of
the house of Burgundy. For some years before her father's
death, she had been confidered as the apparent successor to his
territories, and Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different Princes, with a view of alluring them, by that
offer, to favour the schemes which his restless ambition was con-
tinually forming.

Theimpor- THIS rendered the alliance with her an obje& of general
tanhc:f atliof attention; and all the advantages of acquiring possession of
Europe. her territories, the most opulent at that time and beflt cul-

tivated of any on this fide of the Alps, were perfecly under-
flood. As soon, then, 'as the untimely death of Charles opened
the fucccffion, the eyes of all the Princes in Europe were turned
A 1). *17. towards Mary, and they felt themselves deeply intercfled in the

Jnury choice h w ahich
flc was about to make of the pcrfon, on v; lt')n ile

would lbllow that rich inhcritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the provinces which

flie poffffied had been difinembcred, and wholi dominions
ftrctchcd along the frontier of her territories, had every induce-
men1t to court her alliance. lie had, likcwife, a good title to

expect

io4

V wvs ns
LJsuis XI.
im ith refp.a
to it.

expet the favourable reception of any reasonable proposition
he flhould make, with refpe& to the disposal of a Princess, who
was the vassal of his crown, and descended from the royal blood
of France. There were only two propositions, hbwever, which
he could make with propriety. The one was the marriage of
the Dauphin, the other that of the Count of Angouleme, a
Prince of the blood, with the heiress of Burgundy. By the
former, he would have annexcd all hcr territories to his crown,
and have rendered France at once the most refpedable monarchy
in Europe. But the great disparity of age between the two par-
ties, Mary being twenty, and the Dauphin only eight years old;
the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not to chufe a master pof-
sessed of such power as might enable him to form schemes danger-
ous to their liberties; together with their dread of falling under the
odious and oppressive government of Louis, were obstacles in the
way of executing this plan, which it was vain to think of fur-
mounting. By the latter, the accomplishment of which might
have been attained with ease, Mary having discovered some incli-
nation to a match with the Count of Angouleme', Louis would
have prevented the dominions of the house of Burgundy from
being conveyed to a rival power, and in return for such a fplen-
did eflablilhment for the Count of Angouleme, he muli have ob-
tained, or would have extorted from him concessions highly benefi-
cial to the crown of France. But Louis had been accuffomcd so long
to theintricacies ofa crooked and insidious policy, that he could not
be satisfied with what was obvious and simple; and was so fond of
artifice and refinement, that he came to confider these as his ulti-
mate objed, not as the means only ofconducting affairs. From this
principle, no less than from his unwillingncfs to aggrandize any

Yr.~ Tf Mem. de Comines, i. 358.
VOL. 1.

SECT. II.

,

Io5
p

of

SECT. II.

The singular
course which
he followed.

of his own fubjeds, or from hi desire of opprefing the hotf
of Burgundy, which he hated, he neglefcd the course which
a Prince less able and artful would have taken, and followed
one more suited to his own genius.

HE proposed to render himself maiter, by force of arms, of

those provinces, which Mary held of the crown of France, and
even to push his conquests into her other territories, while he
amused her with infifing continually on the impracticable match:
with the Dauphin.. In prosecuting this plan, he displayed won-
derful talents and industry, and exhibited such scenes of trea-
chery, falsehood and cruelty, as are amazing even in the hiLlory
of Louis XI. Immediately upon the death of Charles, he
put his troops in motion, and advanced towards the Netherlands.
He corrupted the leading men in the provinces of Burgundy
and Artois, and seduced them to desert their sovereign. He
got admiflion into some of the frontier towns by bribing the go-
vernors; the gates of others were opened to him in consequence
of his intrigues with the inhabitants. He negociated with.
Mary; and, in order to render her odious to her fubjets,. he
betrayed to them her most important secrets. He carried on a
private correspondence with the two ministers whom ihe chiefly
trusted, and then communicated the letters which he had re-
ceived from them to the fates of Slanders, who, enraged at
their perfidy, brought them immediately to trial, tortured them
with mofi extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the tears and in-
treaties of their fovcreign, who knew and approved of all that
the miniltcrs lIad done, they beheaded them in her pretence'.

a Mcm. dc Comines. liv. v. ch. 5. p. 309, &c.

WIILE
lo6

S

WHILE Louis, by this condu&, unworthy of a great monarch, SECT. I.

was securing the possession of Burgundy, Artois, and the towns Theefffe& of
on the Somme, the fiates of Slanders carried on a negociation this, the mar-
with the Emperor Frederick III. and concluded a treaty of mar- milian with the

heiress of Bur-

riage between their sovereign and his son Maximilian, Archduke gundy.
of Austria. The illustrious birth of that Prince, as well as the A D. 1477.
high dignity of which he had the profpe&, rendered the alliance
honourable for Mary, while, from the distance of his hereditary
territories, and the scantiness of his revenues, his power was so
inconsiderable as did not excite the jealousy or fear of the Fle-
mings.

THUS Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and the excess of The influence

of that on

his refinements, put the house of Austria in poffefiion of this the state of
noble inheritance. By this acquisition, the foundation of the Europe.
future grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became
master of those territories, which enabled him to carry on his
most formidable and decisive operations against France. Thus,
too, the fame monarch who first united the interior force of
France, and established it on such a footing as to render it for-
midable to the reft of Europe, contributed, far contrary to his
intention, to raise up a rival power, which, during two centuries,
has thwarted the measures, opposed the arms, and checked the
progrcfs of his filcccffror.

THE next event of consequence in the fifteenth century, was The next

onfiderable
the expedition of Charles VIII. into Italy. This occasioned event was

the invasion

revolutions no less memorable; produced alterations, which were of Italy by
more immediately perceived, both in the military and political Cha.les Vll
system; rouzed the flates of Europe to bolder efforts; and
blcndcd their affairs and intcrefts more closely together. The

P 2 mild
9'

Ioy

SECT. II.

The motives
of thit.

mild adminifration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince,
seems to have revived the spirit and genius of the French nation,
which the rigid despotism of his father had depressed, and almost
extinguished. The ardour for military service, natural to the
French nobility, returned, and their young monarch was impa-
tient to~diftinguifh his reign by some splendid enterprize. While
he was uncertain towards what quarter he should turn his arms,
the follicitations and intrigues of an Italian politician, no less
infamous on account of his crimes, than eminent for his abilities,
determined his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the
design of deposing his nephew the duke of Milan, and of placing
himself on the ducal throne, was so much afraid of a combina-
tion of the Italian powers to thwart this measure, and to support
the injured Prince, with whom most of them were conneced by
blood or alliance, that he saw the necessity of securing the aid
of some able protector. The King of France was the person to
whom he applied; and without difelofing to him his own in-
tentions, he laboured to prevail with him to march into Italy,
at the head of a powerful army, in order to seize the crown of
Naples, to which he had pretensions as heir of the house of
Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed by the Angevin
family, had been conveyed to Louis XI. by Charles of Anjou,
count of Maine and Provence. But that sagacious monarch,
though he took immediate poflcfIioni of those territories of which
Charles was really malter, totally disregarded his ideal title to a,
kingdom, over which another Prince reigned in tranquillity;
and uniformly declined involving himfclf in the labyrinth of
Italian politicks. His son, more adventurous, or more incon-
fidcrate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize; and contcmning

all
1o8

all the remonstrances of his most experienced counsellors, pre-
pared to carry it en with the utmost vigour.

CHARLES wanted not power equal to such a great undertak-

ing. His father had transmitted to him such an ample prero-
gative, as gave him the entire command of his kingdom. He
himself had added considerably to the extent of his dominions,
by his prudent marriage with the heiress of Bretagne, which-
rendered him mafier of that province, the last of the great fiefs
that remained to be annexed to the crown. He soon aflembled
forces which he thought sufficient; and so impatient was he to
enter on his career as a conqueror, that sacrificing what was
real, for what was chimerical, he restored Roufillon to Ferdi-
nand, and gave up part of his father's acquisitions in Artois to
Maximilian, with a view of inducing these Princes not to molest
France, while he was carrying on his operations in Italy.

SECT. It

His relburces
fbr this enter-
prize.

BUT so different were the efforts of the States of Europe in, His prepara-

the fifteenth century, from those which we shall behold in the tonsforit
course of this hiltory, that the army, with which Charles under-
took this great enterprize, did not exceed twenty thousand men.
The train of artillery, however, the ammunition, and warlike
flores of every kind provided for its use, were so great as to bear
some refcmblancc to the immense apparatus of modern war .

WI1E.N the French entered Italy, they met with nothing able Its ruccei

to rcfift them. The Italian powers having remained, during a
long period, undisturbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy,.

s Mczcray Hill. tom. ii. 777.

lhai

to09

SECT. IL

Its cftfcs,
particularly in
giving rife to
the fylten
concerning a
1)bldncc of
power.

had formed a system with refpet to their affairs, both in peace
and war, peculiar to themselves. In order to adjust the interests,
and balance the power of the different flates into which Italy
was divided, they were engaged in perpetual and endless nego-
ciations with each other, which they conduced with all the
subtlety of a refining and deceitful policy. Their contests in the
field, when they had recourse to arms,were decided in mock battles,
by innocent and bloodless vitories. Upon the first appearance
of the danger which now impended, they had recourse to the arts
which they had fludied, and employed their utmost ikill in
intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving ineffectual, their
effeminate mercenaries, the only military force that remained in
the country, being fit only for the parade of service, were terrified
at the aspea of real war, and shrunk at its approach. The im-
petuofity of the French valour appeared to them irresistible.
Florence, Pisa, and Rome opened their gates as the French
army advanced. The profpeet of this dreadful invasion firuck
one King of Naples with such panic terror, that he died (if we
may believe historians) of the fright. Another abdicated his
throne from the fame pufillaiiiimous fpilit. A thilid fled out of
his dominions, as soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapo-
litan frontiers. Charles, after marching thither from the bot-
tom of the Alps, with as much rapidity, and almost as little op-
position, as if he had been on a progress through his own domi-
nions, took quiet poSffefion of the throne of Naples, and intimi-
dated or gave law to every power in Italy.

SucIi was the conclusion of this expedition, which mufl be

confidered as the first great exertion of thofi new powers which
the Princes of Europe had acquired, and now began to cxercifc.

Its
lie

fts effeds were no less considerable than its success had been SECT. IL
astonishing. The Italians, unable to resist the impression of the
enemy which broke in upon them, permitted him to hold on his
eourfe undifurbed. They quickly perceived that no single
power, which they could rouze to ation, was an equal match
for a monarch, who ruled over such extensive territories, and
was at the head of such a martial people; but that a confede-
racy might accomplish what the separate members of it durfl
not attempt. To this expedient, the only one that remained to
deliver or to preserve them from the yoke, they had recourse._
While Charles inconsiderately wafted his time at Naples, in
festivals and triumphs on account of his past successes, or was
fondly dreaming of future conquetls in the East, to the empire
of which he now aspired, they formed against him a powerful
combination of almost all the Italian fiates, supported by the
Emperor Maximilian, and Ferdinand King of Aragon. The
union of so many powers, who suspended or forgot all their par-
ticular animofities, that they might aa with concert against an
enemy who had become formidable to them all, awakened
Charles from his thoughtless security. He saw now no prof-
pet of safety but in returning to France. An army of thirty
thousand men, assembled by the allies, was ready to obstruct his
march; and though the French, with a daring courage, which
more than counterbalanced their inferiority in number, broke
through that great body, and gained avictory, which opened to
their monarch a safe passage into his own territories, he was
firipped of all his conquests in Italy in as ihort a time as it had
cost him toacquire them; and the political system in that:country
resumed the fame appearance as before his invasion.

THi

SECT. II.

This beconles
the great ob.
jcd of pol cy,
firfi in Italy,
and then in
Europe.

The wars in
Italy render
flanding ar-
mies general.

THE sudden and decisive effect of this confederacy seems to

have inftruded the Princes and statesmen of Italy as much, as
the irruption of the French had disconcerted and alarmed them.
,They had now extended to the affairs of Europe, the maxims of
-that political science which had hitherto been applied only to
regulate the operations of the petty states in their own country.
They had discovered the method of preventing any monarch
from rising to such a degree of power, as was inconsistent with
the general liberty; and had manifested the importance of at-
tending to that great secret in modern policy, the preservation
of a proper distribution of power among all the members of the
fyltem into which the flates of Europe are formed. During all
the wars of which Italy now became the theatre, and amidst the
hostile operations which the imprudence of Louis XII. and
the ambition of Ferdinand of Aragon, carried on in that coun-
try, with little interruption, from the close of the fifteenth cen-
tury, to that period at which the subsequent history commences,
the maintaining a proper balance of power between the contend-
ing parties became the great object of attention to the statesmen
of Italy. Nor was the idea confined to them. Self-prefervation
taught other powers to adopt it. It grew to be fashionable
and universal. From this era we can trace the progress of
that intcrcourfe between nations, which has linked the powers
of Europe so closely together; and can discern the operations of
that provident policy, which, during peace, guards against re-
mote and contingent dangers; which, in war, hath prevented
rapid and deftrudivc con(luclls.

Tniis was not the only cffcc of the operations which the great

powers of Europe carried on in Italy. They contributed to
render such a clangc, as the French had begun to make in the

6 tfate
t1'2

state of their troops, general; and obliged all the Princes, who
appeared on this new theatre of adion, to eflablifh the military
force of their kingdoms on the fame footing with that of France.
When the feat of war came to be remote from the countries
which maintained the conteit, the service of the feudal vassals
ceased to be of any use; and the neceflity of employing troops
regularly trained to arms, and kept in conltant pay, came at
once to be evident. When Charles marched into Italy, his
cavalry was entirely composed of those companies of Gen-
darmes, embodied by Charles VII. and continued by Louis XI.
his infantry consisted partly of Swiss, hired of the cantons, and
partly of Gascons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss model.
To these Louis XII. added a body of Germans, well known
in the wars of Italy by the name of the Black Bands. But nei-
ther of these monarchs made any account of the feudal militia,
or ever had recourse to that military force which they might
have commanded, in virtue of the ancient inflitutions in their
kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as soon as they began to
ad in Italy, employed the fame instruments, and trusted the exe-
cution of their plans entirely to mercenary troops.

TitIS innovation in the military fyflem was quickly followed

by another, which the custom of employing Swiss in the Italian
wars, was the occasion of introducing. The arms and discipline
of the Swiss were different from those of other European na-
tions. During their long and violent struggles in defence of
their liberties against the house of Aufria, whose armies, like
those of other considerable Princes, confifled chiefly of heavy
armed cavalry, the Swiss found that their poverty, and the
finall number of gentlemen rcfiding in their country, at that
time barren and uncultivated, put it out of their power to bring

VOL. I. Q into

SECT. II.
'--v--i

Teach the
Europeans
the superior
importance of
infantry in
war.

Mp 3

SECT. II.

Nitional ii.
fintry cli--
blifhed ill
(;i .-nan.).

into the field any body of horse capable of facing the enemy.
Necessity compelled them to place all their confidence in infan-
try; and in order to render it capable of withstanding the shock
of cavalry, they gave the soldiers breast-plates and helmets as defen-
five armour; together with long spears, halberts, and heavy swords
as weapons of offence. They formed them into large battalions%
ranged in deep and close array, so as to present on every fide a
formidable front to the enemy h. The men at arms could make
no impression on the solid strength of such body. It repulsed
the Aufirians in all their attempts to conquer Swifterland. It
broke the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarce inferior to
that of France, either in number or reputation: And when first
called to aa in Italy, it bore down by its irresistible force every
enemy that attempted to oppose it. These repeated proofs of
the decisive effeC of infantry, exhibited on such conspicuous
occasions, restored that service to reputation, and gradually re-
established the opinion, which had been long exploded, of its
superior importance in the operations ofwar. But the glory which
the Swiss had acquired, having inspired them with such high
ideas of their own prowess and consequence, as rendered them
mutinous and insolent, the Princes who employed them became
weary of depcnding on the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and
began to turn their attention towards the improvement of their
national infantry.

TIF. German powers having the command of men, whom

naturc has endowed with that fleady courage, and persevering
tIrength, which forms them to be folliers, soon modelled their
troops in such a manner, that they vied with the Swiss both in
lifcipline and valour.

Macliavel Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 451.

THE
1I4

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, and with greater SECT. II.

difficulty, accustomed the impetuous spirit of their people to sub- In Frce.
ordination and discipline; and were at such pains to render their
national infantry refpetable, that as early as the reign of Louis
XII. several gentlemen of high rank had so far abandoned their
ancient ideas, as to condescend to enter into that service'.

THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult to employ any In Spanl.

other than their national troops, in the southern parts ofItaly,which
was the chief scene of their operations in that country, not only
adopted the Swiss discipline, but improved upon it, by mingling
a proper number of soldiers armed with heavy muskets in their
battalions; and thus formed that famous body of infantry, which,
during a century and a half, was the admiration and terror of
all Europe. The Italian states gradlally diminiffed the num-
ber of their cavalry, and, itt imitation of their mlore powerful
neighbours, brought the strength of their armies to consist in
foot soldiers. From this period the nations of Europe have
carried on war with forces more adapted to every fpecics of fcr-
vice, more capable of acing in every country, and better fitted
both for making conquests, and for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe to thcle ina- The Ialan

wars occafior

provemcnts in the art of war, they gave them likewise the first an increase of
idea of the expence which accompanies great and continued the publick
operations, and accuflom(ed them u th te burden of thole inllpofl- Europe.
tions, which are ncceflary fr filpporting thcmn. While the
feudal policy fiubfified in full vigourr, while armies were com-
poscd of military vaflals called forth to attack some ncighbour-

'Brantome, tom, x. p. 18. Mcm. dc Flecrangcs, 143.

(2._2 i;ing

1I5

SECT. II. ing power, and to perform, in a short campaign, the services

-v- - which they owed to their sovereign, the expence of war was

extremely moderate. A small subsidy enabled a Prince to begin
and to finish his greatefr operations. But when Italy became
the theatre on which the powers of Europe contended for fupe-
riority, the preparations requisite for such a diflant expedition,
the pay of armies kept conflantly on foot, their fubfiftance in a
foreign country, the sieges to be undertaken, and the towns to
be defended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and by
creatin, demands unknown in less acive times, multiplied taxes
in every kingdom. The progress of ambition, however, was so
rapid, and Princes extended their operations so fast, that it
was impossible at first to establish funds proportional to the in-
treafe of expence which there occasioned. When Charles VIII.
invaded Naples, the fums requisite for carrying on that enter-
prize so far exceeded those which France had been accustomed to
contribute, that before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his
trcafury was exhausted, and the domeflick resources, of which
his cxtenfive prerogative gave him the comlnand, were at an
end. As he durst not venture to lay any new imposition on his
people, oppressed already with the weight of unusual burdens;
thec only expedient that remained was, to borrow of the Genoese
as much money as would enable him to continue his march.
But he could not obtain the fum that was requisite, without con-
senting to pay annually the exorbitant intcrcft of forty-two
livrcs for every hundred that he receivedk. We may observe
the ltane lifproportion between tlh efforts and revenues of other
Princes, his contemporaries. From this period, taxes went
on incrcafing; and during the reign of Charles V. such

k Mcm. de Comincs, lib. vii. c. 5. p. 440.

fums
116

fums were levied in every state, as would have appeared prodi-
gious at the close of the fifteenth century, and gradually pre-
pared the way for the more exorbitant exaCtions of modern times.

THE last tranfation, previous to the reign of Charles V. that

merits attention on account of its influence upon the slate of
Europe, is the league of Cambray. To humble the republick of
Venice, and to divide its territories, was the objec of all the
powers who united in this confederacy. The civil constitution
of Venice, eflablifhed on a firm basis, had suffered no confidera-
ble alteration for several centuries; during which, the state con-
duted its affairs by maxims of policy no less prudent than vigo-
rous, and adhered to these, with an uniform consistent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advantage over other
states, whose views and measure$ changed as often as the form
of their government, or the persons who administered it. By
these unintermitted exertions of wisdom and valour, the Vene-
tians enlarged the dominions of their commonwealth, until it
became the most considerable power in Italy. While their ex-
tensive commerce, the useful and curious manufactures which
they carried on, together with their monopoly of the precious
commodities of the East, rendered Venice the most opulent
fiate in Europe.

THEIR power was the object of terror to their Italian neigh-

hours. Their wealth was viewed with envy by the greatest
monarchs, who could not vie with their private citizens in the
magnificence of their buildings, in the riclhnefs of their
dress and furniture, or in fplcndor and elegance of living'.

SECT. II.

The lea'lae of
Cambrayano-
ther Impor-
tant occur-

rence.

The motivel
of it.
1 Heliani oratio apud Goldaftum in polit. Imperial. p. 980.

JuLIius II.

117

SECT. II.

The rapid
yrogrefs of
the confede-
lates.

Julius II. whose ambition was superior, and his abilities equal, to
those of any Pontiff who ever fat on the Papal throne, formed
the idea of this league against the Venetians, and endeavoured, by
applying to these passions which I have mentioned, to persuade
other Princes to join in it. By working upon the fears of the
Italian powers, and upon the avarice of the monarchs beyond
the Alps, he induced them, in concurrence with other causes,
which it is not my province to explain, to form against these
haughty republicans one of the mofi extensive confederacies
Europe had ever beheld.

THE Emperor, the King of France, the King of Aragon, the

Pope, were principals in the league of Cambray, to which almost
all thePrinces of Italy acceded, the least considerable of them hoping
for some share in the spoils of a slate, which they already deemed
to be devoted to detfruction. The Venetians might have di-
verted this storm, or have broken its force; but with a prefump-
tuous rashness, to which there is nothing similar in the course of
their history, they waited its approach. The impetuous valour
of the French rendered ineffectual all their precautions for the
safety of the republick; and the fatal battle of Ghiarradadda en-
tirely ruined the army, on which they relied for defence. Julius
seized all the towns which they held in the ecclesiastical territories.
Ferdinand re-annexed the towns of which they had got pof-
session on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions.
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army, advanced towards
Venice on the one fide. The French puihed their conquefRs on
the other. The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies,
and left without one ally, funk from the height of presumption
to the depths of dcfpair; abandoned all their territories on the

continent;
I18

continent; and shut themselves up in their capital, as their last
refuge, and the only place which they hoped to preserve.

THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the confederacy.

The members of it, united while engaged in seizing their prey,
began to feel their ancient jeatoufy and animofities revive, as
soon as they had a profped of dividing it. When the Venetians
observed these symptoms of alienation and distrust, a ray of hope
broke in upon them; the spirit natural to their councils returned;
they resumed such wisdom and firmness, as made some atone-
ment for their former imprudence and dejection; they reco-
vered part of the territory which they had loft; they appeased
the Pope and Ferdinand by well-timed concessions in their
favour; and at length dissolved the confederacy, which had
brought their commonwealth to the brink of ruin.

SECT. II.

DIvifon
anfies among.
them.
JULIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a league which New objels

f their policy

he himself had planned, and imagining that nothing was too ar- and ambition..
duous for him to undertake, conceived the idea of expelling
every foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force of his
mind towards executing a scheme so well suited to his vast and
enterprizing genius. He directed his first attack against the
French, who, on many accounts, were more odious to the Ita-
lians, than any of the foreigners who had acquired dominion in
their country. By his acivity and address, he prevailed on most
of the powers, who had joined in the league of Cambray, to
turn their arms against the King of France, their former
ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had lately ascended the
throne of England, to favour their operations by invading
France. Louis XII. resifted all the cffort8 of this formi-

7 dable

II9

SECT. II,

By thisthe
il.tercourfe
among the
European na-
tions in-
creases.

They arc pre-
pared for the
transactions
of the fix-
leenth cen-
tury.

dable and unexpeted confederacy, with undaunted fortitude.
Holfilities were carried on, during several campaigns, in Italy,
onthe frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy, with alternate success.
Exhausted, at length, by the variety as well as extent of his ope-
rations; unable to withstand a confederacy which brought against
him superior force, conducted with wisdom, and acting with
perseverance; he found it necessary to conclude separate treaties of
peace with his enemies; and the war terminated with the loss
of every thing which the French had acquired in Italy, except the
castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable towns in that dutchy.

TH E various negociations carried on during this busy period,

and the different combinations formed among powers hitherto
little conneced with each other, greatly increased that inter-
course between the nations of Europe, which I have mentioned
as one effect of the events in the fifteenth century. While the
greatness of the objcds at which they aimed, the distant expedi-
tions which they undertook, as well as the length and obstinacy of
the contests in which they engaged, obliged them to exert them-
selves with a vigour and perseverance unknown in the preceding
ages.

THOSE active scenes which the following History will exhi-

bit, and the variety and importance of those tranfadions which
diftinguilh the period to which it extends, are not to be ascribed
solely to the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rivalfhip
of Charles V. and of Francis I. The kingdoms of Europe
had arrived at ficlh a degree of improvement in the internal
adminifiration of government, and Princes had acquired such
command of the national force which was to be exerted in foreign
wars, that they were in a condition to enlarge the sphere of

·k tilt i~their
120

cO iiid it~i d

6

caim and Crdtteeldon, e .Ied. fra i 4- ·t -t
riiJAhip 1etwen mtioo, md laid t u
quarrmb, as could not fA of p u
si~nr ·un u c;rpe; tthes swth(
ainta&profpC ofi t abouditeg ingrcyat

,
i

' A ,,

<r1
ROLi YVa, dW

s .
VOL, L k

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
I

E

W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E U R O P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,,

TO THt
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY..

SECTION II.
riew of the political ConJitstion of the principal States in Europe,

at the Commecenment of thefixteenth Century.

SECT. 11I.

A conlidcra-
blc valutty in
the conflitu-
tion of ti
dlil't;'icni na-
ti )ns of Eu-
rope.

H AV IN G thus enumerated the principal causes and events,

the influence of which extended to all the states in Europe,.

and contributed either to improve their internal government and
police, or to enlarge the fpherc of their ativity, and toaugment their
national force; nothing remains, in order to prepare my readers
t ,.tteriig 'with full infoxiwatio .upon perusing the kiItoir of

the
"' 'V

It

'the Reign of Charles V. but to give some view of the particu-
lar conltitution and form of civil government, in each of the
nations which aaed any considerable part during that period.
While these institutions and occurrences, which I have men-.
tioned, formed the people of Europe to resemble each other,
and conducted them from barbarism to refinement, in the sant
path, and with almost equal steps, there were other circum.
itances which occasioned a difference in their political establish-
ments, and gave rife to those peculiar modes of government,
which have produced such variety in the character and genius
of nations.

IT is no leCs neceftary to become acquainted with the latter,

than to have contemplated the former. The view which I have ex-
hibited of the causes and events, whose influence was universal,
will enable my readers to account for the furprizing resemblance
among the nations of Europe in their interior police, and so-
reign operations. But, without a diftinA knowledge of the
peculiar form and genius of their civil government, a great part
of their tranfadions mull appear altogether mysterious and in-
explicable. The historians of particular States, as they fel-
dom extended their views farther than to the amusement or in~
ftruCtion of their fellow-citizens, by whom they might presume
that all domeftick customs and inltitutions were perfetly
undcrflood, have often neglected to descend into such details
with refped to these, as are sufficient to convey to foreigners full
light and information concerning the occurrences which they
relate. But a history, which comprehends the tranfadions of
so many different countries, would be extremely imperfect, with-
out a previous survey of their constitution and political tfate. It
is from his knowledge of these, that the reader must draw those

R 2 principles,

SECT. .

Necefiary to
explain the
state of each,
when
Charles V.
began his
reign,

CECT.IL

principles, which will enable him to judge with difternmenr,
and to decide with certainty concerning the conduA of nations,

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar forms and regu-

htions in every country, would lead to deducions of immeafu-
rable length. To sketch out the great lines which distinguish
and chara&terize each government, is all that the nature of my
present work will admit of, and all that is necessary to illustrate
the events which it records.

The State of
Iay.

The Papal.
dignity the
higIwlt in
hu ope.

AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the political face of

Italy was extremely different from that of any other part .of
Europe.. Instead of those extensive monarchies,.which occupied
the reft of the continent,. that delightful country was parcelled
out among many small Rates, each of which possessed fove-
reign and independant jurifdidion. The only monarchy in
Italy was that of Naples. The dominion of the Popes was of a
peculiar species, to which there is nothing similar either in an-
cient or modern times. In Venice and Florence, a republican-
form of government was established. Milan was subjed to so-
vcreigns, who had assumed no higher title than that of Dukes.

THE Pope was the first of therf powers in dignity, and not

the least corfiderable by the extent of his territories. In the
primitive church, the jurisdiction of biflops was equal and co-
ordinate. They derived, perhaps, some degree of consideration.
from the dignity of the See in which they presided. They
pjflcffed, howevcr, no real authority or pre-eminence, but what
they acquircd by superior abilities, or superior fandity. As
Rome had. o long been the feat of Empire, and capital of the

world,
X

world, its bishops were on that account entitled to refped; they SECT. III.
received it; but during several ages they claimed and received Origin ",n
nothing more. From there humble beginnings, they advanced progrca of

the Papal

with such an adventurous and well-dire&ed ambition, that they power.
eRfablifhed a spiritual dominion over the minds and sentiments
of men, to which all Europe fubmjtted with implicit obedience.
Theirclaimnofuniverfaljurifdidion,. as heads of the church, and
their pretensions to infallibility in their decisions, as successors
of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant to the ge-
nius of the Christian religion.; But on these foundations, the fu-
perftition and credulity of mankind enabled them to erectan
amazing fuperftruture. In all ecclesiastical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor
was the plenitude of their power confined to these alone; they
dethroned monarchs; disposed of crowns; absolved subje&s from
the obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid kingdoms under
interdics. There was not a state in Europe which had not
been disquieted by their ambition. There was not a throne
which they had not shaken; nor a Prince, who did not tremble
at their power.

NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire absolute, and The tenrito:·

ries of the

to eflablifh it on the ruins of all civil authority, but that the Popes inade-
Popes-{hould have possessed such a degree of temporal ,power, quoateto sup-
as was sufficient to second and enforce their spiritual decrees. ritual juri-
Happily for mankind, while their spiritual jurifdition was most
extensive, and at its greatest height, their temporal property was
extremely limited. They were powerful Pontiffs, formidable
at a diflance; but they were petty Princes, without any confide-
rable domcflick force. They had early endeavoured, indeed,
to acquire territory by arts, similar to those which they had am-

4 ·, ployce

SECT. I.

Their autho-
rity in their
O',,n territo-
ries ex remely
lmited.

It was c;r-
cumfcribed by
the ambition
of the Roman
bron#;

ployed in extending their jurifdition. Under pretence of a
donation from Constantine, and of another from Charlemagne
or his father Pepin, they attempted to take possession of some
towns adjacent to Rome. But there donations were sic-
titious, and availed them little. The benefations, for which
they were indebted to the credulity of the Norman adventurers,
who conquered Naples, and to the fuperflition of the countess
Matilda, were real, and added ample domains to the Holy See.

BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in proportion

to the extent of territory which they had acquired. In the do-
minions annexed to the Holy See, as well as in those subjet to
other Princes in Italy, the sovereign of a state was far from hav-
ing the command of the force which it contained. During the
turbulence and confusion of the middle ages, the powerful no-
bility or leaders of popular factions in Italy, had seized the go-
vernment of different towns; and after strengthening their
fortifications, and taking a body of mercenaries into pay, they
set up for indcpendance. The territory which the church had
gained, was filled with such petty, tyrants, who left the Pope
hardly the shadow of dominion.

As these usurpations almost annihilated the Papal power in

the greater part of the towns subjed to the church, the Roman
barons frequently disputed the authority of the Popes, even in
Rome itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion began to be
propagated, " That as the filndion of ecclesiastics was purely
spiritual, they ought to possess no property, and to claim no tem-
poral jurifdition; but, according to the laudable example of
iheir.predeceffors in the primitive church, should subsist wholly

upon
I26

upon their tithes, or upon the voluntary oblations of the people'." SECT. 1.
This docrine being addressed to meh, who had beheld the (can-
dalous manner in which the avarice and ambition of the clergy
had prompted them to contend for wealth, and to exercise power,
they listened to it with fond attention. The Roman barons,
who had felt most sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppression,
adopted :these sentiments with such ardour, that they set them-
selves instantly to shake off the yoke. They endeavoured to
restore some image of their ancient liberty, by reviving the in- A. D.- 43
ftitution of the Roman senate, in which they vested supreme
authority; committing the executive power sometimes to one
chief senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to a magistrate
dignified with the name of The Patrician. The Popes exerted
themselves with vigour, in order to check this fatal encroach-
ment on their jurifdition. One of them, finding all his endea-
vours ineffecual, was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut
short his days. Another, having ventured to attack the sena-
tors at the head of some armed men, was mortally wounded irl
the frayb. During a considerable period, the power of the
Popes, before which the greatest monarchs in Europe trembled,
was circumscribed within such narrow limits in their own capi-
tal, that they durst scarce exert any aa of authority without the
permission and concurrence of the senate.

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal autlhority, not and by the

turbulence of

only by the usurpations of the Roman nobility,but by tlie mutinous t, e Ro,,lan
spirit of the people. During fventy years of the fourteenth pi'ol, ,O
century, the Popes fixce their rcfidence in Avignon. The inha- to A.tU. 377.

a Otto Frifingenfis de Geflis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap 20.
b Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27, 31. Id. dc Gels. Frid. lib. i c. 27.
Mu.atori Annali d' Italia, vol. ix. 398, 404.

't bitants

127

SECT. III. bitants of Rome, accustomed to confider themselves as the de-
'- --/ fcendants of the people who had conquered the world, and'had

given laws to it, were too high-fpirited to submit with patience
to the delegated authority of those persons, to whom the Popes
committed the government of the city. On many occasions,.
they opposed the execution of the Papal mandates, and on the
slightest appearance of innovation or oppression, they *wre ready
to take arms in defence of their own immunities. Towards the
middle of the fourteenth century, being instigated by Nicolas
Rienzo, a man of low birth and a seditious spirit, but of popular
eloquence, and an enterprizing ambition, they drove all the no-
bility out of the city, established a democratical form of govern-
ment, elected Rienzo Tribune of the people, and invested him
with extensive authority. But though the frantick proceedings
of the tribune loon overturned this new system; though the go-
vernment of Rome was reinstated in its ancient form; yet every
fresh attack contributed to weaken the papal jurisdiction; and
the turbulence of the people concurred with the spirit of inde¢
pendance among the nobility, to circumscribe it within very
narrow bounds'. Gregory VII. and other domineering Pontiffs,
accomplished those great things which rendered them so formi-
dable to the Emperors with whom they contended, not by the
force of their arms, or by the extent of their power, but by the
dread of their spiritual censures, and by the effeCt of their in-
trigues, which excited rivals, and called forth enemies againit
every Prince, whom they wished to depress or to deltroy,

Hiftorie Fiorentine do Giov Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. 104. ap, Murat. Script.

Rerum. Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Rienzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital vol iii.
p. 399g,&c, His. de Nic. Ricnzy, par M. de Boifprcaux, p. 91, &c,

MANiY
xi28

MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not only to humble SECT. lit.

these usurpers, who lorded it over the cities in the ecclesiastical AeaVI
state, but to break the turbulent spirit of the Roman'people. These and Julils 11.

render the

were long unsuccessful. At last Alexander VI. with a policy no 'opes confi-
less artful than flagitious, subdued and extirpated molt of them, cc.
and rendered the Popes maiters of their own dominions. The
enterprizing ambition of Julius II. added conquests of no incon-
fiderable value to the patrimonyof St. Peter. Thus the Popes, by
degrees, became powerful temporal Princes. Their territories, in
the age of Charles V. were of greater extent than at present; their
country was better cultivated, and more populous; and as they
drew large contributions from every part of Europe, their reve-
nues far exceeded those of the neighbouring powers, and ren-
dered them capable of more hidden and vigorous efforts.

TIHE genius of the Papal government, however, was better Def'cs in t'e

nature of

adapted to the exercise of spiritual dominion, than of temporal erc'efjaTca
power. With refpCE to the former, all its maxims were fleady doin
and invariable. Every new Pontiff adopted the plan of his prc-
lcceflbr. By education and habit Ecclcfiaflics were so formed,
that the character of the individual was funk in that oftlie pro-
ftIion; and the passions of the manl were sacrificcd to the intc-
reft and honour of the order. The hands whichl held the reins
of adminifiration might change; but the spirit which condlucted
them was always the fame. While the nicafilrcs of other go-
vcrinments fluLdItated, andl(l the ol)bjc ts at which they aimed varied,
the churcll kept one end ill view; and to this unrclaxiing con-
fiancy of purlitt, it was indebtced for its fuicccts in the bolcdeF
attelmpts ever made by Ihuman ambition.

Vo L. I.

B1UT

SECT. III. BUT in their civil administration, the Popes followed no such

uniform or conrfifent plan. There, as in other governments,
the charaler, the passions, and the interefit of the person who
had the supreme direction of affairs, occasioned a variation both
in objects and measures. As few Prelates reached the fumnmit of
ecclefiafiical dignity, until they were far advanced in life, a
change of masters was more frequent in the Papal dominions
than in other states, and the political system was, of course, less
stable and permanent. Every Pope was eager to make the mot:
of the short period, during which he had the profped of enjoy-
ing power, in order to aggrandize his family, and to attain his
private ends; and it was often the first business of his fucicebr
to undo all that he had done, and to overturn what he had eflt-
blifihed.

As ecclefiafticks were trained to pacifick arts, and early ini-

tiated in the mysteries of that policy, by which the court of
Rome extended or supported its spiritual dominion, the Popes
were apt to eonduc their temporal affairs with the fame spirit;
and in all their measures were more ready to employ the refine-
ments of intrigue, than the force of arms. It was in the Papal,
court that address and subtlety in negociation first became a fci-
ence; and during the fixtecnth century, Rome was confidered as
the school in which it could be heft acquired,

As the decorum of their ecclefiaflical charaAer prevented the

Popes from placing themselves at the head of their armies, or
taking the command, in person, of the military force in their
dominions, they were afraid to arm their fubjets; and in all
their operations, whether offensive or defensive, they trusted
entirely to mercenary troops.

·u·'~* ~As
I3o

As their power and dominions could not descend to their SEcT.IIL

posterity, the Popes were less follicitous than other Princes to
form or to encourage schemes of publick utility and improve-
ment. Their tenure vas only for a short life; present advantage
was all that they attended to; to squeeze and to amass, not to
meliorate, was their obljec. They erected, perhaps, some work
of otentation, to remain as a monument of their Pontificate;
they found it neceiTary, at some times, to establish useful inftitu-
tions, in order to tooth and silence the turbulent populace of
Rome but plans of general benefit to their fubjeds, and framed
with a view to faturity, were rarely objeds of attention in the
Papal policy. The patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed
than any part of Europe; and though a generous' Pontiff might
suspend for a little, or counter-ad the effets of those vices which
are peculiar to the administration of ecclefiafticks; the disease
not only refnained incurable, but has even gone on increasing
from age to age; and the decline of the state has kept pace with
its progress.

ONE circunftance, farther, concerning the Papal government,

is so singular, as to merit attention. As the spiritual supremacy
and temporal power were united in one person, and uniformly
aided each other in their operations, they became so blended
together, that it was difficult to separate them, even in imagina-
tion. The potentates who found it ncceffary to oppofc the mea-
fures which the Popes purflied as temporal Princes, could not di-
vcRf themselves of the reverence which they imagined to be due to
them as heads of the church, and vicars of' Jess Chrifl. It was
with relufance that they could be brought to a rupture with
them; they were averfc to pufl their operations againll them
to extrcnlity; they liftcncd eagerly to the first overtures of ac-

S 2 commodation,

The Popes
derive some
advantages
from the
union of their
spiritual and
temporal au-
tho. ity.

I31

SECT .II.

(Ccr fttution
of he repub-
lick of Ve-
licc, with its
i'i', ard pro-
Lrefi.

commodation, and were willing to procure it almost upon any
terms. Their consciousness of this encouraged the enterprizing
Pontiffs, who filled the Papal throne about the beginning of the
sixteenth century, to engage in schemes seemingly the most ex-
travagant. They trusted, that if their temporal power was not
sufficient to carry them through with success, the refped paid to
their spiritual dignity would enable them to extricate themselves
with facility and with honour d. But when Popes came to take
part more frequently in the contests among Princes, and to en-
gage as principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in Europe,
this veneration for their sacred charater began to abate; and
firiking instances will occur in the following history, of its being
almost totally extinct.

OF all the Italian powers, the republick of Venice, next to
the Pope, was most connected with the reit of Europe. The rife

' The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook and carried on war

2gainft Julius II. remarkably illuflratcs this observation. Louis solemnly cor--
fultcd the clergy of France, whether it was lawful to take arms against a Pope,
who had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and whom neither the faith of treaties,
nor gratitude for favours received, nor the decorum of his character, could refirain
fiom the ir-oft violent ations, to which the lut of power prompts ambitious
Princes. Though his clergy authorized the war, yet Anne of Breragnc, his
(i'-cn, (ntcrt.:incd fLruplcs with regard to the lawfulness of it. The King him-
lit, f;om fiome fllperftition of the ifme kind, car;nicd it on faintly; and, upon
tvcry frcilt ad alntagc, renewed his prorpofitions of peace. MIczerav, Iilt. dc Fiance,
lul. edit. 1685. toni. i. 852. I fliall proeluce another proof of this revcrence for
the Papal charaCter fli'll more firiking. Guicci arini, the most fgacious. perhaps,
of all n:odcrn lIilt(,rians, and the boldelR in painting the vices and ambition of the
Plops,r, rcfIrlnts (ile death of ligliau, a Spanish officer, lho was killed durilni
the licge ot Ntplic,, ;s a Iunifililmcit i nflilted on hiii by heaven, on account of
Ilis having i lpfc d rh!l t ti i of C irnlclnt VII. at libcr. . IGlifloria d'lta-
li;, (.ioncr. 16 j5. vol. ii. l . 18. p.4('7.
132

of that commonwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in the
fifth century; the singular situation of its capital in the small
isles of the Adriatick gulf; and the more singular form of its
civil constitution, are generally known. If we view the Venetian
government as calculated for the order of nobles alone, its infti-
tutions are so excellent; the deliberative, legislative and exe-
cutive powers are so admirably distributed and adjusted, that it
mufi be regarded as a perfect model of political wisdom. But
if we confider it as formed for a numerous body of people sub-
jet to its jurifdition, it will appear a rigid and partial ariflo-
cracy, which lodges all power in the hands of a few members of
the community, while it degrades and oppresses the reft.

THE spirit of government, in a commonwealth of this species,

was, of course, timid and jealous. The Venetian nobles dif-
trusted their own fubjeds, and were afraid of allowing
them the use of arms. They encouraged among them the
arts of indutfry and commerce; they employed them in manu-
factures and in navigation; but never admitted them into the
troops which the slate kept in its pay. The military force of
the republick confited' entirely of foreign mercenaries. The
command of there was never trutfled to noble Venetians, left
they flould acquire such influence over the army, as might en-
danger the publick liberty; or become accuflomcd to thccxcr-
cife of fuclh power, as would make them unwilling to return to
tile condition of private citizens. A soldier of fortune was
placed at tile head of the armies of the commonwealth; and to
obtain that honour, was the great olbjet of the Italian CondottiC'ri,
or leaders of bands, who, in the fifteenth and iixteenth centu-
ries, madt a trade of war, and raitied and hired out soldiers to
diffcrenL (latcs. Butt the famne f;lfpl)cious policy, which induced.

tllcJm.

SECT. Il..

Defeas in its
govern nenr,

with rcfpeCa
to its militaiy
operations..

x33

SECT. Inl.

t -,

them to employ there adventurers, prevented their placing en-
tire confidence in them. Two noblemen, appointed by the fe-
nate, accompanied their army when it took the field, with the
appellation of Proveditori, and like the field-deputies of the
Dutch republick in later times, observed all the motions of the
general, and checked and contronled him in all his operations

A REPUBLICK, with such civil and military institutions, was

not formed to make conquests. White it. fubjecst were dif-
armed, and its nobles excluded from military coeumand, it
carried on its warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage. This
ought to have taught the Venetians to make felf-prefervation,
and the enjoyment of domeflick security, the objets of their
policy. But republicks are apt to be seduced by the spirit of
ambition, as well as Princes. When the Venetians so far forgot
the interior defects in their government, as to aim at extensive
conquests, the fatal blow, which they received in the war ex-
cited by the league of Cambray, convinced them of the impru-
dence and danger of making violent efforts, in opposition to the
genius and tendency of their conflitution.

Exccl'ence of
its ni;val in-
ititutions.

IT is not, however, by its military, but by its naval and com-

mercial poxvcr, that the importance of the Venctian common-
wealth muff be cflimated. In the latter, the real force and
nerves of the flatc consisted. 'The jcaloufy of government did
not extend to this ldepartmcnt. Nothing was apprehended fromn
this quarter, that could prove formidablc to liberty. The senate
cncouragcd the nolles to trade, and to fcrvc on board the fleet.
They lccanm mecrchants and admirals. They cncrcafed the
wealth of their country by their induflry. They added to its

dominions,
134

dominions, by the valour with which they conduqted its naval
armaments.

TH E Venetian commerce was an inexhauflible source of opu-

lence. All the nations in Europe depended upon them; not only
for the commodities of the East, but for various manufatures fa-
bricated by them alone, or finished with a dexterity and elegance
unknown in other countries. From this extensive commerce,
the state derived such immense supplies, as concealed there
vices in its constitution, which I have mentioned; and enabled
it to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an over-match
forthe force which any of its neighbours could bring into the field,
but were sufficient to contend, for some time, with the powerful
monarchs beyond the Alps. During its struggles with the
Princes united against it by the league of Cambray, the repub-
lick levied fums which, even in the present age, would be deemed
considerable; and while the King of France paid the exorbitant in-
terest which I have mentioned for the money advanced to him, and
the Emperor eager to borrow, but deflitute of credit, was known
by the name of Maximilian the Aloney-lefi, the Venetians raised
whatever fums they pleased, at the moderate premium of five
in the hundred' .

THE constitution of Florence was perfectly the reverse of that

of Venice. It partook as much of the democratical turbulence
and licentiousness, as the other of ariftocratical rigour. Flo-
rence, however, was a commercial, not a military democracy.
The nature of its ilftitutions were favourable to commerce, and

'35

SECT. III.

The exterttof
its commtrce.

The confitu-
tion ot 1F:lu-
relnce.

C Hist. de la ligue faite a Canibray par M. 1' AbbE kl Bos. lib. v. Sjndi.
Storia Civil Vcilciialna, lib. viii, c. 16. p. 891, &c.

tlhe

SECT. III. thegcnius ofthepeoplewas turned towards it. Thevaftwealthwhich

---.. the family of Medici had acquired by trade; added to the magni-

ficence, the generosity, and the virtue of the first Cosmo, gave him
such an ascendant over the affections as well as the councils of his
countrymen, that though the forms of popular government were
preserved, though the various departments ofadminiftration were
filled by magifirates diflinguilhed by the ancient names, and
eleaed in the usual manner, he was in reality the head of the com-
monwealth, and in the ftationof a private citizen he possessed fur-
preme authority. Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of
this power to his descendants; and during the greater part of
the fifteenth century, the political state of Florence was ex-
tremely singular. The appearance of republican government
fubfiflcd, the people were passionately attached to it, and on some
occasions contended warmly for their privileges, and yet they
permitted a single family to assume a direCtion of their affairs,
almost as abiolute as if it had been formally invested with fove-
rcign power. The jealousy of the Medici concurred with the
commercial ipirit of the Florentines, in putting the military force
of the republick upon the fame footing with that of the other
Italian flates. The troops, which the Florentines employed in
their wars, confirfed alioft entirely of mercenary foldicrs, fiur-
nihlicd by tlhe Conzotticri, or leaders of bands, whom they took
into thcir pay.

The cnfni;tu. IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the fovcreignty of the
tio, of tl.e
ittg,,'on of iflandl of Sicily was annexed, the feudal government was efa-

ri.a blifhedl in the fatme form, and with the fame dcfcts, as in the

oilier nations of Europe. The frequent and violent revolutions
which llaplpened in that monarchy, had considerably incrcafiec
thlcfc dtlcfd:s, and rendered them more intolerable. The filcccf-

7 Lo1n
136

sion to the crown of Naples had been 'so often interrupted or
altered, and so many Princes of foreign blood had taken pof-
fcffion of tlle throne, that the Neapolitan nobility had loft, in a
great measure, that attachment to the fainily of their sovereigns,
as well as that reverence fo.r their persons, which, in other feudal
kingdoms, contributed to set fopne bounds to the cncroach-
ments of the barons upon the royal prerogative and power.
At the fame time, the different pretenders to the crown, being
obliged to court the barons who adhered to them, and on wbofe
fuppprt they depended for the success of their claims, they
augmennted their privileges by libcral, conccfions, and con-
iived at their boldest usurpations. Even when featcd, on the
throne, it was dangerous for a Prince, who held his sceptre hy
a disputcd title, to venture on any itep towards extending his
own power, or circumscribing tlat of the nobles.

FROM, all thcef causes, the kingdomi of Naplcs was, tb mope

turbulent of any in Europe, and the authority of its Monarchs
the least extenfivc. Though Ferdinand [. who. began bis
reign in the year one thouiand four hundred and fixty-eight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy; though his
ion Alfonso, that he might crush it at once by cuitting off the
leaders of grcateft reputation and influence among thq Neapo-
litan barons, ventured to commit one of the mpofl pclrfdioius and
cruel acions recorded in hiflory; the order of nobles was lcvor-
thclcfs more cxafpcratcd than humbled by the blow . The
resentment which tllcfe outragcs xccited was so violent, and
the power of the malccontent nobles was flill so formidable,

Gianlonc, book xxviii. chap. 2. vol. ii. 1). 410, &c.
VoL. . . T

SECT. IIl.

A. D. ' ^4.
tilat

SECT. III. that to these may be ascribed, in a great degree, the ease and

T"- ' rapidity with which Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom

of Naples 1.

State of the TH E event that gave rife to the violent contests concerning
dispute con-
cerning the the fucceflon to the crown of Naples and Sicily, which brought

ucctfion t

of o many calamities upon these kingdoms, happened in the
the crown, thirteenth century. Upon the death of the Emperor Frederick

II, Manfred his natural ton aspiring to the Neapolitan throne,
A. D. 1254. murdered (if we may believe contemporary historians) his bro-

ther the Emperor Conrad, and by that crime obtained possession
ot ith. The Popes, from their implacable enmity to the house
of Swabia, not only refused to recognize Manfred's title, but
endeavoured to excite against him some rival capable of wrest-
ing the sceptre out of his hand. Charles Count of Anjou, the
brother of St. Louis King of France, undertook this; and he
received from the Popes, the investiture of the kingdom of
Naples and Sicily as a fief held of the Holy See. The Count
of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success; Manfred fell in
battle; and he took poffelion of the vacant throne. But soon
after, Charles sullied the glory which he had acquired, by the in-
jufiice and cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands of
the executioner, Conradin, the last Prince of the house of
Swabia, and the rightfil heir of the Neapolitan crown. That
gallant young Prince asserted his title, to the lafi, with a courage,
worthy of a better fate. On the scaffold, he declared Peter, at
that time Prince, and soon after King of Aragon, who had

v Giannonc, ibid. p. 414.
b Struv. corp. hist. Germ. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii. ch. 5.
138

married
9

married Manfred's only daughter, his heir; and throwing his
glove among the people, he entreated that it might be carried
to Peter as the symbol by which he conveyed all his rights to
him '. The desire of avenging the insult offered to royalty by
the death of Conradin concurred with ambition, in prompting
Peter to take arms in support of the title, which he had ac-
quired. From that period, during almost two centuries, the
houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the crown of Naples.
Amidst a succession of revolutions more rapid, as well as of
crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the history of almost
any other kingdom, Monarchs sometimes of the Aragonefe
line, and sometimes of the Angevin were feated on the throne.
At length the Princes of the house of Aragon obtained such
firm pofleflion of this long-difputed inheritance, that they tranf-
mitted it quietly to a bastard branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was not extinct;

nor had they relinquished their title to the Neapolitan crown.
The Count of Maine and Provence, the heir of this family,
conveyed all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to his
successors. Charles VIII, as I have already related, crossed the
Alps at the head of a powerful army in order to prosecute his
claim with a degree of vigour far superior to that, which the
Princes from whom he derived it, had been capable of exerting.
The rapid progress of his arms in Italy, as well as the flort
time during which he enjoyed the fruits of his success, arc well
known. Frederick the heir of the illegitimate branch of the

' Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. § 2.
k Giannone, book xxvi. cb. 2.

T 2

SECT. III.

A. D. 1434.

Pretenfious of
the French
and Spanifi
Monarchs.

A. D. 1494
Aragonefe

I39

SrC'. III.

.A. D. 1501.

State of the
drtchy of
Milaan, anid
il- riL ht of

11i: c'ioi to
it.

Aragorcfe family, soon recovered the throne of *hich Charles
had difpoffeffed him. Louis XII. and Ferdinand of Aragon united
againfl this Prince, whom both, though sot different reafone,
confidered as an usurper, and agreed to divide his dominions
between them. Frederick, unable to resist the combined Mo-
narchs, each of whom was far his superior in power, resigned
his fceptrc. Louis and Ferdinand, though they-had concurred
in making the conquefi, differed about the division of it; and
fron allies became enemies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly
by the exertion of such military talents as gave him a jult title
to the appellation of the Great Captain, which the Spanish
historians have bestowed upon him; and partly by such shame-
lcfs and frequent violations of the most solemn engagements,
as leave an indelible stain on his memory; stripped the French
of all that they possessed in the Neapolitan dominions, and fe-
cured the peaceable possession of them to his master. These,
together with his other kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted to his
graridfon Charles V, whose right to possess them, if not alto-
gether uncontravertible, seems, at least, to be as well founded
as that, which the Kings of France set in opposition to it'.

THERE is nothing in the political constitution, or interior

government of the dutchy of Milan so remarkable, as to require
a particular explanation. But as the right of fucceflion to that
fertile province was the cause or the pretext of almost all the
var'; carried on in Italy during the reign of Charles V, it i-s
ncccilhry to trace theft diftputcs to their source, and to inquire
into the p)rctcnfions of the various competitors.

' roit.i des Rois tic France au Roya4me de Sicilc. Mem. de Comin. Edit de
Ii tlloy, tom. i. pi rtii. p . 5.

l)URING
14o

DURING the 16ng anid fierce contests excited in Italy by the

violence of the Guelf ard Chibellirie facions, the family of
Visconti rose to great eminence among their fellow-citizens of
Milan. As the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibel-
line or Imperial interest, they by way of recompense, received,
from one Emperor, the dignity of perpetual vicars of the Em-
pire in Italy m. They were created by another; Dukes of Milan,
and together with that title, the possession of the city and its
territories, was bellowed upon them as an hereditary fief".
John King of France, among other expedients for raising
money, which the calamities of his reign obliged him to em-
ploy, condescended to give one of his daughters in marriage to
John Galeazzo Visconti the first Duke of Milan, from whom
he had received considerable fums. Valentine ViCconti one of
the children of this marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke
of Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their marriage-
contradc which the Pope confirmed, it was stipulated that, upon
failure of heirs-male in the family of Visconti, the dutchy of
Milan should descend to the posterity of Valentine and the
Duke of Orleans. That event took place. In the year one
thousand four hundred and forty-feven, Philip Maria the last
Prince of the ducal family of Visconti died. Various compe-
titors pretended to the ficceflion. Charles Duke of Orleans
pleaded his right to it, founded on the marriage-contrac of
his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfotifo King of Naples
claimed it in confequcnc of a will made by Philip Maria in hit
favour. The Emperor contendeld that upon tle extinction of
male iltuc in the ftnlilv of Visconti the iicf returned to the

Pctrarch cpift. ap. Striiv. corp. i. 625.
"l cibnit, cod. jur. ecnt, diiplil. vli . i. 257.

fitpecior

I 4

SEct. III.

Rife and pro-
Qrefs of the
di:putes con-
cerning this.

A. D. 1354.
A.D. 1395.

SECT. III. superior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to the Empire. The

people of Milan finitten with that love of liberty which
prevailed among the Italian States, declared against the
dominion of any master, and established a republican form of
government.

BUT during the firuggle among so many competitors, the

prize for which they contended was seized by one from whom
none of them apprehended any danger. Francis Sforza, the
natural son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and abi-
lities had elevated from the rank of a peasant to be one of the
most eminent and powerful of the Italian Condottieri, having
succeeded his father in the command of the adventurers wha
followed his flandard, had married a natural daughter of the
last Duke of Milan. Upon this shadow of a title Francis found-
ed his pretensions to the dutchy, which he supported with such
talents and valour as placed him at lafi on the ducal throne.
The virtues as well as abilities with which he governed,
inducing his fubjeds to forget the defects in his title, he
transmitted his dominions quietly to his son; from whom they
descended to his grandson. seI was murdered by his grand
uncle Ludovico, surnamcd the Moor, who took poffeflion of the
dutchy ; and his right to it was confirmed by the inveftiturc of
the Emperor Maximilian in the year one thousand four hun-
dred and ninety-four ".

o Ripalin. hid Mcdiol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. corp. i. 930. Du Mont Corps
Diplom. tor. iii. p. ii. 333. ibid.

Iouis

Louis XI. who took pleasure in depressing the Princes of

the blood, and who admired the political abilities of Francis
Sforza, would not permit the Duke of Orleans to take any ftep
in prosecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Ludovico
the Moor kept up such a close connecion with Charles VIII. that
during the greater part of his reign, the claim of the family of
Orleans continued to lie dormant. But when the crown of France
devolved to Louis XII. Duke of Orleans, he instantly asserted the
rights of his family with the ardour which it was natural to ex-
pet. Ludovico Sforza, incapable of contending with such a rival,
was stripped of all his dominions in the space of a few days. The
King, clad in the ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph; and
soon after, Ludovico having been betrayed by the Swiss in his
pay, was sent a prifoncr into France, and shut up in the castle
of Loches, where he lay unpitied during the remainder of his
days. In consequence of one of the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the hifloryof the Milanese, his son Maxi-
milian Sforza was placed on the ducal throne, of which he
kept possession during the reign of Louis XII. His successor
Francis I. was too high-fpirited and enterprizing tamely to rc-
linquifh his title. As soon as he was feated upon the throne,
he prepared to invade the Milanese; and his right of succession
to it, appears from this detail, to have been not only more na-
tural but more just than that of any other competitor.

IT is unneccifary to enter into any detail witl refpec to

the form of government in Genoa, Parma, Modena, and
the other inferior States of Italy. Their names, indced, will'
often occur in the following hiflory. But the power of these

Statcs.

SECT. III.
A.D. 151z.

143

SF:c '. 11.

'I he cr.fl;nt -

v:rnmenit f
$Fai.;.

('onquered by
the Vanda',

A. D. 712.

and by the
Moors.

States thenfelvcs was so inconfidcrable, that their fa-te depend-
ed little upon their own efforts; and the fcqucnt revolutionis
which they underwent, were brought about by the operations
of the Princes who attackcd or defended them, rather than by
any thing peculiar in their internal conflitution.

(tQ the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps, Spain is one

of the inofl ccnfiderable ; and as it was the hercditary domain
of Charles V, as well as the chief foutrce of his po.wer and wLaltli,
a dliinidc knovwlkedg of its political conflitltitpn is of capital ira-
i)rtancc towards undcrinanding the tranfadions of his reign.

Tl; r.: Vandals and Goths, vY'ho overturned, the Roman

power in Spain, eftablilled a form of government in that coun-
try, and brought in customs and laws, perfeCtly similar to those
which were introduced into the reft of Europe, by the other
vicorious tribes which acquired, fcttlements there. For foime
time, focicty advanced, among the new inhal.tats o Spain,
by the f ame fieps, and seemed to hold, the fane coarse, as in
other European nations. To this progress, a ftidlen flop was
put by the invasion of the Saracens or Moors. The Goths
could not withfland the efforts of their entlxufiaftick valour,
which subdued Spain, with the fame iimptuols rapidity that
difiinguifhes all the operations of their arms. The conquerors
introduced into the country in which they fettled the Mahome-
tall religion, the Aralick language, the manners of the East,
together with that talle for the arts, and that love of elegance
ind fplcndour, which the Caliphs had begun to cultivate among
their fubjcAs.

1' SucIr
.1- 1

SUCH Gothick nobles, as disdained to submit to the Moorish

yoke, fled for refuge to the inaccessible mountains of Asturias,
and comforted themselves with enjoying there the exercise of
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the authority of
their ancient laws. Being joined by many of the boldest and
most warlike among their countrymen, they sallied out upon
the adjacent settlements of the Moors, in small parties; and
making short excursions, were satisfied with plunder and re-
venge, without thinking of conquest. By degrees, their strength
increased, their views enlarged, a regular government was
established among them, and they began to aim at extending
their territories. While they pushed on their attacks with the
unremitting ardour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their country from
oppression; while they conducted their operations with the
courage natural to men who had no other occupation but war,
and who were firangers to all the arts which corrupt or en-
feeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft many of the ad-
vantages, to which they had been indebted for their first
success. They threw off all dependance on the Caliphs *; they
neglected to preserve a close connecion with their countrymen
in Africa; their Empire in Spain was split into manyfmall king-
domns; together with the arts which they cultivated, the luxury
to which thcfe gave rife, relaxed, in some measure, the force of
their military inflitutions, and abated the vigour of their war-
like lf)irit. The Moors, however, continued fill to be a gallant
peoplc, and poflcife( great resources. According to the magni-
ficent file of the Spanish historians, eight centuries of almost

* Jos. Sini. Aflimallnus Hiftor. Ital. Scriptores. Vol. iii. p. 135.
VOL. 1. IT

SECT. III.

The Chrifi-
ans gradually
recover do-
minion in
Spain.
uln-

I45

SECT. III.

1492.

uninterrupted war elapsed, and three thousand seven hundred
battles were fought before the last of the Moorish kingdoms in
Spain submitted to the Christian arms.

The union of As the Christians made their conquests upon the Mahome-
its various
kingdoms. tans at various periods, and under different leaders, each formed

the territory which he had wrested from the common enemy,
.ilto an independant State. Spain was divided into as many
separate kingdoms, as it contained provinces, and ;i- each city
of note, a petty Monarch eftabliihed his tbh . .Fumned
all the ensigns of royalty. In a series of ye b, however, by
the usual events of intermarriages, or l ,al succession, or
conquest, all these inferior principalities were annexed to the
more powerful kingdoms of Castile and of Aragon; and at
length by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella, the
former the hereditary Monarch of Aragon, and the latter raised
to the throne of Castile by the affecion of her fubjeds, all the

,481. Spanish crowns were united, and descended in the fame line.

' heir ancient
cuitnms and
lav' refrrved
amui tL all their
·c'.o ut!O.'is ;

FROM this period, the political constitution of Spain began

to assume a regular and uniform appearance; the genius
of government may be delineated, and the progress of its laws
and manners may be traced with certainty. Notwithstanding
the lingular revolution which had happened in Spain, and the
peculiarity of its fate, in being so long fubjcRcd to the Maho-
metan yoke, the customs introdutccd by the Vandals and Goths
had taken fuclh deep root, and were so thoroughly incorporated
with the frame of its government, that in every province which
the Chriflians recovered fromn the Moors, we find the condition
of individuals, as well as the political conflitution, nearly the
tmunc as in other nations of Europe. I,alnds wcrc held by the fame

t tenure;
146

tenure; justice was dispensed in the fame form; the fame pri-
vileges were claimed by the nobility; and the fame power ex-
ercifed by the Cortes, or general assembly of the kingdom.
Several circumfiances contributed to secure this permanence of
the feudal inffitutions in Spain, notwithstanding the conquest
of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned them. Such
of the Spaniards, as preserved their independance, adhered to
their ancient customs not only from attachment to them,
but out of antipathy 'to the Moors, to whose ideas concern-
ing property and government these customs were so totally
repugnant. Even among the Christians, who submitted to the
Moorish conquerors, and consented to become their fubjeds,
ancient customs were not entirely abolished. They were per-
mitted to retain their religion; their laws concerning private
property; their forms of adminifiring justice; and their mode
of levying taxes. The followers of Mahomet are the only en-
thufiafls, who have united the spirit of toleration with zeal
for making proselytes, and who, at the fame time that they
took arms to propagate the doctrine of their prophet, permit-
ed such as would not embrace it, to adhere to their own tenets
and to practise their own rites. To this peculiarity in the
genius of the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire of
the Moors to reconcile the Christians to their yoke, it was
owing that the ancient manners and laws in Spain survived the
violent shock of a conquefi, and continued to fulfift, notwith-
fianding the introductiQn of a new religion and a new form of
government into that country. It is obvious from all these
particulars, that the Chriflians must have found it extremely
caly to rc-eflablifh manners and government on their ancient
foundations, in those provinces of Spain, which they wrcfled

U fuccclrivcly

SECT. III.

whilh rendrsr
their fate in
rome degree
similar to
that of ether
nations of
Europe.

147

SecT. III. successively from the Moors. A considerable part of the peo-

"' ' pie retained such a fondness for the customs, and such a reve-

rence for the laws of their ancestors, that they wished to fee
them restored with full authority, and were not only willing
1but eager to observe the former, and to recognize the authority
of the latter.

Certain pecu. B u T though the feudal form of government, with all the
liarittes in
their conllitu- infitutions that charaCterize it, was thus preserved entire in Caf-
tion and laws. tile and Aragon, as well as in all the kingdoms which depended

on these crowns, therev ere certain peculiarities in their political
constitutions which distinguish them from those of any other

Tle preroga- country in Europe. The regal prerogative, extremely limited
tive moje li-
ml ed, and in every feudal kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, within
the in ,moni-
is of ihe such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of the sovereign
tp ple more almost to nothing. The privileges of the nobility were vast in
¢xtenfiv¢.

proportion, and extended so far, as to border on absolute in-
depcndancc. The immunities of the cities were great, they
polcfiled considerable influence in the Cortes or supreme assem-
blies of the nations, and they aspired at obtaining more. Such
a slate of society, in which the political machine was so ill
adjusted, and the several members of the legislature so impro-
perly balanced, produced interior diforlers in the kingdoms
of Spain, which rose beyond the pitch of turbulence and anar-
chy, usual under the feudal government. The whole tenor of
the Spanish hiflory confirms the truth of this observation; and.
when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius of their policy
gave birth and vigour, was not rcflrained and overawed by the
immediate dread of the Moorifl arms, it broke out into more

frcequent

149

frequent infurre&ions againit the government of their Princes,
as well as more outrageous insults on their dignity, than oc-
cur in the annals of any other country. These were accom-
panied at some times with more liberal sentiments concerning
the rights of the people, at other times with more elevated
notions concerning the privileges of the nobles, than were
common in other nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which was annexed to the

kingdom of Aragon, the impatience of the people to obtain the
redress of their grievances having prompted them to take arms
againit their sovereign John II, they, by a solemn deed, recalled
the oath of allegiance which they had sworn to him, declared him
and his posterity to be unworthy of the throne P, and endeavoured
to establish a republican form of government, in order to fe-
cure the perpetual enjoyment of that liberty, after which they
aspired q. Nearly about the fame period, the indignation of
the Caflilian nobility againit the weak and flagitious admini-
firation of Henry IV, having led them to combine against him,
they arrogated as one of the privileges belonging to their order,
the right of trying and of pafling sentence on their sovereign.
That the exercise of this power might be as publick and solemn,
as the prctenfion to it was bold, they summoncd all the nobi-
lity of their party to meet at Avila, a spacious theatre was
crected in a plain without the walls of the town, an image rc-

SECT. II.

Inflances of
this.

A. D. 146z.

A. D. i4(5;.

P Zurita Analcs de Arag. tom. iv. 113. 115, &c.
q Ferreras hist. d' lfpagnc, torn. vii. p. (2. P. ()rlcans revol. d' Efpagnc,

tomr. iii. p. 155. L. Marihiaus Siculus de rcb. IHifpan. apud Schotti icript.
Hilpari. vol. 429.

.* prefcnting

SzEC. III. presenting the King, was feated on a throne, clad in royal

-' robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre in its hand, and the

sword of justice by its fide. The accusation against the King
was read, and the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in
presence of a numerous assembly. At the close of the first
article of the charge, the archbiihop of Toledo advanced, and
tore the crown from the head of the image ; at the close of the
second, the Conde de Placentia snatched the sword of justice from
its fide; at the close of the third, the Conde de Benevente
wrested the sceptre from its hand; at the close of the last, Don
Diego Lopes de Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the throne.
At the fame instant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother, was pro-
claimed King of Cafiile and Leon in his fleadr.

THE most daring leaders of faction would not have ven-

tured on these measures, nor have conduCted themi with such
publick ceremony, if the sentiments of the people concerning
the royal dignity, had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in Castile and Ara-
gon, as prepared them to approve of such extraordinary pro-
ceedings, or to acquiesce in them.

The Conslitu.
tion and g(-
wcrnmcnt of
Araign.

IN Aragon, the form of government was monarchical, but

the genius and maxims of it were purely republican. The
Kings, who were long clecive, retained only the flhadow of
power; the real cxcrcife of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This fupremn affimbly was compoficd of four

1 Marian. hist. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

different
tse

different arms or members. The nobility of the firfi rank.
The Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class. The re-
presentatives of the cities and towns, whose right to a place in
the Cortes, if we may give credit to the historians of Aragon,
was coeval with the constitution. The eeclefiaftical order, com-
posed of the dignitaries of the church, together with the reprefen-
tatives of the inferior clergy '. No law could pass in this assem-
bly without the assent of every tingle member who had a right
to vote'. Without the permission of the Cortes, no tax could
be imposed; no war could be declared; no peace concluded ;
no money could be coined; nor any alteration be made in the
current specie ". The power of reviewing the proceedings of all
inferior courts, the privilege of infpeting every department of
administration, and the right of redrefling all grievances belonged
to the Cortes. Nor did those who conceived themselves to be
aggrieved address the Cortes in the humble tone of supplicants,
and petition for redress; they demanded it as the birth-right of
free men, and required the guardians of their liberty to decide
with refped to the points which they laid before them '. This
sovereign court was held, during fevcral centuries, every year ;
but, in confcquence of a regulation introduced about the begin-
ning of the fourteentl century, it was convened from that
period only once in two years. After it was affcmbled, the King
had no right to prorogue or difiolve it without its own content ;,
and the i:ciion continued forty days Y.

* Forma de celcbrar Cortes en Ar;igon. por G(cron. Martcl.
t' artel. ibid. p. 2.

IIizr. Bl.nca comment. rcr. Aragon. ap. Schot. f ript. IIirpan. vol. iii.
P. 750.

Mlartel Forma de celebr. p. 2.
llicr. BIlanca conlmenlt. 763.

NoT

-EcT' I1n,

rsr

I5S

$ECT.III. NOT satisfied with having ere&ed these barriers against the
O-Fc ad encroachments of the royal prerogative, nor willing to rely
Office and
jurifdiaion of for the preservation of their liberties on the vigilance and au-
te J ulza. thority of an assembly, similar to the diets, flates general, and

parliaments, in which the other feudal nations placed so much
confidence, the Aragonefe had recourse to an institution pecu-
liar to themselves, and elected a JuJiiza or fupremejudge. This
magistrate, whose office bore some resemblance to that of the
Ephori in ancient Sparta, ated as the guardian of the people,
and the comptroller of the Prince. The person of the Juftiza
was sacred, and his power and jurifdidion almost unbounded.
He was the supreme interpreter of the laws. Not only infe-
rior judges, but the Kings themselves were bound to consult
him in every doubtful cafe, and to receive his responses with
implicit deference*. An appeal lay to him from the royal
judges, as well as from those appointed by the barons within
their refpeCive territories. Even when no appeal was made to
him, he could interpose by his own authority, prohibit the
ordinary judge to proceed, take immediate cognizance of the
cause himself, and remove the party accused to the Maniflfa-
tion or prison of the slate, to which no person had access but
by his perniffion. His power was exerted with no left vigour
and etfct in fupcrintending the administration of government,
than in regulating the course ofjuflice. It was the prerogative
of the Jufliza to infpcLl the condult of the King. Hc had a
title to review all the royal liroclamations and patents, and to
declare whether or not they were agreeable to law, and ought

* Blanca has prefcrvcd two rcfponfis of the Jufizi.a to J imes II. who reigned
towards the clofc of the thirtccnth century, BJallca 74.8.

to

'53

to be carried into execution. He, by his sole authority, could SECT. III.
exclude any of the King's ministers from the conduct of affairs,
and call them to answer for their mal-administration. He him-
self was accountable to the Cortes alone, for the manner in
which he discharged the duties of this high office, and per-
formed funtions of the greatest importance that could be
committed to a subjed [GG] z.

IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the privileges of the

Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of the rights belonging to the Juftiza,
that a very small portion of power remained in the hands of the
King. The Aragonefe seem to have been follicitous that their
Monarchs mhould know and feel this fiate of impotence, to which
they were reduced. Even in swearing allegiance to their fovc-
reign, an ad which ought, naturally; to be accompanied with
professions of fubmiflion and respect, they deviscd an oath, in
such a form, as to remind him of his dependance on his sub-
jeds. " We," said the Juftiza to the King in name of his
high-fpirited barons, " who are each of us as good, and who
are altogether more powerful than you, promise obedience to
your government, if you maintain our rights and liberties ;
but if not, not." Conformably to this oath, they eflablifled it
as a fundamental article in their conflitution, that if the King
should violate their rights and privileges, it was lawful for the
people to (lifclain him as their lbvcreign, and to clct another
in his place '. The attachment of the Aragoncfe to this fingu-
lar constitution of government, was extreme, and their rcfped

The renal
power c;r-
cumfcribed
within narrow
limits.

Hlicr. Bianca Commecnt. p. 747-755.
[GG(; N () T E XXX. a Hicr. Blanca Coinment. 720.

x
VOL. I.

for

A VIEW OF THE
SECT. III. for it approached to fuperflitious veneration [HH]. In the pre-

amble to one of their laws, they declare that such was the barren-
ness of their country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that
if it were not on account of the liberties by which they were
distinguished from other nations, the people would abandon it,
and go in quest of a settlement to some more fruitful region b

C nftitution IN Caflile, there were not such peculiarities in the form of
arid uov,'rn
atint tfaf- government, as to eftablifl any remarkable diflindion between

it, and that of the other European nations. The executive
part of government was committed to the King, but with a
prerogative extremely limited. The legislative authority re-
fided in the Cortes, which was composed of the nobility, the
dignified ecclefiafticks, and the representatives of the cities.
The affcmbly of the Cortes in Castile was very ancient, and
fccms to have been coeval with the constitution. The members
of the three different orders, who had a right of suffrage, met
in one place, and deliberated as one collecive body; the deci-
sions of which were regulated by the sentiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enacting laws, and of redressing
grievances belonged to this assembly; and in order to secure
the assent of the King to such flatutes and regulations, as were
deemed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual
in the Cortes, to take no flep towards granting money,
until all bufincfs relative to the publick welfare was con-
cluded. The representatives of cities seem to have obtained
a feat very early in the Cortes of Caflile, and soon acquired such

[11H] NOTE XXXI.

-;

* Ilicr, Blanca Corn. p. 751.

influence

influence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a period SECT.1IL
when the fplcndour and pre-eminence of the nobility had eclip- '
fed or annihilated all other orders of men. The number of
members from cities bore such a proportion to that of the whole
colledive body, as rendered them extremely refpeeable in the
Cortes [II]. The degree of consideration, which they possessed
in the slate, may be eflima'ed by one event. Upon the death of
John I, a council of regency was appointed to govern the king- A. D. 1g90.
dom during the minority of his son. It was composed of an
equal number of noblemen, and of deputies chosen by the
cities; the latter were admitted to the fame rank, and in-
vested with the fame powers, as prclates and grandees of the
first order . But though the members of communities in Castile
were elevated above the condition wherein they were placed
in other kingdoms of Europe; though they had attained to
such political importance, that even the proud and jealous fpi-
rit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude them from some
share of government; yet the nobles, notwithfianding these ac-
quifitions of the commons, continued to assert the privileges of
their order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone extremely high.
There was not any body of nobility in Europe more diftin-
guifhed for indepcndance of spirit, haughtiness of deportment,
and bold pretensions, than that of Caflilc. The history of that
monarchy affords the nmot (riking examples of the vigilance
with which they observcd, and of the vigour with which they
opposcd every scheme of their Kings, that tended to encroach
on their juriftlidCion, to diminifl their dignity, or to abridge
their power. Even in their ordinary intcrcourfe with their

[IT] NOTE XXXII. Marian. hill. lib. 18. c. r5.

X Monarchs,

tLS

SECT. III.

t -_

Monarchs, they preserved such a consciousness of their rank,
that the nobles of the firit order claimed it as a privilege to be
covered in the royal pretence, and approached their sovereigns
rather as equals than as fubjeds.

THE constitution of the subordinate monarchies, which de-

pended on the crowns of Castile and Aragon, nearly resembled
that of the kingdom to which they were annexed. In all of
them, the dignity and independance of the nobles were great;
the immunities and power of the cities were considerable.

Various
causes of the
limi:ed au-
thority of the
Spanish Mo-
narchs.

AN attentive observation of the singular situation of Spain,

as well as of the various events which occurred there, from the
invasion of the Moors to the union of its kingdoms under Ser-
dinand and Isabella, will discover those causes, to which all the
peculiarities in its political conititution, that I have pointed
out, ought to be ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from the Maho-

metans gradually and with difficulty, the nobles, who fol-
lowed the flandard of any eminent leader in these wars, con-
quered not for him alone, but for themselves. They claimed a
liare in the lands which their valour had torn from the enemy,
and their profpcrity and power incrcafcd, in proportion as the
territory of the Prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors, the Monarchs

of Spain depended so much on their nobles, that it became ne-
cefFary to conciliate their good will by successive grants of new

t honours

honours and privileges. By the time that any Prince could SECT.III.
establish his dominion in a conquered province, the greater part.
of the property was parcelled out by him among his barons,
with such jurifdidion and immunities as raised them almost to
Sovereign power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms ereced in so many diffe-

rent corners of Spain were extremely inconsiderable. The
petty Monarch was but little elevated above his nobles. They,
feeling themselves to be almost his equals, aced as such.
The Kings of such limited domains could neither command
much refpet, nor possess great power; and noblemen, so
nearly on the fame level, could not look up to them with that
reverence, with which the sovereigns of the great monarchies
in Europe were viewed by their fubjeds [KK].

THESE circumfiances concurred in exalting the nobility, and

in deprefling the royal authority; there were others, which
raised the cities in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the Moors, was

perpetually exposed to the excursions of the enemy, with
whom no peace or truce was so permanent as to prove any last-
ing security, felf-prlcfervation obliged pcrfons of all ranks
to fix their refidcnce in places of firength. The canles of
the barons, which, in other countries, afforded a commo-
dious retreat from the depredations of banditti, or from the
transient violence of any interior commotion, were unable to

[KK] NOTE XXXIII.

refif:

SECT. III.
<_--

resist an enemy whose operations were conduced with regular
and persevering vigour. Cities, in which great numbers united
for their mutual defence, were the only places to which people
could retire with any profpeft of safety. To this was owing
the rapid growth of those cities in Spain of which the Chri-
flians recovered possession. All who fled from the Mooriff
yoke resorted to them, as to an asylum; and there, the greater
part of those, who took the field against the Mahometans,
eflablifhed their families.

EACH of these cities, during a longer oi shorter course of

years, was the capital of a little slate, and enjoyed all the ad-
vantages, which accelerate the increase of inhabitants in every
place thai is the feat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the beginning of the

fifteenth century, was considerable, and they were peopled far
beyond the proportion which was common in other parts of
Europe, except in Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors
had introduced manufactures into these cities, while under their
dominion. The Chriltians, who, by intermixture with them,
had learned their arts, continued to cultivate thelfe. The trade
of fcveral of the Spanish towns appears to have been con-
idlcrable ; and the fplirit of commerce continued to preserve
the number of their inhabitants, as the Ifnfc of danger had first
induced them to crowd together.

As the Spanifll cities were populous, many of the inlhai-
tants wcrc of a rank fuil)rior to those who rcfidcd in towns in

other
158

other countries of Europe. That cause, which contributed SECT.III.
chiefly to their population, affected equally persons of every
condition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in order to find
shelter, or in hopes of making a fland there against the enemy,
with greater advantage than in any other station. The persons
clected as their representatives in the Cortes by the cities, or
promoted to offices of trust and dignity in the government of
the community, were often, as will appear from tranfadions
which I shall hereafter relate, of such considerable rank in the
kingdom, as reflected lufire on their conffituents, and on the
stations wherein they were placed.

As it was impossible to carry on a continual war against the

Moors, without some other military force, than that which
the barons were obliged to bring into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to have some troops,
particularly a body of light cavalry, in conflant pay. It was one
of the privileges of the nobles, that their lands were exempt
from the burden of taxes. The charge of supporting the troops
requisite for the publick safety, fell wholly upon the cities ; and
their Kings, being obliged frequently to apply to them for aid,
found it neceflary to gain their favour by concessions, which
extended their immunities, and added to their wealth and
power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumstances, peculiar to

Spain, is addlcd to the general and common causes, which contri-
butcd to aggrandize cities in other countries of Europe, this will

fully

I59

SerCT. IL.

Melrures of
different
Princes in
or~!er to ex.
tend their

power,
particularly
of Ferdinanid
anrd Mibellad,

Ferdl;nnd's
sciitrc~in fu~r

l. ging the

riv'c: and

1owver ot thie
LAsdliy.

fully account for the extensive privileges which they acquired,
as well as the extraordinary consideration to which they at-
tained, in all the Spanish kingdoms [LL].

BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility, and this un-

usual power of the cities in Spain, the royal prerogative was
hemmed in on every hand, and reduced within very narrow
bounds. Sensible of this, and impatient of such restraint, diffe-
rent Monarchs endeavoured, at various juntures, to enlarge
their own jurifdicion, and to circumscribe that of their sub-
jces. Their power, however, or their abilities were so un-
equal to the undertaking, that their efforts were attended with
little fuc~efs. But when Ferdinand and Isabella found themfclves
at the head of all the united kingdoms of Spain, and delivered
from the danger and interruption of domeflick wars, they
were not only in a condition to resume, but were able to prosecute
with advantage, the schemes of extending the prerogative,
which their ancestors had attempted in vain. Ferdinand's pro-
found Sagacity in concerting his measures, his persevering in-
duflry in conducting them, and his uncommon address in carry-
ing them into execution, fitted him admirably for an under-
taking which required all these talents.

As the overgrown power, and high pretcnfions of the no-

bility were what the Monarchs of Spain felt most sensibly, and
bore with the igreatcit impatience, the great olbjet of Ferdi-
nand's policy was to reduce tlicle within more moderate bouinds.
Under various prctexts, ifoictimcs bly violence, more frc-
quently in contliqucnce of decrees obtained in the courts of law,

[UL] NOTE XXXIV.
i6o

he wrelfed from the barons a great part of the lands, which SECT. III.
had been granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of for-
mer Monarchs, particularly during the feeble and profuse
reign of his predecessor Henry IV. He did not give the entire
conduc of affairs to persons of noble birth, who were accuf-
tomed to occupy every department of importance in peace or
in war, as if it had been a privilege peculiar to their order, to
be employed as the sole counsellors and ministers of the crown.
He often tranfated business of great consequence without
their intervention, and committed many offices of power and
trust te new men, devoted to his interest d He introduced a
degree of Rate dignity into his court, which being unknown in
Spain, while it remained split into many small kingdoms,
taught the nobles to approach their sovereign with more cere-
mony, and gradually rendered him the object of greater defe-
rence and refpecl.

THE annexing the mafierfhips of the three military orders Particularlv

of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara, to the crown, was an- tla grnxdia
other expedient, by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the matlrthips of
revenue and power of the Kings of Spain. These orders were ders to the
intfituted in imitation of those of the Knights Tcmplars and of
St. John of Jerusalem, on purpose to wage perpetual war with
the Mahometans, and to protect the pilgrims who visited Com-
poftella, or other places of eminent fiincity in Spain. The
zeal and fuperitition of the ages, in which they were founded,

, Zusita anales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 22.

prompted

Y
VOL. I.

SECT. II.

A. D. 1476,
;ind 1493.

And by cir-
cumfcribing
the jurifdic-
tion of the
nobility.

prompted persons of every rank to bestow such liberal doni-
tions on these holy warriors, that, in a ihort time, they en-
grossed a considerable- hare in the property and wealth of the
kingdom. The masterships of these orders came to be fRations
of the greatest power and opulence to which a Spanifl noble-
man could be advanced. These high dignities were in the dif-
pofal of the Knights of the Order, and placed the persons on
whom they conferred them almost on a level with their fove-
reign [MM]. Ferdinand, unwilling that the nobility, whom he
confidered as already too formidable, ihould derive such addi-
tional credit and influence from possessing the government of these
wealthy fraternities, was solicitous to wrest it out of their
hands, and to vest it in the crown. His measures for accom-
plifhing this, were wifely planned, and executed with. vigour c.
By address, by promises, and by threats, he prevailed on the
Knights of each Order to place Isabella and him at the head of
it. Innocent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this eletion the
the fan&ion of papal authority '; and subsequent Pontiffs ren-
dered the annexation of these masterships to the crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished the power

and influence of the nobility, and added new luffre or autho-
rity to the crown, he was taking other important fleps with
a view to the fame objec. The sovereign jurifdidion which
the feudal barons exercised within their own territories, was
the pride and diftintion of their order. To have invaded

[MM] NOTE XXXV.
e Marian. hist. lib. xxv. c. 5.
s Zurita analcs tom. v. p. 22. AElii. Anton, NebrinTnfis rcrum a Ferdinand
& Elizabc gcflarim dlecadcs. ii. apud Schot. script. liifpan. i. 86o.

5

openly'

openly a privilege which they prized so highly, and in defence
of which they would have run so eagerly to arms, was a measure
too daring for a Prince of Ferdinand's cautious temper. He
took advantage, however, of an opportunity which the state of
his kingdoms and the spirit of his people presented him, in order
to undermine what he durst not assault. The incessant depre-
dations of the Moors, the want of discipline among the troops
which were employed to oppose them, the frequent civil wars
between the crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private wars with each
other, filled all the provinces of Spain with disorder. Rapine,
outrage, and murder, became so common, as not only to inter-
rupt commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all intercourse
between one place and another. That security and protection
which men expec from entering into civil society, ceased almost
totally. Interior order and police, while the feudal institutions
remained in vigour, were so little objects of attention, and the
administration of justice was to extremely feeble, that it would
have been vain to have expected relief from the established laws
or the ordinary judges. But the evil became so intolerable, and
the inhabitants of cities, who were the chief fuffcrers, grew so
impatient of this anarchy, that felf-prcfervation forced them to
have recourse to an extraordinary remedy. About the middle of
the thirteenth century, the cities in the kingdom of Aragon,
nnd after their example those in Caftilc, formed thcmfclvcs into
an association, diflinguiflcd by the name of the ljKil Brothcr-
hood. They exaced a certain contribution from c. (:li of tliC afio-
ciatcd towns; they levied a considerable body of troops, in or-
der to protct travellers, and to purllic criminals; they aploilntced
judges, who opened their courts in various part; of the king-

Y d(om.

SE CTI, I

LZK'

SECT. III.

Notwith-
Ilandin:. nll
ilht'c, the go-
vernment of
Spin itill
vxtren.ely
Ale,.

dom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery, or of any at
that violated the publick peace, and was seized by the troops of
the Brotherhood, was carried before their own judges, who,
without paying any regard to the exclusive and fovereignjurif-
diction which the lord of the place might claim, tried and con-
demned the criminals. By means of this, theprompt and impartial
adminifiration ofjuftice was reflored; and together with it, in-
ternal tranquillity and order began to return. The nobles alone
murmured at this salutary institution. They complained of it
as an encroachment on one of their most valuable privileges..
They remonitrated against it in an high tone; and, on some
occasions, refused to grant any aid to the crown, unless it were
abolished. Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of thegood
effeds of the Holy Brotherhood with refpea to the police of his
kingdoms, but perceived its tendency to abridge, and at length to
annihilate the territorial jurifdiidion of the nobility. He coun-
tenanced the institution on every occasion. He supported it
with the whole force of royal authority; and besides the expe-
dients employed by him in common with the Other monarchs of
Europe, he availed himself of this institution, which was pecu-
liar to his kingdom, in order to limit and abolish that indepen-
dantjurifdidion of the nobility, which was no less inconfiflent with
the authority of the Prince, than with the order of focicty [NNj.

BUT though Ferdinand by these meafurcs considerably en

larged the boundaries of prerogative, and acquired a degree of
influence and power far beyond what any of his predcceflors had
enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority, and the bar-
riers againfi its encroachments, continued to be many and firong.
The spirit of liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain;

[NN] NOTE XXXVI.
164

6

the

the spirit of independance was high among the nobility; and SECT.IIIL
though the love of glory, peculiar to the Spaniards in every period. -,
of their history, prompted them to support Ferdinand with zeal.
in his foreign operations, and'to afford him such aid as enabled
him not only to undertake but to execute great enterprizes; he
reigned over- his fubjeas with a jurifdiaion less extensive than
that of any. of the great monarchs in Europe. It will appear
from many. passages in the following history, that, during a&
considerable part of the reign of his successor Charles V. the.
prerogative of the Spanish crown was equally circumscribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France so nearly referm Constitution.

bled those of the other feudal kingdoms, that such a detail with .nd ovr"'
refpea to them as was necessary, in order to convey fomne idea of 1 rance..
the nature and effeas of the peculiar institutions which took
place in Spain, would be superfluous. In the view which I have
exhibited of the means by which the French monarchs acquired
such full command of the national force of their kingdom, as en-
abled them to engage in extensive schemes of foreign operation,
I have already pointed out the great fleps by which they advan-
ced towards a more ample poffeflion of political power, and a
more uncontrouled exercise of their royal prerogative. All that
now remains is to take notice of such particulars in the confli-
tution of France, as serve either to distinguish it from that of
other countries, or tend to throw any light on the tranfadions.
of that period to which the following liflory extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the firfi race, the royal prc- I'),w(rt f the

rogative was very inconfiderablc. The General Afl'inblies of the is,.!i, r,-
nation, which met annually at flated seasons, extended their an- rflccl' K'lg.
thority to every department of government. '1 le power of

ic:lting

A VIEW OF -THE
SEcT.I. electing Kings, of ena&ing laws, of redrefling grievances, of

pafiing judgment in the last resort, with refpe& to every person
and to every cause, and of conferring donations on the Prince,

Under the resided in this great convention of the nation. Under the fe-
ltcond.

cond race of Kings, notwithitanding the power and splendour
which the conquests of Charlemagne added to the crown, the
general assemblies of the nations continued to poflefs cxtenfive
authority. The right of determining which of the royal fa-
mily ihould be placed on the throne was vested in them. The
monarchs eleced by their suffrage were accustomed regularly to
call and to consult them with refped to every affair of impor-
tance to the state, and without their consent no law was passed,
and no new tax was levied.

Under the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father of the third
third.

race of Kings, took possession of the throne of France, such
changes had happened in the political slate of the kingdom, as
considerably affected the power and jurifditibn of the general
assembly of the nation. The royal authority in the hands of the
degenerate posterity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into infig-
nificancc and contempt. Every considerable proprietor of land
had formed his territory into a barony, alnoft independant of
the sovereign. The ldukes or governors of provinces, the counts
or governors of towns and finall diftrias, and the great officcrs
of the crown, had rendered thcl dignities, originally granted
only d(Ilinlg l)lcalflrc or for lilc, hereditary in their families.
Each of thefi had ufirped all the rights which hitherto had bee'n
cldemed the diflinlions of royalty, particularly the l)rivi-
lcges of difllcfing juflice within their own domains, of coin-
ing money, an(l of waging war. Every district was governe(d by
loc:al cuflorns, acknowledged a diflint lord, and purluedl a frpa-

rate

rate interest. The formality of doing homage to their fove-
reign, was almost the only aft of fubjedion which haughty ba-
rons would perform, and that bound them no farther than they
were willing to acknowledge its obligation [00].

IN a kingdom broken into so many independant baronies,

hardly any common principle of union remained; and the gene-
ral assembly in its deliberations could scarce confider the nation
as forming one body, or eflablifh common regulations to be of
equal force in every part. Within the immediate domains of
the crown the King might publish laws, and they were obeyed,
because there he was acknowledged as the only lord. But if he
had aimed at rendering these general, that would have alarmed the
barons as an encroachment upon the independance of their jurif-
didion. The barons, with no less care, avoided the enacing of
general laws, because the execution of them mull have been.
veiled in the King, and would have enlarged that paramount-
power which was the objed of their jealousy. Thus, under the
descendants of Hugh Capet, the States General (for that was
the name by which the supreme assembly of the French nation.
came then to be distinguished) loft their legislative authority, or
at least entirely relinquished the exercise of it. From that pe-
riod, the jurifdidtion of the States General extended no farther
than to the imposition of new taxes, the determination of que-'
flions with refped to the right of succession to the crown, the
fettling of the regency when the preceding monarch had not
fixed it by his will, and the presenting remonitrances enumerat-
ing the grievances of which the nation wished to obtain redress.

[00] NOTE XXXVII.

As,

SEcT.m.

The power
of the Gene-
ral Assembly
lefi confide-
rable and ex,
tensive.

167

ECT. II. As, during several centuries, the monarchs of Europe seldom

. demanded extraordinary subsidies of their fubjeds, and the other
.events which required the interposition of the States, rarely oc-
curred, their meetings in France were not frequent. They were
summoned occasionally by their Kings, when compelled by their
wants or by their fears to have recourse to their aid; but they
did not, like the Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the
Parliament in England, form an essential member of the confti-
tution, the regular exertion of whose -powers was requisite to
give vigour and order togovernment.

The creown$ %WHEN the States of France ceased to exercise legislative
quiree legifla- authority, the Kings began to afume it. They ventured at first
';cau;hority, on aas of legislation with great reserve; and after taking every

.precaution that could prevent their fubjees from being alarmed
at the exercise of a new power. They did not at once issue their
ordinances in a tone of authority and command. They treated
with their fubjeas; they pointed out what was best; and allured
them to comply with it. By degrees, however, as the preroga-
tive of the crown extended, and as the supreme jurisdiction of
the royal courts came to be etlablifhed, the Kings of France as-
fumed more openly the stile and authority of law-givers, and
before the beginning of the fifteenth century, the complete legis-
;lative power was vefled in them [PP].

andthepower HAVING secured this important acquisition, the fleps that led
of levying
taxes. to the right of imposing taxes were rendered few and easy. The

people, accustomed to fee their sovereigns, by their sole autho-
rity, iltue ordinances which regulated points of the greatef con-
feguence with respect to the property of their fubjets, were not

[PP] NOTE XXXVIII.

alarmed
G68

alarmed when they were required, by the royal edids, to contri-
bute certain fums towards supplying the exigencies of govern-
ment, and carrying forward the measures of the nation. When
Charles VII. and Louis XI. first ventured to exercise this new
power, in the manner which I have already described, the gra-
dual increase of the royal authority had so imperceptibly pre-
pared the minds of the people of France for this innovation, that
it excited no commotion in the kingdom, and seems scarce to
have given rife to any murmur or complaint.

WTW EN the Kings of France had thus engrossed every power

which can be exerted in government; when the right of making
laws, of levying money, of keeping an army of mercenaries in
constant pay, of declaring war and of concluding peace centered
in the crown, the constitution of the kingdom, which, under the
first race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which, under the
iccond race, became an aristocracy, terminated, under the third
race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing that tended to preserve
the appearance, or revive the memory of the ancient mixed go-
vernment, seems from that period to have been incdufrioufly
avoided. During the long and acive reign of Francis I. the
variety as well as extent of whose operations obliged him to lay
many heavy impositions on his fubjeds, the States General of
France were not once aflembled, nor were the people once al-
lowed to exert the power of taxing themfclves, which, accord-
ing to the original ideas of feudal government, was a right cf-
fential to every frec-man.

Two things, however, remained, which moderate!l the cxcr-
cif of the regal prerogative, and rcntraincd it wvitliin fiich bounds

VOL. I. 7. as

S.CT. IlL,

Government
of France be-
comes purely
monarchiced].

The rx~rci'r
ofrpcrogtiire
r.(lraiine.] by

rhe i-ivile~~s

o)f til nAki-
1,1 ty

i6f)

170

A VIEW OF THE
SEcr. III. as preferred the constitution of France from degenerating into

' mere defpotifin. The rights and privileges claimed by the no-

bility must be confidered as one barrier againif the absolute do-
minion of the crown. Though the nobles of France had loft that
political power which was veiled in their order as.a body, they
still retained the personal rights and pre-eminence which they
derived from their rank. They preserved a consciousness of ele-
vation above other classes of citizens; an exemption from burdens
to which they were subjed; a contempt of the occupations in which
they were engaged; the privilege of assuming ensigns that indi-
cated their dignity; a title to be treated with a certain degree of
deference during peace; and a claim to various diflindions when
in the field. Many of these pretensions were not founded on the
words of fiatutes, or derived from positive laws; they were de-
lined and ascertained by the maxims of honorir, a title more deli-
cate, but no less sacred. These rights, established and proteced
by a principle equally vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in
defending them, are to the Sovereign himself objecs of refped
and veneration. Wherever they fland in its way, the royal pre-
rogative is bounded. The violence of a Despot may extermi-
i1itc such an order of men; but as long as it subsists, and its
idca.s of personal diflindion remain entire, the power of the
Prince has limits g.

As in France, the body of nobility was very numerous, and

lctained an high fcnfe of their own pre-eminence, to this we may
alcsribe, in a great measure, the mode of exercising the royal
prerogative which peculiarly diflinguifhes the government of
that kingdom. An intermediate order was placed between the
Monarch and his other fubjeds, and 'in every ad of authority

r. l)s Esprits dcs ,oix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Fcrgufon's Essay on the Hist. of
'ivil Socicty, part. i fee. 10.

it

it became neceflary to attend to its privileges, and not only
to guard against any real violation of these, but to avoid any
suspicion of its being possible that they might be violated.
Thus a species of government was established in France, un-
known in the ancient.world, that of a monarchy, in which the
power of the sovereign, though unconfined by any legal or con-
fiitutional restraint, has certain bounds set to it by the ideas
which one class of his fubjets entertain concerning their own
dignity.

THE jurifdidion of the Parliaments of France, particularly

that of Paris, was the other barrier which served to confine the
exercise of the royal prerogative within certain limits. The par-
liament of Paris was originally the court of the Kings of
France, to which they c:nmmitted the supreme administration
of justice within their own domains, as well as the power
of deciding with refpea to all cafes brought before it by
appeals from the courts of the barons. When the time and place
of its meeting were fixed, when not only the form of its pro-
cedure, but the principles on which it decided, were rendered
regular and confiltent, when every cause of importance was si-
nally determined there, and when the people became accustomed
to resort thither as to the supreme temple ofjuflicc, the parlia-
ment of Paris role to high eflimation in the kingdom, its mem-
bers acquircd dignity, and its decrees were fihbmittcd to, with
deference. The Kings of l:iacc, when they firll began to
allilme the legilative power, in ordci to re;Aoncile tli. minds of
their people to this new exertion of prerogative, produced their
edids and ordinances in the parliamncnt of Paris, that they might
ble approvd of and regiflercd there, before they wrce publlillhed
::nl d(clared to be of authority in the ki ngdol. Dlurin; the

X, 2 intervals

SECT. Ill.

And by the
jurifklidiio
of the pailia-
merts, parti-
cularly that
of Panrts.

17.1

SECT.I[I. intervals between the mectings of the States General of the

kingdom, or under thole reign3 when the States General
were not aflcmbled, the Mvlnarchs of France were accustomed
to consult the parliament of Paris with refpeet to the most ardu-
ous affairs of government, and frequently regulated their condua
by its advice, in declaring war, in concluding peace, and in other
tranfadtions of publicl: concern. Thus there was ereded in
the kingdom a tribunal which became the great depository of
the laws, and by the uniform tenor of its decrees it cftablifhed
principles ofjuftice and forms of proceeding which were confi-
dered as so sacred, that even the sovereign power of the Monarch
durit not venturE to disregard or to violate them. The members
of this illuflrious body, though they neither possess legislative
authority, nor can be confidcred as the reprefcntatives of the
people, have availed themselves of the reputation and influence
which they had acquired among their countrymen, in order
to nmake a fland to the utmost of their ability against every un-
precedented and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative. In
every period of the French hiflory, they have merited the praise
of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of the rights and
privileges of the nation [ QQ].

THlE kingdom extends to the confines of the German Em-

Cnfitt:tkflon
.arli ,ocrl,- pire, from which Charles V. derived his title of highefr dignity.
ret t'mI)llh- In explaining tll political conflitution of this vast and corm-

F;' rplex bodly at the beginning of tle fixtcenth century, I shall

avoid entcring into fuich a detail as would involve my readers
in tiat inextricable labyrinth, which it formed by the multi-
plicity of its tribunals, the number of its members, their

[Q.Q_] NOTE XXXIX.

inlter-
172

I73

interfering rights, and by the endless difcuflions or refine- SECT.IIL
ments of the publick lawyers of Germany with refpeQ to all
these.

THE Empire of Charlemagne was a firuEure ereted in so tsflate under
short a time that it could not be permanent. Under his im- Charlenag-e

and his de-

mediate filcceflor it began to totter; and it soon fell to pieces. fcendantb.
The crown of Germany was separated for ever from that of
France, and the descendants of Charlemagne etablifhed two
great monarchies so situatcd as to give rife to a perpetual rival-
ship and enmity between them. But the Princes of the race
of Charlemagne who were placed on the Imperial throne, were
not altogether so degenerate, as those of the fame family who
reigned in France. In the hands of the former the royal autho-
rity retained some vigour, and the nobles of Germany, though
pofiefled of extensive privilegcs as well as ample territories, did
not so early attain indepcndance. The great offices of the crown
continued to be at the disposal of the sovereign, and during a
long period, fiefs remained in their original slate, without be-
coinig hcrditary aind perpetual in the families to whicl they
had bccn granted.

AT length the German branch of the fimily of Charlemagne OhtTr d;i,;
becane cxtinct, and his feeble dcfccsndants wllh reigned in li, r;ti,',l

") to c si; e-

France had ifnk into ilchl contempt, that the Germans, wvithout rial

, i3it, .

looking towards them, cxcrciltl the right ilhccrent in a frce
people ; and in a general affcnllly of the na.tion cleted Conrad A.. 5.,
(:Couit of Franconiia Emperor. After him l lenry of Saxony,
and lias dcikcndt:iitits the thrcc Othos, wcre placcd, in fucc:.'iiom,

( I1.

ECTr. III. on the Imperial throne, by the suffrages of their countrymen.

-. The extensive territories of the Saxon Emperors, their eminent

abilities and enterprizing genius not only added new vigour to
the Imperial dignity, but raised it to higher power and pre-emi-
A. D. 952. nence. Otho the Great marched at the head of a numerous

army into Italy, and after the example of Charlemagne, gave
law to that country. Every power there recognized his au-
thority. He created Popes and deposed them by his sovereign
mandate. He annexed the kingdom of Italy to the German
Empire. Elated with his success, he aflumed the title of Cafar
AugufRus ; and a Prince born in the heart of Germany pre-
tended to be the successor of the Emperors of ancient Rome,
and claimed a right to the fame power and prerogative.

Th' German
nobility ac-
quire inde-
pendant ard
foveein au-
th rity.

BUT while the Emperors, by means of these new titles, and

new dominions, gradually acquired additional power and fplen-
dour, the nobility of Germany went on at the fame time extend-
ing their privileges and jurisdiction. The situation of affairs was
favourable to their attempts. The vigour which Charlemagne
had given to government quickly relaxed. The inability of
some of his successors was such, as would have encouraged
vas'als less enterprizing than the nobles of that age, to have
claimed new rights and to have assumed new powers. The civil
wars in which other Emperors were engaged, obliged them to
pay perpctual court to their fuibjcds on wlhoe fuipport they
depcndcd, and not only to connive at their ufurpatins, but to
permit and even to authorize them. Fiefs became gradually he-
reditary. They were transmitted not only in the dlirc, but in
the collateral line. The invctliturc of them was demanded not

h Annalilta Saxo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

7

only
174

only by male but by female heirs. Every baron began to ex- SECT.III.
ercife sovereign jurifdidion within his own domains; and the
Dukes and Counts of Germany took wide steps towards ren-
dering their territories diftine and independant States '. The The German

ecclefiafticks

Saxon Emperors observed their progress, and were aware of its raised to the
tendency. But as they could not hope to humble vassals al- Cfmepower.
ready grown too potent, unless they had turned their whole
force as well as attention to that enterprize, and as they were
extremely intent on their expeditions into Italy, which they
could not undertake without the concurrence of their nobles,
they were follicitous not to alarm them by any dire& attack on
their privileges and jurifdiaions. They aimed, however, at
undermining their power, and inconsiderately bestowed ad-
ditional territories, and accumulated new honours on the clergy,
in hopes that this order might serve as a counterpoise to that of
the nobility in any future struggle k.

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in policy were The fatal es-

fees of ag-

quickly felt. Under the Emperors of the Franconian and Swa- grandizing
bian lines, whom the Germans by their voluntary elecion placed Ce Dcrg;.
on the Imperial throne, a new face of things appeared, and a
scene was exhibited in Germany, which astonished all Christen-
dom at that time, and which in the present age appears almofl
incredible. The Popes, hitherto dependant on the Emperors, and
indebted for their power as well as dignity to their beneficence
and protection, began to claim a superior jurifdiaion; and in vir-
tue of authority which they pretended to derive from heaven,

Pfcffcl. abrcge, p. I20, 157. Lib. Feudor, tit . I. Pfcfel. abrcgc, p. 154.

tried,

I75

SEc;T. Iii.

lTc conteRs
between the
1',pes and
I'iipcrors,
-ind the con-
f(qieices of
Litchl.

tried, condemned, excomunicated and deposed their former
ilafters. Nor is this to be confidered merely as a frantick sally
of pafilon in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas concerning
the extent of prieflly domination, and the plenitude of papal
power.' Gregory VII. was able as well as daring. His pre-
fumption and violence were accompanied with political dif-
ccrnmcnt and sagacity. He had observed that the Princes and j
nobles of Germany, had acquired such considerable territories
and such extensive jurifdidion as rendered them not only for-
midablc to the Emperors, but disposed them to favour any at-
tempt to circumscribe their power. He foresaw that the eccle-
fiaflicks of Germany, raised almost to a level with its Princes,
were ready to support any person who would stand forth as the
protector of their privileges and independance. With both of
these Gregory negociated, and had secured many devoted ad-
hcrents among them, before he ventured to enter the lifts
againit the head of the Empire.

HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a pretext that

was popular and plausible. He complained of the venality and
corruption with which the Emperor had granted the inveftiturc
of benefices to ecclefiafticks. He contended that this right be-
longed to him as head of the church; he required Henry to
confine himself within the bounds of his civil jurifdition, and
to abstain for the future from fuich sacrilegious encroachment
on his spiritual dominion. All the censures of the church were
denounced against Henry, bccaufe he refused to relinquish those
powers which his predecessors had uniformly exercised. The
inoft considerable of the German Princes and cccleiafticks were
excited to take arms against him. His mother, his wife, his

3 sons
76

sons were wrought upon to disregard all the ties of blood as well
as of duty, and to join the party of his enemies'. Such were
the successful arts with which the court of Rome inflamed the
superstitious zeal and conduced the faaious spirit of the Ger-
mans and Italians, that an Emperor, distinguished not only for
many virtues, but possessed of considerable talents, was at length
obliged to appear as a supplicant at the gate gs the castle in
which the Pope resided, and to fland there, three days, bare-
footed, in the depth of winter, imploring a pardon, which
at length he obtained with difficulty [RR].

THjis aa of humiliation degraded the Imperial dignity. Nor

was the depression only momentary. The contest between
Gregory and Henry gave rife to the two great fations of the
Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which supporting the
pretensions of the Popes, and the latter defending the rights of
the Emperor, kept Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation
during three centuries. A regular system for humbling the
Emperors and circumscribing their power was formed, and ad-
hered to uniformly throughout that period. The Popes, the
free States in Italy, the nobility and ecclefiafticks of Germany,
were all interested in its success; and notwithitanding the rcturn
of some short intervals of vigour, under the administration of a
few able Emperors, the Imperial authority continued to decline.
During the anarchy of the long interregnum fubfcquent to the
death of William of Holland, it dwindled down to nothing.
Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder of the louse of Aufiria,
and who firit opened the way to its future grandeur, was at

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 325.
[RR] NOTE XL.
Vnr. I. A a length

SECT. II.

A. D. 1077.

The Imperial
authority
graaually de-
clines.

A. D. 12j6,
A. D 1273,

177_
1 v-- -.

v

SecT. III. length eleted Emperor, not that he might re-establish and
.- -.~' extend the Imperial authority, but because his territories and

influence were so inconsiderable as not to excite the jealousy of
the German Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms
of a constitution, the power and vigour of which they had de-
stroyed. Several of his successors were placed on the Imperial
throne from the fame motive; and almost every remaining
prerogative was wrested out of the hands of feeble Princes
unable to exercise or to defend them.

A total DURING this period of turbulence and confusion the conftitu-
change in the
political con- tion of the Germanick body underwent a total change. The ancient
fit Emire. names of courts and magistrates, together with the original forms

and appearance of policy were prefeived; but such new privi-
leges and jurifdidion were assumed, and so many various rights
cftablifhed, that the fame species of government no longer sub-
sifted. The Princes, the great nobility, the dignified ecclesia-
flicks, the free cities had taken advantage of the interregnum,
which I have mentioned, to establish or to extend their ufurpa-
tions. They claimed and exercised the right of governing their
rcfpecive territories with full sovereignty. They acknowledged
no uiperior with rcfped to any point, relative to the interior
adlminifiration and police of their domains. They enaaed laws,
inlmpolcd taxes, coined money, declared war, concluded peace,
and exerted every prerogative peculiar to independant States.
The ideas of order and political union which had formed the
various provinces of Germany into one body were entirely loft;
and the focicty murt have diflolvcd, if the forms of feudal filbor-
lination had not prclerved luich an appearance of connetion or

7 depcndance
178

dependance among the various members of the community, SECT.III.
as preserved it from falling to pieces. - -

THIS bond of union, however, was extremely feeble; and no Expedients

for putting an

principle remained in the German constitution of sufficient force end to tLia
to maintain publick order, and hardly to ascertain personal fecu- slate of

anarchy.

rity. From the acceflion of Rodulph of Hapfburgh, to the reign
of Maximilian, the immediate predecessor of Charles V. the
*Empire felt every calamity which a state must endure when the
authority of government is so much relaxed as to have loft all
vigour. The causes of dissention among that vast number of
members which composed the Germanick body, were infinite
and unavoidable. These gave rife to perpetual private wars,
carried on with all the violence of resentment when unrestrained
by superior authority. Rapine, outrage, exacions, became uni-
versal. Commerce was interrupted; induflry suspended; and
every part of Germany resembled a country which an enemy
had plundered and laid desolate'. The variety of expedients
employed with a view to restore order and tranquillity, prove
that the grievances occasioned by this slate of anarchy had grown
intolerallc. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the diffc-
rcnces among the several flates. The cities united in a league,
the objec of which was to check the rapine and extortions of
the nobility. The nobility formed confederacies, on pirpofe to
maintain tranquillity among their own order. Germany was
divided into several Circles, in cach of which a provincial and
partial jurifdidion was cflablifledl, to supply the place of a pub-
lick and conmon tribunalm.

' See above, pagc 45 and note xxi. Datt. ide pace publica Impcr. p. 25, no. 5s.
p. 28, no. 26. p. 35, no. r.

" Datt. pafii.n Struv. Coilp. Ilift. i. 510, &c.

A a 2 1.L ,r

SE'CT. III. BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that they served only

to demonifrate the violence of that anarchy which prevailed, and

Paiticularlv
by the Inlti- the inefficacy of the means employed to corre& it. At length
tad-on of the
Inperial' Maximilian, by instituting the Imperial chamber, a tribunal
Coamber. composed of judges named partly by the Emperor, partly
A. D. 495. by the several States, and velted with authority to decide

finally concerning all differences among the members of the
Germanick body, re-established publick order in the Empire.
A. D. s1 2. A few years after, by giving a new form to the Aulick council

which takes cognizance of all feudal causes, and such as belong
to the Emperor's immediate jurifdidion, he restored some de-
gree of vigour to the Imperial authority.

At the begin-
r.ing of the
fixtcenthl cen-
tury, the Em-
pire an aflo-
ciation of lo-
vcreign lltatts.

BUT notwithstanding the salutary effe&s of these regulations

and improvements, the political confiitution of the German
Empire, at the commencement of the period of which I propose
to write the history, was of a species so peculiar, as not to re-
femble perfectly any form of government known either in the
ancient or modern world. It was a complex body, formed by
the aifociation of several States, each of which possessed sovereign
and independant jurifdidion within its own territories. Of all
the members which composed this united body, the Emperor
was the head. In his name, all decrees and regulations with
refped to points of common concern, were issued; and to him
the power of carrying them into execution was committed. But
this appearance of monarchical power in the Emperor was more
than counterbalanced by the influence and authority of the
Princes anld States of the Empire in every ac of adminifiration.
No law extending to the whole body could pass, no refolutikn
that affcdted the general intcreft could be taken, without the ap-

-:1 probation
r8o

probation of the Diet of the Empire. In this assembly, every SECT.IIL
sovereign Prince and State of the Germanick body had a right to
be present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees or Recesses of
the Diet were the laws of the Empire, which the Emperor was
bound to ratify and enforce.

UNDER this afpe& the conflitution of the Empire appears a Peculiarities

in the nature

regular confederacy, similar to the Achean league in ancient of thisaffo-
Greece, or to that of the United Provinces and of the Swiss can- ciation
tons in modern times. But if viewed in another light, triking
peculiarities in its political state present themselves. The Ger-
manick body was not formed by the union of members altogether
diftint and independant. All the Princes and States joined in
this aflociation, were originally subjed to the Emperors, and ac-
knowledged them as sovereigns. Besides this, they originally
held their lands as Imperial fiefs, and in consequence of this
tenure owed the Emperors all those services which feudal vassals
are bound to perform to their liege lord. But though this poli-
tical fubjedion was entirely at an end, and the influence of the
feudal relation much diminished, the ancient forms and inftitu-
tions introduced when the Emperors governed Germany with
authority, not inferior to that which the other monarchs of
Europe possessed, still remained. Thus an opposition was efta-
blifhed between the genius of the government, and the forms
of adminifiration in the German Empire. The former confi-
dered the Emperor only as the head of a confederacy, the mcm-
bers of which, by their voluntary choice, have raised him to that
dignity; the latter seemed to imply, that he is really invcftcd
with ovcrecign power. By this circumftancc, such principles of Thi dkr(dl.,

ill tlhe colU?.j
hostility and dlilcord were interwoven in the frame of the Gcr- triion of the

ilalick l ,;lnpilc.

i81

SECT. IlI.

Ari'nn from
the liiinit d
ro'tocr ot the
}Emperol;.

manick body, as asseted each of its members, rendering their
interior union incomplete, and their external efforts feeble and
irregular. The effecs of this vice or disorder inherent in the
conflitution of the Empire are so considerable, that, without at-
tending to them, it is impossible to comprehend many tranfaaions
in the reign of Charles V. or to form just ideas concerning the
genius of the German government.

THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning of the sixteenth

century, were diflinguifhed by the most pompous titles, and by
such cnfigns of dignity as intimated their authority to be superior
to that of all other monarchs. The greatest Princes of the Em-
pire attended and served them on some occasions, as the officers
of their houfhold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed. They retained pretensions to all
the cxtenfivc powers which their predecessors had enjoyed in
any former age. But at the fame time, instead of poffeflng
that ample domain which had belonged to the ancient Emperors
of Germany, and which firetched from Basil to Cologne, along
both banks of the Rhine", they were fiript of all territorial
property, and had not a single city, a single castle, a single foot
of land, that pertained to them as heads of the Empire.
As their domain was alienated, their stated revenues were
reduced almocft to nothing; and the extraordinary aids which
on a few occasions they oltained, were granted sparingly,
and paid with rcludance. The Princes and States of the Emn-
pire, though they fcemcd to recognize the Imperial authority,
were tubl)jcs only in name, each of them poflefing a complcat
lunicipal jurifdidcion within the prccinds of his own territo-
rlies.

Pi-cnlf. Abrcc, &c. p. 241.

I;Fu .\o
182

FROM this ill-compaaed frame of government,. effe&s that

were unavoidable resulted. The Emperors, dazzled with the
splendour of their titles, and the exterior signs of vaR authority,
were apt to imagine themselves to be the real sovereigns of Ger-
many, and were led to aim continually at recovering the exer-
cife of those powers and prerogatives which the forms of the
conflitution seemed toveft in them, and which their predecessors
Charlemagne and the Otho's had actually enjoyed. The Princes
and States, aware of the nature as well as extent of their pre-
tensions, were perpetually on their guard, in order to watch all
the motions of the Imperial court, and to circumscribe its
power within limits flill more narrow. The Emperors, in
support of their claims, appealed to ancient forms and inflitu-
tions, which the States held to be obsolete. The States founded
their rights on recent practice and modern privileges, which
the Emperors confidered as usurpations.

T HI sjealoufy of the Imperial authority, together with the oppo-

fition between it and the rights of the States, increased confidcrably
from the time that the Emperors were eleced, not by the collec-
tive body of German nobles, but by a few Princes of chief dig-
nity. During a long period, all the members of the Gcrmanick
body assemblcd, and made choice of the person whom they ap-
pointed to be their head. But amidst the violence and anarchy
which prevailed for several centuries in the Empire, seven Princes
who pofeffed the niofl cxtenfive territories, and who had ob-
tained a hereditary title to the great offices of the State, acquircd
the cxclufive privilegc of nominating the Emperor. This right
was confirmed to them by the Golden Bull; the mode of cxcr-
cifing it was afcertailcd, and they were dignified with the ap-
pellation of Tilc[lo.s. rTh nobility and free-cities b)cinl, thus

1 rippcd

SECT.III.

From the ra-
tire of the r
titles and pre-
tunfions.

From the
manner in
which they
wcie cl.cd.

I83

SEC r. III.

From the dIf-
terent foi ms
of govern-
ment efla-
bliflicd in the
States which
composed the
(Germanic.k
4body.

firipped of a privilege which they had once enjoyed, were less
conneted with a Prince, towards whose elevation they had
not contributed by their suffrages, and came to be more appre-
henfive of his authority. The Electors, by their extensive
power, and the distinguishing privileges which they possessed,
became formidable to the Emperors, with whom they were
placed almost on a level in several ads of jurifdiion. Thus
the introdution of the Electoral college into the Empire, and the
authority which it acquired, instead of diminishing, contributed
to strengthen the principles es hoflility and discord in the Ger-
manick constitution.

THESE were further augmented by the various and repug-

nant forms of civil policy in the several States which composed
the Germanick body. It is no easy matter to render the union
of independant States perfect and entire, even when the genius
and forms of their refpedive governments happen to be altoge-
ther similar. But in the German Empire,which was a confede-
racy of Princes, of Ecclefiafticks, and of free-cities, it was impof-
fible that they could incorporate thoroughly. The free-cities
were small republicks, in which the maxims and spirit peculiar
to that species of government prevailed. The Princes and nobles
to whom supreme jurisdiCtion belonged, poifeffed a fort of mo-
narchical power within their own territories, and the forms of
their interior administration nearly resembled those of the great
feudal kingdoms. The interests, the ideas, the objeds of States so
differently constituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could their com-
mon deliberations be carried on with the fame spirit, while the love
of liberty and attention to commerce were the reigning principles
in the cities; together with the desire of power and ardour for

military
1 8,

military glory, were the governing paflions of the Princes and SECT.II.
nobility. v--

TH E secular and ecclesiastical members of the Empire were From the bp-

position be-

as little fitted for union as the free-cities and the nobility. Vast ween the (c.
territories were annexed to several of the German bifhopricks cUlefai nc-a
and abbeys, and the dignified ecclefiafticks held some of the members.
highest offices in the Empire by hereditary right. The younger
sons of noblemen of the second order, who had devoted them-
selves to the church, were commonly promoted to these stations
of eminence and power; and it was no small mortification to the
Princes and great nobility to fee persons raised from an inferior
rank to the fame level with themselves, or even exalted to fupe-
rior dignity. The education of these churchmen, the genius of
their profession, and their connection with the court of Rome,
rendered their character as well as interest different from those
of the other members of the Germanick body, with whom they
were called to ad in concert. Thus another source of jealousy
and variance was opened, which ought not to be overlooked
when we are searching into the nature of the German con-
flitution.

To all these causes of dissention may be added one more, From the

in<>lunu)l (li-

arising from the unequal difiribution of power and wealth among liribution of
the States of the lEmpire. The clcaors, and other nobles of p(,,cr amng
tlce higheRt rank, not only pollcifed fovercign jurisdiction, but t'' :,1-''"
govcrncd Ifich cxtenfivc, populous, and rich coutititCs, as ren-
dered them great l'rinces. Many of the other Inemb)ers, though
they enjoyed all the rights of sovereignty, ruled over finch petty

)domains, t thttheir real power borc no prolportioll to thiss highl
prerogativc. A well-coli;npacd and vigorous colnftllederacy c)ull,1

VoLX. I. 13 b 1,)t

*8I

SECT. III.

All thecr ren-
der the Ger-
manick body
incapable of
a&:ng with
union and
vigour.

not be formed of such dilimilar flates. The weaker were jea-
lous, timid, and unable either to aflert or to defend their just
privileges. The more powerful were apt to assume and to be-
come oppressive. The Eleaors and Emperors endeavoured by
turns to extend their own authority, by encroaching on the
rights of these feeble members of the Germanick body; and
they, over-awed or corrupted, tamely gave up their privileges,
or meanly favoured the designs formed against them [SS].

AFTER contemplating all these principles of disunion and

opposition in the conflitution of the German Empire, it will be
easy to account for the want of concord and uniformity, confpi-
cuous in its councils and proceedings. That sow, dilatory,
distrustful and irresolute spirit, which charadcerizes all its deli-
berations, will appear natural in a body, the juntion of whose
members was so incompleat, the different parts of which
were held together by such feeble ties, and set at variance
by such powerful motives. But the Empire of Germa-
ny, nevertheless, comprehended countries of such vast ex-
tent, and was inhabited by such a martial and hardy race
of men, that when the abilities of an Emperor, or zeal for
any common cause, could rouze this unwieldy body to put forth
its ftrcngth, it aded with irrefiflible force. In the following
history we fiall find, that as the measures on which Charles V.
was most intent, were often thwarted or rendered abortive by
the spirit of jcaloufy and division peculiar to the Germanick con-
flitution; so it was by the influence which he acquired over the
Princes of the EImpire, and by engaging them to co-operate
with him, that he was enabled to make fume of the greateli
cflorts which difinlguifli his reign.

[SS] NOTE XLI.

TIlE

2
i86

THE Turkifih history is so blended, during the reign of CharlesV.
with that of the great nations in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte
interpcfed so often, and with fuchdecifive influence, in the wars
and negociations of the Christian Princes, that rome previous
account of the state of government in that great Empire, is no
less necessary for the information of my readers, than these views
of the constitution of other kingdoms which I have already ex-
hibited to them.

SECT. III.

View of the
Turkish go-
vernment.

IT has been the fate of the more southern and fertile parts of Its origin.

Asia, at different periods, to be conquered by that warlike and
hardy race of men, who inhabit the vast country known to the
ancients by the name of Scythia, and among the moderns by
that of Tartary. One tribe of these people, called Turks or
Turcomans, extended its conquerts, under various leaders, and
during several centuries, from the shore of the Caspian to the
straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the middle of the fifteenth
century, these formidable conquerors took Conflantinople by
florm, and established the feat of their government in that Imperial
city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and the other provinces of
the ancient kingdoms of Thrace and M-cedonia, together with
part of Hungary, were fuljcceed to their power.

BUT though the feat of the Turkish governmcnt was fixed in Its dcfp(oic

gofius.

Europe, and the Sultans obtained poflcfion of filch extcnfive
dominions in that quarter of the globe, the genius of their policy
was purely Afiatick ; and may be properly tcrmed a dcfipotifn,
in contra(iflind ion to thcfe monarchical andl reptblican formls of
government whi wew have bccn hitelrtoc contempnl)l:tin1g. Thli
futprice power was vcnlcd in Sultans of the Ottoman race,

B b 2 that

S E c T. II. that bloodbeing deemed so sacred, that no otherwas thought worthy

of the throne. From this elevation, these sovereigns could look
down, and behold all their fubjeds reduced to the fame level be-
fore them. The maxims of Turkish policy admit not any of
those institutions, which, in other countries, limit the exercise,
or moderate the rigour of monarchical power. No great court
with constitutional and permanent jurifdiaion to interpose both
in the enactment and execution of laws. No body of hereditary
nobles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence, whose conscious-
ness of what is due to their rank and character, whose jealousy
of their privileges circumscribe the authority of the Prince, and
ierve not only as a barrier against the excesses of his caprice, but
land as an intermediate order between him and the people.
Under the Turkish government, the political condition of every
subject is equal. To be employed in the service of the Sultan, is the
only circumstance that confers diftinaion. Even this diftinaion
is annexed so closely to the flations in which persons serve, that
it is scarce communicated to those who are placed in them.
The highest dignity in the Empire does not give any rank or
pre-eminence to the family of him who enjoys it. As every
man, before he is raised to any station of authority, muff go
through the preparatory discipline of a long and servile obe-
dlicnce o, the moment he is deprived of power, he and his pofte-
rity return to the fame condition with other fubjeds, and fink
back into obscurity. It is the difiinguifhing and odious charac-
teriflick of the Eaftcrn defpotifin, that it annihilates all other
ranks of men, in order to exalt the monarch; that it leaves no-
thing to the former, while it gives every thing to the latter; that
it endeavours to fix in the minds of those who are fubljct to it,

o State of the Turlkil Emp'rc by Rycaut, p. 25.

7

the

the idea of no relation between men, but that of a malter and of
a slave, the former destined to command and to punish, the latter
formed to tremble and to obey [TT].

SECT. III.
L- -»
BUT as there are circumfiances which frequently obftru& or Power of the

Sultan limited

defeat the salutary effeAs of the beft-regulated governments, by religion;;
there are others which contribute to mitigate the evils of
the most vicious forms of policy. There can, indeed, be no
conltitutional restraints on the will of a Prince in a despotic go-
vernment; but there may be such as are accidental. Absolute
as the Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves circumscribed
both by religion, the principle on which their authority is
founded P, and by the army, the instrument which they muff
employ in order to maintain it. Wherever religion inter-
poses, the will of the Sovereign mutl submit to its decrees.
When the Koran hath prescribed any religious rite; hath en-
joined any moral duty; or hath confirmed, by its fandion, any
political maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot overturn
that which an higher authority hath established. The chief
reftridion, however, on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by
the military power. An armed force mutl surround the throne and by the
of every Despot, to maintain his authority, and to execute his military
commands. As the Turks extended their empire over nations,
which they did not exterminate, but reduce to fubjedion, they
found it necessary to render their military establishment nume-
rous and formidable. Amurath, their third Sultan, in order to Origin rlf tlb

Janizarie.

form a body of devoted troops, that might serve as the immo- A. p. I;6z.
diate guards of his person and dignity, appointed his officers to
fcize annually, as the Imperial property, thefifth part of the

P Rycaut. p. 8.

[TT] NOTE XIII.

youtll

189

SECT. III. youth taken in war. These, after being inftruded in the Ma-
~--'" hometan religion, inured to obedience by severe discipline, and

trained to warlike exercises, were formed into a body diftin-
guifhfed by the name of Janizaries, or new soldiers. Every fen-
timent which enthusiasm can inspire, every mark of diftinfion
that the favour of the Prince could confer, were employed in
order to animate this body with martial ardour, and with a con-
fcioufnefs of its own pre-eminence . The Janizaries soon be-
came the chief ffrength and pride of the Ottoman armies; and
by their number as well as reputation, were diffinguifhed above
all the troops, whose duty it was to attend on the person of the
Sultans [UU].

Their vf.n- THius, as the supreme power in every society is possessed by
fl ,ence in the
Turkifi go- those who have arms in their hands, this formidable body of

soldiers, deffined to be the infiruments of enlarging the Sultan's
authority, acquired, at the fame time, the means of controuling
it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like the Prxetorian bands
in ancient Rome, quickly perceived all the advantages which they
derived fiomn being flationcd in the capital; from their union
under one findlard; and from being mnflers of the person of
tle lrince. The Sultans l)caimc no lces sensible of their influ-
ence and ilnp);rt.lice. T'lh Clpicii(y, or loldicry of the Porte,
was the only power in the Emplir- that a Sultan or his Vifier
hlad rcafon to dread. To prclcrve the fidelity and attachment
of the Janiz.arics, was the great art of government, and the prin-
cipal ol,)jcc of attClctiion in tlhe policy of tle Ottoman court.
Undcr a Inoarcllh, wlhofe abilities aned vigour of mind fit Iiim
for command,a they arc olbfequliious inflrulnents; cxecute what-

. Piin( C.iltcrnii'.; Iiiflory of the Othilan Empire, p. 87.
[1UU!1 NOTE XL!I1.

ever
190

ever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible. Under feeble
Princes, or such as are unfortunate, they become turbulent and
mutinous; aflume the tone of masters; degrade and exalt Sul-
tans at pLeasure; and teach those to tremble, on whose nod, at
other times, life or death depend.

FROM Mahomet II. who took Conflantinople, to Solyman,

who began his reign a few months after Charles V. was placed
on the Imperial throne, a succession of illufirious Princes ruled
over the Turkifl Empire. By their great abilities, they kept
their fubjets of every order, military as well as civil, submissive
to government; and had the absolute command of whatever
force their vast Empire was able to exert. Solyman, in parti-
cular, who is known to the Christians chiefly as a conqueror,
but is celebrated in the Turkifll annals as the great law-giver
who established order and police in their Empire, governed
during his long reign with no less authority than wisdom. He
divided his dominions into several dilfrits; he appointed the
number of foldicrs which each flould furnifl; he appropriated
a certain proportion of the lands in evcry proviuce for their
maintenance; lie rcgulatc(l, with a minute accuracy, every thing
relative to their difciplinc, their arms, and the nature of their
service. He put the finances of the Empire into an ordctly
train of adminifiration; and though the taxes in the Turkilh
dominions, as swell as in the other despotic monarchies of the
East, are far from being confiderablc, he lfupplied that dcfect by
:an attentive and frvere ccconolny.

NoR was it only under fitcl Sultanasas Solyman, vwhiof ta-

lents were no llef adapted to prcferve interior order, thall to
conduct the operations of warl, that the Turkill Elmpire cngagled

' it I

SECT. III.

Preerers of
the Turks to.
tk ar,'S domi-

\vcII fl.y

A !V.1tltgec3

po %,er" ll :li(ti !

sixrecntli Cc!1.
tul y.

I9I

SECT. IHI. with advantage in its contests with the Christian states. The
----- long fucceflion of able Princes, which I have mentioned, had

given such vigour and firmness to the Ottoman government,
that it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth century,
the highest degree of perfeCtion of which its constitution was
capable. Whereas the great monarchies inChriftendom were still
far from that state, which could enable them to at with a full
exertion of their force. Betides this, the Turkish troops in that
age pofleffcd every advantage which arises from superiority in
military discipline. At the time when Solyman began his reign,
tle Janizaries had been embodied near a century anda half, and
during that long period the severity of their military discipline
had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers drawn from the pro-
vinces of the Empire had been kept almost continually under
arms, in the various wars which the Sultans had carried on with
hardly any interval of peace. Against troops thus trained and
accustomed to fcrvice, the forces of the Christian powers took
the field with great disadvantage. The most intelligent as well as
impartial authors of the sixteenth century, acknowledge and la-
ment the superior attainments of theTurks inthe militaryart.[XX]
The fucceif which uniformly attended their arms in all their
wars, demonstrates thejuflnefs of this observation. The Christian
armies (lid not acquire that superiority over the Turks, which
they now poflefs, until the long eflabliflhment of flanding forces
had improved military discipline among the former; and until va-
rious canuis and events, wliich it is not my province to explain,
had corrupted or abolilhed ticir ancient warlike inftitutiolls
among the latter.

LXX] NOTE XAIV.

PR oo;FS
I-,2

# 

PROOF

S

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.
VOL. I.

C c

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

P R OO F S

AND
I L L US T RATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 2. [A].

H E consternation of the Britons, when invaded by the
Pids and Caledonians after the Roman legions were
called out of the island, may give some idea of the

degree of debasement to which the human mind was reduced
by long servitude under the Romans. In their supplicatory
letter to Aetius, which they call the groans of Britain, " We
know not (fay they) which way to turn us. The barbarians
drive us to the sea; and the sea forces us back on the barbari-
ans; between which we have only the choice of two deaths,
either to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be butchered by
the sword." Hiftor. Gildae. ap. Gale. Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.
--- One can scarce believe this dastardly race, to be the de-
fcendants of that gallant people, who repulsed Cafar, and de-
fended their liberty so long againiR the Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 4. [B]

T iE barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but regarded

literature with contempt. They found the inhabitants of all
the provinces of the Empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to

C c 2 war.

war. Such a charader was the object of scorn to an high-
spirited and gallant race of men. " When we would brand an
enemy," fays Liutprandus, ' with disgraceful and contumelious
appellations, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft Romani no-
mine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avari-
tix, quicquid l[ixuri., quicquid mendacii, immo quicquid vitio-
rum eft comprchendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Murat.
Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars. I. p. 48 I. This degeneracy of manners,
illiterate barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even as-
ter they fettled in the countries which they had conquered, they
would not permit their children to be inftruccd in any fcicnce;
"for, (said they), infrudion in the sciences tends to corrupt, ener-
vate, and depress the mind; and he who has been accuftoined to
treml)le undecr the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a sword or
fpcar with an undaunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Script. Byz. vol. i. A considerable number of years
elapsed, before nations so rude, and so unwilling to learn, could
produce hiflorians capable of recording their tranfadions, or of
dcfcribing their manners and institutions. By that time, all
memory of their anci, nt condition was loft, and no monument
rcnained to guide their I;rfl writers to any certain knowledge
of it. If one cxpeds to receive any fatisfadory account of the
manners and laws of the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during
their rcfidlcncc il tllolc countries where they were originally
scatcd, from Jornandes, Iaulus Warnefiidus, or Gregory of
Tou',lr the carlieft anld nmo authentick hlifloriians of tlhel people,
he will be mnil'rablly d(ilapointcd. Whatever imnlperfct view
ihas been coIcvcCd to us of' their ancient slate, we owe not to
their pwn writers, but to the Greek and Roman hiflorians.

NOTE
96G

I97

NOTE III. SE CT. I. p. 5. [C].

A CIRCUMISTANCE related by Prifcus in his history of the

embassy to Attila, King of the Huns, gives a firiking view of the
enthufiaftick passion for war, which prevailed among the bar-
barous nations. When the entertainment to which that fierce
conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors was ended, two
Scythians advanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in which
they celebrated his vitorics, and military virtues. All the
Huns fixed their eyes with attention on the bards. Some
teemed to be delighted with the verses; others, remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with joy; while those
who were become feeble through age, burfi out into tears, be-
wailing the decay of their vigour, and the slate of inacivity in
which they were now obliged to remain. Excerpta ex hiftoria
Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant. Hiftor. Script. edit. Venct. v. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. ii. [D].

A RFMNARKABLE confirmation of both partsofthis reasoning

occurs in the history of England. The Saxons carried on the
conquest of that country with the fame dcftrucdive spirit, which
diflinguilled the other barbarous nations. The ancient inhabi-
tants of Britain were either ex terminated; or forced to take fclclter
among the mountains of Wales; or reduced into servitude. The
Saxon government, laws, manners and languagc were of con-
Icqucnce introduced into Britain ; and were i plerf(etly efta-
blithcd, that all memory of the institutions previous to their con-
licflt was aboliflled. The very revcr!f of this happened in a fiibl-
quenvt revolution. A inglc vidory placed Williaml the Norman on

the

the throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants though oppref-
fed, were not exterminated. William employed the utmost
efforts of his power and policy to make his new subjects con-
form in every thing to the Norman standard; but without fuc-
cess. The Saxons, though vanquished, were far more nu-
merous than their conquerors; when they began to incorporate,
their laws and manners gradually gained ground. The Nor-
man institutions were unpopular and odious; many of them
fell into disuse; and in the English constitution and language,
at this day, many essential parts are manifestly of Saxon, not
of Norman extract.

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. II. [E].

PROCOPIUS, the historian, declines, from a principle of be-

nevolence, to give any particular detail of the cruelties of the
Goths; " Left, fays he, I flould transmit a monument and
example of inhumanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de bello
Goth. lib. iii. cap. IO. ap. Lyz. Script. vol. i. 126. But as the
change, which I have pointed out as a confequcnce of the set-
tlcment of the barbarous nations in the countries formerly sub-
jed to the Roman Empire, could not have taken place, if the
greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not been extirpated,
an event of fulch importance an( influence merits a more par-
ticular illllftration. This will jullify me for exhibiting some
part of that melancholy fpedacle, over which humlanity
prolnpted Procopius to draw a veil. I fliall not, however, lif-
gust my readers by a long detail ; but rel fiatislied with collc:t-
ing Jiome inllanccs of the devaltations made b) two of the
many nations, which fectlld in the Empire. The Vandals

*k were
198

were the first of the barbarians who invaded Spain. It was
one of the richest and mofi populous of the Roman Provinces;
the inhabitants had been distinguished for courage, and had
defended their liberty against the arms of Rome, with greater
obstinacy, and during a longer course of years, than any na-
tion in Europe. But so entirely were they enervated by their
fubjedion to the Romans, that the Vandals who entered the
kingdom A. D. 409. compleated the conquest of it with such
rapidity, that in the year 41 I, these barbarians divided it among
them by calling lots. The desolation occasioned by their inva-
sion is thus described by Idatius an eye witness. " The barba-
rians wafted every thing with hotfile cruelty. The pestilence
was no less deftrudive. A dreadful famine raged, to such
a degree, that the living were constrained to feed on the
dead bodies of their fellow citizens; and all these terrible
plagues desolated at once thc unhappy kingdoms." Idatii
Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. I233. edit. Lugd. I677.
The Goths having attacked the Vandals in their new set-
tlements, a fierce war ensued; the country was plundered by
both parties; the cities which at first escaped were laid in
ashes, and the inhabitants exposed to susser every thing that
the wanton cruelty of barbarians could inflict. Idatius describes
these, ibid. p. I235. b. I236. c. f. A similar account of their
devastations is given by Ifidorus Hifpalenfis, and the contem-
porary writers. Ifid. Chron. ap. Grot. hill. Goth. 732. From
Spain the Vandals passed over to Africa, A. D. 428. Africa
was, next to Egypt, the most fertile of the Roman provinces.
It was one of the granaries of the Empire, and is called by an
ancient writer, the foul of the commonwealth. Though the
army with which they invaded it, did not exceed 30,000 fight-

ing

g99

ing men, they became absolute matiers of the province in leAs:
than two years. A contemporary author gives a dreadful ac-
count of the havock which they made: " They found. a pro-
vince well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the beauty of the.
whole earth. They carried their deftrudtive arms into every
corner of it; they difpeopled it by their devastations; exter-
minating every thing with fire and. sword.- They did not even
spare the vines, and fruit trees, that those to. whom. caves and
inaccessible mountains had afforded a retreat, might find no
nourilhment of any kind. Their hostile rage could not be
satiated, and there was no place exempted from the effecs of
it. They tortured their prisoners with the most exquisite
cruelty, that they might force from them a discovery of their
hidden treasures. The more they discovered, the more they
cxpcded, and the more implacable they became. Neither the
infirmities of age nor of sex; neither the dignity of nobility,
nor the fandity of the sacerdotal office, could mitigate their fury ;
but the more illustrious their prisoners were, the more barbar-
oufly they insulted them. The publick buildings which. refifed
the violence of the flames, they levelled with the ground. They
left many cities without an inhabitant. When they approached
any fortified place, which their undisciplined army could not
reduce, they gathered together a multitude of prisoners, and
putting them to the sword, left their bodies unburied, that the
fcench of the carcasses might oblige the garrison to abandon it."
Viaor Vitenfis de perfecutione Africana. ap. Bibl. Patrum. vol.
viii. p. 666. St. Auguflin an African, and a contemporary
author gives a similar description of their cruelties, opera v. x.
p. 372. edit. I616.-About an hundred years after the fettlc-
ment of the Vandals in Africa, Belisarius attacked and dif-.

1t Ppofflcfedl
0oo

poffefled them. Procopius, a contemporary historian, describes
the devastation which that war occasioned. " Africa, fays he,
was so entirely difpeopled, that one might travel several days in
it without meeting one man; and it is no exaggeration to fay,
that in the course of the war five millions of persons periihed."
Proc. hist. Arcana cap. I8. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 3I5. --I
have dwelt longer upon the calamities of this province, because
they are described not only by contemporary authors, but by eye-
witnesses. The present slate of Africa confirms their testimony.
Many of the most flourishing and populous cities with which
it was filled, were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges remain
to point out where they were situated. That fertile territory
which sustained the Roman Empire lies in a great measure
uncultivated; and that province, which Viaor in his barbarous
Latin called Speciofitas tots t terreforentis, is now the retreat
of pirates and banditti.

WHIL E the Vandals laid wate one part of the Empire, the

Huns dcfolated the reft of it. Of all the barbarous tribes they
were the fierccft and most formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus
a contemporary author, and one of the best of the later lifio-
rians, gives an account of their policy and manners. They
nearly resemble those of the Scythians deifcribcd by the ancients,
and of the Tartars known to the Imoderns. In folme parts of
their cllaradcr, and in several of their customs, they refenible
the favagcs in North Alecrica. Their palion for var and
adtion was cxtrene. "As ill polillicd focicties (fays Ainnlmiaii s)
cafe and tranquillity arc courted, they ticligli11 wr all (lall-
gers. He who falls in battle s reckoned li:lply. 'llcy
who (lie of old ;ige or of difcafi e ; (re diemil il iitll). 'I ltcy

VoL. i. 1) d boaftl

noI

boast, with the utmost exultation, of the number of enemies
whom they have slain, and as the most glorious of all orna-
ments, they fallen the fca!ps of those who have fallen by their
hand to the trappings of their horses." Ammian. Marc. lib.
xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Ludg. I693.-- Their incursions
into the Empire began in the fourth century; and the Romans,
though no strangers, by that time, to the effets of barbarous
rage, were aftoniihed at the cruelty of their devastations.
Thrace, Pannonia, and Illyricum were the countries which
they first laid desolate. As they had no thoughts of fettling in
Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Procopius computes
that in each of these, at a medium, two hundred thoufandperfons
perifled or were carried off as slaves. Procop. hist. Arcan. ap.
Byz. script. vol. i. 316. Thrace, the best cultivated province
in that quarter of the Empire, was converted into a desert, and
when Prifcus accompanied the ambassadors sent to Attila,
there were no inhabitants in some of the cities, but a few mi-
ferable people who had taken shelter among the ruins of the
churches; and the fields were covered with the bones of those
who had fallen by the fwvord.. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34.
Attila became King of the I-Iuns. A. D. 434. He is one of
the greatcle and molt enterprizing conquerors mentioned in
history. He extended his Empire over all the vast countries,
comprchendcd under the general names of Scythia and Ger-
many in the ancient division of the world. While he was
carrying on his wars against the barbarous nations, lie kept the
Roman Empire under perpetual apprehensions, and extorted
vast subsidics from the timid and cffcminate monarchs who
governed it. In the year 45 , he entered Gaul, at the head of
4a army compoflcd of all the various nations which he had sub-

duedl
202

dued. It was more numerous than any with which the barba-
rians had hitherto invaded. the Empire. The devastations
which he committed were horrible; not only the open country,
but the most flourishing cities were desolated. The extent and
cruelty of his devastations are described by Salvianus de Gu-
bernat Dei. edit. Baluz. Par. 1669. p. I39, &c. and by Idatils
ubi supra p. 1235. Aetius put a stop to his progress in that
country by the famous battle of Chalons, in which (if we may
believe the historians of that age) three hundred thousand per-
sons perified. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Geticis ap. Grot,
hist. Gothor. p. 671. Amft. i665. But next year he resolved to
attack the centre of the Empire, and marching into Italy,
wafted it with rage, inflamed by the sense of his late disgrace.
What Italy suffered by the Huns exceeded all the calamities
which the preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought
upon it. Conringius has collected several passages from the
ancient historians, which prove that the devastations committed
by the Vandals and Huns in the countries situated on the banks
of the Rhine, were no less cruel and fatal to the human race.
Exercitatio de urbibus Germanie. Opera, vol. i. 489. But it is
cndlefs, it is thocking to follow thcfe destroyers of mankind
through so many scenes of horror, and to contemplate the
havock which they made of the human fpccics.

BUT the state in which Italy appears to have been, during

several ages, after the barbarous nations fettled in it, is the most
dk-cilive proof of the cruelty as well as extent of their deva-
flations. Whenever any country is thilly i inhabited, trees and
fhlrubs fijring up in the iciilltivated fields, and spreading by

D d d egrcee

degrees form large foreits; by the overflowing of rivers, and
the flagnating of waters, other parts of it are converted into.
lakes and marihes. Ancient Italy, the feat of the RQman ele-
gance and luxury, was cultivated to the highest pitch. But
so effectually did the devaflations of the barbarians destroy
all the effects of their industry and cultivation, that in the
eighth century Italy appears to have been covered with forests
and marshes of vast extent. Muratori enters into a long detail
concerning the situation and limits of these; and proves by the
most authentick evidence, that great tracts of territory, in all
the different provinces of Italy, were either over-run with
w ood, or laid under water. Nor did these occupy parts of the
country naturally barren or of little value, but were spread over
diftrid-s, which ancient writers represent as extremely fertile,
and which at present are highly cultivated. Muratori antiqui-
tates Italica: medii aevi dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. I49, 153, &c. A
firong proof of this occurs in a description of the city of Mo-
dena, by an author of the tenth century. Murat. script. Rerum
Italic. vol. ii. pars. ii. p. 69I. The state of desolation in other
countries of Europe seems to have been the fame. In many of
ihe most early charters now extant, the lands granted to mona-
ilcrics or to private persons, are difiinguilhed into such as are
cultivated or inhabited, and such as were eremni, deiblate. In
iany inltances, lands are granted to persons because they had
taken them fiomn the dcicrt, al ereio, and had cultivated and
planted them with inhabitants. This appears from a charter of
Ulharlemagne, publifled by Eckhart de rebus Francix Oricntalis.
vol. ii. p. 86(,, andi friom many charters of his successors quoted
by Du Cange voc. E'rcnmus.

NMURATO I
204

MVtRATORI adds, that during the eighth and ninth centuries,

Italy was greatly infested by wolves and other wild beasts; ano-
ther mark of its being destitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq.
vol. ii. p. i63. Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient world for
its fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the slate of a country
newly peopled, and rendered habitable.

I A.M sensible, not only that some of the descriptions of the

devastations which I have quoted, may be exaggerated, but
that the barbarous tribes proceeded in different manners, in
making their new settlements. Some of them seemed to be
bent on exterminating the ancient inhabitants; others were
more disposed to incorporate with them. It is not my province
either to enquire into the causes which occasioned this variety in
the conduc of the conquerors, or to describe the fiate of those
countries where the ancient inhabitants were treated most mildly.
The fads which I have produced are sufficient to prove that the
(eftrudion of the human species, occasioned by their hostile in-
vafions of the northern nations, and their subsequent fettle-
jnents, was much greater than the generality of writers seem to
imagine.

NOTE VI. SEC( r. I. p. I3. [F]

I II AVE obfcrved, Note II. that our only certain information con-
cerning the ancient slate of the barbarous nations must be derived
foiln the Greek and Roman writers. Ihtippily an account of
the inflitutions and cufroms of one people, to which those of all
the reft seen to have bccn in a great measure similar, has been
tranfinitted to us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps, that
ever wrote, ofoblcrving them with profound (ifcernment, and
of c'cribing them with propriety and force. The reader must

perceive

o205

perceive that I have Cafar and Tacitus in my eye. The former
gives a short account of the ancient Germans in a few chapters
of the sixth book of his commentaries: The latter wrote a trea-.
tife cxprefsly on that fubje&. These are the most precious and
inftrudive monuments of antiquity to the present inhabitants
of Europe. From them we learn,

i. THAT the slate of Society among the ancient Germans was

of the rudest and most simple form. They subsisted entirely by
hunting or by pasturage. Cxf. lib. vi. c. 21. They negle&ted
agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and flesh. Ibid.
c. 22. Tacitus agrees with him in most of these points; de
inorib. Germ. c. 14, 15, 23. The Goths were equally negli-
gent of agriculture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 31. B.
Society was in the fame state among the Huns, who disdained to
cultivate the earth, or to touch a plough. Amm. Marcel. lib.
xxxi. p. 475. The fame manners took place among the Alans;
ibid. p. 477. While society remains in this simple state, men
by uniting together scarce relinquish any portion of their na-
tural independance. Accordingly we are informed, 2. That the
authority of civil government was extremely limited among the
Germans. During times of peace they had no common or fixed
magifiratc, but the chief men of every dlifirid dilpenfed juflicc,
and accommodated differences. Cxr. ibid. c. 23. Their Kings
had not abfiolute or unbounded powcr; their authority confiltcd
rather ill the privilcge of a(lvifing, tlian i!l the powcr of com-

n:niling. Matters of finall conllcqucncc xvcrc detcrmincd by

thc chicl' mcn; aflairs of implort;alce by tlic whole community.
lacit. c. 7, ir. The 1 Iiins, in like Ii,;incr, dLlilxr;led ill common
conccrnilng every ul)uincl s of m1()Illlclt tL) lit licty; a nd were
nlot ifujce to the rigour of rea;l auzllrlity. Anin. MIarcel.

lib.
^o6

lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual among the ancient Ger-
mans was left at liberty to chufe whether he would take part in
any military enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed on him by pub-
lick authority. " When any of the chief men proposes any ex-
pedition, such as approve of the cause and of the leader rife up,
and declare their intention of following him; and those who do
not fulfil this engagement, are confidered as deserters and trai-
tors, and are looked upon as infamous." Caf. ibid. c. 23. Taci-
tus plainly points at the lame custom, though in terms more
obscure. Tacit. c. I I. 4. As every individual was bt inde-
pendant, and master in so great a degree of his own actions, it
became, ofconfequence, the great objea of every person among
the Germans who aimed at being a leader, to gain adherents,
.and attach them to his person and interest. These adherents
Caesar calls dmbanli and Clientes, i. e. retainers or clients; Ta-
citus, Comites, or companions. The chief diftindion and power
of the leaders, confified in being attended by a numerous band of
chosen youth. This was their pride as well as ornament during
peace, and their defence in war. The favour of thcf retainers
the leaders gained or preserved by presents of armour, and of
liorfes; or by the profuse, though inelegant hospitality, with
which they entertained them. Tacit. c. 14, 15. 5. Another
consequence of the personal liberty and independance which the
Germans retained, even after they united in society, was their
circuifcribing the criminal jurisdiction of the magifirate within
very narrow limits, and their not only claiming hbt cxcrcifingal-
mol all the rights ofprivate resentment and revenge. Their magi-
firatce had not the power either of imprisoning, or of intliciint
any corporal puniflmcnt on a free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every pcrfoii

3, w as

*

was obliged to avenge the wrongs which his parents or friends
had sustained. Their enmities were hereditary, but not irrecon-
cileable. Even murder was compensated by paying a certain
number of cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of the fine went to the
King, or state, a part to the person who had been injured, or to
his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

THESE particulars concerning the institutions and manners

of the Germans, though well known to every person conversant
in ancient literature, I have thought proper to arrange in this
order, and to lay before such of my readers as may be less ac-
quainted with these fads, both because they confirm the account
which I have given of the Ptate of the barbarous nations, and tend to
illuftratc all the observations that i mhall have occasion to make
concerning the various changes in their government and customs.
The laws and cufloms introduced by the barbarous nations into
their new settlements, are the befl commentary on the writings
of Ccefar and Tacitus; and their observations are the best key to
a perse knowledge of these laws and cutfoms.

ONE circumstance with refpcd to the testimonics of Cafar and

Tacitus concerning the Germans, merits attention. Cafar
wrote his brief account of their manners more than an hundred
years before Tacitus composed his treatifei de moribus Germano-
rum. An hundred years make a considerable period in the pro-
grefs of national manners, cfpccially il, during that time, those
people who are rude and unpolilled have had much communi-
cation with more civilized ltates. Tlis was the cafe with the
Germans. Their intcrcourfe with the IRoians began when
Cefar crosscd the Rhine, and increased prodigiously during the

interval
k

interval betwtme thateureqt anmtte time ie when.Taci'tualowiLe
Befidó1stlh heritE.wsardabriffsenece avetxen iteftate
of focietym t~ the dlifferent tribes ef.iemaans. ThetSuiones
were so mudh ,ill.povtdlthat they biegaa ko be corruted Tae.
cap. 44. T-e Serai were so barbarous, fhat it is wonderfiil
how they were able to subs. b. id cap. 46. Whiever-under-
takes to defcTibe the' manners of the Germans, or to found any
political theary upon the state tf society among them, ought
carefully to attend to both there circumflances.

BEFORE I quit this futbjet, it may not be improper to ob-

serve, that though fucceffivealterations in their infitutions, toge-
ther with the gradual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people, who conquered the
Roman Empire, there is flill one race of men nearly in the fame
political situation with that in which they were when they firtl
fettled in their new conquests: I mean the various -tribes and
nations of Savages in North America. It cannot then be con-
fidered either as a digression, or as an improper indulgence of
curiosity to enquire, whether this similarity in their political
state has occasioned any resemblance between their characer and
manners. If the likeness turns out to be firiking, it is a stronger
proof that a just account has been given of the ancient inulabi-
tants of Europe, than the teflimony even of Caesar or of Ta-
citus.

i. The Americans fnbfift chiefly by hunting and fishing.

Some tribes neglect agriculture entirely. Among those who
cultivate some small spot near their huts, that, together with all
works. of labour, is performed by the women. P. Charlcvoix
Journal Hiflorique d'un Voyage de L'Ameriquc 40. Par. I744.
p. 334. In such a fiate of focicty, tile common wants of

VoL. L EC c inca

men being few, and their mutual dependence upon each other
finall, their union is extremely imperfec and feeble, and they
continue to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired. It is
the first idea of an American, that every man is born free and
independent, and that no power on earth hath any right to di-
minifh or circpmfcribe his natural liberty. There is scarce any
appearance of subordination either in civil or domestic govern-
ment. Every one does what he pleases. A father and mother
with their children, live like persons whom chance has brought
together, and whom no common bond unites. Their manner of
educating their children is suitable to this principle. They never
chastise or punish them, even during their infancy. As they
advance in years, they allow them to be entirely masters of their
own ations, and responsible to no body. Id. p. 272, 273.----
2. The power of their civil magistrates is extremely limited.
Among most of their tribes, the Sachem or chief is elective. A
council of old men is chosen to assist him, without whose advice
he determines no affair of importance. The Sachems neither
possess nor claim anygreat degree of authority. They propose and
intreat rather than command. The obedience of their people is
altogether voluntary. Id. p. 266, 268.----3. They engage in
any military enterprize, not from constraint, but choice. When
war is resolved, a chief arises, and offers himself to be the leader.
They who are willing (for they compel no person) fiand up one
after another, and sing their war song. But if after this, any of
there should rcfufc to follow the leader, to whom they have
engaged, his life would be in danger, and he would be confi-
dered as the most infamous of all men. Id. p. 217, 218.----.
4. Such as engage to follow any leader, exped to be treated by
him with great attention and rcfpedt; and he is obliged to
make them l)rcfents of confidcrable value. Id. p. 218.-----

2 5. Among

5. Among the Americans, the magiflrate has scarce any criminal
jurifdidtion. Id. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the person
or family offended may inflict what punishment they please on
the person who was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resent-
ment and desire of vengeance are excessive and implacable. Time
can neither extinguish or abate it. It is the chief inheritance
parents leave to their children; it is transmitted from generation
to generation, until an occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p.
309. Sometimes, however, the offended party is appeared. A
compensation is paid for a murder that has been committed. The
relations of the deceased receive it; and it consists most com-
monly of a captive taken in war, who being substituted in place
of the person who was murdered, assumes his name, and is
adopted into his family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have
pointed out the similarity of those great features which diftin-
guifh and characterize both people. Bochart, and other philolo-
gifts of the last century, who, with more erudition than science,
endeavoured to trace the migrations of various nations, and who
were apt, upon the slightest appearance of resemblance, to find an
affinity between nations far removed from each other, and to
conclude that they were dcfcendcd from the fame ancestors,
would hardly have failed, on viewing filch an amazing similarity,
to pronounce with confidence, " That the Germans and Ameri-
cans must be the fame people." But a philofophcr will satisfy
himfllf with oblerving, "That the characters of nationsdepends
on the late of focicty in which thcy live, and on the political
institutions cflablilhed among them; and that the human mind,
wheniever it is placed in tile fame fitiation, will, in ages thi molt
(liflant, and in countries the iioftC remlote, afsime the fame form,
and be tlililngtiillihcd by the f'mcIl' manners.

211
J: c :.

I s\.e .

E I AVE puhed the comparion between the Germaas ain

Americans no farther than was necessary for the illustration of
my subjea. I do not pretend that the state of society in the tro
countries was perfectly similar. Many of the German tribes
were more civilized than the Americans. Some of them were
not unacquainted with agriculture; almost all of them had flock
of tame cattle, and depended for the chief part of their fuh-.
fiftence upon there. Most of the American tribes fubfL by
hunting, and are in a ruder and more simple Rate than the ancient
Germans. The resemblance, however, between their condition
is greater perhaps than any that we know between two races of
men, and this has produced a furprizing fimiUarity of manners,

NOTE VII. SECT. I. p. 13. [G]

THE booty gained by an army belonged to an army. The

King himself had no part of it but what he acquired by lot. A
remarkable inflance of this occurs in the history of the Franks.
The army of Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, hav-
ing plundered a church, carried off, among other sacred utensils,
a vase of extraordinary size and beauty. The bishop sent depu-
ties to Clovis, bcfceching him to restore the vase, that it might be
again employed in the sacred services to which it had been con-
fecrated. Clovis desired the deputies to follow him to Soissons,
as their booty was to be divided in that place, and promised that
if the lot should give him the disposal of the vase, he would
grant what the bishop dcfired. When he came to Soissons, and
all the booty was placed in one great heap in the middle of the
army, Clovis intreated, that lefore making the division, they
would give him that vase over and above his share. All appeared
willing to gratify the King, and to comply with his requcfl,

when

when a fierce and haughty fotier lifted up his battle-aet and
firiking the vase with the utmo& vialene, cried out with a loud&
voice, " You Tall receive nothing here but that to whih the kI
gives you a right." Gregor TurotL Rifor. Fran~u.wn lil ii.-
c. 27. p. 70. Par. 16 xo.

NOTE VIIU S cT, I. p. 15. [H]

TrHE history of the establishment and progress of the feudal

system, is an interesting objeCt to all the nations of Europe. In'
some countries, their jurisprudence and laws are still in a great
measure feudal, In others, many for1s and prpatices efitblifled
by custom, or founded on ftstutes, took their rife from the feudal
law, and cant be u^4erftoo4 without attending to the ideas
peculiar to it. Several authars 9f the higheQ reputation for
genius and eruditiol, have endeavoure. to illufraW this fubje&,
but they have left many parts of it oicure. I tall endeavour
to trace, with precision, the progress and variation of ideas con-
cerning property in lnd amog the barbaraus nations; and shall
attempt to point out the causes which introcuced there changes,
as well as the effeds which followed upon them. Property in
land seems to have gone through four fucceillve changes aiporg
the people who fettled in the various provinces of the Roman
Empire.

I. VWIIILE the barbarous nations remained in their original

countries, they had no fixed property in land, and no certain
limnis to their pofcilions. Aftcr feeding their flocks in one-
dilfrid, they removed witl thecm, their wives and families, to
anotlher; and abandoned that likcwili in a short tinc. They
were not, in conlifeucnce of this impcrfet fpecic;s of propcrty,,
brought under any pofitivc or formal obligation to Ii: -v the

ctl'1 i lL.m t)';,

community; all their services were purely voluntary. Every
individual was at liberty to chute how far he would contri-
bute towards carrying on any military enterprize. If he fol-
lowed a leader in any expedition, it was from attachment, not
from a sense of obligation. The clearest proof of this has been
produced in note VI. While property continued in this ltate,
we can discover nothing that bears any resemblance to a feudal
tenure, or to the subordination and military service which the
feudal system introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they subdued, the

victorious army divided the conquered lands. That portion
which fell to every soldier, he seized as a recompence due to his
valour, as a settlement acquired by his own sword. He took
possession of it as a freeman in full property. He enjoyed it
during his own life, and could dispose of it at pleasure, or tranf-
mit it as an inheritance to his children. Thus property in land
became fixed. It was at the fame time allodial, i. e. the poffiefbr
had the entire right of property and dominion; he held of no
sovereign or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do homage,
and perform service. But as these new proprietors were in some
danger (as has been observcd in the text) of being diflurbed by
the remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in fiill greater dan-
ger of being attacked by barbarians as fierce and rapacious as
tlcmifclves, they saw the necessity of coming under obligations
to tfclnd the community, more explicit than tllofe to which they
had been fiuljcd in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new fcttlcments, every
frccman became bound to take arms in defence of the commu-
nity, and if he refused or ncglectd lt to do, was liable to a con-

fiderable
214

liderable penalty. I do not mean that any contra& of this kind
was formally concluded, or mutually ratified by any legal folem-
nity. It was, like the other compacs which hold society toge-
ther, established by tacit consent; and their mutual security and
preservation made it the interest of all to recognize its authority,
and to enforce the observation of it. We can trace back this
new obligation on the proprietors of land to a very early period
in the history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began his reign
A. D. 562, exated a fine, bannos juzit exigi, from certain persons
who had refused to accompany him in an expedition. Gregor.
Turon. lib. v. c. 26. p. 2 I. Childibert, who began his reign
A. D. 576, proceeded in the fame manner against others who
had been guilty of a like crime. Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 342.
Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman who possessed five
manfi, i. e. sixty acres of land, inproperty, should march in per-
son againit the enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807. Louis le Debon-
naire, A. D. 815, granted lands to certain Spaniards who fled
from the Saracens, and allowed them to fettle in his territories,
on condition that they should serve in the army like otherfree
men. Capitul. vol. i. p. 500. By land poireffed in property,
which is mentioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are to under-
fland, according to the ltile of that age, allodial land; allodes
and proprielas, ilodum and propriunm being words perfecly fyno-
nimous. Du Cange voce Alodis. The clearcfl proof of the di..
flintion betwccn allodial and beneficiary possession, is contained
in two charters publillhcd by Muratori, by which it appears
that a person might poflcfs one part of his estate as allodial
which he could dlifpofe of at plcafure, the other as a benc-
fiCcium, of which he had only the ufiufru&, the property re-
turning to the fupcrior Lord on his dcmnife. Antiq. Ital. medii

awvi,

215; i

jevi, vol. . . .p; 59, 956·. Tle

T e 4 iftindtion .is pointed out

ia a Capitulare of Charklemagne,.A. . 8I I. edit. Baluz. vol. i,
p. 49 I. In the curious testament of count Everard, who mar-
ried a daughter of Lonis le Debonnaire, by which he disposes of
his vast estate among his children, he di'stinguishes between what
lie possessed proprietrtc, and what he held beneficio, and it ap-
¶'ears that the greater part was allodial. A. D. 837. Aub.
Mirai Opera Diplomatica Lovan. I723. Vol. p. I9.

IN the fame manner Liber honzo is commonly opposed to

Vajfis or Vaffallus; the former denotes an allodial proprietor,
the latter one who held of a fliperior. These free men
were under an obligation to serve the state; and ihis duty
was confidered as so sacred, that frce men were prohibited
from entering into holy orders unless they had obtained
the content of the sovereign. The reason given for this
in the statute is remarkable, " For we are informed that some
do so, not so much out of devotion, as in order to avoid that
military service which they are bound to perform. Capitul.
lib. i. §. I 4. If upon being summoned into the field, any free
man rcfilied to obey, a full IlHrcbannum, i. e. a fine of sixty
crowns, was to be exa&c.l from him according to the law of
the Franks." Capit. Car. nagn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit.
14. §. 13. p. 539. This expression, according to the law of
the Franks, seems to imply that both the obligati;n to frrvc, and
the penalty on those who difrcgarded it, were coeval with the
laws made by the Franks at their firfl ftttliincnt in Gaul. This
fine was levied with such rigour, " Tlat if any pcrfon was in-
folvcnt, he was reduced to fervitudc, and continued in that

3 slate
:I6

fiate until such time as his labour should amount to the value
of the herebannum." Ibid. ri he Emperor Lotharius rendered
the penalty frill more severe; and if any person pofleffing such
an extent of property as made it incumbent on him to take the
field in person refused to obey the summons, all his goods were
declared to be forfeited, and he himself might be punished
with banishment. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars ii. p. 153.

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become fixed and sub-

jed to military service, another change was introduced, though
slowly, and ftep by ftep. We learn from Tacitus that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach to their per-
sons and interests certain adherents, whom he calls Comites.
These fought under their standard, and followed them in all
their enterprizes. The fame custom continued among them
in their new settlements, and those attached or devoted fol-
lowers were calledfideles, antrufliones, homines in trufJe Domi-
nica & leudes. Tacitus informs us, that the rank of a Comes
was deemed honourable; De morib. Germ. c. 13. The com-
position, which is the standard by which we muff judge of the
rank and condition of persons in the middle ages, paid for the
murder of one in trufle Dominica, was triple to that paid for the
murder of a freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44. §. I. & 2. While
the Germans remained in their own country they courted the
favour of there Comites by presents of arms and horses, and by
hospitality. See note VI. While they had no fixed property
in land, these were the only gifts that they could bestow, and
the only reward which their followers desired. But upon their
fettling in the countries which they conquered, and when the
value of property came to be understood among them, instead

VOL.I. F f of

217

218 PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

of these flight presents, the Kings and chieftains bellowed a
more fubitantial recompence in land on their adherents. These
grants were called beneficia, because they were gratuitous do-
nations; and honores, because they were regarded as marks of
diftintion. What were the services originally exated in re-
turn for there benefcia cannot be determined with absolute pre-
cifion; because there are no records so ancient. When allodial
poffeflions were first rendered feudal, they were not, at once,
fubjeeted to the feudal services. The transition here, as in all
other changes of importance, was gradual. As the great ob-
jet of a feudal vassal was to obtain protection, when allodial
proprietors first consented to become vassals of any powerful
leader, they continued to retain as much of their ancient inde-
pendance as was consistent with that new relation. The ho-
mage which they did to the superior of whom they chose to
hold, was called homagium planzm, and bound. them to no-
thing more than fidelity, but without any obligation either of
military service, or attendance in the courts of their superior.
Of this homagium planum some traces, though obscure, may
fill be discovered. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 97. Among the antient
writs published by D. D. De Vie & Vaifette hist. de Langued.
are a great many which they call homagia. They seem to be
an intermediate ftep between the homagium planum mentioned
by Bruffel, and the engagement to perform compleat feudal
service. The one party promises protection, and grants certain
castles or lands, the other engages to defend the person of the
granter, and to affit him likewise in defending his property as
often as he shall be summoned to do so, But these engagements
are accompanied with none of the feudal formalities, and no
mention is made of an, of the feudal fcrvices. They appear

rathrr

rather to be a mutual contra& between equals, than the engage-
ment of a vaflal to perform Cervices to a superior Lord. Preuves
de 1' hiRf. de Lang. tom. ii. 173. & passim. As soon as men
were accustomed to these, the other feudal services were gra-
dually introduced. M. de Montesquieu confiders these beneficia
as fiefs, which originally fubjeaed those who held them to
military service. L'efpr. des Loix. 1. xxx. c. 3. & I6. M.
L'abbe de Mably contends that such as held there were at
first fubje&ed to no other service than what was incumbent on
every free man. Observations fur l'hiftoire de France I. 356.
But upon comparing their proofs and reasonings and conjec-
tures, it seems to be evident, that as every free man, in confe-
quence of his allodial property, was bound to serve the com-
munity under a severe penalty, no good reason can be assigned
for conferring there beneficia, if they did not subjea such as
received them, to some new obligation. Why should a King
have stripped himself of his domain, if he had not expeced,
that, by parcelling it out, he might acquire a right to services to
which he had formerly no title ? We may then warrantably
conclude, " That as allodial property fubjeded those who pof-
sessed it to serve the community, To beneficia fubjeded such
as held them, to personal service and fidelity to him from
whom they received these lands. These beneficia were
granted originally only during pleasure. No circumstance re-
lating to the customs of the middle ages is better ascertained
than this; and innumerable proofs of it might be added to these
produced in L'efprit des Loix, 1. xxx. c. i6. and by Du Cange
voc. beneficium & fecudulm.

IV, BUT

2g9
F f

IV. BUT the poifeflion of benefices did not continue long in
his state. A precarious tenure during pleasure was not fuffi-
cient to satisfy and attach those who held it to their superior
Lord, they soon obtained the confirmation of their benefices
during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces several
quotations from ancient charters and chronicles in proof of this;
Gloss. voc. Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain or
extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary, first in the
direc line, then in the collateral, and at last in the female
line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. Bene-
ficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when each of

there changes took place. M. l'Ab. Mably conjecures with
some probability, that Charles Martel first introduced the prac-
dice of granting beneficia for life: Obfervat. tomr . i. o3,
i60; and that Louis le Debonnaire was among the first who
rendered them hereditary, is evident from the authorities to
which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon however has published
a placitum of Louis le Debonnaire. A. D. 860. by which it
appears that he still continued to grant some benficia only
during life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the year
889, Cdo King of France granted lands to Ricabodo fideli
fiU jurc blcneficiario & fruauario during his own life; and
if lie lloul dlie, and a son were born to him, that right was to
continuc (luring tlhe life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
'lis was an interncdiate flep between fiefs merely during life,
and tcf;s lhereditary to perpetuity. While )bcicficia continued
under their firlt form, and were hcld only during pleasure, le-

who

who granted them not only exercised the Dominium or preroga-
tive of superior Lord ; but he retained the property, giving his
vassal only the ufz/frut. But under the latter form, when they
became hereditary, although feudal lawyers continued to de-
fine a beneficiua agreeably to its original nature, the property
was in effet taken out of the hands of the superior Lord; and
lodged in thole of the vassal. As soon as the reciprocal ad-
vantages of the feudal mode of tenure came to be underflood'
by superiors as well as vassals, that species of holding became
so agreeable to both, that not only lands, but casual rents,
such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at ferries, &c. the
salaries or perquisites of offices, and even pensions them-
selves, were granted and held as fiefs; and military service was
promised and exaaed on account of these. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bretagne. tom. ii. 78. 690. Bruffel,
tom. i. p. 41. How absurd soever it may seem to grant or to
hold such precarious and casual property as a fief; there are
inflances of feudal tenures still more singular. The profits
arising from the masses said at an altar were properly an eccle-
fiaftical revenue, belonging to the clergy of the church or mo-
naftry which performed that duty, but there were sometimes
seized by the powerful barons. In order to ascertain their right
to them, they held them as fiefs of the church, and parcelled
them out in the fame manner as other property to their sub-
vassals. Bouquet. recucil des hist. vol. x. 238. 480. The fame
spirit of encroachment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led the
nobles to extort from their fovcreigns hereditary grants of
offices. Many of the great offices of the crown became heredi-
tary in mot of the kingdoms in Europe, and so conscious were

monarchs

monarchs of this spirit of usurpation among the nobility, and
so follicitous to guard against it, that, on some occasions, they
obliged the persons whom they promoted to any office of dig-
nity, to grant an obligation that neither they, nor their heirs,
should claim it as belonging to them by hereditary right. A
remarkable instance of this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des
Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in the Thefaur.
anecdot. published by Martene & Durand. vol. i. p. 873.--
This revolution in property occasioned a change corresponding
to it in political government; the great vassals of the crown,
as they acquired such extensive possessions, usurped a propor-
tional degree of power, depressed the jurifdidion of the crown,
and trampled on the privileges of the people. It is on account
of this connection, that the tracing the progress of feudal pro-
perty becomes an objed of attention in history; for upon dif-
covering in what state property was at any particular period,
we may determine with precision what was the degree of power
possessed by the King or by the nobility at that juncture.

ONE circumstance more, with refpe& to the changes which

property underwent, deserves attention. I have fiewn that
when the various tribes of barbarians divided their conquests
in the fifth and sixth centuries, the property which they ac-
quired was allodial; but in several parts of Europe property
had become almost entirely feudal by the beginning of the
tenth century. The former species of property seems to be
so much better and more desirable than the latter, that filch a
change appears surprising, especially when we arc informed that
allodial property was frequently converted into feudal, by a

voluntary
222

voluntary deed of the possessor. The motives which determined
them to a choice so repugnant to the ideas of modern times
concerning property, have been investigated and explained by
M. de Montesquieu with his usual discernment and accuracy,
lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most considerable is that of which we
have an hint in Larnbertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer
quoted by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of anar-
chy and disorder which became general in Europe after the
death of Charlemagne; when there was scarce any union
among the different members of the community; and indivi-
duals were exposed, single and undefended by government, to
rapine and opprefflon, it became necessary for every man to
have a powerful protetor, under whose banner he might range
himself, and obtain security against enemies, whom he could not
singly oppose. For this reason he relinquished his allodial in-
dependance, and fubjeated himself to the feudal services, that
he might find safety under the patronage of some refpe&able
superior. In some parts of Europe, this change from allodial
to feudal property became so general, that he who possessed land
had no longer any liberty of choice left. He was obliged to
recognize some liege Lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beau-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Clermont and
Beauvois, if the Lord or Count discovered any lands within his
jurifdition, for which no service was performed, and which
paid to him' no tax or customs, he might instantly seize it as
his own; for, fays he, according to our cutiom no man can
hold allodial property. Couft. ch. 24. p. I23. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at length become ge-
neral in the law of France, Nulle terrefans Seigneur. In other
provinces of FranLe allodial property seems to have remained

223

longer
1

longer unalienated, and to have been more highly valued. A
vast number of charters containing grants, or tales, or ex-
changes of allodial lands in the province of Languedoc are
publifled Hist. gcner. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic &Vaifette,
tom. ii. During the ninth, tenth, and greater part of the
eleventh century, the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarce any mention of feudal tenures
occurs in the deeds of that country. The slate of property,
during there centuries, fceins to have been perfectly similar in
Catalonia, and the country of Roussillon, as appears from the
original charters published in the appendix to Pctr. de la Mar-
ca's treatise de Marca five limite flifpanico. Allodialproperty
seems to have continued in the Low-Countries, to a period still
later. During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries,
this species appears to have been of considerable extent. Miraei
opera Diplom. vol. i. 34, 74, 75. 83, 817, 296, 842, 847, 578.
Some vestiges of allodial property appear there as late as the
fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. The notions of men with
refped to property, vary according to the diversity of their
underflandings, and the caprice of their paflions. At the fame
time that some persons were fond of relinquishing allodial
property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure, others seem -to
have been follicitous to.convert their fiefs into allodial property.
An instance of this occurs in a charter of Louis Ie Debonnaire,
publifled by Eckhard, commentarii de rebus Franciae Orientalis,
vol. ii. 885. Another occurs in the year 1299. Reliquiae MSS.
omnis acvi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. 209. and even one as late as
the year I337. ibid. vol. vii. p. 40. The fame thing took
place in the Low-Countries. Meraxi oper. i. 52.

IF
224

IN tracing these various revolutions of property, I have

hitherto chiefly confined myself to what happened in France,
because the ancient monuments of that nation have either
been more carefully preserved, or have been more clearly
illustrated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in property, and

succeeded each other in the fame order. There is some ground,
however, for conjecuring that allodial property continued
longer in estimation among the Italians, than among the French.
It appears that many of the charters granted by the Emperors
in the ninth century conveyed an allodial right to land.
Murat. antiq. med. xvi. v. i. p. 575, &c. But in the eleventh
century, we find some examples of pcrfons who resigned their
allodial property, and received it back as a feudal tenure. Ib.
p. 6Io, &c. Muratori observes, that the word fcjudum, which
came to be substituted in place of beneficium, does not occur in
any authentick charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
594. A charter of King Robert of France, A. D. ioo8, is
the earliest deed in which I have met with the word fcuduit.
Bouquet recueil des hiftoriens de Gaule & de la France, tom.
x. p. 593. b. This word occurs indeed in an ediEt, A. D.
790, published by Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77. But the authenti-
city of that deed has been called in luflltion, and perhaps the
frequent use of the word feudum in it, is an additional rcafon
for doing ol. The account which I have given of the naturr
both of allodial and ftleudall I)ofic'tflons receivel:; lomme corr-
nmation from the etymology ol tle words tillclv. l/'lde
or allodiumii is compouldedl of the Grcmnnn particle an ald lo/,

Vo.. I.
. g i. c.

i. e. land obtained by lot. Wachteri Gloffar. Germanicum,
voc. Allodium. p. 35. It appears from the authorities produced
by him and by Du Cange, voc. ors, that the northern nations
divided the lands which they had conquered in this manner.
Fcodum is compounded of od possession or estate, and sei'
wages, pay; intimating that it was flipendiary and granted
as a recompence for service. Wachterus ibid. voc. feodum,
P. 44I.

THE progress of the feudal system among the Germans

was perfeetly similar to that which we have traced, in France.
But as the E.mpcrors of Germany, especially after the In-
pcrial crown pased from the descendants of Charlemagne
to the house of Saxony, were far superior to the contemporary
Monarchs of France, in abilities, the Imperial vassals did not
aliire so early to independance, nor did they so soon obtain the
privilege of poffcfling their benefices by hereditary right.
Conrad II. on the Salic, was tile first Emperor, according to the
compilers of the Libri Feudorum, who rendered fiefs hereditary.
lib. i. tit. i. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024. Ludovicus
Pius, under whose reign, grants of hereditary fiefs were frcquent
in France, fulcceeded his father, A. D. 8 x4. Not only was this.
innovatioln so much later in being introduced among the vaflals
of the Gcnnan Emperors, but even after Conrad had cflabliflied
il, tile law continued fiavourable to the ancient pradiicc, and un-
li's: the charter of the vallil bore cxprclly that the fief defccnded
to his heirs, it lwas prclu;mde to l>b granted only lduring life.
Lib. felud. ibid. Ic.ven after the alteration made by Conrad, it
.I as not itLIcollmmIon in Germany to grant ficfs only for life; a

charter
.226

charter of this kind occurs as late as the year 1376. Charta
ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 361. The transmission of
fiefs to collateral and female heirs, took place very slowly
among the Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. I201.
conveying the right of succession to females, but it is granted
as an extraordinary mark of favour, and in reward of uncom-
mon services. Boehmer. ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well
as in France and Italy, a considerable part of the lands continued
to be allodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was intro-
duced. It appears from the Codex Diplomaticus Monafterii
Buch, that a great part of the lands in the marquisate of Mifiia
was fill allodial as late as the thirteenth century. NO 3r, 36,
37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptores hilt. German. cura Schoetgenii &
Kreyfigii. Altenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property
seems to have been common in another diftriat of the fame
province, during the fame period. Reliquiae Diplomatic:
Sandimonial. Beutiz. N° 17, 36, 58. ibid. 374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. P. 16.

As I shall, in another note, have occasion to represent the con-

dition of that part of the people who dwelt in cities, I will con-
fine myself in this to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating the ground dur-
ing the ages under review may be divided into three clallcs:
I. Scrivi or slaves. This seems to have been the Inoft nume-
rous class, and conlifted either of captives taken in war, or of
persons the property in whom was acquired in Iome one of the
various methods cnumerated by Du Cange, voc. Jfirvius. v. 6.

G g 2 . 447.

227

p. 447. The wretched condition of this numerous race of men
will appear from fcvcral circumflanccs. I. Their matiers had
absolute dominion over their persons. They had the power of
punifling their slaves capitally, without the intervention of any
judge. This dangerous right they possesed not only in the more
early periods, when their manners were fierce, but it continued
as late as the twelfth ccntury. Joach. Potgieflcrus de ftatu
fervorum. Lemgov. 1736. 4t). lib. ii. cap. i. §. 4, o1, 13, 24.
Even after this jurisdiction of matiers caine to be restrained, the
life of a slave was deemed to be of so little value, that a very
flight compensation attoned for taking it away. Idem, lib. iii.
c. 6. If mailers had power over the lives of their slaves, it is
evident that almofi no bounds would be set to the rigour of the
punifllmcnts which they might inflict upon them. The Codes
of ancient laws prescribcd punifliments for the crimes of slaves
different from tlioe wvhich were inflicted on free men. The
latter paid only a fine or compcnfation, the former were sub-
jcccd to corploral pu;iiihmcnts. The cruelty of tlicife vs in
manly infltaccs cxccfiive. Slaves, on very flight occasion's,
mitght be put to the rack on quefiion. The laws with rciic
to ltbctf points arc to be found in Potgifclrlus, lib. iii. cap. 7,
2. If the dominion of imaficrs over the lives and perbons of theci-
slaves was tlis c:tcnlivc, it was no leis so over their actions and
property. ''hcy vtcre not originally permitted to marry. Male
and iclili!ci Ilaves were allowcd and even encouraged to COlal);t
together. uLlt tIli, uniotin v:was not conlidered as a marriage, il
was called c( tu/ , l

rnitli, ol(t lnup/ti, or mallr'iZo/ium. Potgitil.

lib. ii. c. 2. . . 'lThis notion1 was lib much cilablifhcid, that du-
ring, Icc.ral ccntu[ic'i asir the barl)arous nations embraced the
Chiriltiai rcligiou, iLvcs who lived as huiband and wife, were

,,iS~~ urX~~~ilot

not joined together by any rcligious ceremony, and did not
reccide the nuptial benediction from a priest. Ibid. §. 1o, II.
WIihc: this conjtuncion between saves came to be confidcrcd as
a la;-i: l marriagc, they were not permitted to marry without
the c' _nLt of their marter, and such as ventured to do so with-
out obtaining that, were punished with great severity, and some-
times were put to death. Potgieff. ibid. §. I2, &c. Gregor.
Turon. hilror. lib. v. c. 3. When the manners of the European
nations became more gentle, and their ideas more liberal, slaves
'lho married w'ithout their maRlcr's consent, were fubjeaeed
only to a fine. PotgiefT. ibid. §. 2o. Du Cange Gloss. voc.
FI'-;:.icita3'riium. '. All the children of slaves, were in the
iame condition vwith their parents, and became the property
of the maftcr. Du Cange Glof. voc. fl'rvus, vol. 6. 450.
lMurat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so entirely the
property of their nmafLrs, that they could fell them at pliafure.
V'hile domcftick flavcry continued, the property in a flve was
fold in the falm manncr vilh that which a person had in any
o-hcr mnov)able. Afterwards slaves became adJ'r;'ipti glkbl, and
v:rec conveyed by falc together with the farm or estate to w\liich
tichy belonged. 1'otgiiefrus has collececd the laws and charters
vwhich illulirate tliis well-known circumnfancc in the condition
of slaves .

Li. . c. 4. 5. Slaves had a title to nothing but

fiubfilance and cl;latlhs from their mafler ; all the profits of their
aLi,,our accrued to him. If a 1afler, lfrom illdllgnce, g'tve l is
1l:tveCs lly /):lli/m or fixed allowance for their fublittance, th' y
ha.l n riliht of property in whlat they fiavcd out of tlat. All
tli.,t they acclumlulated belonged to their nl. '. Votgicf. 1i1).
ii. c. io. Murat. anti(j. Ital. vol. 76i3. Du Caige, voc. Jr',,us,

vol .

229

vol. vi. p. 451. Conformably to the fame principle, all the
cffeets of saves belonged to their matler at their death, and
they could not dispose of them by tcflament. Potgieff. lib. ii. c.
1I . 6. Slaves were diftinguifled from free men by a peculiar
drcfs. Among all the barbarous nations, long hair was a mark
of dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that reason obliged to
shave their heads; and by this diflinceion, how indifferent ioever
it may be in its own nature, they were reminded every moment
of the inferiority of their condition. Potgiefl. lib. iii. c. 4.
For the fame reason it was enacted in the laws of almost all the
nations of Europe, that no slave should be admitted to give evi-
dence against a free man in a court of juflice. Du Cangc, voc.
Jervus, vol. vi. p. 451. Potgiefl. lib. iii. c. 3.

i. Villani. They were likewise adtlfripti glebe or ville,

from which they derived their name, and were transferable
along with it. Du Cange, voc. villanis. But in this they
differed from slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their
master for the land which they cultivated, and after paying
that, all the fruits of their labour and industry belonged to
thcmfclves in property. This distinction is marked by Piere
dte Fontainc's Confeil. Vie de St. Louis par Joinville, p. 19.
edit. de Dut Cange. Several cafes decided agreeably to this
principle are mentioned by Murat. Ibid. p. 773.

3. THE last class of persons employed in agriculture were

free men. These are diltinguifced by various names among
the writers of the middle ages, Arimlannli, conditionales, originarii,
tributales, &6c. These seem to have been persons who pollelted
fomc finall allodial property of their own, and besides that,

cultivated
230

cultivated some farm belonging to their more wealthy neigh-
bours, for which they paid a fixed rent; and bound them-
selves likewise to perform several small services in prato vel in
mefye, in aratura vel itn vinea, such as ploughing a certain
quantity of their landlord's ground, assisting him in harvest
and vintage work, &c. The clearest proof of this may be found
in Muratori, v. i. p. 7I2. and in Du Cange under the refpeaive
words abovementioned. I have not been able to discover whe-
ther these arimanni, &c. were removable at pleasure, or held their
farms by lease for a certain number of years. The former, if we
may judge from the genius and maxims of the age, seems to be
most probable. These persons, however, were confidered as free
men in the most honourable sense of the word; they enjoyed
all the privileges of that condition, and were even called to serve
in war; an honour to which no slave was admitted. Murat.
Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the con-
dition of these three different classes of persons, will enable the
reader to apprehend the full force of an argument which I ihall
produce in confirmation of what I have said in the text concern-
ing the wretched slate of the people. Notwithstanding the im-
mense difference between the first of these classes and the third,
iuch was the spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of land, and to various their opportunities of oppress-
ing those who were fettled on their eflates, and of rendering their
condition intolerable, that many freemen, in despair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered themselves as slaves to
their powerful mailers. This they did, in order that their nmaters
might become more immediately interefled to afford them pro-
tedion, together with the means of Iubfifing theinfelvcs and
their families. The forms of ihclh a ifurrcnder, or obnoxirlio, as
it was then called, arc preservcd by Marcullils, lib. ii. c. .8; and

by

231

by the anonymous reason published by Bignon, together with
colleorr of frrmu!z', c. x6. In both, the Marculfus for the ob-
lz'XiWtit?, is tih wretched and indigent condition of the-perfon who
givcs up his libertv. It was fiill more common for freemen to
furrcnder their liberty to bishops or abbots, that they might par-
take of the fectrity which the vassals and slaves of churches and
monaflerics enjoyed, in consequence of the fuperflitious venera-
tion paid to the faint underwhofe immediate protedion they were
supposed to be taken. Du Cange, voc. obatius, vol. iv. p. I 286.
That condition muff have been miserable indeed, which could
induce a free man voluntarily to renounce his liberty, and to
give up himfelfas a slave to the disposal of another. The num-
ber of slaves in all the nations of Europe was prodigious. The
greater part of the inferior class of people in France were redu-
ced to this fate, at the commencement of the third race of iings.
L'efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. ii. The fame was the cafe in
England. Brady Pref. to Gen. Hist. Many curious sacs with
refped to the ancient state of villains or flaes in England, arc
publishld in observations on the statutes, chiefly the more
ancicnt 2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. SECT. I. p. 19.,

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produccd. Many

charters granted by pcrfons of the highcft rank arc prcfcrved,
from which it appears that they could not ftIbfcribe their name.
It was usual for perlons who could not write, to make the sign
of the cross in confirmation of a charter. Several of thefc re-
main, where Kings and perltns of great eminence allix f''Iium
'rui . 711(111l proptria pro i'lorali/oc l litCraru C . l)ut Cac, voc.
Crux, vol. iii. p. 1191. 1'romi this is derived tle plirale (of
signing instead of flbf:ribing a paper. In the ninth .cnI ry,

i lcblaud

'32
1,

Herbaud Comes Palatii, though supreme judge of the Empire by
virtue of his office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau
Traite de Diplomatique par deux Benedidins, 4t0. tom. ii.
p. 422. So late as the fourteenth century, Du Guefclin, con-
flable of France, the greatest man in the state, and one of the
greatest men of his age, could neither read nor write. St. Palaye
Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82. Nor was this
ignorance confined to laymen; the greater part of the clergy
was not many degrees superior to them in science. Many dig-
nified ecclefiafticks could not subscribe the canons of those coun-
cils, in which they fat as members. Nouv. Traite de diplom.
tom. ii. p. 424. One of the questions appointed by the canons
to be put to perfonr who were candidates for orders was this,
" Whether they could read the gospels and epistles, and explain
the sense of them, at least literally?" Regino Prumienfis ap.
Bruck. Hilt. Philof. v. iii. p. 63 I. Alfred the Great complained,
that from the Humber to the Thames there was not a priest
who understood the liturgy in his mother tongue, or who could
translate the easiest piece of Latin; and that from the Thames
to the sea, the ecclefiaflicks were fill more ignorant. Afserus
de rebus geflis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c. p. 25. The
ignorance of the clergy is quaintly described by an author of the
dark ages. " Potius dediti gula quam Gloffe; potius colli-
gunt libras quam legunt libros; libentius intuentur Martham
quam Marcum; malunt legere in Salmone quam in Solomone.
Alanus de art. Predicat. ap. Lebcuf. Diflert. tom. ii. p. 2 I. To
the obvious causes of fich universal ignorance arising from the
fiate of government and manlers, from the seventh to the
eleventh century, we may add the scarcity of books, and the
difficulty of rendering thenm iore cRnminon during that period.
The Romans wrote their books cither on parchment or on

VoL . I. II II paper

233

paper made of the Egyptian papyrus. The latter being the
cheapest, was ofcourfe the most commonly used. But after the
Saracens conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the commu-
nication between that country and the people fettled in Italy or in
other parts of Europe, was almost entirely broke off, and the papy-
rus was no longer in use among them. They were obliged, on that
account, to write all their books upon parchment, and as the price
of that was high, books became extremely rare and of great
value. We may judge of the scarcity of the materials for
writing them from one circumstance. There still remain feve-
ral manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and following centuries,
wrote on parchment, from which some former writing had been
erased, in order to fubltitute a new composition in its place. In
this manner, it is probable, that several works of the ancients
perished. A book of Livy or of Tacitus might be erased, to
make room for the legendary tale of a faint, or the fuperflitious
prayers of a missal. Murat. Anti. Ital. v. iii. p. 833. P. de
Montfaucon affirms, that the greater part of the manuscripts on
parchment which he has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are
written on parchment from which some former treatise had been
erased. Mem. de L'Acad. des infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want
of materials for writing, is one reason why so many of the works
of the ancients have perished, it accounts likewise for the small
number of manuscripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh
century, when they began to multiply from a cause which fllall be
mentioned. Ililt. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Many circum-
fiances prove the scarcity of books during thfe ages. Private
pertons feldoin ponflffed any b(x)ks whatever. Even monafte-
ties of conliderable note lhad only one miflal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. I.upus, albbot of Ferriercs, in a letter to the
Pope, A. 1). 855, )cfCcches him to lend him a copy of Cicero de
Oratorc & Q.initiliau's Institutions, " for," fays he, " although

we
234

we have parts of those books, there is no compleat copy of them
in all France. Murat. Ant. v. iii. p. 835. The price of books
became so high, that persons of a moderate fortune could not
afford to purchase them. The counters of Anjou paid for a copy
of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Halberftadt, two hundred
sheep, five quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and
millet. Hiftoire Literaire de France par des Religieux Benediains,
tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year 171, when Louis XI. borrow.
ed the works of Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty of
medicine in Paris, he not only deposited as a pledge a confide-
rable quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure a nobleman
to join with him as surety in a deed, binding himself under a
great forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a l'hiftoire
de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Frefnoy, tom. iv. p. 28I.
Many curious circumstances with refpea to the extravagant
price of books in the middle ages, are colleced by that indufiri-
ous compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as deem this
frnall branch of literary history an object of curiosity. When
any person made a present of a book to a church or a monastery,
in which were the only libraries during these ages, it was
deemed a donative of such value, that he offered it on the altar
pro remedio anime sue, in order to obtain the forgivcnefs of his
fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836. Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6.
Nouv. Trait. du Diplomat. par deux Benedidins, 4to. tom. i.
p. 48 I. In the eleventh century, the art of making paper in the
manner now become universal, was invented; by means of that
not only the number of manuscripts increased, but the fludy
of the fcienccs was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib. p. 87 1.
The invention of the art of making paper, and the invention of
the art of printing, are two considerable events in literary hiflory.

-l h 2 It

235

It is remarkable that the former preceded the first dawning of
letters and improvement in knowledge towards the close of the
eleventh century; the latter ushered in the light which spread
over Europe at the xra of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT. I. p. 19.

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the dark ages are

a proof of this. I shall produce one remarkable testimony in
confirmation of it, from an author canonized by the church of
Rome, St. Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyon, in the seventh cen-
tury. "He is a good Christian who comes frequently to
church; who presents the oblation which is offered to God upon
the altar; who doth not taste of the fruits of his own industry
until he has consecrated a part of them to God; who, when the
holy festivals shall approach, lives chastely even with his own
wife during several days, that with a safe conscience he may
draw near to the altar of God; and who, in the last place, can
repeat the Creed and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your
fouls from deftrudion while you have the means in your power;
offer prcfcnts and tythes to churchmen; come more frequently
to church; humbly implore the patronage of the faints; for if
you obfcrve these things, you may come with fccurity in the day
to the tribunal of the eternal Judge, and fay, "Give to us,
O Lord, for we have given unto thee.' Dacherii Spccilcgiuni
Voter. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and judicious translator
of Dr. Moflein's Eccleciaftical Hiflory, from one of wllhfc ad-
ditional notes I have borrowed this paifge, fiubjoins a very pro-
per rcfledion; " We fie here a large and ample description of
a good Chriftianl in whlich there is not the lcat mention of the

love
236

'37

love of God, resignation to his will, obedience to his laws, or of
justice, benevolence, and charity towards men." Mofh. Eccles.
Hist. v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. p. 20.

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church of Rome,

whose doEtrine of infallibility renders all such institutions and
ceremonies as have been once universally received, immutable
and everlasting, that ihe mufft continue to observe in enlightened
times, those rites which were introduced during the ages of
darkness and credulity. What delighted and edified the latter,
must disgust and fliock the former. Many of these rites appear
manifestly to have ben introduced by a superstition of the lowest
and most illiberal species. Many of them were borrowed, with
little variation, from the religious ceremonies established among
the ancient Heathens. Some were so ridiculous, that if every
age did not furnish instances of the fascinating influence of super-
itition, as well as of the whimsical forms which it assumes, it muff
appear incredible that they should ever be received or tolerated.
In several churches of France, they celebrated a feflival in com-
memoration of the Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt. It was
called the fcaft of the Ass. A young girl richly dresscd, with a
child in her arms, was fct upon an ass fupcrbly caparisoned.
The ass was led to the altar in Iolcmln procc.fion. High Mars
was said with great pomp. '1 he ass was taught to kneel at pro-
per places; a hymn no less childifl than impious was fling in
his praile: And when tle ceremony was ended, the prield,
inllead of tlie tniial words with which lie lifilnil(d( tlhe people,
braycd three times like an al'; and the people, inflead of thcir,

ulual

usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three times in the
fame manner. Du Cange, voc. Feflum. v. iii. p. 424. This ri-
diculous ceremony was not, like the festival of fools, and some
other pageants of those ages, a mere farcical entertainment ex-
hibited in a church, and mingled, as was then the cuflom, with
an imitation of some religious rites; it was an ad of devotion,
performed by the ministers of religion, and by the authority of
the church. However, as this practice did not prevail univer-
sally in the Catholick church, its absurdity contributed at last to
abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 25.

As there is no event in the hiflory of mankind more singular than
that of the Crusades, every circumfiance that tends to explain or
to give any rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of the
human mind is interefling. I have asserted in the text, that the
minds of menwere prepared gradually for theamazingeffortwhich
they made in consequence of the exhortations of Peter the her-
mit, by several occurrences previous to his time. A more par-
ticular detail of this curious and obscure part of history, may
perhaps appear to some of my readers to be of importance. That
the end of the world was expeded about the close of the tenth
and beginning of the eleventh century; and that this occasioncd
a general alarm, is evident from the authors to whom I refer in
the text. This belief was so universal and so firong, that it
mingled itfclfwith their civil tranfadions. Many charters in
the latter part of the tenth century begin in this manner:
" Apropinquante mundi termino," &c, As the end of the
world is now at hand, and by various calamities and judgments

t~1- tethe
233

the signs of its approach are now manifest. Hilt. de Langued.
par. D. D. de VicVaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, 90, 117,
158, &c. One effea of this was, that a great number of pil-
grims retorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution to die there, or to
wait the coming of the Lord; Kings, Earls, Marquifles, BiWhops,
and even a great number of women, besides persons of inferior
rank flocked to the Holy Land Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. x. p. 50, 52. Another historian mentions
a vast cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count of An-
gouleme to Jerulalem in the year 1026. Chronic. Ademari, ibid.
p. I62. These pilgrims filled Europe with lamentable accounts of
the state of Christians in the Holy Land. Willern. Tyr. Hist. ap.
Gest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p. 636. Guibert. Abbat. Hilt. ibid.
vol.i. p. 476. Besides this, itwasufualfor many ofthe Christian
inhabitants ofJerufalem, as well as of other cities in the East, to tra-
vel as mendicants through Europe; and bydefcribing the wretched
condition of the professors of the Christian faith under the do-
minion of Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous per-
sons to make tome attempt in order to deliver them from oppref-
sion. Baldrici. Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c. vol. i,
p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbert, archbishop of Ravenna, after-
wards Pope Silvefter II. addressed a letter to all Christians in the
name of the church of Jcrufalem. It is eloquent and pathetic, and
contains a formal exhortation to take arms against the Pagan op-
pressors, in order to rcfclc the holy city from their yoke. Gerberti:
Epiflole ap. Bouquet, Rccucil, tom. x. p. 426. In conlifqucnce of
this lfpirited call, some fulljccts of the rcpublick of Pit'& equipped
a fleet, and invaded the territories of the Mahometans in Syria.
Murat. Script. Rcr. Italic. vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken
in the East, and an opinion prevailed, A. D. o101, that all the

forccs

239

forces of Chrifendom were to unite, in order to drive the Ma-
hometans out of Palestine. Chron. Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x.
p. 152. It is evident from all these particulars, that the ideas
which led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enterprize were
gradually formed; so that the universal concourse to the standard
of the cross when erected by Urban II. will appear less furpri-
sing.

IF the various circumfiances which I have enumerated in this

note, as well as in the history, arc fulficictii tu account for the
ardour with which such vast numbers engaged in such a dange-
rous undertaking, the extensive privileges and immunities
granted to those who assumed the cross, serve to account for the
long continuance of this spirit in Europe. I. They were ex-
empted from prosecutions on account of debt during the time of
their being engaged in this holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis
privilegium, v. ii. p. I 94.---2. They were exempted from
paying intcreft for the money which they had borrowed. Ibid.-
3. They were exempted either entirely, or at least during a cer-
tain time, from the payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonancesdes Rois
de France, tom. i. p. 33.----4. They might alienate their lands
without the confcnt of the fiiperior lord of whom they held. lb.
5. Their pcrfons and effects were taken under tlie protcion of
St. Pctcr, and the anathemas of the church were denounced
against all who fliould nmolct them, or carry on any quarrel or
hoflility againfi tlhem, during their absence, on account of the holy
war. lDu Cangc, 11). Guibcrtus Abblas ap. Bongarf.i. p. 480,482.---
6. They enjoyed all the privilcges of Ecclcfialicks, and were not
bound toplcad in any civil court, but were lcclarcd ful)jct to the
spiritual jurifdiaiion alone. Du Cange, lb. Ordon. des Rois, tom. i.

P. 3b,

p. 34, I74.-7. They obtained a plenary remission of all their
fins, and the gates of heaven were set open to them, without
requiring any proof of their penitence, but their engaging in
this expedition, and thus gratifying their favourite paflion,
the love of war. Guibert. Abbas, p. 480. When we behold
the civil and ecclesiastical powers vying with each other, and
straining their invention in order to devise expedients for
encouraging and adding strength to the spirit of superstition,
can we be furprized that it should become so general as to
render it infamous, and a mark of cowardice to decline engag-
ing in the holy war ? Willierm Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf. vol. ii.
p. 641. The histories of the Crusades written by modern
authors, who are apt to substitute the ideas and maxims of
their own age in the place of those which influenced the per-
sons whose acions they attempt to relate, convey a very imper-
set notion of the spirit at that time predominant in Europe.
The original historians, who were animated themselves with
the fame passions which possessed their contemporaries, exhibit
to us a more striking picture of the times and manners which
they describe. The enthusiastic rapture with which they ac-
count for the effects of the Pope's discourse in the council of
Clermont; the exultation with which they mention the num-
bers who devoted themselves to this holy warfare; the confi-
dence with which they rely on the divine protection; the
cxtafy of joy with which they describe their taking poffcflion of
the holy city, will enable us to conceive in some degree the ex-
travagance of that zeal which agitated the minds of men with
fuchi violence, and will suggest as many singular reflections to a
llilofophcr, as any occurrence in the hiflory of mankind.---It
is unnccirary to fclct the particular pafldgcs in the fcvcral lli-
fiorians which confirm this obfcrvation. But left tlicfe authors

VoL. I. I i nwy

..

may be fufpe&ed of adorning their narrative with any exagge.
rated description, I shall appeal to one of the leaders who con-
du&ed the enterprize. There is extant a letter from Stephen,
the earl of Chartres and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he
gives her an account of the progress of the Crusaders. He de-
scribes the Crusaders as the chosen army of Christ, as the ser-
vants and soldiers of God, as men who marched under the im-
mediate protection of the Almighty, being conducted by
his hand to vitory and conquest. He speaks of the Turks as
accursed, sacrilegious, and devoted by heaven to defruCtion; and
when he mentions the soldiers in the Christian army who had
died, or were killed, he is confident that their fouls were admit-
ted direCtly into the joys of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegium,
vol. iv. p. 257.

THIIE expence of conduting numerous bodies of men from

Europe to Asia, must have been excessive, and the difficulty of
raising the ncceffary ruins must have been proportionally great,
during ages when the publick revenues in every nation of Eu-
rope were extremely finall. Some account is preserved of the
expedients employed by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in
order to levy the money requisite towards equipping him for
the Crufadc, A. D. 1346. These I fllall mention, as they tend
to shew the considerable influence which the Crufadcs had, 1both
on the slate of property and of civil government. i. Ite cx-
posed to sale part of his domains; and as the price was dcftiincd
for filch a tacrcd tcrvice, lie ol)tained tlhe confcnt of the Frenclh
King, of whom tlhef lands were held, ratif-ying the alienation.
Iliti. de l)auphline tom. i. p. 332. 335.--2. Ile iffled a pro-
clamation, in which he promilcd to grant new privileges to the

nobles,
*49

nobles, as well,as new immunities to the cities and towns, in his
territories, in consideration of certain fums which they were in-
flantly to pay on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512. Many
of the charters of community, which I ihall mention in another
note, were obtained in this manner.--3. He exaced a contri-
bution towards defraying the charges of the expedition from all
his fubjecs, whether ecelefiafticks or laymen, who did not ac-
company him in person to the East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335.----
4. He appropriated a considerable part of his usual revenues for
the support of the troops to be employed in this service; ibid.
tom. ii. p. 5 8.---5. He exa&ed considerable fums not only of the
Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of the Lombards and other
bankers who had fixed their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 3 38.
tom. ii. 528. Notwithstanding the variety of these resources,
the Dauphin was involved in such expence by this expedition,
that on his return he was obliged to make new demands on his
fubjeds, and to pillage the Jews by fresh exadions. Ibid. tom. i.
p. 344, 347. When the count de Foix engaged in the first Cru-
fade, he raised the money necessary for defraying the expences
of that expedition, by alienating part of his territories. Hifr.
dc L.,ngucd. par D. D. de Vic & Vaicftte, tom. ii. p. 287. In
like nminner Baldwin, count of Hainaut, mortgaged or fold part
of his dominions to the l)ifhop of Liege. A. D. 1096. Du Mont
Corps Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin
Count of Namur fold part of his estate to a monastery, when he
intended to aflume the cross. A. D. 1239. Mirai opcr. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. SECT.. p. 29.

TIIE. ufuial method of forming an opinion concerning the
comparative state of manners in two different nations, is by

I i g attending

»4A

attending to the fa&s which historians relate concerning each
of them. Various passages might be fele&ed from the Byzantin
historians, describing the splendor and magnificence of the
Greek Empire. P. de Montfaucon has produced from the
writings of St. Chrysostom a very full account of the elegance
and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That father in his sermons
enters into such details concerning the manners and customs
of his contemporaries, as appear frange in discourses from the
pulpit. P. de Montfaucon has collected these descriptions, and
ranged them under different heads. The court of the more
early Greek Emperors seems to have resembled those of Eastern
monarchs, both in magnificence and in corruption of manners.
The Emperors in the eleventh century, though inferior in
power, did not yield to them in ostentation and splendor. Me-
moires de 1'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xx. p. 197.- But we
may decide concerning the comparative state of manners in the
Eastern Empire, and among the nations in the weft of Europe
by another method, which, if not more certain, is at least more
firiking. As Constantinople was the place of rendezvous for
all the armies of the crusaders, this brought together the people,
of the cast and weft as to one great interview. There are ex-
tant several contemporary authors, both among the Greeks and
Iatins, who were witnesses of this singular congress of people
formerly strangers, in a great measure, to each other. They
describe with simplicity and candour, the impression which that
new fpedacle made upon their own minds. This may be con-
fidered as the most lively and just picture of the real character
and manners of each people. When the Greeks speak of the
Franks, they describe them as barbarians, fierce, illiterate, im-
petuous and savage. They aflume a tone of superiority, as a
more poliihed people, acquainted with the arts both of govern-

7 ment
244

ment and of elegance, of which the other were ignorant. It is
thus Anna Comnena describes the manners of the Latins,
Alexias, p. 224. 31 I. 23 7. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always
treats them with contempt as a rude people, the very mention
of whose names was sufficient to contaminate the beauty and
elegance of history, p. 229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against
them with still more violence, and gives an account of their
ferocity and devastations, in terms not unlike those which pre-
ceding historians had employed in describing the incursions of
the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol. iii.
p. 302, &c. But, on the other hand, the Latin historians
were flruck with astonishment at the magnificence, wealth, and
elegance which they discovered in the Eastern Empire. " 0
what a vast city is Constantinople (exclaims Fulcherius Carno-
tenfis, when he first beheld it) and how beautiful! How many
monasteries are there in it, and how many palaces built with
wonderful art! How many manufa&tures are there in the city
amazing to behold ! It would be aftoniihing to relate how it
abounds with all good things, with gold, silver, and Ruffs
of various kinds; for every hour ships arrive in its port laden
with all things necessary for the use of man. Fulcher. ap. Bon-
gars. vol. i. p. 386. Willermus Archbilhop of Tyre, the most
intelligent historian of the crusades, takes frequent occasion to
describe the elegance and splendour of the court of Conftanti-
nople, and adds, that what they observed there exceeded any
idea which they could have formed of it, nofirarum enim rerumn
modum & dignitatem excedunt, Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii.
p. 657. 664. Guntherus, a French monk who wrote a history
of the eonqueft of Constantinople by the crusaders in the thir-
teenth century, speaks of the magnificence of that city in the

fame

245

iame tone of admiration, " Struduram autem lEdificiorum in
corpore civitatis, in ecclefiis videlicet, & turribus, & in domi-
bus magnatorum, vix ullus vel defcribere poteft, vel credere
defcribenti, nifi qui ea oculata fide cognoverit." Hilt Conftan-
tinop. ap. Canifii Le&iones Antiquas. fol. Antw. 1725. vol. iv.
p. I4. Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high rank,
and accustomed to all the magnificence then known in the wcft,
dcfcribes, in similar terms, the aftoniihment and admiration of
such of his fellow soldiers who beheld Conltantinople f)r the
first time: " They could not have believed, fays he, that there
was a city so beautiful and Iich in the whole world. When
they viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its
superb churches, all appeared so great that they could have
formed no conception of this sovereign city, unless they had seen
it with their own eyes." Hifloire de la Conquete de Constant.
P. 49. From these undisguised representations of their own
feelings, it is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latins appeared
to be a race of rude, unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the latter,
how much soever they might contemn the unwarlike charadter
of the former, could not help regarding them as far superior to
themfelvcs in elegance and arts.-That the state of government
and manners was much more improved in Italy than in. the othlir
countries of Europe is evident not only from the fads recorded
in liftory, but it appears that the more ineclligcnt leaders of the
crufadcrs were (iruck with the diffcrviice. Jacubis de Vitriaco,
a French hillorian of the holy vwar, mIakes an ( .Il)orate panc-
gyrick on the charalter ;ll mannlers of the Italians. He views
them as a mo)re polilhcd people, andl particulally celebrates them
for their love of liberty, and civil wiilom ; in conliliis circum-
flpccti, in re fua publica procuranda dillgentes & ftudiofi; fibi

in
I,

247

in poAterum providentes; aliis fubjci renuentes; ante omnia
lihertatem fibi defendentes; sub uno quem eligunt capitaneo,
communitate fuae jura & inifituta didantes, & fimiliter obfer-
vantes. Hiftor. Hierofol. ap. Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. ii.
p. Io85.

NOTE XV. S E C T. p. 33.

THi- different steps taken by the cities of Italy in order

to extend their power and dominion are remarkable. As soon
as their liberties were established, and they began to feel their
own importance, they endeavoured to render themselves masters
of the territory round their walls. Under the Romans, when
cities cnjoyed municipal privileges and jurisdiction, the circum-
jacent lands belonged to each town, and were the property of
the community. But as it was not the genius of the feudal policy
to encourage cities, or to shew any regard for their poffeflions
and immunities, there lands had been seized, and shared among
the conquerors. The barons to whom they were granted,I
erected their castles almost at the gates of the city, and exer-
cifed their jurifdidion there. Under pretence of recovering their
ancient property, many ofthe cities in Italy attacked these troublc-
some neighbours, and difpol)fcffing them, annexed their territories
to the communities, and made thereby a confilerable addition to
their power. Several inltanccs of this occur in the eleventh, and
beginning of the twellth cent uris. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p.
i 59, &c. Their amblition increaling together with their power,.
they afterwards attacked fcvcral lbaron; lituatcd at a greater dif-
tancc from them, and obliged tlhcic to cngage that they fliould
bccome members of their community; that they fhlould take the

14 oatbh

oath of fidelity to their magistrates; that they ihould tbjed
their lands to all burdens and taxes imposed by common con-
sent; that they Gbould defend the community against all its ene-
mies; and that: they should reside within the city during a cer-
tain fpecifiedtime in each year. Murat. ibid. 163. This sub-
jeEtion of the nobility to the municipal government established
in cities, became almost universal, and was often extremely
grievous to persons accustomed to confider themselves as inde-
pendant. Otto Frifingenfis thus defrribes the state of Italy
under Frederick I. " The cities fb much affect liberty, and
are so follicitous to avoid the insolence of power, that almost
all of them have thrown off every other authority, and are
governed by their own magistrates. Insomuch that all that
country is now filled with free cities, each of which have com-
pelled their bishops to reside within their walls, and there is
scarce any nobleman, how great soever his power may be, who
is not fubje& to the laws and government of some city. De
Geffis Frider. 1. Imp. lib. ii. c. 13. p. 453. In another place
he observes of the Marquis of Montserrat that he was almost
the only Italian baron, who had preserved his independance,
and had not become subjea to the laws of any city. See also
Muratori Antichita Eftenfi, vol. i. p. 41I, 412. That state into
which some of the nobles were compelled to enter, others em-
braced from choice. They observed that high degree of fecu-
rity as well as of credit and estimation which the growing
wealth and dominion of the great communities procured to all
the members of them. They were desirous to partake of there,
and to put themselves under such powerful protection. With
this view they voluntarily became citizens of the towns to
which their lands were most contiguous, and abandoning their

ancient
8

ancient cafiles, took up their residence in the cities at least dur-
ing part of the year. Several deeds are still extant, by which
forne of the most illustrious families in Italy are associated as
citizens of different cities. Murat. ib. p. i65, &c. A charter
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a citizen of Ofimo,
A. D. 1I98. in the Marcha di Ancona is still extant. In this
he stipulates, that he will acknowledge himself to be a burgess
of that community; that he will to the utmost of his power
promote its honour and welfare; that he will obey its magi-
firates; that he will enter into no league with its enemies; that
he will reside in the town during two months in every year, or
for a longer time if required by the magifIrates. Tie commu-
nity on the other hand take him, his family and friends under
their protecion, and engage to defend him against every ene-
my. Fr. Ant. Zacharias Anecdota medii xvi. Aug. Taurm.
1755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so important,
that not only laymen, but ecclefiafticks of the highest rank,
condescended to be adopted as members of the great communi-
ties, in hopes of enjoying the safety and dignity which that
conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the inflitution of com-
munities, persons of noble birth had no other residence but
their cafiles. They kept their petty courts there; and the
cities were defcrtcd, having hardly any inhabitants but slaves
or persons of low condition. But in confcquencc of the prac-
tice which I have mentioned, cities not only became more po-
pulous, but were filled with inhabitants of better rank, and a
custom which still fuibfifls in Italy was then introduced, that all
families of diflindion refiel more conflantly in the great towns,
than is ufial in other parts of Europe. As cities acquired new
consideration and dignity by the acccfion of lfch citizens, tlcy

VOL. I. K k became

494

became more Solicitous to preserve their liberty and indepen-
dance. The Emperors, as sovereigns, had anciently a palace in
almost every great city of Italy; when they visited that country
they were accustomed to. reside in these, and the troops which
accompanied them were quartered in the houses of the citizens.
This the citizens confidered both as ignominious and dangerous.
They could not help confidering it as receiving a master and an
enemy within their walls. They laboured therefore to get free
of this fubjeCion. Some cities prevailed on the Emperors to
engage that they should never enter their gates, but take up
their residence without the walls : Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib.
p. 24. Others obtained the Imperial licence to pull down the
palace situated within their liberties, on condition that they
built another in the suburbs for the reception of the Emperor-
Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various. enci,-cch-
ments of the Italian cities alarmed the Emperors, and put them.
on schemes for re-establishing the Imperial jurifdidion over
them on its ancient footing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in
this cnterprize with great ardour. The free cities of Italy joined
together in a general league, and flood on their defence; and
after a long contell, carried on with alternate success, a solemn
treaty of peace was concluded at Conflance, A. D. i 83. by
which all the privileges and immunities granted by former
Emperors to the principal cities in Italy were confirmed and
ratitied. Murat. ditelrt. XLVIII. This treaty of Conflance was
conficred as i

a icanI important article in the jurisprudence of the

middle ages, tlit it is ufitally published together with the Libri
Feudurum at the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. Tlhe treaty
securcd privileges of great importance to the confederate cities,
and thoulig, it rctfrvscd a conidlcrabl) degree of authority and

:j~1 j·.tirifdidion
2S9

jrrifdition to the Empire, yet the cities persevered with such
vigour in their efforts in order to extend their immunities, and
the conjunctures in which they made them were so favourable,
that, before the conclusion of the thirteenth century, most of the
great cities in Italy had shaken off all marks of fubjeaion to the
Empire, and were become independant sovereign republicks.
It is not requisite that I should trace the various steps by which
they advanced to this high degree of power so fatal to the Empire,
and so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori with
his usual industry has collected many original papers which
illultrate this curious and little known part of history. Murat.
Antiq. Ital. DisTert. L. See alfojo. Bapt. Villanovn hist. Laudis
Pompeii five Lodi in Grev. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol, iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. . 34.

L ON G before the inltitution of communities in France,

charters of immunity or Franchise were granted to some towns
and villages by the Lords on whom they depended. But these are
very different from such as became common in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. They did not ered these towns into cor-
porations; they did not establish a municipal government; they
did not grant them the privilege of bearing arms. They con-
tained nothing more than a manumission of the inhabitants
from the yoke of fcrvitudc; an exemption from certain services
which were oppressive and ignominious ; and the eflablifhment
of a fixed tax or rent which they were to pay to their Lord in
place ofimpofitions which he could formerly lay upon them at
pleasure. Two charters of this kind to two villages in the
county of Roufillan, one A. D. 974. the other A. D. 1025,

K k 2 are

25 I

are fill extant. Petr. de Marca Marca, five limes Hifpanicus.
app. p. 909. I038. Such concessions, it is probable, were not
unknown in other parts of Europe, and may be confidered as
a ftep towards the more extensive privileges conferred by Louis
the Gross on the towns within his domains. The communities
in France never aspired to the fame independance with those in
Italy. They acquired new privileges and immunities, but the
right of sovereignty remained entire to the King or baron with-
in whose territories the rcfpedivc cities were situated, and
from whom they received the charter of their freedom. A
great number of these charters granted both by the Kings of
France, and by their great vassals are published by M. D'Achery
in his Specilegium, and many are found in the collection of the
Ordonances des Rois de France. These convey a very striking
reprefcntation of the wretched condition of cities previous to
the inflitution of communities, when they were subjed to the
judges appointed by the superior Lords of whom they held, and
had scarce any other law but their will. Each concession in
there charters must be confidered as a grant of some new pri-
vilege which the people did not formerly enjoy, and each re-
gulation as a method of redressing some grievance under which
they formerly laboured. The charters of communities con-
t;in likewise the first expedients employed for the introduction
of equal laws, and regular government. On both these ac-
counts they merit particular attention, and therefore inftcad
of referring my readers to the many bulky volumes in which
they are scattered, I lliall give them a view of tome of the most
implortant articles in these charters ranged under two general
heads. I. Such as rcfpce( personal safety. II. Such as refped
the security of property.

I. DURING
252

I. DURING that slate of turbulence and disorder which the

corruption of the feudal government introduced into Europe,
personal safety was the chief object of every individual; and
as the great military barons alone were able to give fuffi-
cient protection to their vassals, this was one great source
of their power and authority. But, by the institution of
communities, effectual provision was made for the safety of
individuals indepcndant of the nobles. For, I. the funda-
mental article in every charter was, that all the members of it
bound themselves by oath to assist, defend, and fland by each
other against all aggrcffors, and that they flould not susser any
pcrfon to injure, difirefs, or molest, any of their fellow citizens.
D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi. 34 I, &c.---2. Whoever residcd in any
town wihich was made free, was obliged under afevere penaky
to accede to the community, and to take part in the mutual
defence of its members. D'Acler. Spic. xi. 344.---3. The com-
munities had the privilege of carrying arms; of making war
on their private enemies; and of executing by military force
any fcntence which their magistrates pronounced. D'Ach.
Spicel. x. 64.;, 644. xi. 343.--4. The praCtice of making satis-
faction by a pecuniary compensation fir mur(ler, afitialt, or
other ad.- ,)f violence, most inconfiftlnt with the order of society,
and the safety of individuals, was abolifl'd ; and such as con-
mittrd there crimes were punishcd capitally, or with rigour
adceqate to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Mirxi opera Diplmnia-
tica, i. Z9 .---5. No mel'belr of a coimulni ty was blound tojuil-
tify or defend hllilnfltlf I battle, or conbat, but if' h w.as clhargd
witli any crime, h u

e could l)e convicted only by the cvidcinc( of

witnielrs, and the regular cotirfe of legal proceedings. Mir.ils,
'[ ibid. D)'Ac. xi. 375, 349. Ordon. torn. iii. 265.---6. If any

,. Iman

man fufpe&ed himself to be in danger from the malice or en-
mity of another, upon his making oath to that effect before a
magistrate, the person fufpeded was bound under a severe
penalty to give security for his peaceable behaviour. D'Ach. xi.
346. This is the fame fpecics of security which is frill known
in Scotland under the name of Lawburrows. In France it was
first introduced among the inhabitants of communities, and
having been found to contribute considerably towards personal
safety, it was extended to all the other members of the society.
Eftabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du Cange vie
de St. Louis, p. 15.

II. THE provisions in the charters of communities concerning

the security of property are not less considerable than those re-
fpeaing personal safety. By the ancient law of France no per-
son could be arrested or confined in prison on account of any
private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 72, 8o.
If any person was arrested upon any pretext, but his having
been guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out
of the h:.nds of the officers who had seized him. Ordon. iii.
p. 7. Freedom froln arrest on account of debt Ieems likewise
to 1: b.. bc n cnjoyed in other countries. Gudenus Sylloge
1)iplom. 47;. In lfcicty, while it remained in its rudest and
inolf simple form, debt fecms to have been confidered as an
,oligation mncrcly perloinal. Men had made fiome progress to-
wards refinement before creditors acquired a right of seizing
the property of their debtors in order to recover payment. The
expedients for this purpoft were all introduccd originally in
communities, and we can trace the gradual progrcfs of them.
I. The fimplcfl and molf obvious fpccies of security was, that

the
254

the person who fold any commodity should receive a pledge
from him who bought it, which he restored upon receiving
payment. Of this custom there are vestiges in several charters
of community. D'Ach. ix. x85. xi. 377.--2. When no pledge
was given, and the debtor became refracory or insolvent, the
creditor was allowed to seize his effects with a strong hand,
and by his private authority; the citizens of Paris are warran-
ted by the royal mandate, " ut ubicumque, et quocumque
modo poterunt, tantum capiant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam
integre & plenarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores
exiftant." Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6. This rude practice, suit-
able only to the violence of a slate of nature, was tolerated
longer than one can conceive to be possible in any society,
where laws and order were at all known. The ordonance
authorizing it was issued, A. D. 1 I 34. and that which correts
the law, and prohibits creditors from seizing the effects of their
debtors, unless by a warrant from a magistrate, and under his
infpeaion, was not published until the year i 35 I. Ordon. torn. ii.
438. It is probable, however, that men were taught, by ob-
serving the disorders which the former mode of proceeding oc-
cafioned, to correct it in pracice long before a remedy was
provided by a law to that cffct. Every discerning reader will
apply this obiervation to many other cufloms and practices
whic;' I have mentioned. New customs are not always to be
afcrile'd to the laws which authorize them. Thcfe flatutes only
give ;i legal landtion to ficlh things as the experience of mankind
has previously foun(l to be proper and beneficial.---3. As soon
as the interpotition of the mlagiftrate became rcquifite, regular
provision was male for attaching or diltraining the movcable
effets of a debtor; and if his movcables were not fifflicicnt to

dilfcharge

2SS

discharge the debt, his immoveable property, or estate in land
was liable to the fame diflrefs, and was fold for the benefit of
his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. I84, 185. xi. p. 348. 380. As
this regulation afforded the moR compleat security to the cre-
ditor, it was confidered as so severe, that humanity pointed
out several limitations in the execution of it. Creditors were
prohibited from seizing the wearing apparel of their debtors,
their beds, the door of their houfc, their intfhuments of hus-
bandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. I84. xi. 377. Upon the fame princi-
ples, when the power of distraining effects became more
general, the horse and arms of a gentleman could not be seized,
D'Ach. ix. I85. As hunting was the favourite amufcment of
martial nobles, the Emperor Lodovicus Pius prohibited the
seizing of a hawk on account of any composition or debt.
Capitul. lib. iv. § 21. But if the debtor had no other move-
ables, even there privileged articles might be seized.---4. In
order to render the security of property conlpleat within a com-
munity, every person who was admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or build a houie, or to purchase lands, within
its precints, or at leafi to brin- into the town a considerable
portion of his moveablcs per quar j'flitiari poIft, ft quid forte in
curl quererl evenerit. D'Ach. xi. 32.', Ordon. i. 367. Libertates
S. Georgii de Efpcranchia. Hilf. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 26.---
5. That security might be as perfec as possible; in some towns
the members of the community seem to have been bound for
each other. D'Ach. x. 644.---6. All (uiicftiois wilii rcfpect to
property were tried within the community, by magilirates and
judges, which the citizens clected or all)pinted. Their deci-
lions were more equal and fixed titan the fcitenlces which de-
pended on the capricious and arbitrary will of a baron who

thought

thought hinfelf superior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644, 646. xi.
344. & passim. Ordon. iii. 204.---7. No member of a commu-
nity could be burdened by any arbitrary tax; for the superior
lord who granted the charter of communiry, accepted of a fixed
census or duty in lieu of all demands. Ordon. t, iii. 204. Li-
bertates de Calma. Hifi. de Dauphine, torn. i. p. 19. Libert.
St. Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could the men-
bers of a community bedifireffed by an unequal imposition of the
film to be levied on the community. Regulations are inserted
in the charters of Come communities concerning the method of
determining the quota of any tax to be levied on each inhabitant.
D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis published an ordonance concern-
ing this matter, which extended to all the communities. Oridon.
t. i. I86. These regulations are extremely favourable to li-
berty, as they vest the power of proportioning the taxes in a cer-
tain number of citizens chosen out of each parish, who were
bound by solemn oath to decide according to juflice.--That the
more perfet security of property was one great objec of those
who inflituted communities, we learn, not only from the
nature of the thing, but from the express words of several
charters, of which I shall only mention that granted by Alienor,
Queen of England and Dutchess of Guienne, to the community
of Poitiers, " ut fua propria melius defendere poffint, & magis
integrc cuftodire." Du Cange voc. Conmmunia, v. ii. p. 863.----
Such are some of the capital regulations established in communi-
ties during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. These may be
confidered as the first rudiments of law an<ordcr, and contributed
greatly to introduce regular government among all the members
of focicty. As soon as communities were instituted, high senti-
ments of liberty began to appear. When Humbert, lord of

VOL. I. L 1 Beaujeu,

Beaujeu, upon granting a charter of community to the town of
Belleville, exated of the inhabitants an oath of fidelity to him-
self and successors, they stipulated, on their part, that he ihould
swear to maintain their franchises and liberties; and for their
greater security, they obliged him to bring twenty gentlemen to
take the fame oath, and to be bound together with him. D'Ach.
ix. 183. In the fame manner the lord of Moirens in Dauphine
produced a certain number of persons as his sureties for the ob-
servation of the articles contained in the charter of community
to that town. These were bound to surrender themselves pri-
foners to the inhabitants of Moirens, if their liege lord should vio-
late any of their franchises, and they promised to remain in cuf-
tody until he Ihould grant them redress. Hill. de Dauphine,
tomr. i. p. 7. If the mayor or chief magistrate of a town did
any injury to a citizen, he was obliged to give security for his
appearance in judgment in the fame manner as a private person;
and if cafl, was liable to the fame penalty. D'Ach. ix. 183.
These are ideas of equality uncommon in the feudal times. Corm-
munities were so favourable to freedom, that they were diflin-
guifhed by the name of Libertates. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863.
They were at firfi extremely odious to the nobles, who foresaw
what a check they must prove to their power and domination.
Guibert Abbot of Nogent calls them execrable inventions, by
which, contrary to law and juflice, slaves withdrew themselves
from that obedience which they owed to their masters. Du
Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which some of the nobles and
powerful ecclefiaflicks opposed the eflablifhlment of commu-
nities, and endeavoured to circumscribe their privileges, was
extraordinary. A firiking inflanceof this occurs in the conteff
between the archbithop of Reims, and the inhabitants of that

community.
2 8

community. It was the chief business of every archbishop,
during a considerable time, to abridge the rights andjurifdi&ion
of the community; and the great objed of the citizens, especially
when the fee was vacant, to maintain, to recover, and to extend
their jurisdiction. Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville de
Reims par M. Anquetil. tom. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concerning the rfate of

cities, and the condition of their inhabitants, are confirmed by
innumerable passages in the historians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that some cities of the first
order were in a better Rtate, and enjoyed a superior degree of
liberty. Under the Roman government, the municipal govern-
ment established in cities was extremely favourable to liberty.
The jurifdidtion of the senate in each corporation, and the pri-
vileges of the citizens, were both extensive. There is reason to
believe, that some of the greater cities which escaped the deftruc-
tive rage of the barbarous nations, still retained their ancient
form of government, at least in a great measure. They were
governed by a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom
they themselves elected. Very strong presumptions in favour
of this opinion are produced by M. 1'Abbe De Bos. Hilt.
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. I8, &c. tom. ii. p. 524.
edit. I742. It appears from some of the charters of communi-
ties to cities, granted in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
that they only confirm the privileges possessed by the inhabitants
previous to the efabliflment of the community. D'Acher. Spe-
cileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed their privileges as
having possessed them without interruption from the times of
the Romans. Hilt. Crit.dc la Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But
the number of cities which enjoycd fucli immunities was to

I, 1 final,

2s59.

small, as in no degree to diminish the force of my conclufionm
in the text.

NOTE XVIL. SECT. I. p. 34,

HAVING given a full account of the establishment as well as

effeds of communities in Italyand France, it will be necessary to
enquire with some attention into the progress of cities and of mu-
nicipal government in Germany. The ancient Germans had
no cities. Even in their hamlets or villages they did not build
their houses contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
cap. i6. They confidered it as a badge of servitude to be
obliged to dwell in a city surrounded with walls. When one
of their tribes had shaken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having recovered li-
berty, to demolish the walls of a town which the Romans had,
built in their country. Even the fiercest animals, said they, lose
their spirit and courage when they are confined. Tac. Hifior.
lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built several cities of note on the
banks of the Rhine. But in all the vast countries from that
river to the coafls of the RBahick, there was hardly one city pre-
vious to the ninth century of the Christian ara. Conringius;
Exercitatio de Urbibus Germaniax Oper. vol. i. §. 25, 27, 31,
&c. HIcineccius differs from Conringius with respect to this,
But even after allowing to his arguments andauthorities their ut-
most force, they prove only that there were a few places in those
extensive regions on which ofme historians have bcftowed the
name of towns. Elem. Jur. German. lib. i . §. ro. Under
Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his family, as the political
fate of Germany began to improve, fevcral cities were founded,

and:
260

and men became accustomed to associate and to live together ins
one place. Charlemagne founded two archbifhopricks and nine
bifhopricks in the most considerable towns of Germany. Aub.
Mirai Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. 6. His fucccffors increased
the number of these; and as the bishops fixed their residence in
these cities, and performed religious funcions there, that in-
duced many people to fettle in them. Conring. ibid. § 48.
B3ut Henry, firnamed the Fowler, who began his reign A. D.
920, mufft be confidered as the great founder of the cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infefied by the incursions
of the Hungarians and other barbarous people. In order to op-
pose them, Henry encouraged his fubjeds to fettle in cities
which he surrounded with walls and towers. He enjoined or
persuaded a certain proportion of the nobility to fix their refi-
dence in the towns, and thus rendered the condition of citizens
more honourable than it had been formerly. Wittikindus
Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. §. 82. Folll this period the num-
ber of cities continued to encreafe, and they became more popu-
lous and more wealthy. But cities were frill destitute of muni-
cipal liberty or jurifclition. Such of them as were situated in
the Imperial demcfnes, were fibjetd to the Emperors, and their
Comites, MIU!, and other judges prcfided in them, and dispensed
juflice. Towns fitated on the cl.te of a baron, were part of
his fief, and he or his officers cxcrcifed a similar jurifdiclion in
them. Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Ieinec. Elem. Jur. Germ.
lib. i. § 104. cThe Germans borrowed the inflitution of com-
munitics from the Italians. Knipfcliildius Tradatus Politico.
Ililtor. Jurid. de CivitattnlT Inpcrin!liim Juribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5. N". 2 3. Frederick Brarbarof was the firftl Emperor wlio,
from the fame political conlideration that influenced Lewis the

CJ n's,'

261

Gross, multiplied communities in order to abridge the power of
the nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de 1' Hiftoire & du Droit Publique
d'Allemagne, 4t0. p. 297. From the reign of Henry the
Fowler, to the time when the German cities acquired full pof-
session of their immunities, various circumstances contributed to
their increase. The establishment of bifhopricks (already men-
tioned) and the building of cathedrals, naturally induced many
people to fettle there. It became the custom to hold councils and
courts of judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well as civil,
in cities. In the eleventh century, many slaves were enfran-
chificd, the greater part of which fettled in cities. Several mines
were discovered and wrought in different provinces, which drew
together such a concourse of people, as gave rife to several cities.
Conring. § IO5. The cities began in the thirteenth century to
form leagues for their mutual defence, and for repressing the
disorders occasioned by the private wars among the barons, as
well as by their exactions. This rendered the condition of the
inhabitants of cities more secure than that of any order of men,
and allured many to become members of their communities.
Conring. § 94. There were inhabitants of three different
ranks in the towns of Germany. The nobles, or familia, the
citizens, or libcri, and the artizans who were slaves, or homines
proprii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29. N°. 13. ITenry V. who
began his reign A. D. I 16o, inifranclifed the slaves who were
artisans or inhabitants in several towns, and gave them the rank
of citizens, or liberi. Pfcffcl, p. 254. Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29.
N°. 13, 1 19. Though the cities in Germany did not acquire
liberty so early as those in France, they extended their privileges
much farther. All the Imperial and frec cities, the number of
which is considerable, acquired the full right of being ilmne-

diarte;

diate; by which term in the German jurisprudence, we are to
underfiand, that they are subjea to the Empire alone, and possess
within their own precinas all the rights of compleat and inde-
pendant sovereignty.. The various privileges of the Imperial
cities, the great guardians of the Germanic liberties, are enume-
rated by Knipfchild, lib. ii. The great articles are generally
known, and it would be improper to enter into any disquisition
concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 34.

THE Spanish hiflorians are almost entirely silent concerning

the origin and progress of communities in that kingdom; so
that I cannot fix with any degree of certainty the time and man-
ner of their first introdution there. It appears, however, from
Mariana, vol. ii. p. 22 I, fol. Hagae 1736, that in the year 1350,
eighteen cities had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile.
From the account which ihall be given of their conffitution and
pretensions, Sed. III. of this volume, it is evident that their
privileges and form of government were the fame with those of
the other feudal corporations; and this, as well as the pcrfed
similarity of political intfitutions and tranfadions in all the feu-
dal kingdoms, may lead us to conclude, that communities were
introduced there in the fame manner, and probably about the fame
time, as in the other nations of Europe. InAragon, as I shall have oc-
calion to ol)crve in a fil)lcqqucnt note, cities ieem early to have ac-
quired cxtenfivc imintunitic;, togetherwith a share in the legifla-
ture. In tli year Ii 8, the citiz.cns of Sa;ragossa had not only

9 attained.

263

attained political liberty, but they were declared to be of equal
rank with the nobles of the second class; and many other im-
munities, unknown to persons in their rank of life in other parts
of Europe, were conferred upon them. Zurita Anales de Ara-
gon, tom. i. p. 44, In England, the eftablithment of communi-
ties or corporations was posterior to the Conquest. The pracice
·was borrowed from France, and the privileges granted by the
crown were perfecly timilar to those which I have enumerated.
But as this part of history is well known to most of my readers,
I shall, without entering into any critical or minute difculfion,
refer them to authors who have fully illufirated this interefling
point in the English hiflory. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs.
Madox Firma Burgi, chap. i. fed. ix. Hume's History of
England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not improbable that
some of the towns in England were formed into corporations,
under the Saxon Kings, and that the charters granted by the
Kings of the Norman race were not charters of enfranchisement
from a slate of slavery, but a confirmation of privileges which
they already enjoyed. See Lord Lyttelton's History of Henry II.
vol. ii. p. 317. The English cities, however, were very incon-
fiderable in the twelfth century. A clear proof of this occurs in
the hiflory to which I last referred. Fitzftephen, a contempo-
rary author, gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of Henry II. and the terms in which he fpcaks of its trade,
its wealth, and the splendour of its inhabitants, would fuggclt no
inadequate idea of its state at present, when it is the greatcft
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas of grandeur and
magnificence are merely comparative. It appears from a con-
temporary author, Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London, who

had

had good opportunity of being well informed, that this city, of
which Fitzftephen gives fAih a pompous account, containe. no
more than forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 315, 316. The
other cities were small in proportion, and in no condition to ex-
tort any extensive privileges. That the conffitution of the bo-
roughs in Scotland, in many circumstances, resembled that of
the towns in France and England, is manifest from the Leges
Burgorum annexed to the Regiam Majefatem.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 39,

SOON after the introduction of the third estate into the na-

tional council, the spirit of liberty which that excited in France
began to produce conspicuous effects. In several provinces of
France, the nobility and communities formed associations,
whereby they bound themselves to defend their rights and pri-
vileges against the formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the
King. The Count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of
one of these associations, dated in the year I314, twelve years
after the admiflion of the deputies from towns into the States
General. Hiftoire de l'ancien gouvernement de la France,
tom. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which the people asserted and
prepared to maintain their rights, obliged their sovereigns to
refpeC them. Six years after this association, Philip the Long
issued a writ of summons to the community of Narbonnc, in the
following terms: " Philip, by the Grace, &c. to our well-
beloved, &c. As we desire with all our heart, and above all
other things, to govern our kingdom and people in peace and
tranquillity, by the help of God; amd to reform our said king-
dom in so far as it flands in nced thercof, for the publick good,

Vo . I. M Il and

265

and for the benefit of our fubjees, who in times paR have been-
aggrieved and oppressed in diverse manners by the malice of
sundry persons, as we have learned by common report, as well as
by the information of good men worthy of credit, and we having
determined in our council which we have called to meet in our good
city, &c. to give redrefsto the utmost ofourpower, by all ways and
means poflible, according to reason and justice, and willing that
this should be done with solemnity and deliberation by the advice of
the prelates, barons, and good towns of our realm, and particularly
of you, and that it should be tranfaded agreeably to the will of
God, and for the good of our people, therefore we command,"
&c. Mably, obfervat. ii. App. p. 386. I shall allow these to
be only the formal words of a publick and legal stile, but the ideas
are singular, and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could exped in that age. A popular monarch of Great Britain
could hardly addrcfs himself to parliament, in terms more fa-
vourable to publick liberty. There occurs in the History of
France a firiking inflance of the progress which the principles
of liberty had made in that kingdom, and of the influence which
the deputics of towns had acquired in the States General. Du-
ring the calamities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the States General
made a bold effort to extend their own privileges and jurif-
didion. The regulations eftabliflcd by the States held A. D.
1 355, concerning the mode of levying taxes, the administration
of which they vcencl not in the crown, but in commissioners
appointed by the States; concerning the coining of money; con-
cerning the redress of the grievance of purveyance; conccrning
the regular adlinilifiration of juflicc; are much more suitable to
the genius of a republican government than that of a feudal

monarchy.
.266

monarchy. This curious flatute is publilhed, Ordon. t. iii. p. x9.
Such as have not an opportunity to consult that large colletion
will find an abridgment of it, Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix.
p. 130. or in Hiftoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 2 I 3. The French hifto-
rians represent the bishop of Laon, and Marcel Provost of the mer-
chants of Paris, who had the chief diretion of this assembly, as
seditious tribunes, violent, irtterefted, ambitious, and aiming at
innovations subversive of the conltitution and government of
their country. That may have been the cafe, but there men pof-
sessed the confidence of the people; and the measures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable, plainly prove that the
spirit of liberty had spread wonderfully, and that the ideas which
then prevailed in France concerning government were extremely
liberal. The States General held at Paris A. D. 355, consisted
of about eight hundred members, and above one half of these
were deputies from towns., M. Secouffe Pref. a Ordon. tom. iii.
p. 48. It appears that in all the different assemblics of the
States, held during the reign of John, the representatives of
towns had great influence, and in every rcfped the third State
was confidered as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other
two. Ibid. passim. These spirited efforts were Inade in France
long before the H1ouse of Commons in England acquired any
considerable influence in the legislature. As the feudal system was
carried to its utmost height in France sooner than in England,
so it began to decline sooner in the former than in the latter king-
dom. In England, almost all attempts to cflablifl or to extend
the liberty of the people have bcen fuicccfsful; in France they
have proved unfortunate. What were the accidental events, or
political caufcs which occasioned this diffcrenc, it is not my prc-
sint business to enquire.

N O T E
M 11 2

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p. 4I..

IN a former note, NO VIII. I have enquired into the condi-

tion of that part of the people which was employed in agricul-
ture, and have represented the various hardships and calamities
of their situation. When charters of liberty and manumission
were granted to such persons, they contained four concessions
corresponding to the four capital grievances to which men in a
slate of servitude are subjet. i. The right of disposing of
their persons by sale or grant was relinquished. 2. Power was
given to them of conveying their property and effecs by will
or any other legal deed. Or if they happened to die intestate,
it was provided that their property should go to their lawful
heirs in the fame manner as the property of other persons.
3. The services and taxes which they owed to their superior or
liege Lord, which were formerly arbitrary and imposed at plea-
ftire, are precifcly ascertained'. 4. They are allowed the pri-
vilege of marrying whatever person they chose, as formerly they
could contract no marriage without their Lord's permifion,
and with no person but one of his slaves. All there particulars
are found united in the charter granted Hlabitatoribus Montis-
Iritonis. A. ). 1 376. Hill. de Dauphine, tor. i. p. 81. Many
circumftanccs concurred with those which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that wretched state.
The gentle tiiritof the Christian religion, together with the doc-
trines which it teaches, concerning the original equality osman-
kind, as well as the impartial eye with 4wh1ich the Almighty re-
gards men of every condition, and admits them to a participa-
tiron of his benefits, arc inconfifltct wvili servitude. IBut in
this, as in many other inflances, conliderations of iutcref, andt

the
a68

the maxims of false policy led men to a conduc inconsistent with
their principles. They were so sensible, however, of the incon-
fiftency, that to set their fellow Christians at liberty from
servitude was deemed an ad of piety highly meritorious- and.
acceptable to heaven. The humane spirit of the Christian re--
ligion struggled with the maxims and manners of the world,.,
and contributed more than any other circumstance to introduce
the practice of manumiflion. When Pope Gregory the Great,
who flouriihed toward the end of the sixth century, granted
liberty to some of his slaves, he gives this reason for it, " Cum
redemptor notfer, totius conditor nature, ad hoc propitiatus
humanam carnem voluerit affumere, ut divinitatis fuei gratia,.
dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo, prifina:x nos refti-
tueret libertati; falubriter agitur, si homines, quos ab initio
liberos natura protulit, & jus gentium jugo fubftituit fervitutis,,
in ea, qu. n-ati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio libertate red-
dantur. Gregor. Magn. ap. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. I. § .3. Several
laws or charters founded on reasons similar to this, are pro-
duced by the fame author. Accordingly a great part of the
charters of manumiflion previous to the reign of Louis X. are
granted pro amore dei, pro remcdio animx, & pro mercede
animac. 1Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 849, 850. Du Cangc,
voc. niaumlliio. The formality of manumiflion was executed,
in a church, as a religious folemnlity. The person to be set free.
was led round the great altar with a torch in his hand, lie took
hold of the horns of the altar, and there the folcmn words con-
ferring liberty were pronounced. Du Cangc, lb. vol. iv. p. 467.
I fiall tranlcribc a part oi- a charter of nanumlilnion glrantcd
A. I). Ic 56; both as it contains a full account of the ccremo-
nies uscd in this formn of manumnilion, and as a tieciinccn o' the

imoie'tlt'

imperfect knowledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous age.
It is granted by Willa the widow of Hugo the Duke and Mar-
quis, in favour of Cleriza one of her slaves. Et ideo nos
Domine Wille indite cometiffe---libera et abfolvo te Cleriza
filia Uberto--pro timore omnipotentis dei, & remedio lumi-
narie anime bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo.
glorioffiflimo, ut quando illum Dominus de hac vita migrare,
jufferit, pars iniqua non abeat poteftatem ullam, fed anguelus
Domini noftri Jesu Chrifti colocare dignitur illum inter fandos
diledos suos; & beatus Petrus princips apoftolorum, qui habed
poteflatem omnium animarum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi
abfolvat anima: ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad illum janua
paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo pref-
biter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fandi Bartholomrei apoftoli;
traad te tribus vicibus circa altare ipfius ecclefix cum cereo ap-
prehenfum in manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am-
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe deviduntur. Sta-
timq; pro remedio luminarie anime bone memorie quondam
supra fcripto Domni ugo, et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia,
& dixit, Ecce quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq; partem
tibi placuerit, tam sic supra fcripta Cleriza, qua nofque tui
llercdces, qui ab ac hora in anca nati, vel procreati fuerit
utriufq; fcxus, &c." Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other char-
ters minght have been feleded, which, in point of grammar or
flylc, arc in no wife fLuperior to this. Manumiflion was fre-
quently granted on dearhl-bcd or by latter-will. As the minds
of men are at that time awakencd to fentiiments of humanity
and piety, thlcfe deeds proc(eded fiom religious motives, and
are granted pro rccm/ltionec aninia, in order to obtain accep-
tance with God, Du Cange ubi filpra, p. 470. & voc. fervus

vo()l.
2.7

vol. vi. p. 45I. Another method of obtaining liberty was by
entering into holy orders, or taking the vow in a monastery.
This was permitted for some time; but so many slaves escaped,
by this means out of the hands of their mailers, that the prac-
tice was.afterwards restrained, and at last prohibited by the laws
of almost all the nations of Europe. Murat. ib. p. 842. Con-
formably to the fame principles, Princes, on the birth of a son,
or upon any other agreeable event, appointed a certain number
of slaves to be enfranchised, as a testimony of their gratitude to
God for that benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39. There
are several forms of manumission publiflled by Marculfus, and
all of them are founded on religious considerations, in order to
procure the favour of God, or to obtain the forgiveness of their
fins. Lib. ii. c. 23, 33, 34, edit. Baluz. The fame obferva-
tion holds with refpeC to the other collecions of Formulae an-
nexed to Marculfus. As sentim'ents of religion induced some to
grant liberty to their fellow-Chriftians who groaned under the
yoke of servitude; so mistaken ideas concerning devotion led
others to relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived an
extraordinary refped for the faint who was the patron of any
church or monastery in which he was accustomed to attend re-
ligious worihip, it was not unusual among men possessed with
an excess of filperilitious reverence, to give up themselves and
their posterity to be the slaves of the faint. Mabillon. de re
Diplomat. lib. vi. 632. The oblati or voluntary flavcs of
churches or nonaflcries were very numerous, and may be di-
vided into three different clancs. The first were fiuch as put
thenlfclvcs and efl'cds under the protedion of a particular

mchurch or monalelry, binding themselves to decfend its privilcges
and property against every aggressor. Thefc were prompted to

5 do.

27x

do so, not merely by devotion, but in-order to obtain-that fecu-
rity which arose from the protection of the church. They
.were rather vassals than slaves, and sometimes persons of noble
birth found it prudent to secure the protection of the church in
.this manner. Persons of the second class bound themselves to

pay an annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates to a church
·or monastery. Besides this, they sometimes engaged to per-
form certain services. They were called cenfuales. The last
class confifled of such as actually renounced their liberty, and
became slaves in the ftrie and proper sense of the word. These
were called linjiteriales, and enslaved their bodies, as some
of the charters bear, that they might -procure the liberty of
their fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum, lib. i. cap. i. §. 6, 7.
-How zealous the clergy were to encourage the opinions which
-led to this practice will appear from a clause in a charter by
which one gives up himself as a slave to a Inonaftery, " Cum fit
omni carnali ingenuitate generofius extremum quodcumq; Dei
fcrvitium, scilicet quod terrena nobilitas multos plerumq; vitio-
rulm fcrvos facit, fervitus vero Chrifti nobiles virtutibus red-
dit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus vitia comparaverit,
claret pro certo cum effe gencrofiorem, qui fe Dei fervitio pra-
buerit proniorem. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens, &c." Ano-
ther author fays, Eligens magis etfe fervus Dei quam libertus
frcculi, firnitcr credens & fcicns, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft,
fiinmmaquc ingenuitas fit in qua fervitus comparabatur Chrifti,
LCc. Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not
;l.pcar, tliat tlic cnfranlcliifcment of slaves was a frequent prac-
tice wllile tlle feudal t'tlem prcfcrvcd its vigour. On the
contrary, tliere were laws which lect bounds to this practice as
tietrilmimtal to ifcicty. Potgicfl lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The info-

6 rior
'272

rior order of men owed the recovery of their liberty to the de-
cline of that ariftocratical policy, which lodged the most ex-
tensive power in the hands of a few members of the society, and
depressed all the reft. When Louis X. iflued his ordonance,
several slaves had been so long accustomed to servitude, and
their minds were so much debased by that unhappy situation,
that they refused to accept of the liberty which was offered
them. D'Ach. Spicel. v. xi. p. 387. Long after the reign of
Louis X. several of the French nobility continued to aflert their
ancient dominion over their slaves. It appears from an ordon-
ance of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin Constable of France,
that the custom of enfranchising them was confidered as a per-
nicious innovation. Morice Mem. pour fervir des preuves
a l'hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. Ioo. In some instances when the
praedial slaves were declared to be freemen, they were Rill
bound to perform certain services to their ancient masters; and
were kept in a Rate different from other fubjets, being re-
firided either from purchasing land, or becoming members of a
community within the precincts of the manor to which they
formerly belonged. Martene & Durand. Thefaur. Anecdot.
vol. i. p. 914. This, however, fccms not to lave been common.
---There is no general law for the manumillion of slaves in tle
Statute-book of England similar to that which has been quoted
from the ordonances of the Kings of France. Though the
genius of the Englifl constitution feemrs early to have favoured
personal liberty, personal servitude, nevcrthelcfs, continued long
in England in some particular places. In the year 1I14, we
find a charter of -Ienry VIII. enfrancliifing two tlaves bclong-
ing to one of his manors. Rym. FcIdcr. vol. xiii. p. 470. As
late as the year 1574, therc is a conmnifion fiom (Qlcen I li-

VoL. I. N n zabctli

2:73

zabeth with refpea to the manumission of certain bondmen be-
longing to her. Rymer. in Obfervat. on the statutes, &c. p. 25r.

NOTE XXL SECT. I. P.47.

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more singular than

that of private war. It is a right of so great importance, and pre-
vailed so universally, that the regulations concerning it make a
considerable figure in the system of laws during the middle ages.
M. de Montesquieu, who has unravelled so many intricate
points in feudal jurisprudence, and thrown light on so many
curloms formerly obscure and unintelligible, was not led by his
subjeE to confider this. I ihall therefore give a more minute
account of the customs and regulations which direced a practice
so contrary to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. I. Among the ancient Germans, as
well as other nations in a similar slate of society, the- right of
avenging injuries was a private and personal right, exercised by
force of arms, without any reference to an umpire, or any ap.
peal to a magistrate for decision. The clearest proofs of this
were produced Note VI. 2. This pradice fuibfifed among the
barbarous nations after their fcttlement in the provinces of the
Empire which they conquered; and as the causes of disTention
among them multiplied, their family feuds and private wars
became more frequent. Proofs of this occur in their early his-
torians. Greg. Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. 18. lib. x.
c. 27. and likewise in tlhe codes of their laws. It was
not only allowable for the relations to avenge the injuries of
their family, but it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad qucmcunque hcreditas terra: per-
crlerit, ad ilium vcflis bellica id eft lorica & ultio proximi,

&.
274

& folatio leudis, debet pertinere. tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr.
Leg. Salic. tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. § o1.
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble birth, had
the right of private war. All disputes among slaves, vil-
lani, the inhabitants of towns, and freemen of inferior con-
dition, were decided in the courts ofjuftice. All disputes be-.
tween gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were terminated
in the fame manner. The right of private war supposed nobi-
lity of birth, and equality of rank in the contending parties.
Beaumanoir Couflumes de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon. des
Rois de France, tom. ii. 395. § xvii. 508. § xv, &c. The
dignified ecclefiafticks likewise claimed and exercised the right
of private war; but as it was not altogether decent for them to
prosecute quarrels in person, advocati or vilancs were chosen
by the several monasteries and bifhopricks. These were com-
monly men of high rank and reputation, who became the pro-
tedors of the churches and convents by whom they were
elected; espoused their quarrels, and fought their battles; armis
omnia qus erant ecclefix virilitcr defendebant, et vigilanter
protegebant. Bruffel Usage des fiefs, torn. i. p. 144. Du
Cange voc. advocatur. On many occasions, the martial ideas
to which ecclefiafticks of noble birth were accuflomed, made
them forget the pacifick spirit of their profeflion, and led them
into the field in person at the hcad of their vaflals, " ilanmua,
fcrro, caede, polfcfliones ecclcfiarum prcxlati efendcf ecant."
ClLido Abbas ap. Du Cange. Ib. p. 179.---4. It was not every
injury or trcrpafs that gave a gentleman a title to make war
upon his adversary. Atrocious ads of violence, inlillts and
aflronts publickly committed, were legal and permitted motives
for taking arms againfi the authors of them. Such crimes as
arc now lmnilllcd capitally in civilized nations, at that tilme
jullificd private hofnilitic. Beauinan. ch. lix. Du Cange

N n 2 l)nlrt.

Difert. xxix. fur Joinville, p. 33P. But though the avenging
of injuries was the only motive that could legally authorize a
private war, yet disputes concerning civil property, often gave
rife to hostilities, and were terminated by the sword. Du Cange
Difflrt. p. 332.-5. All persons present when any quarrel
arofc, or any act of violence was committed, were included in
the war which it occasioned, for it was supposed to be im-
poflible for any man in such a situation, to remain neutral,
without taking fide with one or other of the contending
parties. Beauman. p. 300.---6. All the kindred of the two
principals in the war were included in it, and obliged to
espouse the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they
were connected. Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded on
the maxim of the ancient Germans, " fufcipere tam inimici-
tias feu patris, feu propinqui, quam amicitias, neceffe eft;" a
maxim natural to all rude and simple nations, among which
the form of society, and political union strengthens such a fen-
timent. The method of ascertaining the degree of affinity
which obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of a kinsman
was curious. While the church prohibited the marriage of per-
f)ns within the seventh degree of affinity, the vengeance of
private war extended as far as this absurd prohibition, and all

lwho had such a remote connection with any of the principals
were involved in the calamities of war. But when the church
relaxed lbincwhat of its rigour, and did not extend its prohibi-
tion of marrying beyond the fourth degree of affinity, the fame
refridion took place in the condud of private war. Beauman.
o03,. Du Cange Dissert. 333----7. A private war could not
be carried on between two full brothers, because both have
the fiane common kindred, and confequcntly neither have any
pcroins Ibotlld to tan(l by Iin againit the other, in the contefl;
but two brollicrs of the half' blood might wage war, beC;allC

7 ctchl
276

each of them has a diftin& kindred. Beauman. p. 299.--8. The
vassals of each principal in any private war were involved in
the contest, because by the feudal maxims they were bound to
take arms in defence of the chieftain of whom they held, and
to aflift him in every quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feudal
tenures were introduced, and this artificial conneaion was efta-
lifhed between vassals and the baron of whom they held, vassals
came to be confidered as in the fame fiate with relations. Beau-
man. 303.---9. Private wars were very frequent for several
centuries. Nothing contributed more to increase those disorders
in government, and that ferocity of manners which reduced the
nations of Europe to that wretched state which distinguished the
period of history which I am reviewing. Nothing was such an
obstacle to the introduction of a regular administration of justice.
Nothing could more effectually discourage industry, or retard
the progress and cultivation of the arts of peace. Private wars
were carried on with all the deftrutive rage, which is to be
dreaded from violent resentment when armed with force, and
authorised by law. It appears from the laws prohibiting or
refiraining the exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion of
the inoft barbarous enemy could not be more desolating to a
country, or more fatal to its inhabitants, than those intcflinc
wars. Ordon. t. i. p. 701. tom. ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The
contemporary historians dcfcribe the exceffcs committed in pro-
fecution of these quarrels, in fuich terms, as excite aflonifnihlnit
and horror. I shall mention only one palTage from the hiflory
of the Holy War, by Guibcrt, Abbot of Nogcnt: " Erat co tenm-
porc maximis ad inviccn hloflilitatibus, totius Francornm rcgni
fadla turlatio; crcbra ubi(l; latrocinia, viaruln obfcflio; :1(lic-
bantur )paliin, immoni fiebant inccndlia ilfinita; nlullis pratcr sola
& intlomita cupiditate ceillcntilbs caultis cstrilcbanti l- 'I:lia;

&.

277

& ut brevi totum claudam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum fubja.
cebat, nufquam attendendo cujus effct, praedx patebat. Gefta
Dei per Francos, vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus colleCted the chief regulations which custom

had established concerning the right and exercise of private war,
I shall enumerate in chronological order the various expedients
employed to aboliff or restrain this fatal cuflom. I. The first
expedient employed by the civil magistrate in order to set some
bounds to the violence of private revenge, was the fixing by law
tile fine or composition to be paid for each different crime. The
injured person was originally the sole judge concerning the na-
ture of the wrong which he had suffered, the degree of vengeance
which he should exad, as well as the species of attonement or
reparation with which he should reft satisfied. Resentment be-
came of course as implacable as it was fierce. It was often a point
of honour not to forgive, nor to be reconciled. This made it
neceflary to fix those compositions which make so great a figure
in the laws of barbarous nations. The nature of crimes and of-
fences was eflimated by the magistrate, and the film due to the
person offended was ascertaincd with a minute, and often a whim-
fical accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of the Lombards, who
reigned about the middle of the seventh century, difcovcrs his
intention both in ascertaining the composition to be paid by
the offender, and in increasing its value; it is, fays he, that the
enmity may be extinguifcld, the prosecution may ccafe, and
peacc may be rcltored. Leg. Langob. lib. i. tit. 7. 5 Io.----
o. About the beginning of the ninth century, Charlemagne
struck at the root of the evil, and cnadcd, " That when any
person had ben guilty of a crime, or had committed an outrage,
lie flould immediately submit to the penance which the church

imp ofed,

imposed, and offer to pay the composition which the law pre-
fcribed; and if the injured person or his kindred should refuse
to accept of this, and presume to avenge themselves by force of
arms, their lands and properties should be forfeited. Capitul.
A. D. 802. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 37I.--3. But in this, as well as
in other regulations, the genius of Charlemagne advanced be-
fore the spirit of his age. The ideas of his contemporaries con-
cerning regular government were too imperfec, and their man-
ners too fierce to submit to this law. Private wars, with all the-
calamities which they occasioned, became more frequent than'
ever after the death of that great monarch. His successors were
unable to restrain them. The church found it necessary to in-
terpofe. The most early of these interpositions now extant, is
towards the end of the tenth century. In the year 990, several
Bishops in the south of France assembled, and published various
regulations, in order to set some bounds to the violence and
frequency of private wars; if any person within their dio-
cesses should venture to transgress, they ordained that he should
be excluded from al Christian privileges during his life, and.
be denied Christian burial after his death. Du Mont Corps Di-
plomatique, tom. i. p. 41. These, however, were only partial
remedies; and therefore a council was hcld at Limoges, A. D.
994' The bodies of the faints, according to the custom of those
ages, were carried thither; and by these sacred rclicks men were
exhorted to lay down their arms, to extinguish their animofities,
and to swear that they would not for the future violate the pub-
lick peace by their private hoflilities. Bouquet Recueil des
Iiflor. vol. x. p. 49, 147. Several other councils issued decrees
to the fame effet. Du Cange Dissert. 343.---4. But the autho-
rity of councils, how venerable soever in those ages, was not
fuficient to abolifl a cult)on which flattcrcd the pride of tie

"I jIoblcs,,

nobles, and gratified their favourite passions. The evil grew
so intolerable, that it became necessary to employ supernatural
means for suppressing it. A bishop of Aquitaine, A. D. 1032,
pretended that an angel had appeared to him, and brought him
a writing from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their ho-
flilitics, and to be reconciled to each other. It was during a sea-
son of public calamity that he published this revelation. The
minds of men were disposed to receive pious impreflions; and
willing to perform any thing in order to avert the wrath of hea-
ven. A general peace and cessation from hostilities took place,
and continued for seven years; and a resolution was formed that
no man should in times to come attack or molest his adversaries
during the seasons set apart for celebrating the great festivals of
the church, or from the evening of Thursday in each week to the
morning of Monday in the week ensuing, the intervening days
being confidered as particularly holy, our Lord's Passion having
happened on one of these days, and his Refurredion on another.
A change in the dispositions of men so sudden, and which pro-
duced a resolution so unexpeded, was confidered as miraculous;
and the respite from hostilities which followed upon it, was
called The Truce of God. Glabcr. Rodulphus Hiftor. lib. v. ap.
Bouquet. vol. x. p. 59. This, from being a regulation or con-
ccrt in one kingdom, became a general law in Christendom, and
was confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and the violaters
were fublljcccdl to the penalty of excommunication. Corpus Jur.
Canon. )ccrctal. lib. i. tit. 34. c. 1. Du Cange Gloffar. voc.
TlrcuIa. An ad of the council of Toulujes in Roussillon, A. D.
o141, containing all the flipulations required by the truce of
(od, is publishcd by D)oin de Vic & Dom Vaifette Hilt. de
Ianguedoc, tom. ii. Prcuvcs, p. 2o6. A ceflttion from hollili-
ties during three conmpleat days in every week, allowed such a

confidcrablc
s80

considerable space for the passions of the antagoniffs to cool, and
for the people to enjoy a respite from the calamities of war, as
well as (o take mieaflres for their own'fecurity, that, if this
truce of God had been exaCdy observed, it must have gone far
towards putting an end t6-private-wars.' This, however, seems
not to have been the cafe; - the nobles, disregarding the truce,
prosecuted their quarrels without interruption as formerly. Qua
nimirum tempeftate, univerfz provitcia adeo devaftationis con-
tinuz importuritate inquietantur, ut ne ipfa, pro obfervatione
divina pacis, profeffa facramenta cuflodiantur. Abbas Ufper-
genfis apuid Datt de'pace imperii publica, p. 13. NO. 35. The
violefit spirit ot t{i 'nobility could not be restrained by any en-
gagetnents. The complaints of this were frequent; and bishops,
inr orffer to compel them to reiew their vows and prbmifes of
ceasing from their private wars, weire obliged to enjoin their
-ergr'to fuifpend the perf6toance of divine service, and the
erdlfe of any religlous funClion wilthin the parifies of such
as were refraory an O
o ftinate. 4ift. de. Langued. par. D.

, -'
7£ -D

'. ._',

£2 ..'"."-

'li ', ..' .'

. 'D. -

'" .

ie.VicV'ytaif&tte, tom, Al. Preuves, p.. I8.--5. The peo-
pie, eager to obtain relief froq theair .ffferings, called in a
second time a pretended revelation to tleir aid. Towards the
end of thc twelfth century, a carpenter in Guienne gave out
that Jesus Christ together with the bleffie Virgin hlad appeared
to him, aind having commanded him to exhort mankind to peace,
had kiven him, as a proof of his miflion, an image of the Virgin
holding her son in ler arms, with this i!lfcription, Lamb of

od,
; who takeft away the fin of the wolrl, give us peace.
This low fanatick addrcflFcd hiinfclf to an ignorant age, prone
to credit what was marvellous. He was rcceived a ai a inlifired
ieflntic ger of God. Many prelates and barons alremblcd at
Puy, and took an oath, not ouly to make peace with all their

V OL. . 0 o own

*own enemies, but to attack such as.refufed ta lay dowr
their arms, and to be reconciled to- their enemies.- They formed
an association for this purpose, and assumed the honourable
name of the Brotherhood of God. Robertus de Monte Michaelc
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tor. i. Ordon. p. 29. But the influ-
ence of this fuperfitious terror or' devotion was not of long
continuance.-6. The civil magistrate was obliged to exert his
authority in order to check a cufRom which threatened the dif-
solution of government. Philip Augustus, as some imagine,
or St. Louis, as is more probable, published an ordonance, A. D.
1245, prohibiting any person to commence hostilities against
the friends and vassals of his adversar.y until forty days after
the commiflon of the crime or offence which gave rife to the
quarrel; declaring, that if any man presumed to transgress
this statute, he should be confidered as guilty of a breach of
publick peace, and be tried and punished by the judge ordi-
nary as a traitor. Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This was called
the Royal T'ruce, and afforded time for the violence of resent-
mcnt to subside, as well as leisure for the good offices of such
as were willing to compose the difference. The happy effects
of this regulation seem to have been considerable, if we may
judge from the solicitude of iucceeding monarchs to enforce it.
---7. In order to refrain the exercise of private war still far-
ther, Philip the Fair, towards the close of the fame century,
A. D. i296, published an ordonance commanding all private
hostilitics to cease, while he was engaged in war against the
enemies of the state. Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 390. This regula-
tion, which seems to be almost cflential to the cxiftence and
prcfervation of focicty, was often renewed by his fiuccefors,
and being enforced by the regal authority, proved a confidera-
ble check to the deflrudtive contefis of the nobles. Both these

regulations,
282

regulations, introduced first in France, were adopted by the
other nations of Europe.--8. The evil, however, was so in-
reterate, that it did not yield to all these remedies. No sooner
was publick peace eftabliihed in any kingdom, than the barons
renewed their private hostilities. They not only struggled to
maintain this pernicious right, but to-fecure the exercise of it
without any restraint. Upon the death of Philip the Fair, the
nobles of different provinces in France formed associations, and
presented remonfirances to his successor, demanding the repeal
of several laws, by which he had abridged the privileges of
their order. Among these, the right of private war is always
mentioned as one of the most valuable; and they claim, that
the restraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal truce, as
well as that arising from the ordonance of the year I 296, (hould
-be taken off. In some inflances, the two sons of Philip who
mounted the throne successively, eluded their demands; in
others, they were obliged to make concessions. Ordon. tom. i.
p. 551, 557, 561, 573. The ordonances to which I here refer,
are of fiuch length that I cannot insert them, but they are ex-
treinely curibus, and' Iay be peculiarly instruCtive to an Eng-
lifh reader, as they throw considerable light on that period of
English hiflory, in which the attempts to circumscribe the regal
prerogative were carried on, not by the people struggling for
liberty, but by the nobles contending for power. It is not ne-
ceflary to produce any evidence of the continuance and frequency
of private wars under the successors of Philip the Fair.---9. A
praqice fomcwhat similar to the royal truce was introduced, il
order to firengthen and extend it. Bonds of aflurancc, or mu-
tual iscurity, were demanded from the parties at variance, by
which they obliged themselves to abllain from all hofilitics,
either during a time mentioned in the bond, or for ever; and
became subjee to heavy penalties, if they violated this obliga-

Oo 2z

tion.

p tiqn. TThefe- y9ons ;vec ,fooetiM l ; oly( 'but
-more frequently exadted by. tb aut4poty.phe civil.agjiftte.
Upon a petition from. the party wh°ofeithim.felf wea.ft, tl e
magifirate. furim oned ,l.adx efiy zo.a',. i ,,tt:ut, ld
Qbliged him to gi-e aebx^dl'-affmcl~ r!, . if2 Ae
copmnit ed any. f.ber Jogiit4i t be:cae. ubjedx _.lhe
penalties of treason, iobj. lrtraiat p vo rivate w .s *8w.w
in'the ~g- Lo.?.,
,& :a,,

* te age _.; , 1~iis. .Efita bi9i s,

,1sttc'l, rn I se

frequent in Bretagee antwhat is very remarkabe, such bonds
of assurance wire i ver mutually betiree.n vafia s and the lord
of whom they held. OlJyer deClifflon Arants one to the Iuie
of BretaPne, n,& .ivreg . Morie.Memi. pour(,emir ,4e
prerves 'a I'iilt. de. Bret. tom .
. p. 846. i. p 37f. Many

I *

, o. - .

* _

t- .-

,

-

.

c

e

i n' t

.-

e . rnI- c'

ar

.

z

examnples 6ofbnd of assurance in other provinces of France are
colle&ed by' BPruei tom . ii. p. 856. The, nobles of Bur
gundi tcmonflrated againit this praaice, and obtained exemp-
tion irbm-oit as an encroachment on tihe privileges of their otder.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 558. This mode of security was firt intro-
duced in cities, and the good effeas of it having been felt there,
was extended to the nobles. See Note XVI. Io. The cala-
mitics occasioned by private wars, became at some times so
intolerable, that the nobles entered into voluntary associations,
binding themselves to refer:all matters in dispute, whether con-
cerning civil property, or points of honour, to the determina-
tion of the majority of the associates. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 728.----1 i. But
all these expedients proving ineffctual, Charles VI. A. D. 1413,
ifued an ordonance exprcfly prohibiting private wars on any
pretext whatfocver, with power to the judge ordinary to com-
pel all persons to comply with this injundion, and to punilh
such as should prove refractory or disobedient, by imprisoning
their pcfons, fcizing their goods, and appointing the officers

of
7

6f"aie, matgeurs , eJteurs,

.to live at free .qutarters on. their

-iatc;. -i"f fe' hwowere i aifoldiitc t' this edict could not be
personally arrested, heiapponieid t;heir friends and vaftals to be
ffized, and 4etainedn unthley gave futet for keeping -the
pieace.; adriaio.e da l a.s,. ;uom,,  rivileges which

it te leaoded in opoitn to his ordonance. Ordon.

tom. r. .- ; HoQY is .the progrsfs -o£ reason and es
civi oirder gufatlons which to u,.apper.fo. equitable,. obvi-
'"oui 'aindi mpe, requird i tie effrts of civil and .ccleiaftical

ditt y driAg fevieratcentunes, to oinotiduce and establish

tU "iteripodb1erior to this period, Louis XI.: was obliged to

abolish ftivate wars'in Dauphine, by a particular edia, A. D.
i'Sr; - 3'. Cange di ert. p. 34S.

.TnHS .note rould swell to a difproportionalbulk, if I fhoutd
attenipt"toaenquire iWith the faie minute attention into the prO
grel ei i this pernicious cuafom im the otheir countries of Europe.
In England, 'the ideas -of th Saxdns concerning personal re-
venge, thc right of priVat'e wats, and the composition due to
the party offended, seem to have been much the fame with those
which prevailed on the continent. The law of Ina de Vindi-
cantibus, in the eighth'century, Lamb. p. 3; those of Edmund
in the tenth century, de homicidio, Lamb. p. 72. & de inimi-
citiis, p. 76; and those of Edward the Confessor, in the ele-
venth century, de temporibus & diebus pacis, or Treuga Dci,
Lamb. p. 126, are perfealy similar to the ordonances of the
French Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Edward, de
pace regis, are still more explicit than those of the French Mo-
narchs, and, by several provisions in them, difcovcr that a
more pcrfec police was established in England at that period.
Lambard. p. i28. fol. verf. Even after the conquefi, private
wars, and the regulations for preventing them, were not alto-

gether

gether unknown, as appears from Madox Formulare Anglica-
num, No. CXLV. and from the extracs from Domesday Book,
publificd by Gale Scriptores hist. Britan. p. 759, 777. The
well known clause in the form of an English indictment,
which, as an aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions
his having assaulted a person, who was in the peace of God
and of the King, seems to be borrowed from the Treuga or Pax
Dei and the Pax Regis which I have explained. But after
the conquest, the mention of private wars among the no-
bility, occurs more rarely in the English history, than in that
of any other European nation, and no laws concerning them
are to be found in the body of their statutes.. Such a change in
their own manners, and such a variation from those of their
neighbours is remarkable. Is it to be ascribed to the extraor-
dinary power which William the Norman acquired by right of
conquest, and transmitted to his fucceflors, which rendered the
execution of justice more vigorous and decisive, and the ju-
rifdidion of the King's court more extensive -than under
the Monarchs on the continent ? Or, was it owing to the
settlement of the Normans in England, who having never
adopted the practice of private war in their own country, abo-
lifhed it in the kingdom which they conquered ? It is asserted
in an Ordonancc of Joln King of France, that in all times past,
pcrions of every rank in Normandy have been prohibited to
wage war, and the practicc has been deemed unlawful. Ordon.
tor. ii. p. 407. If this fadC were certain, it would go far to-
avard(s explaining the peculiarity which I have mentioned. B1ut
as there arc t)ine IEnglifh Ads of Parliament, wlich, according
to the remark of the learned autlor of the O1f/irvatiolns on the
Slatutts, chiY/ly the more ancient, which recite falihoods, it may
be added, that this is not peculiar to the laws of that country.
Notwithlfandilg the politivc aflcrtion containcd i: this publick

*; law

PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 287

law of France, there is good reason for confidering.it as a flatute
which recites a fallhood. This, however, is not the place for
difcufiing that point. It is an inquiry not unworthy the curio-
fity of an English antiquarian.

IN Castile, the pernicious pracice of private war prevailed,

and was authorised by-:the customs and law of the kingdom.
Leges Tauri. tit. 76.. cum - commentario Anton. Gomnezii,
p. 55 . As the Castilian nobles were no less turbulent than
powerful, their quarrels and hostilities involved their country in
many calamities. Innumerable proofs of this occur in Mariana.
In Aragon, the right of private revenge was likewise authorised
by law; exercised in its full extent, and accompanied with
the fame unhappy consequences. Hieron. Blanca Comment. de
rebus [Arag. ap. Schotti. Hifpan. illuftrat. vol. ii. p. 733. Lex
Jacobi I. A. D. I247. Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de
Aragon, lib. ix. p. 182. Several confederacies between the
Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for the restoring of peace,
founded on the truce of God, are fill extant. Petr. de Marca.
Marca fivi Limes Hispanic. App. 1303, 1388, 1428. As early
as the year I I65, we find a combination of the King and court
of Aragon, in order to abolish the right of private war, and
to punilh those who prefuimed to claim that privilege. Anales
de Aragon por Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so inve-
terate, that Charles V. A. D. 1519. was obliged to publish a
law enforcing all former regulations tending to fupprcfs this
praticc. Fucros & Obfcrvanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

TiHE Lombards, and other northern nations who fettled in

Italy, introduced the fame maxims concerning the right of re-
venge into that country, and thcfc were followed by the fame
cffets. As the progress of the evil was perfetly Iimilar to

what

what happened in France, the expedients employed to check its
career, or to extirpate it finally, resembled those which I have
enumerated. Murat. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany the disorders and calamities occasioned by the

right of private war were greater and more intolerable than in
any other country of Europe. The Imperial authority was so
much shaken and enfeebled by the violence of the civil wars,
excited by the contests between the Popes and the Emperors of
the Franconian and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but
the cities acquired almost independant power, and scorned all fuib
ordination and obedience to the laws. The frequency of these
faide or private wars, are often mentioned in the Ger man. An-
nals, and the fatal effeds of them are most pathetically described,
Datt. de pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap, v. na. 30. painm. - The
Germans early adopted the Treuga Dei, which warf^siefa
blifhed in France. This, however, proved but a temporayan4
ineffeaual refmedy.' The disorders multiplied so fast, and grey
so enormous, that they threatened the dissolution of society, ?a
compelled the Germans to have recourse to the only remedy_ 9f
the evil, viz. an absolute prohibition of private wars.
'Emperor, William, pu'bl1'fbe1 his edict to this purpose, A. D.
1255, an hundred and sixty years previous to the ordonance of
Charles VI. in France. Datt. lib. i. cap. 4. n". 20. But neither 1e
nor his fucccffors had authority to secure the observance of it.
'This gave rilt to a pratice in Germany, which conveys to us a
fIriking idea both of the intolerable calamitics occalioned by
private wars, and of the fecblelicfs of government durilg the
twvelfth and thirtcenth centuries. The cities an nQbs enter'
into alliances andl anfociations,, by which they b!ound thenfclv"
to rmaintain the publlick pea'ce, and to Iacu.w'arson fun h ,a;
hlOuld violatc it. This was the origin, of the leaguc of, the

, hinic,

Rhine, of Suabia, and of many smaller confederacies diflin-
guifhed by various names. The rife and beneficial effects of
these associations are traced by Datt with great accuracy. What-
ever degree of publick peace, or of regular administration wag
preserved in the Empire from the beginning of the twelfth cen-
tury to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these leagues.
During that period, political order, refpea for the laws, together
with the equal administration ofjuftice, made considerable progress
in Germany. But the final and perpetual abolition of the right
of private war was not accomplished until A. D. 1495. The
Imperial authority was by that time more firmly established, the
ideas of men with refpet to government and subordination
were become more just. That barbarous and pernicious privi-
lege which the nobles had so long possessed, was declared to be
incompatible with the happiness and existence of society.
In order to terminate any differences which might arise among
the various numbers of the Germanick body, the Imperial cham-
ber was instituted with supreme jurifdiclion, to judge without
appeal in every question brought before it. That court has sub-
sifted since that period, forming a very refpetable tribunal,
of essential importance in the German conftitutiond-Batt, lib. iii.
iv. v. Pfeffel abrege de 'Hiftoire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

N O T E XXII. SECT. I. p. 56. Y]

Ir would be tedious and of little use to enumerate the various

modes of appealing to the justice of God, which superstition in-
troduced during the ages of ignorance. I fiall mention only
one, because we have an account of it in a placitum or trial in
the presence of Charlemagne, from which we may learn the in-

VOL. I. P p1 pcrfc&

perfeat manner in which justice was administered even during
his reign. In the year 775, a contest arose between the bishop
of Paris and the abbot of St. Denys, concerning the property
of a small abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds and records,
in order to prove the rightto be in them. Inflead oftrying the
authenticity, or confidering the import of these, the point was
referred to the judicium crucis. Each produced a person,
who, during the celebration of mass, flood before the cross
with his arms expanded; and he whose representative firfi be-
came weary, and altered his polture, loft the cause. The person
employed by the bishop on this occasion had less firength or less
spirit than his adversary, and the queflion was decided in favour
of the abbot. Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a
Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne countenanced such an ab-
surd mode of decision, it is no wonder that other monarchs
should tolerate it folong. M. de Montesquieu has treated of
the trial by judicial combat at confiderahle length. The two
talents which distinguish that illustrious author, industry in
tracing all the circumilances of ancient and obscure institutions,
and sagacity in penetrating into the caufcs and principles which
contributed to eftablif them, are equally conspicuous in his
ol)fervations on this filbjet. To these I refer the reader, as
they contain most of the principles by which I have endea-
voiurcd to explain this pradice. D lc l'll)rit des Loix, lib. xxviii.
It fcems to be probable from the remnarks of M. de Monltcilllicu,
as well as froml the fads lro(duccl I by Muratori, torn. iii. 1)il'lc t.
xxxviii. that tlic appeals to tlhe jultice of God l)y the cxp)ri-
ments with lire and water, &c. were pratdifed by tlle people
who fcttled in the diellrent provinces of tile Romaln lnmpirc,
)betfre they Iiad rcco(urte to tile judicial combat. 'I'lle judicial
combat, howevcr, was thc moll ancient mode of tcrmililatilg

~* ;1ly~any
9go

any controversy among the barbarous nations in their original
settlements. This is evident from Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii.
c. 8. who informs us, that all queltions which were decided
among the Romans by legal trial, were terminated among the
Germans by arms. The fame tiing appears in the ancient laws
and customs of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. O. Stiernhlbk de Jure
Sueonlm & Gothorum vetufto. 4to. Holmixr 1682. lib. i. c. 7.
It is probable that when the various tribes which invaded the
Empire were converted to Christianity, the repugnance of the
custom of allowing judicial combats to the precepts of reli-
gion, was so glaring, that, for some time, it was aboliihed, and
by degrees, several circumitances which I have mentioned, led
them to resume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable from a law quoted by Stiern-

hook in- the treatise which I have mentioned, that the judicial
combat was originally permitted, in order to determine points
refpeding the personal charater, or reputation of individuals, and
was afterwards extended not only to criminal cafes, but to questions
concerning property. The words of the laware, " if any man ihall
fay to another these reproachful words, " you are not a man equal
" to other men," or, " you have not the heart of a man," and
the other shall reply, " I am a man as good as you." Let them
meet on the highway. If lie who firfl gave offence appear,
and the pcrfon offenldd absent himself, let the latter be deemed
worfc than he was called; let liiin not le admitted to give
evidclicc injutdgnment either for man or woman, and let him nlot
lave tlle privilege of making a teflament. If the person offended
appe)ar, anld lie whlo gave the offence be absent, let him call upon
the other thrice witli a loud voice, and make a mark upon the
earth, and then let him who abftlnted hiinfelf be deemed infa-

) p )2 IllOtiS)

t2I

mous, because he uttered words which he durst not support.
If both ihall appear properly armed, and the person offended
shall fall' in the combat, let a half compensation be paid for his
death. But if the person who gave the offence shall fall, let
it be imputed to his own rashness. The petulance of his tongue
hath been fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without any
compensation being demanded for his death." Lex Uplandica
ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people were extremely delicate with
refpca to every thing that affected their reputation as soldiers.
By the laws of the Salians, if any man called another a hare, or
accused him of having left his fiield in the field of battle, he
was ordained' to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. §'4. 6.
By the law of the Lombards if any one called another arga, i. e.
a good for nothing fellow, he might immediately challenge himv
to combat. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v. § r. By the law of the
Salians, if one called another cenitus, a term of reproach equi-
valent to arga, the fine which he was bound to pay was very
high. Tit. xxxii. § Y. Paulus Diaconus relates the violent
impression which this reproachful expreflion made upon one of
his countrymen, and the fatal effets with which it was attended.
De Geflis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas concerning
the point of honour, which we are apt to confider as a modern
refinement, as well as the practice of duelling, to which it gave
rife, are derived from the notions of our ancestors, while in a
slate of focicty very little improved.

As M. de Montcfquieu's view of'tliis subjcd did not lead him

to confider every circumltnfncc relative to jutdicial combats, I
Ihall mention foome particular faOs ncceffary for the illuflration
of what I have said with refpcd to them. A remarkable in-

fiance
29z

fiance occurs of the decision of an abftra& point of law by com-
bat. A question arose in the tenth century concerning the right
of representation, which was not then fixed, though now uni-
verfally eflablifhed in every part of Europe. " It was a matter
of doubt and dispute, (faith the historian) whether the sons of a
son ought to be reckoned among the children of the family, and
succeed equally with their uncles, if their father happened to
die while their grandfather was alive. An assembly was called
to deliberate on.this point, and it was the general opinion that
it ought to be remitted to the examination and decision of
judges. But the Emperor following a better course, and desirous
of dealing honourably with his people and noblcs, appointed
the matter to be decided by battle between two chan orions He
who appeared in behalf of the right of children to represent
their deceased father was vicorious; and it was eftablitfed,
by a perpetual decree, that they should hereafter share in the
inheritance together with their uncles. Wittickindus Corbeins,
lib. Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii. If
we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men to any acion
more extravagant than this of fettling a point in law by
combat, it must he that of referring the truth or falsehood
of a religious opinion to be decided in the fame manner. To
the disgrace of human reason, it has been capable even of this
extravagance. A queflion was agitated in Spain in the eleventh
century, whether the Mufarabic Liturgy and ritual which had
been used in the churches of Spain, or that approved of by the
See of Rome, which differed in many particulars from the
other, contained the form of worship most acceptable to the
Deity. The Spaniards contended zealously for the ritual of
their ancestors. The Popes urged them to receive that to whicih

they

293

they had given their infallible fanaion. A violent contest arose.
The nobles proposed to decide the controversy by the sword.
The king approved of this method of decision. Two knights in
complcal: armour entered the lifts. John Ruys de Matanca,
the champion of the Mufarabic Liturgy, was vitorious. But the
Queen and Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, infilted on having the matter submitted to another trial,
and had interest enough to prevail in a request, inconsistent with
the laws of combat, which being confidered as an appeal to
God, the decision ought to have been acquiesced in as final. A
great fire was kindled. A copy of each Liturgy was cast into
the flames. It was agreed that the book which flood this
proof, and remained untouched, should be received in all the
churches of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed likewise
in this trial, and if we may believe Roderigo de Toledo, remain-
ed unhurt by the fire, when the other was reduced to aflies.
The Queen and Archbishop had power or art fifficient to elude
this decision also, and the use of the Mufarabic form of devotion
was permitted only in certain churches. A determination no
less extraordinary than the whole transaction. Rodr. de
Toledo, quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol. d'Ffpagne,
tom. i. p. 217. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378.
A rcmarkable proof of the general use of trial by combat, and of
the pr:tdilction for that mode of decision occurs in the laws of
the ILonbai(ls. It was a cuflom in the middle ages, that any per-
oin mligllt clhlt the law to wllich he would be filbjcCeld; and by
the prcfcriptioll; of that law hle was obliged to regllate his tranl-
actions, witlhout being bound to comply with any practice au-
thorired by olther codes of law. Perlions who had lilhjcdc(le
thlcmnclvs to thc Roman law, and adhered to the ancient juril-

p)rUtdncc,

prudence, as far as any knowledge of it was retained in those
ages of ignorance, were exempted from paying any regard to
the forms of proceedings established by the laws of the Burgun-
dians, Lombards, and other barbarous people. But the Emperor
Otho, in direct contradicion to this received maxim, ordained,
" That all persons, under whatever law they lived, even although
it were the Roman law, should be bound to conform to the
edicts concerning the trial by combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii.
tit. 55. § 38. While the judicial combat subsisted, proof by
charters, contracs, or other deeds, became ineffectual; and even
this species of evidence, calculated to render the proceedings of
courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When a charter or other
instrument was produced by one o' the parties, his opponent
might challenge it, affirm that it was false and forged, and
offer to prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34. It is
true, that among the reasons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on ac-
count of'which judges might refuse to permit a trial by combat,
one is, " If the point in contest can be clearly proved or afcer-
tained by other evidence." Court. de Beauv. ch. 63. p. 323.
But that regulation removed the evil only a single flep. For the
party who fufpeded that a witnets was about to depose in a man-
ncr unfavouralle to his caufc, might accuse him of being
fulorncd, give him the lie, and challenge him to combat;
if the witness was vanquithed in battle, no other evidence was
admiittcd, and the party by whom he was summoncd to appear
loll his cause. Leg. lBaivar. tit. i6. § 2. Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.
Bcaumnan. cli. 6Ir p. ,1 5. The rcafon given for obliging a wit-
lncs to acccl)t of a diciiallcc, :11ied to defend himifelf by combat, is
rcmin;:i;')lc, and contains tile ltime idea which is fill the Iouii-
dation of what is called the point of honour; " for it is jull,

that

that if any one affirms that he perfelly knows the truth of any
thing, and offers to give oath upon it, that he should not hefi-
tate to maintain the veracity of his affirmation in combat." Leg.
Burgund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efablifhed in every

country of Europe, is a fad well known, and requires no proof.
That this mode of decision was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it, but from the ear-
lieft writers concerning the practice of law in the different na-
tions of Europe. They treat of this custom at great length; they
enumerate the regulations concerning it with minute accuracy;
and explain them with much solicitude. It made a capital and
extensive article injurifprudence. There is not any one fubjeat
in their system of law which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or the
compilers of the Affifes de Jerusalem seem to have confidered as
of greater importance; and none on which they have beltowed
so much attention. The fame observation will hold with rcfpec
to the early authors of other nations. It appears from Madox,
that trials of this kind were so frequent in England, that fines,
paid on these occasions, made no inconfiderablc branch of the
King's revenue. Hilt. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349 . A ery
curious account of a judicial combat between Mcfire RoI(:rL de
Beaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre Tourneminc, in pretence of tile
duke of Bretagne, A. D. 1385, is published by Morce M[ern.
pour fcrvir de preuvcs at l'hift. de Bretagnc, tomr. ii. p. 938.
All the formalities observed in such extraordinary proceedings
are there described more minutely, than in any ancient mnonu-
ment which I have had an opportunity ofconlidlring. 1 ournc-
mine was accufcd-by Bcaumanoir of having murdered his brother.

4 The

297

The former was vanquilhed, but was saved from being hanged
upon the spot, by the generous intercession of his antagonist. A
good account of the origin of the laws concerning judicial com-
bat, is published in the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci,
lib. ix. c. 8. in Grxv. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THIS mode of trial was so acceptable, that ecclefiaflicks, not-

withstanding the prohibitions of the church, were conltraincd
not only to connive at the pratice, but to authorize it. A re-
markable inflance of this is produced by Pafquier Recherches,
lib. iv. ch. i. p. 350. The abbot Wittikindus, whose words I
have produced in this note, confidered the determination of a
point in law by combat, as the bell and most honourable mode
of decision. In the year 978, a judicial combat was fought in
the presence of the Emperor Henry. The archbishop Aldebert
advised him to terminate a contest which had arisen between two
noblemen of his court, by this mode of decision. The van-
quiihed combatant, though a person of high rank, was beheaded
on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc. Merfb. chez Bouquet
Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. I2z. Questions concerning the
property of churches and monalteries, were decided by combat.
In the year 961, a controvcrfy concerning the church of St.
Medard, whether it belonged to the abbey of Beaulieu, was ter-
minated by judicial combat. Bouquet Recucil des Hil(f. tom. ix.
p. 729. Ibid. p. 612, &c. The Emperor Henry I. declares,
that his law authorising the practice of judicial combats, was
enacted with consent and applaulc of many faithful bifihops.
Ibid. p. 23 I. So remarkably did the martial ideas of tlofe ages
prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon law, which in
other instances had such credit and authority witl eccclcfiaflicks.
A judicial combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles V.
A. I). 1522. The combatants fought in the Emperor's presence,

VoL. I. Qq and

and the battle was condu&ced with all the rites prescribed by the
ancient laws of chivalry. The whole tranfation is described at
great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. 17.
p. 205.

THEr last inflance which occurs in the history of France, of a

judicial combat authorifedl by the magiitrate, was the famous one
between M. Jarnac and M. de la ChaiSfaignerie, A. D. 1547.
A trial by combat was appointed in England, A. D. 1571. under
the infpetion of the judges in the court of common pleas; and
though it was not carried to the fame extremity with the for-
mer, Queen Elizabeth having interposed her authority, and
enjoined the parties to compound the matter, yet in order to
preserve their honour, the lifts were marked out, and all the
forms previous to the combat were observed with much cere-
mony. Spelm. Gloss. voc. Campus, p. 103. In the year
I63 . a judicial combat was appointed between Donald Lord
Rea, and David Ramsay, Efq; by the authority of the Lord
high Conflable, and Earl Marihal of England; but that quar-
rel likewise terminated without bloodshed, being accommodated
by Charles I. Another inflance occurs seven years later. Rush-
worth in Observations on the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. S E c T. I. ).62. [Z]

TIIE text contains the great outlines which mark the course

of private and public jurifdition in the several nations of Eu-
rope. I shall lere follow more minutely the various fleps of
this progress, as the matter is curious and important enough
to merit this attention. The payment of a fine by way of satis-
faCion to the person or family injured, wag the first device of a
rude people, in order to check the career of private refcntment,
and to cxtinguifh thofeJaide, or deadly feuds which were pro-

fccuted
.98

fecuted among them with the utmost violence. This custom
may be traced back to the ancient Germans. Tacit. de Morib.
Ger. c. 2 . and prevailed among other uncivilized nations.
Many examples of this are collected by the ingenious and learn-
ed author of 'Historical Law-Tracts, vol. i. p. 41. These fines
were ascertained and levied in three different manners. At firit
they were fettled by voluntary agreement between the parties at
variance. When their rage began to subside, and they felt the
bad effects of their continuing in enmity, they came to terms of
concord, and the fatisfadion made was called a composition, im-
plying that it was fixed by mutual consent. De l'Efprit des
Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from some of the more
ancient codes of laws, that when these were compiled matters
flill remained in that simple slate. In certain cafes, the person
who had committed an offence was left exposed to the resent-
ment of those whom he -had injured, until he ihould recover
their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. I.
§ I. The next mode of levying these fines was by the sentence
of arbiters. An arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem
amicabilis compositor. lib. I I. c. 4. § o1. He could estimate the
degree of offence with more impartiality than the parties inte-
refted, and determine with greater equity what fatisfadion
qught to be demanded. It is difficult to bring an authentic
proof of a custom previous to the records preserved in any na-
tion of Europe. But one of the Formula Andegavenfes com-
piled in the sixth century, seems to allude to a tranfadion carried
on not by the authority of a judge, but by the mediation
of arbiters. Bouquet Recueil des Hiflor. torn. iv. p. .566.
But as an arbiter wanted authority to enforce his ldcilions,
judlges were appointed with compulsive power to oblige both
parties to ac(quiesce in their decisions. Previouls to this last
lHep, the expedient of paying compotitions was an iimpcrfct

Q(q 2 remedy

g99.

remedy against the pernicious effe&s of private resentment. As
soon as this important change was introduced, the magiitrate,
putting himself in place of the person injured, ascertained the
composition with which he ought to reft satisfied. Every pof-
fible injury that could occur in the course of human society, was.
confidered and eflimated, and the compositions due to the per-
son aggrieved were fixed with such minute attention as discovers,
in most cafes, amazing discernment and delicacy, in some in-
fiances, unaccountable caprice. Besides the composition payable
to the private party, a certain fu-m, called afredum, was paid
to the King or slate, as Tacitus expresses it, or to the fifcus, in
the language of the barbarous laws. Some authors, blending
the refined ideas of modern policy with their reasonings con-
cerning ancient tranfaaions, have imagined that the fredum
was a compensation due to the community, on account of the
violation of the publick peace. But it is manifefly the price
paid to the magifrate for the protection which he afforded
against the violence of resentment. The enading of this was
a considerable ftep towards improvement in criminal jurifpru-
dence. In some of the more ancient codes of laws, thefreda
are altogether omitted, or so seldom mentioned, that it is evi-
dent they were but little known. In the latter codes the fredum
is as precisely specified as the composition. In common cafes j
was equal to the third part of the composition. Capitul. vol. i.
p. 52. In ftome extraordinary cafes, where it was more difficult
to protect the person who had committed violence, the fredum
was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. 515. These freda made a
considerable branch in the revenues of the barons; and where-
ever territorial jurifdidion was granted, the royal judges were
prohibited from levying any frcda. In explaining the nature
of the fredum, I have followed, in a great meaftirc, the opinion
of M. de Montesquieu, though I know that fcvcral learned anti-

"- qluarians
800

quarians have taken the word in a different sense. De l'Efprit
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 20, &c. The great objec of judges was
to compel the one party to give, and the other to accept the
fatisfadion prescribed. They multiplied regulations to this pur-
pose, and enforced them by grievous penalties. Leg. Longob,
lib. i. tit. 9. § 34. Ib. tit. 37. § 1, 2. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371r
§ 22. The person who received a composition was obliged to
cease from all farther hostility, and to confirm his reconciliation
with the adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
§ 8. As an additional and more permanent evidence of recon-
ciliation, he was required to grant a bond of security to the per-
son from whom he received a composition, absolving him from
all farther prosecution. Marculfus and the other collecors of
ancient writs have preserved several different forms of such
bonds. Marc. lib. T . § T8. append. § 23. Form. Sirmondica,
§ 39. The Letters of Slanes, known in the law of Scotland,
are perfectly similar to these bonds of security. By the letter3
of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a person who had been mur-
dered, bound thenfelves, in consideration of an AJ4ythment or
compolition paid to them, to forgive, pass over, and forever for-
get, and in oblivion interr all rancour, malice, revenge, preju-
dice, grudge and refentmcint, that they have or may conceive
against the aggreifor or his posterity, for the crime which
he had committed, and dilcharge him of all aCtion, civil or cri-
minal, againfl him or his eftatc, for now and ever. Syftcm of Stiles
by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862. In the ancient form of let-
ters of Slanes, the private party not only forgives and forgets,
but pardons and grants remiflion of the crime. Tlhis practice,
Dallas, rca;ining according to the principles of his own agc,
confi(lcrs as an cncroachment on the rights of fovcrcig-lty, as
none, fays lec, could pardon a criminal but the king. Ibid. But
it. early and rude times, the prosecution, the punimmicnt, aind

the

301

the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of the private person
who was injured. Madox has published two writs, one in the
reign of Edward I. the other in the reign of Edward III. by
which private persons grant a release or pardon of all trespasses,
felonies, robberies, and murders committed. Formul. Anglican.
N". 702, 705. In the last of these inftrnments, some regard
seems to be paid to the rights of the sovereign, for the pardon
is granted en quant que en nous eJt. Even after the authority of
the magistrate is interposcd in punishing criminals, the punish-
ment of criminals is long confidered chiefly as a gratification
to the resentment of the persons who have been injured. In
Persia a murderer is fIill delivered to the relations of the person
whom he has slain, who put him to death with their own hands.
If they refuse to accept of a ium of money as a compefifa-
tion, the sovereign, ablolute as he is, cannot pardon the mur-
derer. Tavcrnier's Voyages, book v. c. 5 and Io. By a law in
the kingdom of Aragon as late as the year I564, the punish-
ment of one condemned to death cannot be mitigated but by
content of the parties who have been injured. Fueros & Obfer-
vancias del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from enmity, which I

have mentioned, any person rencwed hostilitics, and was guilty
of any violence, either towards the person from whom he had
received a composition, or towards his relations and heirs, this
was dcemcd a most heinous crime, and puiifhcd with extraor-
dinary rigour. It was an a&l of (lirc& rcbellioIl againit the
authority of the magifiratc, and wals reprcffed by the intcrpoli-
tion of all his power. Ieg. ILongob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8, 34.
Capit. vol. i. p.37I. 3 § 2. T. us the avenging of injuries
was taken out of private hands, a legal composition was clla-
bliflied, and peace and amity were rcetored under the infplclioin,

andl
302

and by the authority of a judge. It is evident, that at the time
when the barbarians fettled in the provinces of the Roman Em-
pire, they had fixed judges established among them with com-
pulfive authority. Persons vested with this charader are
mentioned by the earliest historians. Du Cange, voc. Judices.
The right of territorial jurifdidion was not altogether an ufur-
pation of the feudal barons. There is good reason to believe
that the powerful leaders who seized different diftrids of the
countries which they conquered, and kept possession of them as
allodial property, assumed at the fame time the right of jurif-
didion, and exercised it within their own territories. This
jurifdidion was supreme, and extended to all causes. The
clearest proofs of this are produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit
publique de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206, &c. The
privilege of judging his own v4ffals, appears to have been ori-
ginally a right inherent in every baron who held a fief. As far
back as the archives of nations can condud us with any cer-
tainty, we find the jurifdidion and fief united. One of the
earliest charters to a layman which I have met with, is that of
Ludovicus Pins, A. D. 814. And it contains the right of terri-
torial jurifdidion, in the inoft express and cxtcnfivc terms,
Capitul. vol. ii. p. I4O5. There ar manny charters to churches
;ind monasterics of a more early date, containing grants of fiii-
lar jurifdition, and prohibiting any royal judge to enter the
territories of those churches or monasteries, or to perform any
ad of judicial authority there. Bouquet. Rccueil. des Iifl.
tom. iv. p. 628, 63I, 633. tom. v. p. 703, 710, 752, 762.
Muratori has published nma ny very ancient charters containing
the fame immunities. Antiq. Ital. Dilfcrt. lxx. In nmol of
these deeds, the exaCing of 'Freda is particularly prohlil)itedl,
which ihews that they conflituted a valuable part of thc pbl)llick
rcvcnuc at that jundure. The cxpencc of obtaining a tlltclnc

C in

303

inl
L

304 PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS,

in a court of justice during the middle ages was so considerable,
that this circumstance alone was sufficient to render men unwil-
ling to decide any contest in judicial form. It appears from a
charter in the thirteenth century, that the baron who had the
right of justice, received the fifth part of the value of every
subjed, the property of which was tried and determined in his
court. If, after the commencement of a law suit, the parties
terminated the contest in an amicable manner, or by arbitration,
they were nevertheless hound to pay the fifth part of the sub-
jea contested to the court before which the suit had been
brought. Hist. de Dauphine. Geneve, 1722. tom. i. p. 22.
Similar to this is a regulation in the charter of liberty granted to
the town of Friburg, A. D. 1120. If two of the citizens shall
quarrel, and if one of them hall complain to the superior Lord
or to his judge, and after commencing the suit shall be privately
reconciled to his adversary; the judge, if he does not approve
of this reconciliation, may compel him to insist in his law-suit;
and all who were present at the reconciliation /hall forfeit the
favour of the superior Lord. Hiitoria Zaringo Badcnfis. Auaor.
Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolfr. I765. 4to. vol. v. p. 55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurifdicion which those who

held fiefs possessed originally, we cannot now determine with
certainty. It is evident that, during the disorders which pre-
vailed in every kingdom of Europe, the great vaflals took ad-
vantage of the feebleness of their Monarchs, and enlarged their
jurifdidions to the utmost. As early as the tenth century, the
more powerful barons had usurped the right of deciding all
causes, whether civil or criminal. They had acquired the High
Justice as well as the Low. Eflabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24,
25. Their fentenccs were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any superior court. Several striking instances of this

are
9

are colleted by Bruffel. Traite des Fiefs, liv. iii. c. 1 , 12, I 3.
Not satisfied with this, the mnorepotent' arons got their terri-
toties erected into Regalities, with almost every royal preroga-
tive and jurifdidion. Inflaces of there were frequent in France.
Bruff. ib. In Scotland, where the power of the feudal nobles
became exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical Law
Trads, vol. i. ttac. vi. Even' in England, though the alu-
thority of the Norman Kings circumscribed the jurifdition of
the barons more than in any feudal kingdom, several counties
palatine were ereced, into which the King's judges could not
enter, and no writ could come in the King's name, until it
received the feal of the county palatine. Spelman. Gloss. voc
Comites Palatini; Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of
England, vol. iii. p. 78. These lords of regalities had a right
to claim or rescue their vassals from the King's judges, if they
assumed any jurifdiaion over them. Bruffel ubi supra. In the
law of Scotland this privilege was termed the right of repledg-
ing; and the frequency of it not only interrupted the course of
justice, but gave rife to great disorders in the exercise of it.
Hilt. Law Trats, ib. The jurifdidion of the counties palatine
was producive of like inconveniencies in England.

THE remedies provided by Princes against the bad effecs of

these usurpations were various, and gradually applied. Under
Charlemagne and his immediate dcfcciidants, thc regal preroga-
tive flill retaiiled great viaour, and the Duces, Coniites, and
Mffi Dominici, the former-of whom were ordinary and fixed
judges, the latter extraordinary and itinerant judges, in the
different provinces of their cxtenfive dominions, excrcifed a
jurisdiction co-ordinate with the barons in some cafes, and fu-

VOL. I. RI r perior

.
4.

perior to them in others. Du Cange voc. Dux, oamites &
MAtfi. Murat. Antiq. Dissert. TviiL & iA. But under the feeble
race of Monarchs who succeeded them, the authority of the
royal judges declined, and the barohs usurped that unlimited
jurifdi'dion which has been described. Louis VI. of France
attempted to revive the function of the MI/i7 Dominici under the
title of fj7es des Exempts, but the barons were become too pow-
erful to bear such art encroachment on their jurifdiaion, and he
was obliged to desist from employing them. Henaut. Abtege
Chron. tom. ii. p. 730o His fucceflbrs (as has been obfelved)
had recourse to expedients less alarming. The appeal dr de-
saute de Droit, or on account of the refusal of justice, was the
first which was attended with any considerable effet. Accord-
ing to the maxims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many
vassals as enabled him to try by their peers, the parties who
offered to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused to pro-
eeed in the trial, the cause might be carried, by appeal, to the
court of the superior lord of whom the baron held, and tried'
there. De 1'Esprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange voc..
defetlus Juflitiz. The number of Peers or assessors in the courts
of Barons was frequently very considerable. It appears from
a criminal trial in the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D.
1299, that upwards of two hundred persons were present, and
affirled in the trial, and voted in pafling judgment. Hist. de
Langued. par D. ). De Vie & Vaifette, tom. iv. Preuves,,
p. I 14. As the right of jurifdiCion had been usurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to hold courts.
This gave frequent occasion to such appeals, and rendered the
pracice familiar. By degrees, such appeals began to be taken
from the courts of the more powerfuL barons, and it is evident,

from
306

from a disima i reoded by B tufel thathe royal judges were
willing to give countenamee to aony prrtext for them. Traite
des Fiefa, tom. i. p. 235, 261. This species of appeal had
etsi effeed in abridging the jurifdision of the nobks, than
the appeal on a ount of the injufice of the sentence.
When the feudal monarch were powerful, and their'judges
possessed extenive authority, such appeals teem to have been
frequent. Capitul, vol. i. p. 175, I8o; and they were made in
a manner suitable to the rudeness of a simple age. The persons
aggrieved rgforted to the palace of their sovereign, and with
outcrke and lotu noise casled to him for redress. CapituL lib.
iii. c. 59. Chroniic. Lawterbergienfe ap. Mencken. Script.
German. vol. ii. p. 284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the
appeals to the Juftiza or supreme judge were taken in such a
form as fuppofd the appellant to be in immediate danger of
death or of ome violent outrage; he rulhed into the prefece of
the judge crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Fuerza, Euerza,
thus imploring (as it were) the inflant interposition of that fu-
preme judge in order to save him. Hier. Blanca Comment. do
rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Pillorii, vol. iii. p. 153,
The abolition of the trial by combat facilitated the revival of
appeals of this kind. The effets of this subordination which
appeals eftabliihed, in introducing attention, equity, and con-
fiftency of decision into courts of judicature, were soon confpi-
cuous; and almoR all causes of importance were carried to be
finally determined in the King's courts. Bruffel, ton. i. 252.
Various circumstances which contributed towards the introduc-
tion and frequency of such appeals are enumerated De l'Efprit
des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of fuicl
effect as the attention which monarchs gave to the confitutidh

R r z and

atd dignity ;of their courts of .juftite;. It was the antidnt cuf-
tom for the feudal; monarchs to preide; themfeives, in their
courts, and to administer justice in-perfon.. Marculf. lib. i.
§ 25. Murat. Dissert. xxxi. Charlemagnei whiff he was dress-
ing, used to.call parties into his presence, and having' heard and
confidered the subje6t of litigation, ga+e judgment concerning it.
Eginhartus vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hist. of Exche-
quer, vol. i. p. 9I. This could not fail of rendering their
courts refpedable St. Louis, who incouraged to the utmost
the pracice. of appeals, revived this aricient;-urfom, and! ad-
ministered justice in perfon'with all the' ancient fitmplicity.
" I have often seen the- faint," :fays Joinville, " fit under the
shade of an oak in the wood of Vincenties, when all who
had any complaint, freely approached him. At other times
he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, And feating him-
self upon it, heard the causes that were brought before him."
lift. de St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 176I. Princes of inferior rank,
who pofleffed the right of justice, sometimes dispensed it in
person, and presided in their tribunals. Two instances of this
occur with refped to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hist. de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii .

p. 257. But as Kings and

Princes could not decide every cause in person, nor bring them
all to be determined in the fame court; they appointed Baillis,
with a right of jurifdi-ion, in different districts of their king-
doln. These possessed powers somewhat similar to those of the
ancient Comites. It was towards the end of the twelfth cen-
tury, and beginning of the thirteenth, that this office was firit
inflituted in France. Briufll, liv. ii. c. 35. When the King
had a court eftabliflhcd in different quarters of his dominions, this
invited his fubjcs to have recourfc to it. It was the private in-

terest
a8

9.

tered of the Baillis, as well as an objeet of publick policg, to
extend their jurifdi&ion. They took advantage of every de-
ser in the rights of the barons, and of every error in their
proceedings, to remove causes out of their courts, and to bring
them under their own cognizance. There was a diftintion in
the feudal law, and an extremely ancient one, between the
high juflice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. D. 812. § 4. A. D.
8i5. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i. c. 40. Many barons pof-
sessed the latter jurifl;R;inn who had no title to the former. The
former included the right of trying crimes of every kind, even
the highest; the latter was confined to petty trespasses. This
furnished endless pretexts for obftruaing, restraining and re-
viewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§ 25. 458. § 29.- A regulation of greater importance fuc-
ceeded the institution of Baillis. The King's supreme court or
parliament was rendered fixed as to the place, and constant as
to the time of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of justice was originally
ambulatory, followed the person of the monarch, and was held
only during some of the great feflivals. Philip Augustus, A. D.
1305. rendered it sedentary at Paris, and continued its terms
during the greater part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv.
ii. c. 2 and 3, &c. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. § 62. He and his
successors vested extensive powers in that court; they granted
the members of it several privileges and diftinaions which it
would be tedious to enumerate. Pafiluicr, ib. Vclly hist. de
France, tom. vii. p. 307. PerIons eminent for integrity and
skill in law were appointed judges there. Ib. By degrees the
final decision of all causes of importance was brought into the
parliament of Paris, and the other parliaments which admini-
ftred jultice in the King's name, in different provinces of the

kingdon.

S3o

kingdom. This jurifdi&ion, however, the parliament of Paris
acquired very slowly, and the great vassals of the crown made
violent efforts in order to obftruR the attempts of this parlia-
ment to extend its authority. Towards the close of the thirteenth
century, Philip the Fair was obliged to prohibit his parliament
from taking cognisance of certain appeals brought into it from
the courts of the Count of Brctagne, and to recognise his right
of supreme and final jurifdifion. Memoires pour fcrvir de
Preuves i 1'Hifloire ce Brctagnc pat Morice, tom. i. p. 1037.
1074. Charles VI. at the end of the following century was
obliged to confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in more
ample form. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 580, 58 r. So violent was the
opposition of the barons to this right of appeal which they
confidered as fatal to their privileges and power, that the au-
thors of the Encyclopedie have mentioned several instances in
which barons put to death, or mutilated, or confiscated the goods
of such as ventured to appeal from the sentences pronounced in
their courts, to the parliament of Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parle-
tnent, p. 25.

THE progress of jurifdidion in the other feudal kingdoms

was in a great measure similar to that which we have traced in
France. In England, the territorial jurifdiation of the barons
was both ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons. N° 5 and 9.
After the Norman conquest it became more ftridly feudal; and
it is evident from fads recorded in the English hiflory, as well
as from the institution of counties Palatine, which I have already
mentioned, that the usurpations of the nobles in England were
not inferior to those of their contemporaries on the continent.
The fame expedients were employed to circumscribe or abolifli
those dangerous jurifdicions. William the Conqueror eflar

5 blilhcd
SIo

blifhed a confant court in the hall of his palace; from which
the four courts nor entrusted with the administration of
justice in England took their rife. Henry II. divided his king-
dom into fix circuits, and sent itinerant judges to hold their
courts in them at stated seasons. Blackstone's Commentaries on
the Laws of England, vol. iii 57. Justices of peace were ap-
pointed in every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose
jurifdiaion the people gradually had rernolrfe in mny civil causes.
The privileges of the Counties Palatine were gradually limited;
with refped to some points they were abolished; and the ad-
miniflration of justice was brought into the King's courts) or
before judges of his appointment. The several fleps taken for
this purpose are enumerated in Dalrymple's Hiftiry of Feudal
Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland the usurpations of the nobility were more exor-

bitant than in any other feudal kingdom. The progress of their
encroachments, and the methods taken by the crown to limit
or abolish their territorial and independantjurifdiaions, both
which I had occasion to confider and explain in a former work,
differed very little from those of which I have now given the
detail. History of Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in the labyrinth of

German jurisprudence, were I to attempt to delineate the pro-
grefs ofjurifdidion in the Empire, with a minute accuracy. It
is sufficient to observe, that the authority which the Aulick coun-
eil and Imperial chamber now poffcfs, took its rife from the fame
abuse of territorial jurifdiaion, and was acquired in the fame
manner that the royal courts attained influence in other coun-
tries. All the important fads with refped to both there particu-

lars,

31i

lars, may be found in Phil. Datt. de pace publica Imperii, lib. iv.
The capital articles are pointed out in Pfeffel Abrege6 de P'Hiftoire
& Droit publique d'Allemagne, p. 556, 58 ; and in Traite du
Droit publique dc 1' Empire par M. le Coq. de Villeray. Both
the two last treatises are of great authority, having been com-
poit'd under the eye of M. Schoepflin of Strafburgh, one of the
ablest publick lawyers in Germany.

NOTE XXIV. SECT. I. p. 65. [AA]

IT is not easy to fix with precision the period at which Eccle-

fiaflicks first began to claim exemption from the civil jurisdiction.
It is certain, that during the early and purest ages of the church,
they pretended to no such immunity. The authority of the
civil magistrate extended to all persons, and to all causes. This
fad has not only been clearly eftabliihed by Protestant authors,
but is admitted by many Roman Catholicks of eminence, and
particularly by the writers in defence of the liberties of the Gal-
lican church. There are several original papers published by
Muratori, which shew that in the ninth and tenth centuries,
caufcs of the greatest importance relating to ecclefiafticks were
fill determined by civil judges. Antiq. Ital. vol. v. Dissert. lxx.
l.cclcfiaslicks did not shake off all at once their fubjedion to civil
courts. This privilege, like their other usurpations, was gained
slowly, and flep by siep. This exemption seems at firfi to have
been merely an aft of complaisance, flowing from veneration for
their characer. Thus from a charter of Charlemagne in favour
of the church of Mans, A. D. 796, to which M. 1'Abbe de Soy
refers in his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 20o, that monarch

6 directs
31,

direts his judges, if any difference mhould arise between the
administrators of the revenues of that church and any person
whatever, not to summon the administrators to appear in mallo
publico; but first of all to meet with them, and to endeavour to
accommodate the difference in an amicable manner. . This in-
dulgence was in process of time improved into a legal exemp-
tion; which was founded on the fame superstitious refped of the
laity for the clerical characer and function. A remarkable in-
fiance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick Barbarossa, A. D.
1 172, to the monastery of Altenburg. He grants them judi-
cium non tantum fanguinolentis plage, fed vita & mortis; he
prohibits any of the royal judges from disturbing their jurifdic-
tion; and the reason which he gives for this ample concession is,
nam quorum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus leve
eft, & jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus illius oppreflionis
contumelia, vel manu Laica fatigari. Mencken. Script. rer.
Germ. vol. iii. p. 1067.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is contained in the

text, that I should describe the manner in which the code of the
canon law was compiled, and shew that the doctrines in it most
favourable to the power of the clergy, are founded on ignorance,
or supported by fraud and forgery. The reader will find a full
account of there in Gerard. Van Maftricht, Hiftoria Juris Eccle-
fiaftici, & in Science de Government par M. Real, ton. vii. c. r,
& 3. § 2, 3, &c. The history of the progress and extent of
ecclefiafical jurifdiadion, with an account of the arts which the
clergy employed in order to draw causes of every kind into the
fpiritulal courts, is no less curious, and would throw great lig;ht
upon many of the customs and institutions of the dark ages; lilt

VoL. I. S f it

it is likewise foreign from the present fubje& Du Cange in
his Gloflary, voc. Curia Chrftianitatis, has colleted most of the
causes with refpe& to which the clergy arrogated an exclusive
jurifdidion, and refers to the authors, or original papers, which
confirm his observations. Giannone ins his Civil Hifiory of
Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged there under proper heads, and
scrutinizes the pretensions of the church with his usual bold-
ness and discernment. M. Fleury observes, that the clergy mul-
tiplied, at such a rate, the pretexts for extending the authority
of the spiritual courts, that it was in their power to withdraw
every person and every cause from the jurifdiaion of the civil
magistrate. His. Eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. I6. But how
ill founded soever the jurifdi&ion of the clergy may be, or what-
ever might be the abuses to which their manner of exercising it
gave rife, the principles and forms of their jurisprudence were
far more perfet than that which was known in the civil courts.
It is probable that ecclesiastics never submitted, during' any
period of the middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes of
the barbarous nations, but were governed entirely by the Ro-
man law. They regulated all their tranfadions by such of its
maxims as were preserved by tradition, or were contained in the
Theodosian code, and other books extant among them. This
we learnfrom a custom which prevailed universally in those ages.
Every person was permitted to chufe among the various codes
of laws then in force, that to which he was willing to conform.
In any tranfadion of importance, it was usual for the peribns
contracting to mention the law to which they ulbmitted, that it
mig!lt be known how any controvcrfy that should arise between
them was to be decided. Innumerable proofs of this occur in
the charters of the middle ages. But the clergy confidercd it as
such a valuable privilege of their order to be governed by the

Romnan
3t4

3I5

Roman law, that when any person entered into holy orders, it
was usual for him to renounce the laws to which he had been
formerly subjee, and to declare that he now submitted to the
Roman law. Conftat me Johannem clericum, filium quondam
Verandi, qui profeflus fum, ex natione mea, lege vivere Lango-
bardorum, fed tamen, pro honore ecclefiaflico, lege nunc videor
vivere Romana. Charta A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui
profeffus fum, more facerdotii mei, lege vivere Romana. Charta,
A. D. 1075. Muratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol. i. p. 78.

THE code of the canon law began to be compiled early in the

ninth century. Mem. de l'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346,
&c. It was above two centuries after that before any collection
was made of those customs, which were the rule of judgment
in the courts of the barons. Spiritual judges decided, of
cpurfe, according to written and known laws; Layjudges, left
without any fixed guide, were direced by loose traditionary
cutfoms. But besides this general advantage of the canon law,
its forms and principles were more consonant to reason, and
more favourable to the equitable decision of every point in con-
troverfy, than those which prevailed in lay courts. It appears
from Notes XXI. and XXII. concerning private wars, and the trial
by combat, that the whole spirit of ecclesiastical jurisprudence
was adverse to there sanguinary customs which were defRrudive
of justice; and the whole force of ecclesiastical authority was
exerted to aboliflh them, and to substitute trials by law and evi-
dence in their room. Almost all the forms in lay courts which
contribute to eftablifl, and continue to preserve order in judicial
proceedings, are borrowed from the canon law. Fleury Inflit.
du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St. Louis in his Eftablife-

S f I menB

mens confirms many of his new regulations concerning pro-
perty, and the administration ofjufice, by the authority of the
canon law, from which he borrowed them. Thus, for inflance,
the first hint of attaching moveables for the recovery of a debt,
was taken from the canon law. Eftabl. liv. ii. c. 2I and 40. And
likewise the cefflo bonorum, by a person who was insolvent.
Ibid. In the fame manner, he established new regulations with
refpet to the effeas of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89.
These and many other salutary regulations, the Canonists bor-
rowed from the Roman law. Many other examples might be
produced of more perfea jurisprudence in the canon law than
was known in lay courts. For that reason it was deemed an
high privilege to be subjet to ecclesiastical jurifdiEion. Among
the many immunities, by which men were alluded to engage in
the dangerous expeditions for the recovery of the Holy Land,
one of the most considerable was the declaring those who took
the Cross to be subjeCt only to the spiritual courts. See Note
XIII. and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilegia.

NOTE XXV. SECT. I. p. 67. [BB]

TIIE rapidity with which the knowledge and study of the

lloman law spread over Europe, is amazing. The copy of the
I'anrleds was found at Amalphi, A. D. I 137. Irnerius opened a
college of civil law at Bologne a few years after. Giann. Hilt.
book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught as a part of academical
learning in different parts of France before the middle of the
century. Vaccarius gave ledures on the civil law at Oxford as
early as the year 1147. A regular system of feudal law, form-
ed plainly in imitation of the Roman code, was composed by
two Milanese lawyers about the year i 150. Gratian publiflhed

the

the code of canon law, with large additions and emendations,
about the fame time. The earliest colletion of these customs,
which served as the rules of decision in the courts ofjuftice, is
the Affies de Jerusalem. They were compiled, as the preamble
informs us, in the year 1099, and are called Jus Confue-
tudinarium quo regehatur regnum orientale. Willerm. Tyt.
lib. xix. c. 2. But peculiar circumfiances were the occasion of
this early compilation. The victorious Crusaders fettled as a
colony in a foreign country, and adventurers from all the diffe-
rent nations of Europe composed this new society. It was ne-
ceffary on that account to ascertain the laws and customs which
were to regulate the tranfadions of business, and the adminiftra-
tion ofjuftice among them. But there was at that time no col-
lection of customs, and no attempt to render law fixed in any
country of Europe. The first undertaking of that kind was by
Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in his Tractatus de
Legibus & Confuetudinibus Anglia, composed about the
*year i I8. The Regiam Majeftatem in Scotland, ascribed to
David I. seems to be an imitation, and a ferviie one of Glan-
ville. Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us that he was the first
who had attempted such a work in France, composed his Con-
feil, which contains an account of the customs of the country
of Vcrmandois, in the reign of St. Louis, which began, A. D.
1226. Beaumanoir, the author of the Coiutiumtes de Beauvofis,
lived about the fame time. The Eftabliffemens of St. Louis,
containinlg a large collecion of the customs which prevailed
wvithin the royal domains, wcrc published by the authority of
that monarch. As soon as men became acquainted with the
advantages of having written cufomns and laws to which they
could have rccourfe on cvcry occasion, the method of collcding

them
*

317

.them became common. Charles VII, of France, by an ordo-
,iance, A. D. 1453. appointed the customary laws in every pro-
'vince of France to be colleded and arranged. Velly and Villaret.
.Hifitire, tom. xvi. p. 113. His successor, Louis XI. renewed
the injundtion. But this salutary undertaking hath never been
fully.executed, and the French jurifpru4ence remains more ob-
fcure and uncertain than if these prudent regulations of their mo-
narchs had taken effec. A practice was eftablilhed in the
-middle ages, which affords the clearest proof that judges while
they had no other rule to dired their decrees but unwritten and
traditionary customs, were often at a loss how to find out the
fads and principles, according to which they were bound to de-
cide. They were obliged in dubious cafes to call a certain num-
ber of old men, and to lay the cafe before them, that they
might inform them what was the pratice or custom with regard
to the point. This was called Enqueftepar tourbe. Du Cange,
voc. Turba. The effecs of the revival of the Roman jurif-
prudence have been explained by M. de Montesquieu, liv. xxviii.
c. 42. and by Mr. Hume, Hill. of England, vol. ii. p. 44i. I
have adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend to review
any subjed which such writers have confidered, without receiv-
ing from them light and information ? At the fame time I am
,convinced that the knowledge of the Roman law was not so en-
tirely loft in Europe during the middle ages, as is commonly
believed. My subjed does not require me to examine this point.
Many firiking fads with regard to it are colleded by Donato An-
tonio YAfti Dall' Ufo c autorita della ragione civile nelle pro-
vincie dell' Imperio Occidentale. Nap. I751. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately conneted with the muni-
cipal jurifprudcnce in several countries of Europe, is a fat so

8 well

well known, that it needs no illufration. Even in England&
where the Common law is fippofed to form a system perfe&ly-
diftin& from the Roman code, and although those who apply
il that country to the study of the Common law boast,-
with affectationj of this, diftin&ion, it is evident that many of
the ideas and maxims- of the civil law are incorperated Into the,
English jurisprudence. This is well illustrated by the ingenious-
and learned, author of Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the.
more ancient. ad. edit. p. 66.-

NOTE XXVI: S ECT; I. p. 69. [CC].

THE whole history of the middle ages makes it evident that-

war was the sole profeflion of gentlemen, and'the only fubje&'
attended to in their education. Even after some change in-
manners began to take place, and the civil arts of life had ac-
quired rome reputation, the ancient ideas with refpee to the
accomplishments neceflary for a person of noble birth, continued,
long in force. In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we
have an account of the youthful' exercises and occupations of
Francis I. and they are altogether martial and athletic. That
father of letters owed his relish for them, not to education, but;
to his own good sense, and good taste. The manners of the
superior order of ecclesiastics during the middle ages, furnish
the firongefi proof that the diftinaion of professions was scarce
known in Europe. The funcions and character of the clergy;
arc obvioully very different from those of laymen;, and among
the inferior orders of churchmen, this conffituted a diflindt
characer, separate from that.of their citizens. But the digni-
fictl ccclcfiaflics, who were frequently of noble birth; were above
such a diflindion; they retained the idea of what belonged to
them as gentlemen, and in fpitc of the decrees of Popes, or

the'

319

the canons of councils, they bore arms, led their vassals to the
field, and fought at their head in battle. Among them the
priesthood was scarce a separate profession; the military accom-
plifhments which they thought essential to them as gentlemen,
were cultivated; the theological science, and pacific virtues suit-
able to their spiritual funcion, were negleted and deipifed.

As soon as the science of law became a laborious study, and

the pratice of it a separate profession, such as rose to eminence
in it obtained honours formerly appropriated to soldiers. Knight-
hood was the most illustrious mark of diftindion during several
ages, and conferred privileges to which rank or birth alone
were not entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent for
their knowledge of law were advanced, and by that, were
placed on a level with those whom their military talents had
rendered conspicuous. Miles JuJiztite, Miles Literatus became
common titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as early
as A. D. 1251 . If a judge attained a certain rank in the courts
ofjuftice, that alone gave him a right to the honour of knight-
hood. Pafquier Recherches, liv. i i. c. I6. p. 130. Diflerta-
tations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie par Honore de Sainte Marie,
p. 164, &c. A profession which led to offices that enobled
such as held them, grew into credit, and the people of Europe
became accustomed to fee men rife to eminence by civil as well
as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p.72. [DD.J

TJiE chief intention of these notes, was to bring at once un-

der the view of my readers, such facts and circunmllances as
tend to illufirate or confirm what is contained in that part of
the hiflory to which they refer. When tlhcfc lay fcattcred in
many different authors, and were taken from books not gene-

rally
320

rally known, or which it would be disagreeable to consult, I
thought it would be of advantage to colled them together. But
when every thing necessary for the proof or illustration of my
narrative or reasonings may be found in any one book which
is generally known, or deserves to be so, I shall satisfy myself
with referring to it. This is the cafe with ref)pc to Chivalry.
Almost every fad which I have mentioned in the text, toge-
ther with many other curious and inftrudive particulars, con-
cerning this singular inflitution, may be found in Memoircs fur
l'ancienne Chevalerie confiderce comme un eftabliffemtnt p(lliti-
que & militaire, par M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. SE CT. III. p. 76. [EE].

THE subjed of my enquiries does not call me to write a

history of the progress of science. The fads and observations
which I have produced are sufficient to illustrate the effets of
its progreis upon manners and the slate of society. While fci-
ence was altogether extind in the weflern parts of Europe, it
was cultivated in Conflantinople and other parts of the Grecian
Empire. But the ifbtile genius of the Grecks turned almost
enti rely to thc(logical disputation. The Latins borrowed tlhat spirit
fronm licm, and many of the controversics which Itill occupy,
and ldixitc thleologianLs, took their riie among the Grccks, from
wlhom the othllr euroIpans delived a confideralle part of their
knowlcdglc. Sec the tcllimony of Alneas Sylvius ap Conringiumn
de antiq. aca(dcllicis, p. 43. Iliftoire literairc de France, toim.
v'ii. p. 1

P , & C. toni. ix. p. 151, &c. Soon after the Empire

of tle Caliphls was clllalliill'd in the Eafl, lilmc illustrious prin-
ces arolc among tlhem, \vlio encouraged lC:icnce. But when the
/Arabians turned .their altiention to the literature cultivated by
the ancient Grccks and Rollmas, the chafIe and corrced tiflte oi
their works of gClius ilppcarcd fligid and unanimatcd to a

Yol. . . T t p)O(l)oC

pce6pe of a more warm imagination. It was impossible for them
to admire the poets and historians of Athens, or of Rome.
Tut they were sensible of the merit of their philosophers. The
operations of the intcllet are more fixed and uniform than
those of the fancy or taste. Truth makes an impression nearly
the fame in every place; the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant,
or sublime, vary in different climates. The Arabians, though
they neglcded Homer, tranllated the molt eminent of the Greek
piilofophlrs into their own language; and, guided by their pre-
ccpts and discoveries, applied themselves with great ardour to
the fludy of geometry, astronomy, medicine, dialeCtics and
metaphysics. In the three former they made considerable and
tfefull improvements, which have contributed not a little to ad-
vancc those sciences to that high degree of perfecion which
thcv havc attained. In the two latter, they chose Aristotle for
their guidc, and refining on the subtle and distinguishing spirit
which characerizes his philosophy, they rendered it altogether
frivolous or unintelligible. The schools established in the East
for teaching and cultivating these sciences, were in high repu-
tation. They communicated their love of science to their coun-
trylmen, who conquered Asia and Spain; and the schools infli-
tuted there were little inferior in fame to those in the East.
Many of tih persons who diltinguifhed themselves by their pro-
ficieicy in lcicnce in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were
educated among the Arabians. Bruckerus collecs many inftan-
ces of this, Ilifor. Philof. v. iii. p. 681, &c. Almost all the
men eminent for fcicnce during fcveral centuries, were inftruaed
in the fcicnces; by the Arabians. The first knowledge of the
Ariflotclian philosophy in the middle ages, was acquired by
translations of his works out of the Arabick. The Arabian
commentators were deemed the molt Ikilful and authentic
guides in the study of his fyflem. Conring. antiq. acad. Dir. iii.

4;: P- 95,
On"

p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &C. Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iii.
p. 932, &c. From them the Schoolmen 'derived the genius
and principles of their philosophy, which contributed so much
to retard the progress of true science.

TH E establishment of Colleges or Universities is a remarkable

cera in literary history. The schools in cathedrals and mona-
fieries confined themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar.
There were only one or two masers employed in that office. But
in colleges, professors were appointed to teach all the different
parts. of science. The time that ought to be allotted to the
fludy of each was ascertained. A regular form of trying the
proficiency of students was prescribed; and academical titles
and honours were conferred on filch as acquitted themselves
with approbation. A good account of the origin and nature of
these is given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiquitates Roftochienfes,
five, HiftoriaUrbis & Academiae Roftoch.ap. Monumenta inedita
Rer. Germ. per E. J. de Wefiphaien, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. I743.
The firfl obscure mention of these academical degrees in the Uni-
verfity of Paris, (from which the other universities in Europe have
borrowed mofl of their customs and inflitutions) occurs, A. D. 1215.
Crevier hist. de l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were
completely eflabliflhd, A. D. I 3 . lb. 248. It is unnecessary to
cnumerate the fcveral privileges to which batchlclors, maftcrs, and
dlotors were entitled. One circumfiancc is fuflicicnt to dcImon-
firate the luigl degree of estimation in which they were held.
Dorors in the different faculties contended with knights for
the precedence, and the dilpute was terminated in many inflan-
ces by advancing the former to the dignity of knighthood, the
high prcrogatives of which I have mentioned. It was evncc afnlrtcd,
tlhat a loor ha( a right to that title witllout creation. Bar-
tolus taughtt- dolorcm athialitcr regenten in jure civili per

T t 2 dlceiiiiiuii

Sz$

decennium effici militem ipso fadto. I-Ionore de St. Marie DiC-
fert. p. I65. This was called Cheva!erie de lectures, and the
persons advanced to that dignity, milites Clerici. These new
eflablifhments for education, together with the extraordinary
honours conferred on learned men, greatly encreafed the num-
ber of scholars. In the year I262, there were ten thousand
fludents in the university of Bologna; and it appears from the
history of that university, that law was the only science taught
in it at that time. In the year 1340, there were thirty thou-
sand in the university of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Ander-
son's Clironol. Deduction of Commerce, vol. i. p. 172. I.n the
fame century, ten thousand persons voted in a question agitated
in the university of Paris; and as graduates alone were admitted
to that privilege, the number of fludents must have been vastly
great. Veily Hist. de France, tom. xi. p. I47. There were
indeed few univcrfities in Europe at that time; but such a
number of fludents may nevertheless be produced as a proof of
the extraordinary ardour with which men turned to the fludy
of fcicncc in those ages; it shows likewise that they already be-
gan to confilcr other profeiTions than that of a foldicr as ho-
o>urlable and ulcfful.

N 0 r E XXIX. S I:CT. IIl. p. 82. [I].

'I' : gr :'t variety of fill;jcCis wlii I ha\vw cnllcavonu-cl to

iljlfU l' ti , t;'i.l shit' cxtc't (;' ti\i:; Il 'i~: \\hich I now enter, viil
;iilny lly adcl) n'; toI' : \v:Mt'Is (' t 2\l. (d1 ,C)lntt'iili,'u, \xlici 1xe

Ix i1;8 t') t ir'',ii 0o t'.(»;'r;i :,_I:. . t' t'I. t' \w !ictll tilt ov'

w inIll r.1 I ,i' c t,') 1) i ll 't .l: 'l i ',) c

2 it 1;,;c ; l.)lt tlic at1jli'i;

'' of tlls; \vo;C (l1'i iit prnilt il. I vifhl to ',li]lc oli a trall-
' (qul li rc.ln ; l)tit I am liiirrid . ;.lt,ni [)y at torrent."
324

MAN Y proofs occur in history of the little intercourse between

nations during the middle ages. Towards the close of the tenth
century, Count Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to an abbot of Clugny in
Burgundy, famous for his fandity, intreating him to condut
the monks thither. The language in which he addressed that
holy man is singular: He tells him, that he had undertaken the
labour of such a great journey; that he was fatigued with the
length of it, therefore hoped to obtain his requefi, and that his
journey into such a distant country should not be in vain. The
answer of the abbot is flill more extraordinary: I-Ie refitled
to comply with his desire, as it would be extremely fatiguing to
go along with him into a firange and unknown region. Vita
Burchardi veneraliles Comitis ap. Bouquet Rec. des His. vol. x.
p. 35I. Even so late as the beginning of the twelfth century,
the monks of Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know that
there was filch a city as Tournay in Slanders; and the monks
of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unacquainted with the
situation of Ferrieres. A tranfadion in which they were both
concerned, made it necefl.ry for them to have fomc intcrcourfc.
The mutual intercft of both monafleries prompted cach to find
out the situation of tle other. After a long fcarch, which is
partictilarly dcfcribed, the ditlcovcry was made by accident.
I-lerimaimiiu Abba:; de Rctlatlrationc St. Martini Tornaccnfis an.
Dachcr. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of the middle
ancs witllh rcl)dcl to the litua i')11 i1( Ind'c('l y of remote coull-
fries was fill more rcmallikcl)e. 'i'ie mofl ancient gcor;,r)pliical
cchart which now remin;ils as a I;l ,illilltC i ()' tlhe !itlc o tiat
fcienc in Europe durilng the Ili(ddll ar1-s, is ti:nd ill a manlt-
iclript of tlh Chroniquic Sc St. 1)::iys. 'I'llere the tl ii-c 1prts of
thic earthl then known are ii) lipr'cntctl, lIil:t .criilllcmi iS;
placed illn tl middle oi thc jtu ,:, and Al ':n.lddria ao'. 'ari to

4. b.

325

be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de l'Acad. des Belles Lettres,
torn. xvi. p. i85. There seem to have been no inns or houses
of entertainment for the reception of travellers during the mid-
dle ages. Aurat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 58I, &c. This is a
proof of the little intercourse which took place between different
lations. Among people whose manners are simple, and who
are seldom visited by firangers, hospitality is a virtue of the
first rank. This duty of hospitality was so necessary in that
slate of focicty which took place during the middle ages, that it
was not confidered as one of those virtues which men may
pradife or not, according to the temper of their minds, and the
gencrofity of their hearts. Hospitality was enforced by statutes,
and those who negleced this duty were liable to punifiment.
Quicumquc hofpiti venienti ledum, aut focum negaverit, trium
felidorum inlatione muldetur, Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § I.
Si quis homini aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
lexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul. lib. vi. § 82.
This incrcafc of the penalty, at a period so long after that in
which the laws of the 3urgundians were publiflied, and when
the Itate of focicty was lmuch improved, is very remarkable.
Other laws of the lame purport are colleced by Jo. Fred. Polac
Syflema Jurifprud. Gcrmanicxc, Lips. 1733. p. 75. The laws of
the Slavi were more rigorous than any that he mentions; they
ordaincd, " that the movcablcs of an inhofpitalle pcrion should be
confiscatcd, and his house burnt. They were even so follicitous
for the entertainment of firangcrs, that they permitted the land-
lord to fical for the support of his gucft." Quod nodu sura-
tus fiucris, eras apponc, holptitibus. Rcrumn Meclcburgicar.
lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Pcclir. Lips. 175I. p. 50. In confc-
quence of these laws, or of that itate of focicty which made it
proper to cnad tlicin, hlof)itality abounded while the intcrcourfl
among nmen was inconliderable, and fccurcd the firanger a kind

rc(:cl)ti(jii
3a6

reception under every roof where he chore to take shelter. This,
too, proves clearly, that the intercourse among men was rare, for
as feon as this increased, what was a pleasure became burden,
and the entertaining of travellers was converted into a branch
of commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof flill more con-

vincing of the fmrall intercourse between different nations. The
genius of the Feudal system, as well as the spirit of jealousy
which always accompanies ignorance, joined in discouraging
firangers from fettling in any country. If a person removed
from one provincc in a kingdom to another, he was bound
within a year and a day to acknowledge himself the vassal of
the baron in whose eflate he fettled; if he negleEed to do so, he
became liable to a penalty; and if at his death he negleEed to
leave a certain legacy to the baron within whose territories he
resided, all his goods were confiscated. The hardships imposed
on foreigners fettling in a strange country, were frill more intole-
rable. In more early times, the superior lord of any territory
in which a foreigner fettled, might seize his person, and reduce
him to servitude. Very striking instances of this occur in the
history of the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the Norman s
in the ninth century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime
provinces of France to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom.
But instead of being received with that humanity to which their
wretched condition entitled them, they were reduced to a fate of
servitude. Both the civil and ecclefiaflical powers found it ne-
ceffary to intcrpofe, in order to put a flop to this barbarous
practice. Potgicflir. de Statu Scrvor. lib. i. c. I. § IG. In other
countries, the laws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime
provinces to reduce such as were shipwrecked on their coast to fcr-
vitude. Ibid. § 17. This barbarous cunlom prevailed in other

countries.

327.

countries of Europe. The pratice of seizing the goods of per-
sons who had been shipwrecked, and of confiscating as the pro-
perty of the lord on whose manor they were thrown, seems
to have been universal. De Weftphalen Monum. inedita Rer.
Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. ct Du Cange, voc. Laganum, Bechr.
Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 5 2. Among the ancient Welsh, three forts
of persons, a madman, a firangcr, and a 1'- per, might be killed
with impunity. Leges IHoel Dla, quoted in Obfervat. on tlhe
Statutes, chiefly the more ancicnt, p. 22. M. de Lauriere
produces several ancient dceds; which prove that in diffcrent
provinces of France, firangers became the slaves of the lord on
wvhofe lands they fettled. Gloffaire du l)roit Francois, Art.
Aubaine, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, " that there are several places
in France, in which if a firanger fixes his residence for a year
and day, lie becomes the slave of the lord of the manor. Cout.
de Beauv. ch. 45. p. 254. But as a pradice so contrary to hu-
manity could not subsist, the superior lords found it necessary to
refR satisficd with levying certain annual taxes from aliens,
imposing upon them some extraordinary duties or services. But
when any firanger died, he could not convey his cffets by a will;
. tnd all his real as well as personal eitate fell to the King, or to the
lord of the barony, to the cxclufion of his natural heirs. This is
termed in France Droit d'Aubainc. Pref. de Lauricr. Ordon.
toni. i. p. 15. Bruflil. tom. ii. p. 944[. Du Cange, voc. Albrai.
1'a1li1licr RIcchcrchcs, p. 367. Thlis pradice of confiscating the
cffcdts of Ifrangcrs upon their death was very ancient. It is
mentioned, though very obscurely, in a law of Charlemagne,
A. 1). 8a3 Cpitul. al. p. 507. § 5. Not only persons
wlho were born in a foreign country were fiubjec to the Droit
d'Aubaine, but even fuich as removed from one diocese to ano-
ther, or from the lands of one baron to another. Bruifel. vol. ii.

p. 947.

p. 947, 949. It is scarce possible to conceive any law more un-
favourable to the intercourse between nations. Something fimi-
lar to it, however, may be found in the ancient laws of every
kingdom in Europe. With refpet to Italy, fee Murat. Ant.
vol. ii. p. 14. It is no small disgrace to the French jurifpru-
dence, that this barbarous, inhospitable custom, should still re-
main in a nation so highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded under a feeble

form of government, incapable of framing or executing salutary
laws, rendered the communication between the different pro-
vinces of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It appears
from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in the ninth century,
that the highways were so much infested by banditti, that it was
necessary for travellers to form themselves into companies or
caravans, that they might be safe from the assaults of robbers.
Bouquet Recueil des Hist. vol. vii. 515. The numerous regu-
lations published by Charles the Bald in the fame century, disco-
ver the frequency of these disorders; and such ads of violence
were become so common, that by many they were hardly confi-
dered as criminal; and for this reason the inferior judges called
Centenarii were required to take an oath, that they would nei-
ther commit any robbery themselves, nor protet fuich as were
guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63, 68.
The historians of the ninth and tenth centuries give pathetic
descriptions of these disorders. Some remarkable pafagcs to
this purpose are collectd by Mat. Jo. Beehr Icr. Meclcl.
lib. viii. p. 6o3. They became so frequcnt and audc(lious,
that the authority of tile civil magitfrate was unable to
rcprcfs them. The ecclcfiaflical juriftli(lion was called in to aid
it. Councils were held with great foleimnity, the bodies of the
faints were brought thither, and in presence of their sacred

VOL. I. U u rclicu s,

reliqucs, anathemas were. denounced against, robbers, and other
violators of the publick peace. Bouquet Recueil des-Hit, to. x.
p. 36p, 43I, 536. One of there forms of excommuuication if-
sued A. D. 988, is still preservcd, and is so singular, and com-
posed with eloquence of such a peculiar kind, that it will pot
perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After the usual in-
troduaion, and mentioning the outrage which gave occasion to
the anathema, it runs thus; Obtenebrefcant occuli vefiri, qui
concupiverunt; arefcant manus, qua rapuerunt; debilitentur
omnia membra, qua adjaverunt. Semper laboretis, nec requiemr
inveniatis, frutuque veftri laboris privemini. Formidetis, &
paveatis, a' facie perfequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis,.ut tabe-.
fcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veitra cum Juda traditore Domini,
in terra mortis et tenebrarum; donee corda veftra ad fatisfac-
tioner plenam convertantur.- Ne ceffent a vobis. ha mali-
(lidiones, fcelerum veftrorum perfecutrices, quamdiu permane-
bitis in peccato pervafionis. Amen. Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib.
P. 517.

WIT I refpet to the progress of commerce which I have de-

fcribed, p. 78, &c. it may be obfcrved that the Italian states carried
on fomc commerce with the cities of the Greek empire, as early
as the age of Charlemagne, and imported into their own coun-
try the rich commodities of the cars. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii.
p. 882. In the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a trade
with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The inhabitants of Amalphi
and Pisa had likewise extended their trade to the fame ports. Murat.
li). p. 884, 885 . The cceds of tle Crufadcs in increasing the wcalth
and comlmerce of the Italian flates, and particularly that which
they carried on witll the Iafit, I have cxplaincd page 29th of this
volilme. Tlhey not only imported the Indian commodities from the
alft, but cltablillcd mnlanuliiuarcs of curious fabric in thcirown

country.
330

country. Several of these are enumerated by Muratori in his
Dielertations concerning the arts and the weaving of the middle
ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399. They made great pro-
grefs, particularly in the manufacture of silk, which had long
been peculiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk fluffs were
of such high price in ancient Rome, that only a few persons of
the first rank were able to purchase them. Under Aurelian,
A. D. 270, a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound of
gbld. Abfit ut auro fila penfentur. Libra enim auri tune libra
ferici suit. Vopifcus in Aureliano. Justinian, in the sixth century,
introduced the art of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which ren-
dered the commodity somewhat more plentiful, though still it was
of such great value, as to remain an article of luxury or magnifi-
cence, reserved only for persons of the first order, or for publick
folemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily, about the year I130,
carried off a number of artificers in the silk trade from Athens,
and fettling them in Palermo, introduced the culture of silk into
his kingdom, from which it was communicated to other parts
of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7. This seems to
have rendered silk so common, that about the middle of the
fourteenth century, a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared in
one procession clad in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a produc-
tion of the East. Some plants of the sugar cane were brought
from Asia; and the first attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was
made about the middle of the twelfth century. From thence
they were traniplanted into the foutlern provinces of Spain.
From Spain tlcy were carried to the Canary and Madeira iflcs,
and at length into tile new worll. Iu(dovico Guicciardini, in
enumerating the goods imnlortcd inlto Antwerp, about the year
I56o, mentions the filg;:Lr wlhich thl , rcceivcd from Spain and
Portugal as a confidertable articl. 1 I' idcltibs thlit a, tile pro;-

L1 u t. .tJ

331

dua of the Madeira and Canary islands. Defcritt. de Paefi BassS,
p. i80, I8I. The sugar cane was either not introduced into
the Weft-Indies at that time, or the cultivation of it was notfo
considerable as to furnish an article in commerce. In the middle
ag,'s, though sugar was not raised in such quantities, or employ-
ed for io many purposes, as to become one of the common
ncceflaries of life, it appears to have been a considerable article
in the commerce of the Italian flates.

THESE various commodities with which the Italians furnished

the other nations of Europe, procured them a favourable recep-
tion in every kingdom. They were established in France in the
thirteenth century with most extensive immunities. They not
only obtained every indulgence favourable to their commerce,
but personal rights and privileges were granted to them, which
the natives of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By a fidccial proviso, they were exempted from the
droit d'aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards engrossed the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled, they became
masters of its afih. Money of course was in their hands not
only a sign of the value of their commodities, but became an
object of commerce itself. They dealt largely as bankers. In
an ordonance, A. 1). 295, we find them ftiled imercatores and
,,mimpJ'res. They carried on this as well as other branches of
their commerce with foinewhat of that rapacious spirit which is
natural to monopoli/z.rs, wlio are not rcftrained by the concur-
rence of rivals. An abfullrd opinion, which prevailed in the
nidd(le ages, was, however, in toibc mcafurc, the caufc of their
exorbitant (deiands, and may be pleaded in apology for them.
(ommerce cannot be carried on with advantage unless tihe per-
ilons who lcid a tilm are allowed a certain lprcimiumi for the ulc
d't their 1on1ey, and as a coimnpcnl.ition for the risk which they

rul n
$3-

333

run in permitting another to traffick with their flock. This
premium is fixed by' law in all commercial countries, and is
called the legal interest of money. But the Fathers of the church
preposterously applied the prohibitions of usury in scripture
to the payment of legal interest, and condemned it as a fin. The
fihoolmen, milled by Aristotle, whose sentiments they followed
implicitly, and without Lexamination, adopted the fame error,
and enforced' it. BlackRtone's Commentaries on the laws of
England, vol. ii. p. 455. Thus the Lombards found them-
selves engaged in a traffick which was deemed criminal and
odious. They were liable to punishment if detected. They
were not satisfied, therefore, with that moderate premium,
which they might have claimed if their trade had been
open and authorised by law. They exaced a fum propor-
tional to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Accord-
ingly, we siid that it was usual for them to demand twenty
per cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth century.
Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About the beginning
of that century, the countess of Slanders was obliged to
borrow money in order to pay her husband's ransom. She
procured the fum requisite, either from Italian merchants or
from Jews. The lowet intereftwhich the paid to them was above
twenty per cent. and some of them exactd near thirty. Mar-
tcne and Durand. Thefaur. Anecdotorum. vol. i. p. 886. In
the fourteenth century, A. D. I311, Philip IV. fixed the interest
which might be legally exaaed in the fairs of Champagne at
twenty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i. p. 484. The interest of money
in Aragon was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. 1242. fixed it
by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca. Marca five Itimes
Iilpan. app. I433. As late as the year 1490, it appears that

7 the

. . . "

!  . . . . . . s,.-. .

. '. l . . 1 .
the intereIt of money in Placentia, was. at ie rate of forty per

,. . -.. - --- -*, ;.^J vdl~y.- ,* c .

o /^r
cent. This is the more extraordinary, becaue at that tine

, . . . ... . . . ( ) 9]

* -O( * -

the commerce of the Italian States .was ;eccomecofiderablc.
Memorie Storiche de Piacenza, tom. viii, p. p04, Piac. 1760.
It appears from Lud. Guicciardini, thatCharles V. had fixed
the rate of interest in his dominions inx ;th, Low-Countries at
twelve per cent, and at the time when he wrote about the year
i56o, it was not uncommon to exad more than that fum. He
complains of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effects
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di Paefi Bafi, p. 172.
This high interest of money, is alone 'a proof that the profits
on commerce were exorbitant.----The Lombards were likewise
established in England, in the thirteenth century, and a con-
fiderable lfreet in the city of London fill bears their name.
They enjoyed great privileges, and carried on an extensive
commerce, particularly -as bankers. See Anderson's Chronol.
Dedution, vol i. p. 137, I6o, 204, 23I, where the flatutes or
other authorities which confirm this are quoted. But the chief
mart for Italian commodities was at iruges. Navigation was
then so imperfect, that a voyage between the Baltick and Me-
diterranean could not be performed in one summer. For that
reason a magazine or llorchoufe half way between the com-
mercial cities in the north, and those in Italy became necessary.
Bruges was pitched upon as the moil convenient station. That
choice introduced vast wealth into the Low-Countries. Brugcs
was at once the staple for English wool; for the woollen and
linen manufadturcs of the Ncthcrlands; for the naval florcs,
and other bulky commodities of thlc,nortl ; and for the Indian
commoditics, as well as domeflick productions imported by the
Italian Statc,. The cxtcnt of its commerce in Indian goods

2 with

witbh lynicy gaye ,Sppris,,fromp .one fa4t. In .the .year 1 3

88,

five. Vonetian aleaffes laden. With Indian commodities arrived
at BrWues,, in ,order,to dispose of their .cargoes' at the fair.
L. Gui, - Defcxitt.. di lpaefi lBaffi, p. 74. Galeaffes were vefiels
of veryconfiderIble b.urdp., It was the. greatest emporium in
all Europe. Many. proofs .ns thi,s. occur in. .he historians and
recqrds of thqeit'q,, nir l adxdfoureenth centuries. .But instead
of mu.i.plying;qu6oations, I {haLl refer my readers to Anderson,
vol. i.p. 2. , 37, 213, 246, &c. The nature of this work
prevents me from entering into any long details, but there are
some detached fads, which give an high idea of the wealth
botl of the :Flemish and,Italian commercial flates. The Duke
of Brabant contratedhis daughter to the Black Prince, son of
Edward III. of England,. A. D. 1I339, and gave, her a. portion
whioh: wo0ld amount ito three hundred thousand pounds of our
prefert money. - Ryer's Fxdera, vol. v. p. I 3. John Gale-
azzo Visconti Iuke, of Milan .oncluded a, treaty, of marriage
between his daughter. and Lionel Duke.of Clarence Edward's
third fqn. A. D.: 1367,. and.grawted .her a portion equal to two
hundred thousand pounds of our preset money.' Rymer Faeder.
vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant .fums. so far; exceeding what
was then granted by the most powerfill monarchs, and which
appear extraordinary even in the present age, when the wealth
of Europe is so much incrafed, muff have arisen from the
richcs which flowed into these countries fiom their extensive
and lucrative commncrce. The first source of wealth to the
towns situated on the Baltick fca, icems to have been the her-
ring-fifllcry; the floals of hcrring fi-equenting at that time the
co(;ln of Swcdcin and Dennmark, in the, fame manner as they
now rclort to theC I3iJifl co)aftl. The effc(td of this fihlery are

ths3

336 PROOFS- 'AND IDLLUS'TRAT IO'NS:

thus dercreibed by'an author of the thirteenth century. 'The
Danes, fays he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of
sailors, are now cloathed in scarlet, puirple and 'fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing from their annual fishery
on the coast of Schonen; so that all nations retort to them,
bringing:their gold, 'silver and precious commodities, that they
may purchase herrings, which the divine bounty bestows upon
them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Conring. de Urbib. German.
§ 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful commercial

confederacy known in history. Its origin towards the close of
the twelfth century, and the objeas of its union, are described
by Knipfcildt Tretatus Hiftorico-Politico Juridicus de Juribus
Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson has mentioned the
chief fa&s with refped to their commercial progress, the extent
of the privileges which they obtained in different countries,
their successful wars with several monarchs, as well as the spirit
and zeal with which they contended for those liberties and rights
without which it is impossible to carry on commerce to advan-
tage. The vigorous efforts of a society attentive only to
commercial objets, could not fail of diffusing over Europe
new and more liberal ideas concerning juftiee and order where-
ever they fettled,

IN England the progress of -ommcrce was extremely flow;

and the causes of this are obvious. During the Saxon hcptarchy,
England, split into many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually
nt variance with each other, cxpofed to the fierce incursions of

the

the Danes, and other northern pirates, and funk in barbarity
and ignorance, was in no condition to cultivate commerce, or
to pursue any system of useful and salutary policy. When a
better profpea began to open by the union of the kingdom
under one monarch, the Norman conqucft took place. This
occasioned such a violent shock, and such a sudden and
total revolution of property, that the nation did not recover
from it during several reigns. By the time that the conflitu-
tion began to acquire some flability, and the English had to
incorporated with their conquerors as to become one people,
the nation engaged with no less ardour than imprudence in
support of their monarch's pretensions to the crown of France,
and long wafted its vigour and genius in its wild efforts to
conquer that kingdom. When by ill success, and repeated
disappointments, a period was at last put to this fatal frenzy,
and the nation beginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure
to breathe and to gather new firength, the deftruaive wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster broke out, and in-
volved the kingdom in the worst of all calamities. Thus, bc-
fides the common olflrudions of commerce occasioned by the
nature of the feudal government, and the state of manners
during the middle ages, its progress in England was retarded
bly peculiar caulcs. Such a fucceflion of cvents adverse to the
commercial spirit was fifficient to have checked its growth,
although cvery other circumfiance had favoured it. The Eng-
lill were accordingly one of the lalt nations in Europe who
availed themfelvcs of their natural commercial advantages.
Bcforc the reign of Edward III. all the wool of England, except
a ;inall (quantity wrought into coarse cloths for home confrmp-
tion, was fold to the Flcmings or Lombards, and manufactured

Vol.. I. X x by

337

by them. Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some
of the Flemifl weavers to fettle in England, it was long before
the English were capable of fabricating cloth for foreign mar-
kets, and the export of unwrought wool still continued to be
the chief article of their commerce. Anderson paffim.-All
foreign commodities were brought into England by the Lom-
bard or Hanfeatick merchants. The English ports were fre-
quented by ships both from the north and south of Europe,
and they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits arising
from the supply of their wants. The first commercial treaty
of England on record, is that with Haquin King of Norway,
A. D. I217. Anders. vol. i. p. Io8. But they did not venture
to trade in their own ships to the Baltick until the beginning of
the fourteenth century. lb. I51. It was after the middle of
the fifteenth before they sent any ship into the Mediterranean.
Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long before this period that their vessels
visited the ports of Spain or Portugal. But though I have
pointed out the flow progress of the English commerce, as a
fad little attended to, and yet meriting consideration; the con-
course of foreigners to the ports of England, together with the
communication among all the different countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of the twelfth
century, is fifficielt to justify all the obfcrvations and reason-
ings in the text concerning the influence of commerce on the
fate of manners, and of focicty.

NOTE XXX. S ECT. III p. 153.

I JIAlVE not bCCn able to difcovcr the precise manner in
which the Jufliza was appointed. Among the claims of

the
33&

the junta or union formed againtl James I. A. D. 1264, this was
one; that the King should not nominate any person to be Jus-
tiza without the content or approbation of the ricos-hombres or
nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon, vol. i. p. i8o. But the
King in his answer to their remonstrance asserts, " that it was
established by immemorial praaice, and was conformable to the
laws of the kingdom, that the King, in virtue of his royal
prerogative, named the Jufliza. Zurita, Ibid. i8I. Blanca, 656.
From another paflage in Zurita, it appears that while the Ara-
gonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union, i. e. the power of
confederating against their Sovereign as often as they conceived
that he had violated any of their rights and immunities, the
Juftiza was not only nominated by the King, but held his office
during his pleasure. Nor was this pracice attended with any
bad effects, as the privilege of the union was a sufficient and
effecual check to any abufc of the royal prerogative. But when
the privilege of the union was abolished as dangerous to the
order and peace of society, it was agreed that the Juftiza
should continue in office during life. Several Kings, however,
attempted to remove the Juttizas who were obnoxious to them,
and they sometimes fuccecded in the attempt. In order to guard
against this encroachment, which would have deflroyed the in-
tention of the institution, and have rendered the Juftiza the
idependant and tool of the crown, instead of the guardian of the
people, a law was enacted in the Cortes, A. D. I442, or-
daining that the Juftiza should continue in office during life,
and ihould not be removed firom it unlcfs by the authority of
the Cortes. Fueros & ()Obfrvancial del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. 22. By former laws the pcrfon of the Juftiza had been
tleclared sacred, and lie was rctfonfilblc only to the Cortes. Ibid.
p. 15. 1). Zurita and Blanca, who both publiihcd their hiflo-

X x 2 rics,

339

ries while the Jufliza of Aragon retained the full exercise of
his privileges and jurifdidion, have negleted to explain several
circumstances with regard to the office of that refpedable magi-
firate, because they addressed their works to their countrymen,
who were well acquainted with every particular concerning the
funations of a judge, to whom they looked up as to the guardi-
an of their liberties. It is vain to consult the later historians of
Spain, about any point, with refped to which the excellent his-
torians whom I have named are silent. The ancient constitution
of their country was overturned, and despotism efiablifhed on
the ruin of its liberties, when the writers of this and the pre-
ceding century compored their histories, and on that account
they had little curiosity to know the nature of those institutions
to which their ancertors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or they
were afraid to describe them with much accuracy. The spirit
with which Mariana, his continuator Miniana, and Ferreras,
write their hitfories, is very different from that of the two his-
torians of Aragon, from whom I have taken my account of
the conltitution of that kingdom.

Two circumflances concerning the Juftiza, besides those

which I have mentioned in the text, are worthy of observation,
i. None of the ricos-hombres, or noblemen of the first order,
could be appointed Jufliza. He was taken out of the ftcond
class or cavallcros, who anfwcr nearly to gentlemen or common-
ers in Great Britain. Fucros & Oblfcrvanc. del Rcyno, &c. lib. i.
p. ,1. b. '1he realon was. By the lawsof Aragon, the ricos-
homliles were not lubjccd to capital punishment; but as it was
nccclltry for the fccurity of liberty, that the Juftiza flould be
accountable for the manner in which he executed the high trust
rclpoi(l in llim, it was a powcrful reitraint upon him to know

that
34o

that he was liable to be punished with the utmolS rigour.
Blanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita, tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Obfer-
vanc. lib. ix. p. I82. b. I83. It appears too from many passages
in Zurita, that the Juftiza was appointed to check the domi-
neering and oppressive spirit of the nobles, as well as to set
bounds to the power of the monarch, and therefore he was
chosen from an order of citizens equally intereited in opposing
both.

2. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such vast powers as the Jus-

tiza, might have exercised them in a manner pernicious to the
itate, if he himself had been subjec to no convroul. A conti-
tutional remedy, however, was provided againit this danger.
Seventeen persons were chosen by lot in each meeting of the
Cortes. These formed a tribunal called the court of inquisition
into the office of Juftiza. This court met at three fiated terms
in each year. Every person had liberty of complaining to it of
any iniquity or neglec of duty in the Juftiza, or in the infe-
rior judges, who ated in his name. The Juftiza and his de-
puties were called to answer for their conduct. The members
of the court passed sentence by ballot. They might punish by
degradation, confiscation of goods, or even with death. The
law which ereced this court, and regulated the forms of its
procedure, was enactcd A. D. 146 . Zurita Anales, iv. 102.
Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. 770. Irevious to this period,
inquiry was made into the conducd of the Jltliza, though not
with the fame formality. He was from the first inflitution of
the office fubjcet to the review of the Cortes. The constant
dread of such an impartial and fcvcrc inquiry into his belhavi-
our, was a powerful motive to the vigilant and faithfil dif-.

charge.

34t

charge of his duty, A remarkable instance of the authority of
the Jufiiza when opposed to that of the King, occurs in the
year 1386. By the constitution of Aragon, the eldest son or
heir apparent of the crown possesscd considerable power and
jurifdidion in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. del Reyno
de Arag. lib. i. p. i6. Peter IV. instigated by a second wife,
attempted to deprive his son of this, and enjoined his fubjets
to yield him no obedience. The Prince immediately applied to
the Juftiza; " the fafc-guard and defence, fays Zurita, against
all violence and oppression." The Jufliza granted him theJirmo
de derecho, the effect of which was, that upon his giving surety
to appear in judgment, he could not be deprived of any immu-
nity or privilege, which he poifeffed, but in consequence of a
legal trial before the Juftiza, and of a fcntence pronounced by
him. This was publiflhed throughout the kingdom, and not-
withflanding the proclamation in contradiEtion to this which
had been issued by the King, the Prince continued in the exer-
cifc of all his rights, and his authority was univcrfally rccog-
nized. Zurita Analcs de Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. SE C T. III. 154.

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring tcflimony of many

ref)peablc authors, to mention this as the constitutional form of
the oath of allegiance, which the Aragonefe swore to thcir So-
vcreigns. I mufft acknowledge, however, that I have not found
this singular oath in any Spanish author whom I have hlad an
opportunity to consult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all hiltoriogra-
phcrs appointed by the Cortes of Aragon to record the tranfac-
lions of the kingdom. All these writers poffcfs a mcrit, which

t1- is

343

is very rare among historians. They are extremely accurate in
tracing the progress of the laws and confiitution of their coun-
try. Their silence with refpeC to this, creates some suspicion
concerning the genuineness of the oath. But as it is mentioned
by so many authors, who produce the ancient Spanish words in
whi:ch it is expressed, it is probable that they have taken it from
some writer of credit, whose works have not fallen into my
hands. The spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the
genius of the Aragonefe constitution.

THE privilege of Union which I mentioned in the preceding

note, and alluded to in the next, is indeed one of the most fin-
gular which could take place in a regular government, and the
oath thatI have mentioned expresses nothing more than this con-
ftitutional privilege entitled the Aragonefe to perform. If the
King or his ministers violated any of the laws or immunities of
the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate rcdrefs in consequence
of their representations and remonfirances, the nobles of the firif
rank, or Ricos-hombre.r dae natura, &' d mef:adal, the cqucIieria
order, or the nobility of the second class, called IIldl/,.')s & lfan-
ciones, together with the magiltratcs of cities, might cither ill
the cortes, or in a voluntary aflnl:nbly, join in union, and l)in(diii
themselves by mutual oaths and the cxchange of holtliges to he
faithful to cach other, they might require the King, in tlhe nlame
and by the authority of Ilis l)h(dv corporate, to grant them re-
dress. If the King refilued to comply with their rc(lcl}, or
took arms in order to oppoif them, they Imight, in 'viltie of
the privilege of union, initlantly withdraw their alltgilancc fionI
the King, refutie to acknowledge him as their Sovcrcigl, anti
proceed to clc another Monarch ; nor did they incur alny

gIilt,

guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that account.
Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 66i, 669. This union did not re-
femble the confederacies in ot-her feudal kingdoms. It was a
c,nflitutional association, which pretended to legal privileges,
which issued its mandates under a common feal, and proceeded
in all its onerations by regular and afccrtained forms. This
dangerous right was not only claimed, but exercised. In the
year 1287, the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso 1. and obliged the King not only to comply with
their demands, but to ratify a privilege so fatal to the power of
the crown. Zurita Analcs, tom. i. p. 322. In the year 1347,
an union was formed against Peter IV. with equal fuiccefs, and
a new ratification of the privilege was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii.
p. 202. But soon after, the King having defeated the leaders
of the union in battle, the privilege of union was finally abro-
gated in the Cortes, and all the laws or records which contained
any confirmation of it, were cancelled or destroyed. The King,
in presence of the Cortes, called for the ad whereby he had
ratified the union, and having wounded his hand with his poi-
niard, he held it above the record, " That privilege, fays he,
(" which has been so fatal to the kingdom, and to injurious to
"roylty, should be effaced with the blood of a King." Zu-
rita, tom. ii . 22. 9. he law abolishing the union is pub-
lifhed. Fueros & Obfcrvanc. lib. ix. p. 178. From that pe-
riod the Julliza became the confitittional guardian of publick
lilerty, and his power and juriklidion occalioncd none of those
violent convulsions which the tumultuary privilege of the union
was apt to produce. The confliturion of Aragonl, however,
flill remained extremely free. One source of this liberty was
from the early admnifion of the reprcfenttatives of cities into the

Cortcs.
344

34S

Cortes. It seems probable, from Zurita, that burgefles were
conflituent members of the Cortes from its sirss institution. He
mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. I I 33, inwhich the procu-
radores de las ciudades y villas were present. Tom. i. p. Sr.
This is the constitutional language in which their pretence is
declared in the Cortes, after the journals of that court were re-
gularly kept. It is probable,, that an historian so accurate as
Zurita, would not have used there words, if he had not taken
them from some authentick record. It was more than a cen-
tury after this period before the representatives of cities formed
a conflituent part in the supreme assemblies of the other Euro-
pean nations. The free ipirit of the Aragonefe government is
conspicuous in many particulars. The Cortes not only opposed
the attempts of their Kings to increase their revenue, or to ex-
tend their prerogative, but they claimed rights and exercised
powers which will appear extraordinary even in a country ac-
cuftorned to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year 1286, the
Cortes claimed the privilege of naming the members of the
King's council and the officers of his houfhold, and they seem
to have obtained it for some time. Zurita, tor. i. p. 303, 307.
It was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers who
commanded the troops railed by their authority. This seems
to be evident from a paflage in Zurita. When the Cortes, in
the year i,503, raiscd a body of troops to be employed in Italy;
it pait'cd a ad empowcring the King to name the officcrs who
hlould command them, Zurita, torn. v. p. 274; which plainly
implies that without this warrant, it did not belong to 1him1 in
virtue of his prerogative. In the F;leros & ()Olibrvaiicias dcl
rcyno de Aragon, two general declarations of the rights and pri-
vileges of the Aragoncie arc publilhcd; the one in the reign of

Vol. I. Y y l'cdr,

Pedro I. A. D. 283, the other in that of James II. A. D. 1 35s.
They are of such length, that I cannot insert them, but it is
evident from these, that not only the privileges of the nobility,
but the rights of the people, personal as well as political,
were, at that period, more extensive, and better understood than
in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The oath by
which the King bound himself to observe those rights and liber-
ties of the people, was very solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p. 15.
The Cortes of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and
vigilance, which are peculiar to free states, in guarding the effen-
tial parts of the constitution, but they were scrupulously atten-
tive to observe the most minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed. According to the established laws and
customs of Aragon, no foreigner had liberty to enter the hall
in which the Cortes assembled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481,
appointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the kingdom, while he
was absent during the course of the campaign. The law re-
quired that a regent should take the oath of fidelity in pretence
of the Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner, before ihe could
be admitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to pass an at au-
thorizing the ferjeant-porter to open the door of the hall, and&
to allow her to enter; " so attentive were they, fays Zurita, to
" observe theft laws and forms, even such as may seem most
" minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure the personal

rights of individuals, than to maintain the freedom of the
constitution; and the spirit of their statutes with refpea to both.
was equally liberal. Two faas relative to this matter merit
obfcrvation. By an cxprefs statute in the year 1325, it was

declared
346

347

declared to be unlawful to put any native Aragonefe to the tor-
ture. If he could not be conviced by the testimony of witnesses,
he was instantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita re-
cords the regulation with the fatisfaaion natural to an historian,
when he contemplates the humanity of his countrymen. He
compares the laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both ex-
empted citizens and freemen from such ignominious and cruel
treatment, and had recourse to it only in the trial of slaves.
Zurita had reason to beRlow such an encomium on the laws of
his country. Torture was at that time permitted by the laws of
every other nation in Europe. Even in England, from which
the mild spirit of legislation has long banished it, torture was
not, at that time, unknown. Observations on the Statutes,
chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

THE other fat shows, that the fame spirit which influenced

the legislature prevailed among the people. In the year I485, the
religious zeal of Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. Though the Aragonefe were
no less superstitiously attached than the other Spaniards to the
Roman Catholick faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds
of error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors had scattered,
yet they took arms against the inquisitors, murdered the chief
inquisitor, and long opposed the establishment of that tribunal.
The reason which they gave for their conduct was, That the
mode of trial in the inquisition was inconfificnt with liberty.
Thc criminal was not confronted with the witnefccs, lie was
not acquainted with what they deposed against him, he was
fubjeted to torture, and the goods of perfsns condemned were
confiscated. Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

Yy 2

TIIE

348 PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

THE form of government in the kingdom of Valencia, and

principality of Catalonia, which were annexed to the crown of
Aragon, was likewise extremely favourable to liberty. The
Valencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame manner
with the Aragonefe. But they had no magistrate resembling
the Juftiza. The Catalonians were no less jealous of their
liberties than the two other nations, and no less bold in assert-
ing them. But it is not necessary for illustrating the follow-
ing history to enter into any farther detail concerning the
peculiarities in the conflitution of these kingdoms.

NOTE XXXII. SEC T. III. p. 155.

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians of Castile for

such information as might enable me to trace the progress of
laws and government in Castile, or to explain the nature of
the conffitution with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith I
have described the political ltate of Aragon. It is manifest not
only from the historians of Castile, but from its ancient laws,
particularly the Fuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally
elective. Ley 2, 5, 8. They were chosen by the bishops, the
nobility, and the people, ibid. It appears from the fame vene-
rable code of laws that the prerogative of the Castilian monarchs
was extremely limited. Villaldiego, in his commentary on these
laws, produces many fads and authorities in confirmation of
both these particulars. Dr. Geddes, who was well acquainted
with Spanish literature, complains that he could find noau-
thor, who gave a diflind account of the Cortes or supreme
aflcilmbly of the nation, or who described the manner in which
it was elde, or mentioned the precise number of members who
had a right to fit in it. lie produces, however, fiom Gil

I (Conzalcs

Gonzales d'Avila, who published a history of Henry II, the
writ of summons to the town of Abula, requiring it to chufe
representatives to appear in the Cortes which he called to meet
A. D. i390. From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes, Mar-
quiffes, the mailers of the three military orders, Condes and
Riccos-hombres were required to attend. These composed the
bodies of ecclefiafticks and nobles, which formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which sent members to that
meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight. The number of
representatives, (for the cities had right to chute more or
fewer according to their respeCtive dignity) amounted to an
hundred and twenty-five. Geddes Miscellaneous Tracs, vol. i.
331. Zurita having occasion to mention the Cortes which
Ferdinand held at Toro A. D. I 505, in order to secure to him-
self the government of Castile after the death of Isabella,
records, with his usual accuracy, the names of the members
present, and of the cities which they represented. From that
lift it appears, that only eighteen cities had deputies in this
assembly. Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 3. What was the occa-
sion of this great inequality in the number of cities represented
in these two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable to explain.

NOTE XXXIII. SECT. III. p. 157.

A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was cngroffed by

the nobility. L.Mariniius Siculus, who composed his treatise de
Rcbtls I-Iifpanixr dluring the reign of Charles V. gives a cata-
logue of the Spanifhl nobility, together with the yearly rent of
thcir eflates. According to his account, which hie affirms was

as

1

35e

as accurate as the nature of the subjed would admit, the fum
total of the annual revenue of their lands amounted to one
million four hundred and eighty two thousand ducats. If we
make allowance for the vast difference in the value of
money in the fifteenth century from that which it now
bears, and confider that the catalogue of Marinaeus includes
only the Titulados, or nobility whose families were difiin-
guiffed by some honorary title, their wealth must appear
very great. L. Marinaeus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i..
p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their contests with the
crown, which I shall hereafter relate, complain of the exten-
five property of the nobility as extremely pernicious to the
kingdom. In one of their manifesto's they assert that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an hundred
leagues, the crown did not possess more than three villages.
All the reft belonged to the nobility, and could be fubje&ed to
no publick burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Carl. V. vol. i.
p. 422. It appears from the testimony of authors quoted by
Bovadilla that these vast poffeflions were bestowed upon the
Ricos-hombres, hidalgos, and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile,
in reward for the assistance, which they had received from them
in expelling the Moors. They likewise obtained by the fame
means a considerable influence in the cities, many of which
anciently depended upon the nobil;iy Politica para Corregi-
dores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXIV. SEc T. III. p. 160.

I IAVE been able to diicover nothing certain, as I observed

Note XVIII. with rcfpet to the origin of communities or free
cities in Spain. It is probable, that as soon as these were reco-

vered

vered from the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed their residence
i them being persons of diftindtion and credit, had all the
privileges of municipal government and jurisdiction conferred
upon them. Many striking proofs occur of the splendour,
wealth and power of the Spanish cities. Hieronymus Paulus
wrote a description of Barcelona in the year 491i, and com-
pares the dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and the
elegance of its buildings, the variety of its manufacures, and
the extent of its commerce to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap.
Scottum. Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marinaus describes Toledo as
a large and populous city. A great number of its inhabitants
were persons of quality and of illustrious rank. Its commerce
was great. It applied particularly to the manufactures of silk
and wool; and the number of inhabitants employed in there
two branches of trade amounted nearly to ten thousand. Marin.
ubi supr. p. 308. I know no city, fays he, that I would pre-
ser to Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p. 312.
We may form some estimate of its populousness from the fol-
lowing circumstances. The citizens took arms in the year
x156, in order to oppose a measure concerted by cardinal Xi-
menes, and they mustered in the city, and in the territory
which belonged to it thirty thousand fighting men. Sandov. Vida
del Emper. Carl. V. tom. i. p. 81. The manufatures carried
on in the towns of Spain were not intended merely for home
consumption, they were exported to foreign countries, and that
commerce was a considerable source of wealth to the inhabitants.
The maritime laws of Barcelona are the foundation of mer-
cantile jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges Rhodiae
were among the ancients. All the commercial ftatcs in Italy
adopted these laws, and regulated their trade according to tLciu.

9. Sandi
J;

Sandi Storia Civile Veneziana, Vol. ii. 865. It appears from
several ordonances of the Kings of France, that the merchants
of Aragon and Castile were received on the fame footing, and
admitted to the fame privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances
des Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135. iii. I66, 504, 635. Cities in
such a flourishing slate became a refpeaable part of the society,
and were entitled to a considerable share in the legislature.
The magistrates of Barcelona aspired to the highest honour a
Spanish subjea can enjoy, that of being covered in the presence
of their sovereign, and of being treated as grandees of the
kingdom. Origin de la dignidad de Grande de Caltilla por
Don Alonfo Carillo. Madr. I657. p. I8.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. 111. p. 62.

THE military order of St. Jago, the mofl honourable and opu-

lent of the three Spanish orders, was inflituted about the year
1170. The bull of confirmation by Alexander III. is dated
A. D. 1176. At that time a considerable part of Spain was
fuibje to the Moors, and the whole country much cxpofcd to
the depredations not only of the encmy, but of banditti. It is
no wonder, then, that an inititution, the olbjec of which was to
oppose the enemies of the Chriflian faith, and to refirain and
pllnifl those who (difilrbcd the publick peace, hlould be cx-
treniely popular, and meet with gteneral encoiurlgemicnt. l lle
wcaltl and power of the order l)came io grcat, that one liflorian
fays, that the Grand Maflcr of St. Jago was the cperfn( in Spain
of greatest power and dignity next to the Kinti. Jl.. Anton.
Nebriflenfis, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hlif). i. i l. Another observes,
that the order pofiffced every thing in Caltile that a Kiln would

molt
352

353

most desire toobtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22. The knights took
the vows of obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chastity. By
the former they were bound implicitly to obey the commands of
their grand matler. The order could bring into the field a
thousand men at arms. A3. Ant. Nebref. p. 813. Ifthefe men
at arms were accompanied as was usual in that age, this was a
formidable body of cavalry. There belonged to this order
eighty-four commanderies, and two hundred priories and other
benefices. Dirfertations fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St.
Marie, p. 262. It is easy to fee how formidable to his sovereign
the command of these troops, the adminiflration of such revenues,
and the disposal of so many offices, must have rendered a subjed.
The other two orders, though inferior to that of St. Jago in
power and wealth, were nevertheless very considerable. When
the conquest of Granada deprived the knights of St. Jago of
those enemies againit whom their zeal was originally directed,
superstition found out a new object, in defence of which they
engaged to employ their courage. To their usual oath, they
added the following clause: " We swear to believe, to maintain,
and to contend in publick and in private, that the Virgin Mary,
the mother of God, our Lady, was conceived without the lain
of original fin." This singular addition was made about the
middle of the seventeenth century, Honors de St, Marie Difl
fertations, &c. p. 263.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p. 164.

I HArVE frequently had occasion to take notice of the dcfcdt

in police during the middle ages, occasioned ly the feeblencfs of
government, and the want of proper fubordirnation among the

VoL, .
I. z diflercnt

different ranks of men. I have observed in a former note, that
this greatly interrupted the intercourse between nations, and
even between different places in the fame kingdom. The defcrip-
tion which the Spanish historians give of the frequency of ra-
pine, murder, and every aft of violence, in all the provinces of
Spain, are amazing, and prefcnt to us the idea of a society but
little removed from the disorder and turbulence of that which
has been called a state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. r.
175. El. Ant. Nebriffenfis rer. a Ferdin. geitar. Hist. ap. Schot-
tum II. 849. Though the excess of these disorders rendered
the institution of the Santa Hermandad necessary, great care
was taken at first to avoid giving any offence or alarm to the
nobility. The jurisdiction of the judges of the Hermandad was
cxprefsly confined to crimes that violated the publick peace. All
other offences were left to the cognizance of the ordinary judges.
If a person was guilty of the most notorious perjury, in any
trial before a judge of the Hermandad, he could not punilh him,
but was obliged to remit the cafe to the ordinary judge of the
place. Commentaria in Regias Hifpan. Conftitut. per Alph. de
Azevedo, pars v. p. 220, &c. fol. Duaci, 1612. Notwithstanding
these reftritions, the Barons were sensible how much the Her-
mandad would encroach on their jurifdidion. In Castile, some
opposition was made to the institution; but Ferdinand had the
address to obtain the content of the Constable to the introducion
of the Hermandad into that part of the kingdom where his estate
lay; and by that means, as well as the popularity of the infti-
tution, he surmounted every obfiacle that stood in its way.
iEl. Ant. Nebrifsen. 85i. In Aragon, the Nobles combired
against it with greater spirit; and Ferdinand, though he sup-
ported it with vigour, was obliged to make tome conceflions in

~~~~~~t ~order
134

355.

order to reconcile them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The
power and revenue of the Hermandad in Catile seems to have
been very great. Ferdinand, when preparing for the war
against the Moors of Granada, required of the Hermandad to
furnilh him sixteen thousand beasts of burden, together with
eight thousand men to conduc them, and he obtained what he
demanded. A1. Ant. Nebriff. 881. The Hermandad has been
found to be of so much use in preserving peace, and restraining
or detecting crimes, that it is still continued in Spain, although
it be no longer necessary either for moderating the power of the
nobility, or extending that of the crown.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 167.

NOTHING is more common among Antiquarians, and there is

not a more copious source of error, than to decide concerning
the intfitutions and manners of past ages, by the forms and ideas
which prevail in their own times. The French lawyers in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries having found their fove-
reigns in possession of absolute power, seem to think it a duty in-
cumbent on them, to maintain that such unbounded authority
belonged to the crown in every period of their monarchy.
" The government of France, fays M. de Real very gravely,
is purely monarchical at this day, as it was from the beginning.
Our Kings were absolute originally as they are at prefcnt."
Science du Governement, tor. ii. p. 31. It is impossible, how-
ever, to conceive two flates of civil society more unlike to each
other, than that of the French nation under Clovis, and that under
Louis XV. It is evident from the codes of laws of the various
tribes which fettled in Gaul and the countries adjacent to it, as

Z; z well

well as from the history of Gregory of Tours, and other early
annalists, that among all these people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they had scarce begun
to acquire the first rudiments of that order and police which are
necessary in extensive societies. The King or leader had the
command of soldiers or companions, who followed his standard
from choice, not by confiraint. I have produced the clearefl
evidence of this, Note VI. An event related by Gregory of
Tours, lib. iv. c. 14, affords the most striking proof of the de-
pendancc of the early French Kings on the sentiments and incli-
nation of their people. Clotaire I. having marched at the head
of his army, in the year 553, againif the Saxons, that people,
intimidated at his approach, sued for peace, and offered to pay a
large fum to the offended monarch. Clotaire was willing to
close with what they proposed. But his army infitcd to be
led forth to battle. The King employed all his eloquence to
pcrfuade them to accept of what the Saxons were ready to pay.
The Saxons, in order to sooth them, increased their original
offer. The King renewed his follicitations: But the army
cnraiged, rushcd upon the King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged
lihun out of it, and %wotld have slain himn on the spot, if he had
nut contfientcd to lead them iinflantly against the enemy.

I I tlc early nmonarcls of France porffcnld fucli limited autlio-

ritly, c'cvi while at thle head of tlicir army, their prerogative
(lriil'i_; pcace will be Mound to be Itill more confined. They
;.l:cnmlctl tlhi t llroe nlot by any IlIerC(lit:;y right, b)lt in confc-
(qIcnIC of1 the cl lectin tof thlir llIt jces. In orlcer to avoid a1l
Iillnne(cfltry nullb)er of' (lquotationsl, I refe r my readers to H-otto-
imanni Fr.ncl)-gaLllia, c:,p. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, whcre they will

q4 find
356

find the fullest proof of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus,
and the most authentick historians of the Merovingian Kings.
The effect of this elecion was not to invefi them with absolute
power. Whatever related to the general welfare of the nation,
was submitted to publick deliberation, and determined by the
fuffragc of the people, in the annual assemblies called Lcs
Champs des Mars and Les Champs de Mai. These affimblies
were cal!cd Cha;:/)s, because, according to the custom of all the
barbarous n:,tions, they were held in the open air, in foine plain
capable of containing the vafl number of persons who had a
right to be present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis veterum
Germanorum, vol. i. § 19, &c. They were denominated
Champs de Mars and de Mai, from the months in which they
were h.'el. Every free man seems to have had a right to be
present in thefc assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. §I33, &c. The
ancient annals of the Franks describe the persons who were pre-
sent in the afiembl7 held A. r). 788, in these words: In placito
Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontiics, majs, m , minorcs, facer-
dotes, reguli, duces, comnites, pr ,fcdti, cives, oppidani, Apud
Sorler. § 304. Thire Ive;ry thing that concerned the happlinefs
of their country, fays an ancient hiflorian, every thing that could
be of benefit to the Franks W' is confidered, anl enjoined. Fre-
degarius ap. Du Cange (;ll or.

l vo. (Caimpus Martii. Clilotha-

rius II. describes the business, and acknowledges the authority
of these assemblies. They are called, fliys he, that whatever
relates to the common safety may be cnlidlered and resolved by
common deliberation; an(l whlat.evr they determine, to that I
will conforin. Amoimns de (Get1. iiiinc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. 7Bol-
quet Rccurcil. iii. I 6. The flatutory clalifcs, or words of legi-
l;ltive authority in the decrees iFri<el in tlie'lc alf'iblics, run not

i'l

357

in the name of the King alone. " We have treated, fays Clhil-
debert, in a decree, A. D. 532, in the assembly of March, toge-
ther withour Nobles, concerning some affairs, and we now pub-
lifh the conclusion, that it may come to the knowledge of all."
Childeb. Decret ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 3. We
have agreed together with our vassals. Ibid. § 2. It is agreed
in the assembly in which we were all united. Ibid. § 4. The
Salic laws, the most venerable monument of French jurifpru-
dence, were enaEted in the fame manner. Dictaverunt Salicam
legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc temporis apud earn erant
Redores. Sunt autem eleti de pluribus viri quatuor -- qui per
tres Mallos convenientes, omnes caufarum origines follicite difcur-
rendo, tra&antes de fingulis judicium decreverunt hoc modo.
Prasf. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid. p. I22. Hoc decretum
eft apud regem & principes ejus, & apud cuntum populum
chriflianum, qui infra regnum Merwingorum confiftunt. Ibid.
p. 124. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings of the first
race are careful to specify that they were granted with the con-
sent of their vassals. Ego Childebertus Rex una cum confenfu
& voluntate Francorum, &c. A.D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 622.
Chlotharius III. unai cum patribus noftris epifcopis, optimatibus,
caeterifque palatii noftri riniftris, A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De
confenfu fidelium noftrorum. Mably Obferv, tom. i. p. 239. The
historians likewise describe the funcions of the King in the
national assemblies in such terms, as imply that his authority
there was extremely small, and that every thing depended on
the court itself. Ipfe Rex (fays the authors of Annales Franco-
rum, speaking of the Field of March) fcdebat in fella regia,
circumftante exercitu, pracipiebatque is, die illo, quicquid a Fran-
cis decretum crat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT
359

359

THAT the general aflcmblies exercised fupeme jufifdilIoi

over all persons, and with refpeC to all causes, is so evident as
to tfand in need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut, A. D.
6I3, how unjust soever the sentence against her may be, as
related by Fredegarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet. ib-d. 430. is in
itself sufficient proof of this. The notorious violence and ini-
quity of the sentence serve to demonstrate the extent of jurif-
didion which this assembly possessed, as a Prince so sanguinary
as Clothaire II. thought the fandion of its authority would be
fufiicient to justify his rigorous treatment of the mother and
grandmother of so many Kings.

WITH refpet to conferring donatives on the Prince, we may

observe that among nations whose manners and political inflitu-
tions are simple, the publick, as well as individuals, having few
wants, they are unacquainted with taxes, and free uncivilized
tribes diidain to submit to any fated imposition. This was
remarkably the cafe of the Germans, and of all the various
people that ilfued from that country. Tacitus pronounces two
tribes not to be of German origin, because they submitted topay
taxes. De Morib. Germ. c. 43; and speaking of another tribe
according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he fays, " they
were not degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid. c. 29.
Upon their settlement in Gaul, we may conclude that while
elated with the consciousness of vicory, they would not renounce
the high-fpirited ideas of their ancestors, or voluntarily submit
to a burden which they regarded as a badge of fcrvitudc. The
evidence of the earliest records and historians jiifti this conclu-
sion. M. de Montesquieu in the twelfth and filbfquent chap-
ters of the thirteenth book of 1'Elirit des LoiL, and M. d(l

M;hLly

Mably Obfervat. fur l'Hift. de France, tom. i. p. 247. have
investigated this fad with grcit ;t.tcIntiin, and have proved
clearly that the property of no ir-e-mani ai:lont the Franks was
fuljeat to any stated tax. That 'he iltut rcitlired nothing from
persons of this rank but.mli! jry iervice at their own expence,
and that they ihould entertain 'he King in their houses when
he was upon any progress throi!,h his dominions, or his- offi-
cers when sent on any publick employment, furnishing them
with carriages and horfcs. Monarchs lbliilted alrooft entirely
upon the revenues of their own (iomains, and upon the per-
quifites arising from the adminiftraticn of justice, together with
a few finall fines and forfeitures exadLed from those who ¶had
been guilty of certain trefpaifes. It is torei-n from my subjet
to enumerate there. The reader may find them in Obicrvat. de
M. de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted ty free-men to

their sovereign it was purely voluntary. In the annual assem-
lly of March or May it was the custom to make the King a
pre'ent of money, of horses or arms, or of fme otllcr thing
of value. This was anancient cuflom, and derived fro,!r their
ancellors the Germans. Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac xiritln
conferri principibus vel armentorum vel frugium, quro; pro h,))re
acceptum, etiam neceflitatibus fubvcnit. Tacit. de n'\or. c(erm.
c. 15. These gifte, if we may form a jud(!:mnent onccrning
tlen from the general terms in which they are mentioned t, the
ancient hiltorians,.were confidecrable, and made no small pall of
the royal revenue. Many passages to this purpose are prodi( cd
by M. du Cangc, Dissert. iv. fur Joinville, 153. Somctiincs a
,conquicred people fpccitied the gift which they bound t-hcmrnlvcS

to
360

to pay annually, and it was exated as a debt if they failed
Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. 155. It is probable
that the firfi ftep towards taxation was to ascertain the value of
these gifts which were originally gratuitous, and to compel the
people to pay the fum at which they were rated. Still, how-
ever, some memory of their original was preserved, and the
aids granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Europe were
termed benevolences or free-gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were raised to the

throne by the election of the people, Pepinus Rex pius, fays
an author who wrote a few years after the tranfadion which
he records, per authoritatem Papxe, & untionem fanti chris-
matis, & eledionem omnium Francorum in regni folio fubli-
matus eft. Claufula de Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil
des Hiftor. tor. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the chief men of the
nation had transferred the crown from one family to another, an
oath was exadted of them that they Ihould maintain on the
throne the family which they had now promoted; ut nunquam
de alterius lumbis regem in aevo prafumant eligere. Ibid. p. Io.
This oath the nation faithfully observed during a considerable
space of time. The posterity of Pippin kept poffefflon of the
throne; but with refpet to the manner of dividing their domi-
nions among their children, Princes were obliged to consult the
general alfembly of the nation. Thus Pippin himself, A. ).
768, appointed his two sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to
reign asjoint fovcreigns; but he did this, unacum confcnfu Iran-
corum & procerum fuorum feu & cpifcoporum, before whomn
he laid the matter in their general assembly. Convcntus apui
fantum Dionyfium. Capitular. vol. i. p. 187. This dcftnlatioi*

VOL. L A a ia 11e

A1l

the French confirmed in a subsequent assembly, whichwas called'
upon the death of Pippin.; for, as Eginhart relates, they not only
appointed them Kings, but by their authority they regulated the
limits of their rcfpedive territories, Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet
Rlccuil, tom. v. p. 90. In the. fame manner, it was. by the
authority of the supreme assemblies that any dispute which arofo
,lnmong the defccndants of the royal family was determinedl
(Charlcmagne recognizes this important part of their jurifdic-
tion, and confirms it in his charter concerning the partition of
Lis dominions; for he appoints, that, in cafe of any uncertainty
with refpea to the right of the several competitors, he whom'
the people shall chufe, shall succeed. to the crown. Capitular..
vol. i. 412.

UN D ER the second race of Kings, the afembly of the nation.,

dilhinguifhed by the name of Conventus, Malli, Placita, wera
regularly aflcmbled once a year at least, and frequently twice in
t] c car. One of the most valuable monuments of the history of
Frat icc is the trcatife of Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheims, de
ondine ;l'latii. He died A. D. 882. only fixty-eight years
;Ifter (llarlcmagnle, and he relates in that ihort discourse the
Lf;is whliCh WCer communicated to him by Adalhardus, a minis-
ter anl confident of Charlemagne. From him we learn that
tlhis great monarch never failed to hold the general assembly of
lhi sllb)cdts every year. In quo placito generalitas univerforum.
Im;joruin tarn clericorurn quam laicorum conveniebat. Hincm.
oper. edit, Sirinondi, vol. ii. c. 29. 2 . In these afiemblies,,
matters which related to the general safety and state of the king-
doln wcre always difcufled, before they entered upon any pri-
vatet or less important bufincfs. Ibid. c. 33. p. 213. His

immediate

immediate successors imitated his example, and tranfaaed no
affair of importance without the advice of their great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of the French

government continued to be in a good measure democratical.
The nobles, the dignified ecclesiastics, and the great officers of
the crown, were not the only members of the national council;
the people, or the whole body of free-men, either in person, or
by their representatives, had a right to be present in it. Hinc-
marus, in describing the manner of holding the general assem-
blies, fays, that if the weather was favourable, they met in the
open air, but, if otherwise, they had different apartments allot-
ted to them, so that the dignified clergy were separated from the
laity, and the comites vel hujufmodi principes fibimet honorifi-
cabiliter a cxtera multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. p. 'c. 35.
p. 114. Agobardus, archbishop of Lyons, thus describes a na-
tional council in the year 833, wherein he was present. Qui
ubique conventus extitit ex reverentiffimis epifcopis, & magni-
ficentiffimis viris inluftribus, collegio quoque abbatum & comi-
tum, promifcuaeque atatis & dignitatis populo. The catera
multitudo of Hincmarus is the fame with the populus of Agobar-
dus, and both describe the inferior order of freemen, the fame
who were afterwards known in France by the name of the third
estate, and in England by the name of commons. The people,
as well as the members of higher dignity, were admitted to a
share of the legislative power. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803. it is
ordained, " that the question shall be put to the people with
refpet to every new law, and if they shall agree to it, they
shall confirm it by their signature. Capit. vol. i. 394. There
are two capitularia which convey to us a full idea of the part
which the people had in the adininifiration of governmlnt.

A a Wh en

363

When they felt the weight of any grievance, they had a right
to petition the sovereign for redref&. One of these petitions, in
which they desire that ecelefiafticks might be exempted from
bearing arms, and from serving in perfor against the encmy, is
still extant. It is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used only by men
conscious of liberty, and of the extensive privileges which they
possessed.. They conclude with requiring him to grant their
demand, if he wished that they should any longer continue faith-
ful fubjeds to him. That great monarch, instead of being
offended or furprized at the boldness of their petition, received
it in a most gracious manner, and signified his willingness to
comply with it. But sensible that he himself did not possess
kgiflative authority, he promises to lay the matter before the
next general assembly, that such things as were of common
concern to all might be there confidered and established by com-
mon content. Capitul. tom. i. p. 405---409. As the people
by their petitions brought matters tobe proposed in the general
assembly, we learn from another capitulare the form in which
they were approved there, and enaAed as laws. The propofi-
tions were read aloud, and then the people were required to de-
clare whether they assented to them or not. They signified
their affcnt by crying three times, " We are satisficd," and
then the capitulare was confirmed by the subscription of the mo-
narch, the clergy and the chief men of the laity. Capitul,
tom. i. p. 6^7. A. D. 822. It seems probable from a capitulare
of Carolus Calvus, A. D. 85i, that the sovereign could not
refuse his assent to what was proposed and established by his
fubjeds in the general afiembly. Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii
p. 47. It is unneccflary to multiply quotations concerning the

legislative
^r&

legislative power of the national assembly of France under the
second race, or concerning its right to determine with regard to
peace and war. The uniform style of the Capitularia is an
abundant confirmation of the former. The reader who desires
any farther information with refpea to the latter, may consult
Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gouvernement de la France, tom. iii.
p. 87, &c. What has been said with refped to the admiflion
of the people or their representatives into the fupremre alfembly
merits attention not only in tracing the progress of the French
government, but on account of the light which it throws upon
a similar quefion agitated in England, concerning the time
when the commons became part of the legiflativc body in that
kingdom.

NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. m. p. i68.

THAT important change which the conffitution of France

underwent, when the legislative power was transferred from
the great council of the nation to the King, has been explained
by the French antiquarians with less care, than they bestow in
illustrating other events in their history. For that reason I
have endeavoured with the greater attention to trace the fleps
which led to this memorable revolution. I shall here add some
particulars which tend farther to illustrate it. The Leges Sali-
ca, the Leges Burgundionum, and other codes published by the
several tribes which fettled in Gaul, were general laws extend-
ing to every person, to every province and district where their
authority was acknowledged. But they seem to have become
obsolete; and the rcalbn of their falling into disuse is very obvi-
ous. Almost the whole property of the nation was allodial
when there law8 were frailced. Buit when the feudal inflitu-

4 tiolis

36$

tions became general, and gave rife to an infinite variety of
questions peculiar to that species of tenure, the ancient codes
were of no use in deciding with regard to these, because they
could not contain regulations applicable to cafes which did not
exist at the time when they were compiled. This considerable
change in the nature of property made it neceftary to publish
the new regulations contained in the Capitularia. Many of
these, as is evident from the perusal of them, were general
laws extending to the whole French nation, in the general assem-
bly of which they were enaded. The weakness of the
greater part of the monarchs of the second race, and the
disorder into which the nation was thrown by the depre-
dations of the Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an
independant power formerly unknown in France. The nature
and extent of that jurifdiaion which they aflumed, I have for-
merly confidered. The political union of the kingdom was at
an end, its ancient constitution was dissolved, and only a feudal
relation subsisted between the King and his vassals. The regal
jurifdiiion extended no further than the domains of the
crown. Under the last Kings of the second race, these were
reduced almost to nothing. Under the first Kings of the third
race, they comprehended little more than the patrimonial eflate
of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the crown. Even with
this accession, they continued to be very narrow. Velly. Hilt.
de France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of the most considerable pro-
vinces of France did not at first acknowledge Hugh Capet as a
lawful Monarch. There are fill extant several charters, granted
during the first years of his reign, with this remarkable clause
in the form of dating the charter; " Deo regnante, rege ex-
," peCtante," regnante domino noftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis au-

tem
366

tern contra jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil. tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title was thus openly
disputed, was not in a condition to aflErt the royal jurifdidion,,
or to limit that of the barons.

ALL these circumfiances rendered it easy for the barons to

usu1rp the rights of royaltywithin their own territories. The
capitularia became no less obsolete than .the ancient laws;
local customs were every where introduced, and became the sole
rule by which all civil tranfadions were conducted, and all
causes were tried. The wonderful ignorance, which became
general in France, during the ninth and tenth centuries, contri-
buted to the introducion of customary law. Few persons, except
ecclesiastics, could read; and as it was not possible for them to.
have recourse to written laws, either as their guide in business,
or their rule in adminiftring jutlice, the customary law univer-
sally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general assembly of the nation

seems not to have been called, nor to have once exerted its legis-
lativc authority. Local customs regulated and decided every
thing. A striking proof of this occurs in tracing the progress
of the French jurisprudence. The last of the Capitularia col-
leted by M. Baluze, was irfued in the year 92 i, by Charles the
Simple. An hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period
to the publication of the firlt ordonance of the Kings of the
third race, contained in the great collcdion of M. Laurierc,
and the first ordonance which appears to be an ad of legifiation
extending to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Augustus,
A.D. 1190. Ordon. tom. i. p. I, I8. During that long

'^-.t ?period

$67

period of one hundred and fixty-nine years, all tranfadiot8
were direted by local customs, and no addition was made to the
statutory law of France. The ordonances, previous to the reign
of Philip Augutus, contain regulations, the authority of which
did not extend beyond the King's domains.

VARIOUS instances occur of the caution with which the Kings

of France ventured at firR to exercise legislative authority. M.
l'Ab. de Mably produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A. D.
J206, concerning the Jews, who, in that age, were in some
measure the property of the lord in whose territories they re-
fided. But it is not so much an ac of royal power, as a treaty
of the King with the countess of Champagne, and the comte de
Dampierre; and the regulations in it seem to be established not
by his authority, but by their content. Obfervat. fur l'hift. de
France, ii. p. 35 5. In the fame manner an ordonance of Louis
VIII. concerning the Jews, A. D. i223, is a contrac between
the King and his nobles, with rcfpect to their manner of treat-
ing that unhappy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The
Eflabliffemens of St. Louis, though well adapted to serve as
general laws to the whole kingdom, were not publiffed as such,
but only as a complete code of cuflomary law, to be of autho-
rity within the King's domains. The wisdom, the equity and
the order conspicuous in that code of St. Louis, procured it a
favourable reception throughout the kingdom. The venera-
tion due to the virtues and good intentions of its author, con-
; tributed not a little to reconcile the nation to that legislative
authority, which the King began to assume. Soon after his
time, the idea of the King's poffeflinp filpreme legislative power
tecame common. If, fays Buaumanoir, the King makes any

..fiabliflment
368

eftablilhment specially for his own domain, the barons may
nevertheless adhere to their ancient cufloms; but if the efta-
blifhment be general, it shall be current throughout the whole
kingdom, and we ought to believe that such eflablifhments are
made with mature deliberation, and for the general good. Cout.
de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 265. Though the Kings of the third
race did not call the general assembly of the nation, during the
long period from Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair, yet they seem
to have consulted the bishops and barons who happened to be
present in their court, with refped to any new law which they
published. Examples of this occur Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5.
The practice seems to have continued as late as the reign of St.
Louis, when the legislative authority of the crown was well
established. Ordon. tom. i. p. 58. A. D. I246. This atten-
tion paid to the barons facilitated the King's acquiring such full
possession of the legislative power, as enabled them afterwards
to exercise it without obferviiig that formality.

THE aflemblies, diftinguifiedlby the name of the States Gene-

ral, were firfl called, A. D. T 302, anid were held occasionally from
that period to the year I614, since which time they have not
been summoned. These were very difl'crent fiom the ancient
assemblies of the French nation under the Kings of the sirs and
second race. Therc is no point with rcfpcd to which the
French antiquarians are more generally agreed, than in main-
taining that the States General had no fulfrage in the pafling of
laws, and poflchlcd no proper juridlidion. 'lih whole tenor
of thl French history confirms this opinion. T'he form of pro-
ceeding in the States General was this. The King addrelled
lrinlmelf to the whole body afleCibled in one place, and laid bc-
fore them the affairs lon accciiiit of which lie had
Il urnioned

Vol. . I. Ii 1 tlsi l.

369

them. The deputies of each of the three orders, of nobles, of
clergy, and of the third eflate, met apart, and prepared their
cahier or memorial, containing their answer to the propositions
which had been made to them, together with the reprefenta-
tions which they thought proper to lay before the King. These
answers and representations were confidered by the King in his
council, and generally gave rife to an ordonance. These ordo-
nances were not addressed to the three efiates in common. Some-
times the King addressed an ordonance to each of the estates in
particular. Sometimes he mentioned the assembly of the three
eflates. Sometimes mention is made only of the affenbly of
that estate to which the ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no
mention at all is made of the assembly of estates, which fug-
gested the propriety of enacting the law. Preface au tom. iii.
des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the States General had only the pri-
vilege of advising and remonstrating; the legislative authority
resided in the King alone.

NOTE XXXIX. SECT. III. p. 172.

I} the parliament of Paris be confidered only as the fuprerue

court of juiticc, every thing relative to its origin and jurifdic-
tion is clear and obvious. It is the ancient court of the King's
palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and invested with
an cxtenfivc and ascertaincd jurifdidion. The power of this
court, while employed in this part of its funcions, is not the
objct of present consideration. The prctenfions of the parlia-
ment to controul the exercise of the legislative authority, and
its claim of a right to interpose with refped to publick affairs
and the political admiifilration of the kingdom, lead to inqui-
rics attended with greater difficulty. As the officers and men-

9 bens
370

37'

bers of the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated by the
King, were paid by him, and on several occasions were removed
by him at pleasure, (Chroniq. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. chez
les Mem. de Comines, tom. ii. p. 5r. Edit. de M. Lenglet de
Frefnoy,) they cannot be confidered as representatives of the
people, nor could they claim any ihare in the legislative power
as ading in their name. We muff search for some other source
of this high privilege. The parliament was originally com-
posed of the most eminent persons in the kingdom. The peers
of France, ecclesiastics of the highest order, and noblemen of
illuftrous birth were members of it, to whom were added some
clerks and counsellors learned in the laws. Pafquier Recherches,
p. 44, &c. Encyclopedie, tom. xii. Art. Parlement, p. 3, 5.
A court thus constituted was properly a committee of the States
General of the kingdom, and was composcd of these barons and
fideles, whom the Kings of France were accustomed to consult
with regard to every ad of jurisdiction or legislative authority.
It was natural, therefore, during the intervals between the
meetings of the States General, or during those periods when
that assembly was not called, to consult the parliament, to lay
matters of publick concern before it, and to obtain its approbation
and concurrence, before any ordonance was published, to which
the people were required to conform. 2. Under the second race of
Kings, every new law was reduced into proper form by the Chan-
cellor of the kingdom, was proposed by him to the people, and
when enacted, was committed to him to be kept among the piubl
lick records, that he might give authentick copies of it to all
who flioulddemand them. Hincm. de ord. plalat. c. I6. Capitul.
Car. Calv. tit. xiv. § I. tit. xxxiii. The chanccllor plrfilcie in
the parliament of I'aris at its first inflitution. F.lyncl()cdlic,

B 1b b toIn.

torn. ii. art. Chancelier, p. 88. It was therefore natural for
the King to continue to employ him in his ancient functions of
framing, taking into his custody, and publishing the ordonances
which were iflued. To an ancient copy of the Capitularia of
Charlemagne, the following words are subjoined. Anno tertio
Clementiflimi domini noftri Caroli Augufti, sub ipso anno, hec
fada Capitula funt, & confignata Stephano comiti, ut hac ma-
nifefta faceret Parifiis mallo publico, & illa legere faceret
coram Scabineis, quod ita & fecit, & omnes in uno confenfe-
runt, quod ipfi voluiffent obfervare ufque in pofterum, etiam
omnes Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria
fubter fignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil. tom. v. p. 663. Mallus
signifies not only the publick assembly of the nation, but the
court ofjuftice held by the comes, or missus dominicus. Sca-
bini were the judges, or the assessors of the judges in that court.
Here then seems to be a very.early instance, not only of laws
being published in a court of justice, but of their being veri-
sied or confirmed by the subscription of the judges. If this was
the common practice, it naturally introduced the verifying of
cdils in the parliament of Paris. But this conjeture I pro-
potfe witl that diffidence, which I have felt in all my reason-
ings concerning the laws and infitutions of foreign nations.
3. This iupreinc court of justice in France was dignified with
the appellation of parliament, the name by which the general
alcmnbly of the nation was diflinguifhcd towards the close of
tlhc Iccond race of Kings; and men, both in rcafoning and in
conduct, are wonderfully influenced by the iimilarity of names.
The prefcrving the ancient names of the magiltrates eflablifhed
wlile rcpublican government fibfifte(l in Rome, enabled Au-
guflus and hiL fucccllbrs to ailuine new powers, witl lcfs obfcr-

v.ation,
372

-vation, and greater ease. The beflowing the fame name in
France upon two courts, which were extremely different, con-
tributed not a little to confound their jurifdi&ion and func-
tions.

ALL there circumstances concurred in leading the Kings of

France to avail themselves of the parliament of Paris, as the in-
firument of reconciling the people to their exercise of legifla-
tive authority. The French, accufomred to fee, all new laws
examined and authorized before they were published, did not
sufficiently distinguish between the effeCt of performing this in
the national assembly, or in a court appointed by the King.
But as that court was composed of refpetable members, and
well skilled in the laws of their country, when any new edic
received its fandion, that was sufficient to dispose the people to
implicit fubmiillion.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regijering the royal

edics in the parliament of Paris became common, the parlia-
ment contended that this was necefary in order to give them
legal authority. It was cftablilhcd as a fundamental maxim in
French jurifprudcncc, that no law could be publishcd in any
other manner; that without this formality no edic or ordo-
nancc could have any cffe ; that the people were not
bound to obey it, and ought not to confider it as an edict
or ordonancc until it was verified in the fuprcme court,
after free deliberation. Rochel-lavin dks Parlcmenis de France,
4to. Gen. i6zl. p. 921. The parliament, at different times,
hath witl great fortitude anld integrity oppoilcd the will of
their tovcrcigns, and notwithflanding their rcpeated and pe-
reiimptory rcLtiliiti, .us and conmmands, hath reftilled to verify

and'

0.
2

373

and publiih such edias as it conceived to be oppressive to the
people, or subversive of the constitution of the kingdom.
Roche-flavin reckons that between the year I562, and the
year I589, the parliament refused to verify more than a hun-
dred edias of the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many instances of the
spirit and conflancy with which the parliaments of France op-
posed pernicious laws, and asserted their own privileges are
enumerated by Limnxsus Notitia: Regni Francix, lib. i. c. 9.
p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain and defend

this privilege, bore no proportion to its importance, or to the
courage with which its members asserted it. When any mo-
narch was determined that an edic flhould be carried into
execution, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved not to
verify or publish it, he could easily supply this defe& by the
plenitude of his regal power. He repaired to the parliament
in person, he took poffeflion of his feat of justice, and corm-
manded the edia to be read, verified, registered and published
in his presence. Then, according to another maxim of French
law, the King himself being present, neither the parliament,
nor any magistrate whatever, can exercise any authority, or
perform any fundion. Adveniente Principe, cefFat magifiratus.
Roche-flavin. ibid. p.928, 929. Encyclopedie tom. ix. Art. Lit
de 7iylice, p. 58 . Roche-flavin mentions several inflances of
Kings who atually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to the
residue of the rights and liberties transmittcd to the French by
their ancestors. Pafquier produces some inltances of the fame
kind. Rech. p. 61. Limnaus enumerates many others, which
the length to which this note has swellcd, prevents me from

inserting
374

375

iaferting at length, though they tend greatly to illufirate this
important article in the French history, p. 245. Thus by an
exertion of prerogative, which, though violent, seems to be
eonflitutional, and is justified by innumerable precedents, all
the efforts of the parliament to limit and controul the King's
legislative authority, are rendered ineffetual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the constitution or jurif-

didion of any parliament in France, but that of Paris. All of
them are formed upon the model of that most ancient and
refpetable tribunal, and all my observations concerning it
will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. SEcT. II. p. 177.

THE humiliating posture, in which a great Emperor im-

plored absolution, is an event so singular, that the words in
which Gregory himself describes it, merit a place here, and
convey a striking picture of the arrogance of that Pontiff.
Per triduum, ante portam cafiri, depolito omni rcgio cultu,
miferabiliter, utpote difcalccatus, & laneis indutus, perliftens,
non prius cum multo flctu apoftolicx miferationis auxiliun, &
consolationem implorari dcltitit, quam omnes qui ibi adcrant,
& ad quos rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paffionis miicricordiam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus &
lacrimis intcrccdcntcs, omncs quidem inifolitain nofirn incntis
dwriticm imirarcntir ; nonulli vcro in nobis non apo)oloicm fedis
gravitatcm, lid quali tyrannicx feritatis crudclitatemc cflc cla-

marcut.

rarent. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Contefla Matilda da
Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756, vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLI. SECT. III. p. I86.

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace the various feps

in the progress of the constitution of the Empire, and to explain
the peculiarities in its policy very fully, it is not necessary to
add much by way of illustration. What appears to be of any
importance I shall range under diftind heads.

I. WITIH refpea to the power, jurifdidion and revenue of

the Emperors. A very just idea of these may be formed by
attending to the view which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the
Emperors at two different periods. The first at the close of
the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, according to his enume-
ration were the right of conferring all the great ecclesiastical
benefices in Germany; of receiving the revenues of them
during a vacancy; of Mort-main, or of succeeding to the
effeds of ecclefiaflicks who died intestate. The right of con-
firming or of annulling the elections of the Popes. The right
of assembling councils, and of appointing them to decide con-
cerning the affairs of the church. The right of conferring
the title of King upon their vassals. The right of granting
vacant iiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the Em-
pire, whether arising firom the Impcrial dlomains, from imposts
and tolls, from gold or filvcr mines, ifomn the taxes paid by
the Jews, or from forfeiturcs. The right of governing Italy
as its pIroper fovercigns. The right of rclding free cities, and
of cflablilhliig lairs ill them. lie rigli of allcmbling tlme

diets
J76

377

diets of the Empire, and of fixing the time of their duration.
The right of coining money, and of conferring that privilege
on the states of the Empire. The right of adminiftring both
high and low juflice within the territories of the different ilates.
Abrege p. 160. The other period is at the extinction of the
Emperors of the families of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D.
1437. According to the fame author the Imperial prerogatives
at that time were the right of conferring all dignities and
titles, except the privilege of being a ltate of the Empire. The
right of Preces primarie or of appointing once during their
reign a dignitary in each chapter or religious house. The right
of granting dispensations with refpee to the age of majority.
The right of ere&ing cities, and of conferring the privilege of
coining money. The right of calling the meetings of the diet,
and of presiding in them. Abrege, &c. p. 507. It were easy
to show that M. Pfeffel is well founded in all these assertions,
and to confirm them by the teflimony of the moll reipedable
authors. In the one period the Emperors appear as mighty
Sovereigns with extensive prerogatives; in the other as the
heads of a confederacy with very limited powers.

TiE revenues of the Emperors decreascd flill more than

their authority. The early Emperors, and particularly those
of the Saxon line, besides their vast patrimonial or hereditary
territories, 1ofleffed an extensive domain both in Italy and
(;erm;iny which belonged to them as Emperors. Italy bc-
long-ed to thec Emperors as their proper kingdom, and the re-
venues which they drew from it were very confiderablc. The
firrt alienations of the Imperial revenue were made in this
country. The Italian cities having acquired wealth, and afpir-

Vol,. I. C c c ing

ing at independance, purchased their liberty from different Em-
perors, as I have observed Note XV. The fums which they
paid, and the Emperors with whom they concluded these bar-
gains, are mentioned by Cafp. Klockius de Erario Norimb.
I671. p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus diffi-
pated all that remained of the Italian branch of the domain.
The German domain lay chiefly upon the banks of the Rhine,
and was under the government of the Counts Palatine. It is
not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to estimate the value
of this ancient domain, which has been so long incorporated
with the territories of different Princes. Some hints with re-
fpe& to it may be found in the glossary of Speidelius which he
has intituled Speculum Juridico-Philologico-politico-Hiftoricuin
Obfervationum, &c. Norimb. i673. vol. i. 679. 1045. a more
full account of it is given by Klockius de IErario, p. 84. Be-
fides this, the Emperors possessed considerable diftrids of land
lying intermixed with the estates of the Dukes and baronsi
They were accustomed to visit there frequently, and drew from
them what was sufficient to support their court during the
time of their residence. AnnaliftTr, ap. Struv. tom. . i. 61. A
great part of these were seized by the nobles during the long
interregnum, or during the wars occasioncd by the contefis
between the Emperors and the court of Rome. At the fame time
that such incroachments were made on the fixed or territorial
property of the Emperors, they were robbed allnot entirely
of their casual revenues. The Princes and barons appropria-
ting to themeflves taxes and duties of evcry kind, which had
usually been paid to them, I'fcffcl Abrcgó, p. 374. The profulfe
and inconsiderate ambition of Charles IV. tfluandcrcd whatever
tcmained of the Imperial revenues after so many defalcations.

IHIe,
378

He, in the year I376, in order to prevail with the EleAors to
chufe his son Wenceslaus King of the Romans, promised each
of them a hundred thousand crowns. But being unable to pay

so large a fum, and eager to secure the election to his son, he
alienated to the three ecclesiastical Eledors, and to the Count
Palatine, such countries as still belonged to the Imperial domain
on the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over to them all
the taxes and tolls then levied by the Emperors in that diftrit.
Trithemius, and the author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh
enumerate the territories and taxes which were thus alienated,
and represent this as the last and fatal blow to the Imperial
authority. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the
ihreds of the ancient revenues possessed by the Emperors have
been so inconsiderable, that, in the opinion of Speidelius, all
that they yield would be so far from defraying the expence of
supporting their houfhold, that they would not pay the charge
of maintaining the posts eflablifhed in the Empire. Speidelii
Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680. These funds, inconsiderable as
they were, continued to decrease. Granvelle, the minister of
Charles V, asserted in the year 1546, in pretence of several of
the German Princes, that his master drew no money at all
from the Empire. Sleid. History of the Reformation. Lond.
S689. p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present. Traite de
droit Publique de l'Empire par M. le Coq de Villeray, p. 55.
From the reign of Charles IV, whom Maximilian called the
pest of the Empire, the Emperors have depended entirely on
their hereditary dominions, as the only source of their power
and even of their fubfiflence.

2. Tffr

379
C cc

2. THE ancient mode of electing the Emperors, and the va-

rious changes which it underwent, require some illustration.
The Imperial crown, as well as those of molt monarchies in
Europe, were originally attained by election. An opinion long
prevailed among the antiquaries and publick lawyers of Ger-
many, that the right of chufing the Emperors was velfed in
the archbishops of Mcntz, Cologne and Treves, the King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edict of Otho III,
confirmed by Gregory V, about the year 996. But the whole
tenor of history contradicts this opinion. It appears that from
the earliest period in the history of Germany, the person who
was to reign over all, was eleced by the suffrage of all. Thus
Conrad I. was eleaed by all the people of the Franks, fay some
annaifts; by all the princes and chief men, fay others; by all the
nation, lay others. Seetheir words, Struv. Corp. 211 . Conringius
de German. Imper. Repub. Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654.
p. 103. In the year 1024, posterior to the supposed regulations
of Otho IIH, Conrad II, was ele&ed by all the chief men, and his
election was approved and confirmed by the people, Struv. Corp.
084. At the eletion of Lotharius II. A. D. 1125, sixty ihou-
sand persons of all ranks were present. He was named by the
chief men, and their nomination was approved by the people.
Struv. ibid. p. 357. The first author who mentions the seven
Eletors is Martinus Polonus, who flourished in the reign of
Frederick II, which ended A. D. 1250. We find that in all the
ancient elections to which I have referred, the Princes of
greatest power and authority were allowed by their country-
men to name the person whom they wished to appoint Emperor,
and the people approved or disapproved of their nomination.

This
380

This privilege of voting first is called by the German lawyers
the right of Praetaxation. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was
the first origin of the exclusive right which the Eletors ac-
quired. The Electors possessed the most extensive territories of
any Princes in the Empire; all the great offices of the slate
were in their hands by hereditary right; as soon as they ob-
tained or engrofTed so much influence in the eletion, as to be
allowed the right of prataxation, it became unnecessary for the
inferior ecclefiafticks and barons to attend, when they had no
other funtion but that of confirming the deed of these more
powerful Princes, by their assent. During times of turbu-
lence, they could not resort to the place of election, without a
numerous retinue of armed vassals, the expence of which they
were obliged to defray out of their own revenues. The rights
of the seven Eledors were supported by all the descendants and
allies of their powerful families, who ihared in the splendor
and influence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing pri-
vilege. Pfeffel. Abrege, p. 376. The seven Eletors were con-
fidered as the representatives of all the orders, which composed
the highest class of German nobility. There were three arch-
bilhops, chancellors of the three great diftrids into which the
Empire was anciently divided; one King; one Duke; one
Marquis; and one Count. All theefc circumfiances coptrib.uted
to render the introduction of this confidcrable :innovation into
the constitution of the Germanick body, extremely easy. Every
thing of importance, relating to this branch of the political slate
of the Empire, is well illufirated by Onuphrius Panvinius an
Augustinian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles
V. His trcatifc, if we make some allowance for that partiality

3 which

381

which he expresses in favour of the powers which the Popes
claimed in the Empire, has the merit of being one of the first
works in which a contraverted point in history is examined
with critical precision, and with a proper attention to that evi-
dence which is derived from records, or the testimony of con-
temporary hiitorians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Politica
Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Eleaors have engrossed the sole right of chufing the

Emperors, they have aflumed likewise that of deposing them.
This high power the Electors have not only presumed to claim,
but have ventured, in more than one instance, to exercise. In
the year 1298, a part of the gledors deposed Adolphus of
Nassau and fubflituted Albert of Aufiria in his place. The
reasons on which they found their sentence, show that this
deed flowed from facious, not from publick-fpirited motives.
Struv. Corp. vol. i. 540. In the first year of the fifteenth cen-
tury, the Electors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed the Imperial
crown on the head of Rupert Eletor Palatine. The aa of
deposition is still extant. Goldafti Conflit. vol. i. 379. It is
pronounced in the name and by the authority of the Elecors,
and confirmed by several prelates and barons of the Empire,
who were present. These exertions of the electoral power de-
monfirate that the Imperial authority was funk very low.

TIE other privileges of the electors, and the rights of the

electoral college are explained by the writers on the publick law
in Germany.

3. WITE
3s»

3. WITH refpe& to the diets or general assemblies of the

Empire, it would be necessary, if my objec were to write a par-
ticular history of Germany, to enter into a minute detail, con-
cerning the forms of affemblingit, the persons who haveright to
be present, their division into several Colleges or Benches, the
objects of their deliberation, the mode in which they carry on
their debates or give their suffrages, and the authority of their
decrees or recesses. But in a general history it is sufficient to
observe, that, originally, the diets of the Empire were perfectly
the fame with the assemblies of March and of May, held by the
Kings of France. They met, at least, once a year. Every free-
man had a right to be present. They were assemblies, in which
a monarch deliberated with his fubjeds, concerning their com-
mon interest. Arumaus de comitiis Rom. German. Imperii, 4to,
Jenae. 1660, cap. 7. NO. 20, &c. But when the Princes, dig-
nified ecclesiastics, and barons, acquired territorial and inde-
pendantjurifdidion, the diet became an assembly of the separate
flates, which formed the confederacy of which the Emperor was
head. While the constitution of the Empire remained in its pri-
mitive form, attendance on the diets was a duty, like the other
services due from feudal fubjeds to their sovereign, which the
members were bound to perform in person; and if any member
who had a right to be present in the diet ncgledcd to attend in
person, he not only loft his vote, but was liable to an heavy
penalty. Arumceus de Comit. c. 5. nO. 40. Whereas, from the
time that the members of the diet became indepcndant flates,
the right of suffrage was annexed to the territory or dignity,
not to the person. The members, if they could not, or would
not attend in p(rfon, might fend their deputies, as Irinccs

fend

fend ambassadors, and they were entitled to exercise all the
rights belonging to their confiituents. Ibid. N° 42, 46, 49.
By degrees, and upon the fame principle of confidering
the diet as an assembly of independant states, in which each
confederate had the right of suffrage, if any member possessed
more than one of those states or charaters which entitle to a
feat in the diet, he was allowed a proportional number of
suffrages. Pfeffel. Abrege 622. From the fame cause the
Imperial cities, as soon as they became free, and acquired
supreme and independant jurifdidion within their own
territories, were received as members of the diet. The
powers of the diet extend to every thing relative to the
common concern of the Germanick body, or that can in-
terest or assec it as a confederacy. The diet takes no cogni-
zance of the interior administration in the different States,
unless that happens to disturb or threaten the general safety.

4. WITH refped to the Imperial chamber, the jurifdidion

of which has been the great source of order and tranquillity in
Germany, it is neccffary to observe, that this court was infii-
tuted in order to put an end to the calamities occasioned by
private wars in Germany. 1 have already traced the rife and
progress of this pracice, and pointed out its pernicious effects
as fully as their extcnfivc influence during the middle ages me-
rited. In Germany, private wars seem to have been more fre-
quent and producive of worse confequenccs than in the other
countries of Europe. There are obvious rcafons for this. The
nobility of Germany were extremely numerous, and the causes

of
3A4

of their dissention multiplied in proportion. The territorial
jurifdicion which the German nobles acquired, was more com-
pleat than that professed by their order in other nations. They
became, in reality, independant powers, and they claimed all
the privileges of that characer. The long interregnum accuf-
tomed them to an uncontrouled licence, and led them to forget
that subordination which is necessary in order to maintain pub-
lick tranquillity. At the time when the other monarchs of
Europe began to acquire such an increase of power and re-
venues, as added new force to their government, the authority
and revenues of the Emperors continued gradually to decline.
The diets of the Empire, which alone had authority to judge
between such mighty barons, and power to enforce its deci-
sions, met very seldom. Conring. Acroamata, p. 234. The
diets when they did assemble were often composed of several
thousand members, Chronic. Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary assemblies, ill-qualified to decide
concerning any quelfion of right. The session of the diets conti-
nued only two or three days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they
had no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in the smallest
degree intricate. Thus Germany was left, in fomc measure,
without any court of judicature, capable of repressing the evils
of private war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in other coun-

tries of Europe in order to restrain this practice, and which
I have described Note XXI. were tried in Germany with
little effet. The confederacies of the nobles and of the
cities, and the division of Germany into various circles, which

VOL. I. Dd d I men-

385

I mentioned in that Note, were found likewise insufficient.
As a last remedy, the Germans had recourse to arbiters whom
they called Auftrege. The barons and fates in different parts
of Germany joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all contraverfies, that might arise between
them, to the determination of AuJtrege, and to submit to their
sentences as final. These arbiters are named sometimes in the
treaty of convention, an instance of which occurs in Lude.
wig Reliquax Manufcr. omnis avi, vol. ii. 212. sometimes they
were chosen by mutual content; sometimes they were appointed:
by neutral persons; and sometimes the choice was left to be
decided by lot. Datt. de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap, 27.
N° 60, &c. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc. Auftrag. p. 95. Upon
the introduction of this pradice, the publick tribunals ofjuftice
became, in a great measure, useless, and were almost entirely
deserted.

IN order to re-establish the authority of government, Maxi-

milian inffituted the Imperial chamber, at the period which I
have mentioned. This tribunal confided originally of a prefi-
dent, who was always a nobleman of the first order, and of
sixteen judges. The president was appointed by the Emperor,
and the judges, partly by him, and partly by the States, accord-
ing to forms which it is unnecessary to describe. A fum was
impofedi with their own consent, on the States of the Empire,
for paying the flaries of the judges9 and officers in this court.
The Imperial chamber was effablifhed first at Franofort on the
Maine. During the reign of Charles V. it was removed to
Spiress and continued in that city above a contury and a half.

It

It is now fixed at Wetar. This court takes cognizance of
all questions concerning civil right between the States of
the Empire, and passes judgment in the lafi resort, and
without appeal. To it belongs, likewire, the privilege of
judging in criminal causes, which may be confidered as con-
neted with the preservation of the publick peace. Pfeffel
Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or jurifdit&ion

together with such as refpe& the territories, which hold
of the Empire in Italy, belong properly to the jurifdiaion of
the Aulick council. This tribunal was formed upon the model
of the ancient court of the palace initituted by the Emperors of
.Germany. It depended not upon the States of the Empire, but
upon the Emperor; he having the right of appointing at plea-
sure all the judges of whom it is composed. Maximilian, in
order to procure some compensation for the diminution of his
authority, by the powers veiled in the Imperial chamber, pre-
vailed on the diet A. D. IS12. to give its consent to the efta-
bliihment of the Aulick council. Since that time, it has been
a great obje& of policy in the court of Vienna to extend the
jurifdiOion, and support the authority of the Aulick council,
and to circumscribe and weaken those of the Imperial chamber.
The tedious forms and dilatory proceedings of the Imperial cham-
ber have furnished the Emperors with pretexts for doing so. Lites
Spirx, according to the witticism of a Cerman lawyer, spirant,
fed nunquam exfpirant. Such delays are unavoidable in a court
composed of members named by States, jealous of each other.
Whereas the judges of the Aulick council, depending on one
mafier, and being responsible to him alone, are more vigo-

D d d 2 rous

$87
r

rous and decisive. Puffendorf. de Statu Imper. German. cap. v.

20. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 58i.

NOTE XLI. SECT. II. p. 189.

THE description which I have given of the Turkish govern-

ment is conformable to the accounts of the moit intelligent
travellers who have visited that Empire. The count de Mar-
figli, in his treatise concerning the military slate of the Turkish
Empire, ch. vi. and the Author of observations on the religion,
laws, government and manners of the Turks, published at
London 1768, vol. i. p. 8I. differ from other writers who have
described the political confitution of that powerful monarchy.
As they had opportunity, during their long residence in Turkey,
to observe the order and justice conspicuous in several depart-
ments of adminifiration, they teem unwilling to admit that it
should be denominated a despotism. But when the form of
government in any country is represented to be defpotick, this
does not suppose that the power of the monarch is continually
exerted in ads of violence, injustice and cruelty. Under govern-
ments of every species, unless when some frantick tyrant hap-
pens to hold the scepter, the ordinary administration must be
conformable to the principles of justice, and if not adive in
promoting the welfare of the people, cannot certainly have
their deftruCion for its objet. A slate, in which the fovcrcign
poffcffes the absolute command of a vaRl military force, together
with the difiofal of an extcnfivc revenue; in which the people
have no privileges, and no part either immediate or remote in
legislation; in which there is no body of hereditary nobility,

jealous
388

jealous of their own rights and diftin&ions, to fiand as an in-
termediate order between the Prince and the people, cannot be
distinguished by any name but that of a despotism. The re-
firaints, however, which I have mentioned, arising from the
Capiculy, and from religion, are powerful. But they are not
such as change the nature or denomination of the government.
When a defpotick Prince employs an armed force to support
his authority, he commits the supreme power to their hands.
The Pretorian bands in Rome, dethroned, murdered, and
exalted Princes, in the fame wanton manner with the soldiery
of the Porte at Conitantinople. But notwithstanding this, the
Roman Emperors have been confidered by all political writers
as possessing defpotick power.

NOTE XLIII. SECT. II p. 90.

THE inffitution, the discipline, and privileges of the Jani-

zaries are described by all the authors who give any account of
the Turkish government. The manner in which enthufiafim
was employed in order to inspire them with courage is thus
related by Prince Cantemir, " When Amurath I. had formed
them into a body, he sent them to Haji Bcktafh a Turkish
Saint, famous for his miracles and prophecies, desiring him to
give them a banner, to pray to God for their success, and to
give them a name. The faint, when they appeared in his pre-
fence, put the flecve of his gown upon one of their heads, and
fays, Let them be called Yengichcri. Let their countenance be
ever bright, their hands vicorious, their sword keen, let their

pecar

389

:spear always haong over the heads of their enemies, and where.
ever they go, may they return with a mhining face. History
of the Ottoman Empire, p. 38. The number of Janizaries,
at the first inffitution of the body, was not considerable. Under
Solyman, in the year 1521, they amounted to twelve thousand.
Since that time their number has greatly increased, Marfigli,
Etat. &c. ch. i6. p. 68. Though Solyman possessed such abi-
lities and authority as to restrain this formidable body within
the bounds of obedience, yet its tendency to limit the power of
the Sultans was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied M. D'Aramon
ambafrador from Henry II. of France to Solyman, published
an account of his travels, in which he describes and celebrates
the discipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame time predicts
that they would, one day, become formidable to their mailers,
and a& the fame part at Constantinople, as the Pratorian bands
*had done at Rome. Collection of Voyages from the Earl of
'Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

'NOTE XLIV. SECT. III p. 192,

'SOL Y MAN the Magnificent, to whom the Turkish hiloriarn

have given the firname of Canuni, or instituter of rules, first
brought the finances and military eftablilhment of the Turkish
Empire into a regular form. He divided the military force
into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Porte, which was pro-
perly the standing army, and Serrataculy or soldiers appointed
to guard the frontiers. The chief firength of the latter consisted
of those who held Timariots and Ziams. These were portions

6 of
m90

of land granted to certain persons for life, in much the fame
manner as the military fiefs among the nations of Europe, in
return for which military service was performed. Solyman, in
his Canun-Name or book of regulations, fixed with great ac-
curacy the extent of these lands in each province of his Em-
pire, appointed the precise number of soldiers each person who
held a Timariot or a Ziam should bring into the field, and
established the pay which they should receive while engaged
in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have given
extracts from this book of regulations, and it appears that the
ordinary establishment of the Turkish army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When these are added to the
soldiery of the Porte, they formed a military power which
vafily exceeded what any ChrifRian Siate could command.
Marfigli Etat Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's slate of the
Ottoman Empire, book iii. ch. 2. AsSolyman, during his ative
reign, was engaged so constantly in war, that his troops were
always in the field, the Serrataculy became almost equal to the
Janizaries themfclves in discipline and valour.

IT is not furprizing, then, that the authors of the sixteenth

century should represent the Turks as far superior to the Chri-
flians, both in the knowledge and in the practice of the art of
war. 'Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians learned the art
of fortifying towns from the Turks. Hiftor. lib. xv. p. 266.
Bufbeqpius, who was ambaflador from Ferdinand to Solynan,
and who had opportunity to observe the slate both of the
Chrifian' and Turkith armies, publilhed a difeourfe concerning
the, bt mfianer, of carying on war agaiat the Tutks, in

which

which he points out at great length the immense advantages
which the infidels pofleffed with refped to discipline, and mi-
litary improvements of every kind. Bufbequii opera edit.
Elzevir. p. 393, &c. The testimony of other authors might
be added, if the matter were, in any degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illustrations, I ought to

explain the reason of two omifflons in them; one of which it
is necessary to mention on my own account, the other to ob-
viate an objection to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning the progress

of government, manners, literature and commerce during the
middle ages, as well as in my delineations of the political con-
flitution of the different States of Europe at the opening of the
sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned M. de Voltaire,
wno, in his Ejfay fur l'hifloire generale, has reviewed the fame
period, and has treated of all these fubjeas. This does not
proceed from inattention to the works of that extraordinary
man, whose genius, no less enterprizing than universal, has
attempted almost every different species of literary composition.
In many of these he excels. In all, if he had left religion un-
touched, he is inftruaive and agreeable. But as he fcldom
imitates the example of modern historians in citing the authors
from whom they derived their information, I could not, with
propriety, appeal to his authority in confirmation of any doubt-
ful or unknown fact. I have often, however, followed him as
my guide in these researches; and he has not only pointed out

5 the
392

the fats with refpeC to which it was of importance to inquire,
but the eomclufions which it was proper to draw from them.
If he had, at the fame time, mentioned the books which relate
these particulars, a great part of my labour would have been
unracefiary, and many of his readers who new confider him
only as an entertaining and lively writer, would find that he
'is a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omission; every intelligent reader mult

have observed, that I have not entered, either in the historical
part of this volume, or in the Proofs and Illustrations, into
the fame detail with refpet to the ancient laws and customs
of the British kingdoms, as concerning those of the other
European nations. As the capital fads with regard to the
progress of government and manners in their own country
are known to most of my readers, such a detail appeared to me
to be less essential. Such fats and observations, however, as
were necessary towards completing my design in this part of
the work, I have mentioned under the different articles which
are the fubjets of my disquisitions. The state of government,
in all the nations of Europe, having been nearly the fame dur-
ing several ages, nothing can tend more to illufirate the pro-
grefs of the English constitution, than a careful inquiry into
the laws and customs of the kingdoms on the continent. This
source of information has been too much neglected by the
English antiquarians and lawyers. Filled with admiration of
that happy constitution now efablifhed in Great Britain, they
have been more attentive to its forms and principles, than to
the condition and ideas of remote times, which, in almoR every

VOL. L E e e particular,

particular, differ from the present. While engaged in perusing
the laws, charters, and early historians of the continental
kingdoms, I have often been led to think that an attempt to
illustrate the progress of the English jurisprudence and policy,
by a comparison with those of other kingdoms in a similar ftu-
ation, would be of great utility, and might throw much light
on some points which are now obscure, and decide others,
which have been long contraverted.

INDEX
194

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

D

TO THE
FIR

S

T

A

^F R IC , the Thocking devaflations
I.. made there by the Vandals, 199.

Alanus, his character of the clergy in

his time, 233.
.lfred the Great, his complaint of the igno-

rance of the clergy, 233.
Allodial poffeflion of land, explained, 214.

How such poffeflion became subjea to mili-
tary service, ib. Distinguished from bene-
ficiary tenures, 215. How converted into
feudal tenures, 222.

Allodium, the etymology of that word, 225.
Ammianus, his character of the Huns, 201,

206.
Amurath, Sultan, the body ofJanizaries formed

by him, 190.
,lnathemta, form of that denounced against rob-

bers during the middle ages, 330.
Arabia, the antient Greek philosophy cultivated

there, while loft in Europe, 321, Note xxviii.
The progress of philosophy from thence to
Europe, 322.
Aragon, rife of the kingdom of, 146. Its

union with Cafrile, ib. The conRfitution
and form of its government, l 0o. The pri-
vileges of its Cortcs, 51. Office and jurif-

OL U ME.

dinion of the Jufliza, r15. The regal
powervery confined, I53. Formof the al-
legiance swore to the Kings of, ib. The
power of the nobility to controul the regal
power, 344. Their privilege of union ta-
ken away by Peter IV. ib. The establish-
ment of the Inquisition opposed there, 347.
Armies, flanding, the rife of, traced, 92. By

what means they became more general in
Europe, 112.
Arms, the profefion of, the moR honourable, in

uncivilized nations, 67.
Ass, an account of the antient Romih feast of,

237, Note xii.

Afemblies, legifative, how formed, 36.
Affimblits, general, of France, their power un-

der the firt race of Kings, 165. Under the
fccond and third, 166. At what period they
loft their legislative authority, 167.
Attila, King of the Huns, account of his recep-

tion of the Roman ambassadors, 197, Note iii.
Some account of his conquees, 202.
Avila, an asnembly of Castilian nobles there,

solemnly try, and depose Henry IV. their
King, 149.
dAu/ria, the houfc of, by whom founded,

177.

E c 2 Baillis,
I

N

E

X

'" :'

* . *

. \

n'. . .
I

B
*aitlus, in the old French law, their office ex-

plained, 308.
dalancs of power, the first rife of, in Europe,
i r. The progress of, 112.
Baltie, the firt source of wealth, to the towns

situated on that lea, 335.
Barcelona, its trade, riches, and privileges at

the close of the fifteenth century, 351.
Barons, their independence, and mutual hofti-

Jities, under the feudal fyflem, 16. How
affected by the infranchifement of cities, 34.
Acquire a participation in legislative govern-
ment, 36. Their private wars for redress of
personal injuries, 44. Methods employed
to aboli(h these contentions, 46. Origin
of their supreme and independant jurifdic-
tirn, 57. The bad effeEts refuhing from
there privileges, 58. The fleps taken by
Princes to reduce their courts, 60. How
obliged to relinquish their judicial preroga-
tives, 68. Of Italy, fubjedted to municipal
laws, 247, Note xv. Their right of terri-
torial jurifdiaion explained, 303. Their
emoluments from caufcs decided in their
courts, 304.
Benfies, under the feudal system, a history of,

217. When they became hereditary, 220.
Books, an inquiry into the materials of the an-

tient ones, 233. The lots of old manuscripts
accounted for, 234. The great prices they
fold for in antient time,, 235.
Boroughs, representatives of, how introduced

into national councils, 37.
B,-itons antient, their difirefs and dejection

when deserted by the Romans, and harrafled
by the Pids and Calcdonians, r95, Nate i.
rrathtrhood cf God, an account of that affocia-
tion for cxtinguifbing private wars, 282.
Br"kes, how it became the chief mart for Ita-

liln commodities during the middle ages,
BuEgm lnly, Mary heiress of, the importance with

which her choice in a hulband was confi-
lered by all Europe, 104. The treacherous
views of Lewis XI. of France toward her,
106. Is married to the Archduke Maxi-
milian, 107. The influence of thib match
on the slate of Europe, ib.

C
Cerfar, his account of the antient Germans,

comp;ircd with that ofTacitus, 206.

Cambray, treaty of, its obje&, i 17. The con-.

federacy difiblved, 119.
Canon Law, an inquiry into, 62. Progress of

ecclefiallical usurpations, 63. The maxims
of, more equitable than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 64.
Coflile, rife ofthe kingdom of, 146. Its union

with Aragon, ib. Its King Henry IV. so-
lemnly tried and deposed in an alfembly of
the nobles, 149. The constitution and go-
vernment of that kingdom, 154. A history
of the Cortes of, and its privileges, ib. The
kingdom originally elecive, 348, Note xxxii.
Cata/onia, the spirited behaviour of the people

there in defence of their rights, againfi their
King John II. of Aragon, 149.
Cenftal/s, a species of the Oblati, or voluntary

alaves, the obligations they entered into de-
fcribed, 272.
Centenarii, or inferior judges in the middle

ages, the extraordinary oath required from
them, 329.
Champs de Mars, and de Mai, account of those

aflemblies of the antient Gauls, 357.
Charlemagne, his law to prevent private wars

for xedrefs of personal injuries, 46, 278.
State of Germany under his deTcendants,
173.
Cbarles IV. Emperor, diflipates the Imperial

domains, 378.
Charles V. Emperor, an emulator of the heroic

conduc of his rival, Francis I. 72. His fu-
ture grandeur founded on the marriage of the
Archduke Maximilian with the heiress of
Burgundy, 107.
Charles VII. of France, the first who introduced

flanding armies in Europe, 93. His fuccefi-
ful extension of the regal prerogative, 96.
Chmlcs VIII. of France, his charadcr, 108.

How induced to invade Italy, ib. His re-
sources and preparations for this enterprize,
109. His rapid success, ilo. A combina-
tion of the Italian flatcs formed againf him,
i l . Is forced to return back to France, ib.
The diftrefTed ltate of his revenues by this
expedition, 116.
Charlivoix, his account of the North American

Indians, made use of in a comparifln be-
tween them and the antient ;ermans, 209.
Cbarters, of immunity or franchise, an inquiry

into the nature of those granted by the ba-
rons of France to the towns under their ju-
rildidtiols, 251, No:' xvi. Of communi-

ties,

.1-

ties, granted hy the Khigs of France, how
they tended to eftabllfh regular government,
33, 252.
Chivalrj, the origin of, 69. Its beneficial es-

sets oh human manners, 70. The enthu-
fiafm of, diftinguifled from its salutary con-
fequeRces, 71.
Cbrfianty, corrupted when firil brought into

Europe, 73. Its influence in freeing man-
kind from the bondage of the feudal policy,
268, Note xx.
Circles of Germany, the occasion of their being

formed, 179.
Cities, the antient slate of, under the feudal po-

licy, 31. The freedom of, where first elta-
blifhed, 32. Charters of community, why
granted in France by Louis le Gross, 33.
Obtain the like all over Europe, 34. Ac-
quire political consideration, 36.
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, 63.

Their plan of jurisprudence more perfect
than that of the civil courts in the middle
ages, 64. The great ignorance of, in the
early feudal times of Europe, 233
Cler;za, lave to Willa, widow of Duke Hugo,

extra& from the charter of manumiflion,
granted to her, 270.
Cltrmnnt, council of, rcfolves on the Holy war,

24. See Peter the hcrmit, and Crusades.
Ctlaire 1. inflance of the finall authority he

had over his army, 356.
Clotharius 11. his account of the popular afcm-

blies among the antient Gauls, 357.
Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy,

unable to rctiin a sacrcd vise taken by his
army, from being difl.ibuted by lot among
the reftof the plunder, 21 ?, Note vii.
C'.l'ges, the filft cftabl!flimcnt of, in Europe,

32.3.
C mbat, judicial, the prohibition of, an im-

provemnent iin the adminiflration ofjuflice,
47. The foundation and univcriality of
this mode of trial, 52. The pernicious es-
sects of, 54. Various expedients for abo-
lilhing this p1racice, 55. The antient Swe-
dlifh law of, for words of reproach, 291.
Positive evidence, or points of proof, ren-
dered ineffcdtual by it, 295. This mode of
trial authorized by the ecclesiastics, 297.
The last inflances of, in the histories of
France and England, 298.

Commerct, the spirit bs crusading how far fa-

vourable to, at that early period, 29. The
sirs establishment of free corporations, 32.
Charters of community why granted by
Louis le GroCG, 33. The like practice ob-
tains atl over Europe, 34. The salutary
effe&s of there institutions, ib. The low
state of, during the middle ages, 77. Causes
contributing to its revival, ib. Promoted by
the Hanseatic league, 79. Is cultivated in
the Netherlands, 80. [s introduced into
England by Edward III. 8-. The benefi-
cial consequences resulting from the revival
of, 81. The early cultivation of, in Italy,
330.
Common law, the first compilation of, made in

England by Lord Chief Jufiice Glanville,
317. Communities; fee Charters, Cities, Commerce,

and Corporations.
Comnena, Anne, her character of the Crusaders,

245.
Compnfi, mariner's, when invented, and its

influence on the extension of commerce, 78.
Compojftion for personal injuries, the motive for

establishing, 278. The cuftor of, deduced
from the practice of the antient Germans,
299. Compurgators, introduced as evidence in the

jurisprudence of the middle ages, 49.

Condsttieri, in the Italian policy, what, 133.
CGnrad, count of Franconia, how he obtained

election to the Empire, 173.
ConLadin, the last rightful heir to the crown of

Naples of the houle of Swabia, his unhappy
fate, 138.
Con/lance, treaty of, between the Emperor Fre-

deric BJrbaiolla, and the free cicis of Italy,
250. Confiantinoplb, its flourifling itate at the time

of the Crusades, 2h. When fill taken by
the Turks, 187. T he Crufadcrs how looked
upon there, 244. The account given of
this city by the Latin Wxiters, 245.

Confiitutions, popular, how formed, 30.
Cordova, GonfiIlvo de, fccurcs the uown of

Naples to Ferdinand of Aragon, 140.
Corporations, and bodies politic, the eltablifl-

mcnts of, how far favourable to the improve-
ment of manneis, 30. Tlhe pimilgts of,
whtre firfI claimed, 32. ClhaIters of com-

mlunity,

minity, why granted by Louis le Gross in
France, 33. The institution of, obtains
all over Europe, 34. Their effeas, ib.
Cortes of Aragon, its conflitution and privi-

leges, 151, 345.
Corte of CaRife, a history of, and an account

of its confti'ution and privileges, 154. The
vigilance with which it guarded its privi-
leges against the encroachments of the regal
power, 155.
Cruatles, the firfl motives of undertaking, 22.

Theenthufiaftic zeal with which they were
undertaken, 23. Firfl promoted by Peter
the hermit, 24. he success of them, 25.
The coidfequcnces resulting from them, ib.
Their effects on manners, 26. On pro-
perty, 27. How advantageous to the en-
largement of the regal power of the Eu-
ropean Princes, 28. The commercial effeads
of, 29, 78. The universal frenzy for en-
gaging in there expeditions accounted for,
238, Note xiii. The privileges granted to
those who engaged in them, 240. Stephen
earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of
them, 242. The expences of conduEting
them, how raised, ib. Charaler given of
the Crusaders by the Greek writers, 244.

D
Debt, the first hint of attaching moveables for

the recovery of, derived from the canon
law, 316.
Debtors, how confidered in the rude and fimpic

slate of society, 254.

Diets of Gernmany, foine account of, 383.
Dolfors in the diffcrcit facultics, dilpute pre-

cedence with knights, 323.

E
E'cl/fiafti;aljurifpr(ldence, more pecfect in irs

pl.n than the civil courts of the middle
ages, 64.
Ecclefa/lic, when, and by what !cgrecs they

clailmed cxemptilon fior civil jurilnicition,
312. Military talcnts cultivated and exer-
c:fcl by thofl of the nlidd le ages, 319.
I'..lw, d ill . of 1E. , l;'.!ld, hi ciilc.ivotirs to in-

tr(,duce forn(1CU' ilin( li.is kigdlollm, si.

I,'/eors of (Gcrl:l;ly, teie ric of their p iv ilcgeS,

18t3.
L/uy, St. his dfinitioni or derc iptioln of a good

'Ghlill an, 236, Nite xi.

Emperors of Germany, an inquiry into their

power, jurnfdi&ion, and revenue, 376,
Note xli. The antient mode of electing
them, 380.
England, a summary view of the contests be.

tween, and France, 88. The consequences
of its losing its continental possessions, gr.
The power of the crown how extended,
102. See Henry VII. Why so many marks
of Saxon usages and language, in compari-
Con with those of the Normans, to be found
in, 197, Note IV. When corporations be-
gan to be eflablifhed in, 264. Instances of
the long continuance of personal servitude
there, 273. Inquiry into the Saxon laws
for putting an end to private wars, 285.
The causes of the speedy decline of private
wars there, proposed to the researches of
Antiquarians, 286. The last instances
of judicial combat recorded in the hitfory of,
298. The territorial jurifdition of the ba-
rons now abolished, 310. Cause of the flow
progress of commerce there, 336. The first
commercial treaty entered into by,'338.
Evidence, the imperfe& nature of that admitted

in law proceedings during the middle ages,
48. Rendered ineffectual by the judicial
combat, 295.
Europe, the alterations in, by the conquefis of

the Romans, 2. The improvements the
nations of, received in exchange for their li-
berties, ib. Its disadvantages under this
change of circumfiances, ib. Inquiry into
the flppofed populousness of the antient
northern nations, 4. The savage defola:
tinns exercised by the Goths, Vandals, and
Hunr, 9. The univcrlal change occasioned
ly their irruptions and conqudcts, to. Tha
filit rudiments of the present policy of, to
be deduced from this period, il. Origin
of the feudal fyflcm, 13. Sec F,'udal .,yjiem.
The general barbarism introduced with this
plicy, 18. At what time government and
manners hcaan to improve, 21. The canses
and events which contributed to this im-
provement, 22. See Crufa.'ef, Corporations,
I'eoplc. The micil-ics occ.ifioncd by private
wars in, 45. Methods taktn to suppress
thi n, 46. Judicial combats prohibited, 47.
''he dcfeCts of judicial proceedings in the
niiddlc agcs, 48. The influence of super-
liitioi il thcle pioccedinls, 50. The orii111

of
t

of the independent territorial jurifdiaions
of the barons, 57. The bad consequences
of their judicial power, 58. The fleps ta-
ken by Princes to abolish their courts, 60.
Au inquiry into the canon law, 62. Re-
vival of the Roman law, 66. Effects of
the spirit of chivalry, 69. How improved
by the progress of science and cultivation of
literature, 72. Chriflianity corrupted when
first received in, 73. Scholastic theology
the firfl objed of learning in, 74. Low
Rate of commerce in, during the middle
ages, 77. Commerce revives in Italy, 78.
Is promoted by the Hanseatic league, 79. Is
cultivated in the Netherlands, 80. The
effeds of the progress of commerce, on the
polishing of manners, 81. The effects of
the marriage of the heiress of Burgundy
with the archduke Maxinrilian, on the tfate
of, 107. By what means standing forces
became general in, 112. Consequences of
the league of Cambray to, r17. A view of
the political constitution of the several States
of, at the commencement of the fixtcenth
century, 122. Italy, 124. The papacy,
ib. Venice, 132. Florence, 135. Naples,
136. Milan, 140. Spain, 144. France,
165. Germany, 172. Turkey, 187. In-
fances of the small intercourse among na-
tions in the middle ages, 325.

F

Fordum, the etymology of that word, 226.
.Fitss, under the feudal fftlem, a history of,

217. When they became hereditary, 200.
Ferdinand, Kiwn if Aragon, unites the Spandfh

monarchy, by his marriage with ihabcla of
Castile, 146. His schemes to exalt the
regal power, 160. R(fumes former :rants
of land from his barons, 16i. Un; : to
the crown the grand masterships Llice
three military orders, ib. Why he pa:tro-
nized the aflociation called the Holy brothbe-
hood, againfi the barons, 1t4.
Feudal system, the origin of, deduced, 13.

The primary object of this policy, 14. Its
deficiencies for interior government, 1i.
Tenures of land, how established under, ib.
'I'he rife of intestine discords among the ba-
rons under, 16. The servile state of the
people, ib. The weak authority of the King,
:b. It influence on the cxtcrn.l operations

of war, 17. The general extintion of all
arts and (ciences effeced by, 18. Its ope-.
ration on religion, 19. Its influence on the
characer of the human mind, 20. At what
time government and manners began to be
improved, 21. The causes and events which
contributed to this improvement, 22. See
Crusades. The antient state of cities under,
31. The frame of national councils under
this policy, 36. How alteredby theprogrefs
of civil liberty, 37. An inquiry into the
administration ofjuftice under, 42. Private
war, 43. Judicial combat, 47. The in-
dependant jurifdiCdions of the barons, 57.
The distinCtion between free men and vas-
fals under, 216. How strangers were con-
fidered and treated under, 327.
Fitzftephens, observations or; his account of the

fiate of London, at the time of Henry II.
264.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, a view of the conflitution of, at the

commencement of the sixteenth century,
135. The influence acquired by Cosmo
di Medici in, 136.
France, by what means the towns in, first ob-

tained charters of community, 33. Ordi-
rances of Louis X. and his Brother Philip
in favour if civil liberty, 40. Methods
employed to fipprefs private wars, 46. St.
Louis attempts to discountenance judioial
combat, 55. A view of the contenls be-
tweel), lnd t"ngland, 88. Theconfequen-
ces of its recovering its provinces from Eng-
land, 91. The monarchy of, how strength-
encd by this event, 92. The rife of {tand-
iog forces in, 93. The regal prerogative
ftrciinthened by this measure, 95. The
ex.tLnilon of the regal prerogative vigorously
pui!ued by Louis XI, 97. See Louis XI.
The effedts of the invasion of Italy by
Charles VIii. 108. See Chailei VIIl. Na-
tional infantry eftabliihed in, 115. League
of Cambray formed against the Venetians,
118. Battle of Ghiarradadda, ib. An in-
quiry into its antient governmient and laws,
165. The power of the general afiemblies
under the firit race (f Kings, ib. Under
the fccond and thiud, i 6. T'he regal power
confined to the King's own domains, 167.
When tile general iflcinbly or flatrs general,
loll their legilitivc authority, i/. When the

King*

Kings egeth to aflirt their legflative power,
168. When the government of, became
purely monarchical, 69. The regal power
nevertheless restrained by the privileges of the
nobility, 170. An inquiry into the jurif-
didlion of its parliaments, particularly that
of Paris, 171. How the allodial property
of land there was altered into. feudal, 223.
The progress of liberty in that kingdom
iraced, 265. Note xix. The attempts to
establish liberty there unsuccessful, 267.
The last instance ofjudicial combat recorded
in the hiflory of, z98. The present go-
vernment of, compared with that of ancient
Gaul, 355. Note xxxvii. The States-
general, when first aflembled, 369.
Francis I. of France, his charatcr influenced

by the (pirit of chivalry, 71. Is emulated by
the Emperor Charles V. 72.
Fredetick Barbarolna, Emperor, the free cities

of Italy unite against him, 250. Treaty of
Constance with them, ib. Was the first
who granted privileges to the cities in Ger-
many, 261.
Fredum, in the antient German usages explain-

ed, 300.
Freemen, how distinguished from vaflals, un-

der the feudal policy, 216, 230. Why often
induced to surrender their freedom and be-
come slaves, ',31.
Fulcherius Carnotenfis, his character of the

city of Conltantinople, 245.

G
Gaul, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal, there, 223. The go-
vernment of, compared with that of modern
France, 355. Note xxxvii. The small au-
thority the Kings of, enjoyed over their
armies illufirated in an anecdote of Clo-
taire I. 356. Account of the popular as-
femblies of, 357. The salic laws how en-
acted, 358. Were not subject to taxation,
359' See France.
Geoffrey de Villhbardouin, his account of the

magnificence of Conflantinople at the time
when taken by the Crufaderb, 246.
Germans, antient, an account of their usages

and way of life, 206. Their method of
engaging in war, 207. A comparison be-
twee) them and the North American In-
dians, 209. Why they had no cities, 260.

TO THE

Note xvii. The pra&ice of compoundig
for personal injuries by fines, deduced from
their usages, 299.
Germany, little interested in foreign concerns

at the beginning of the fifteenth century, 89.
National infantry eflabilihed in, 114. State
of under Charlemagne and his descendants,
173. Conrad, count of Franconia chosen
Emperor, ib. His successors in the Impe-
rial dignity, ib. How the nobility of, ac-
quired independant sovereign authority, 174.
The fatal effecs of aggrandizing the clergy
in, 175. The contests between the Empe-
ror Henry IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 176,
Rife of the factions of Guelfs and Ghibe-
lines, 177. Declineof the Imperial autho-
rity, ib. The House of Aufiria, by whom
founded, ib. A total change in the politi-
cal conflitution of the Empire, 178. The
Rate of anarchy in which it continued to the
time of Maximilian the immediate prede-
ceffor of Charles V. 179. Divided into
circles, ib. The Imperial chamber infli-
tuted, 18o. The Aulic council reformed,
ib. A view of its political conLtitution at
the commencement of the enCuing history,
ib. Its defects pointed out, 181. The Im-
perial dignity and power compared, 182.
Election of the Emperors, 1i8. The re-
pugnant forms of civil policy in the several
States of, 184. The opposition between
the secular and ecclcfiaflical members of, 185.
The united body hence incapable of acing
with vigour, I86. When cities firfi began.
to be built in, 260. Note xvii When the
cities of, first acquired municipal privileges,
261. The artizans of, when infranchifed,
262. Immediate cities in the German jurif-
prudence, what, 263. The great calami-
ties occasioned there by private wars, 288.
Origin of the league of the Rhine, ib. When
private wars were finally abolished there,
289. Inquiry into the power, jurifdilion
and revenue of its Emperors, 376. Note xli.
The antient mode of eleting the Emperors,
380. Account of the diets, 383.

Ghibelines, See Guelfs.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Ve-

netians, 118.
Glanville, Lord Chief Juflice, the fills who

compiled a body of common law, in all Eu-
rope, 317.

Goths,

Gths, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the Roman

empire, and precipitate its downfal, 3. The
Rate of the countries from whence they
iflued, 4. The motives of their first excur-
sions, 5. How they came to fettle in the
countries they conquered, 6. A comparison
drawn between them and the Romansi at
the period of their irruptions, 8. Coilpared
with the native Americans, 9. The defo-
lations they occasioned in Europe, ib. The
universal change made by them in the fate
of Europe, to. The principles on which
they made their settlements, 12. Origin of
the feudal system, 13. See Feudal Sy/lem.
An inquiry into the administration ofjuftice
among, 42. Their private wars, 43. De-
Afroy the monuments of the Roman arts, 72.
Their contempt of the Romans, and hatred
of their arts, 196. Note ii. Their aversion
to literature, ib. No authentic account of
their origin, or antient history existing, ib.
Government, how limited by the feudal policy,

16. The effe&s of the Crusades on, 28.
How affeced by the infranchifement of
cities, 35. Legislative aflemblies how
formed, 36. Private wars defirudive to the
authority of, 46. Methods employed to
abolish this hostile mode of redressing in-
juries, ib. How affeced by the fupream
independant jurifdiaions of the barons, 58.
The Reps toward abolishing them, 60.
The origin and growth of royal courts of
justice, 6o. How influenced by the revival
of science and literature, 76. A view of,
at the beginning of the fifteenth century, 84.
The power of Monarchs then very limited,
85, Their revenues small, ib. Their ar-
mies unfit for conqtuef, ib. The Princes
hence incapable of extensive plans of opera-
tion, 87. The kingdoms very little con-
nteed with each other, 88. How tie es-
forts of, from this period became more
powerful and cxtcilfive, 9o. The conle-
tuiences of England losing its provinces ill
France, 9g. The fcheimc: of Louis XI. of
France to extend the regal power, 97. See
Louis Xl. The power of the Englilh crown
enlarged 102. See Henry VII. As also that
,t Spain, 103. How the use of standing
armnies became general, iii. A view of
the political constitution of the fcvcra I flates
of iuro,l)p, at tie coinnenccnient of the

VJL. I.

fixteend century, 124. In what refipes
the charters of communities granted by the
Kings of France, tended to introduce a re-
gular form of, 253.
Greece, the breeding of silk worms, when in-

troduced there, 331.
Greek Emperors, their magnificence at Con-

flantinople, 244.
Gregory of Tours, remarks on the fiate of Eu-

rope during the period of which he wrote
the hiflory, 21.
Gregory the Great, Pope, his reason for grant-

ing liberty to his slaves, 269.
Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation of his con-

tefls with Henry IV. Emperor of Germany,
176. The mean fubmiflion he extorted from
Henry, 177. His own account of this as-
fair, 375.
Guelf, and Ghibelines, rife of those fa&ions

in Germany, 177.
Guicciardini, the historian, inflance of his fu-

perfitious reverence for Pope Clement VII.
132. Note.
Guntherus, a Monk, his character of Con-

ftantinople, at the time when taken by the
Crusaders, 245.

H
Hanseatic league, when formed, and its in-

fluence on the extension of commerce, 79.
336.
Henry IV. of Castile, solemnly tried and de-

posed by an assembly of Castilian nobles,
149.
Henry IV. Emperor of Germany, the humili-

ating state to which he was reduced by Pope
Gregory VII. 176, 375. Note xl.
I-cnry VIi. of England, his fitlation at his

acceflion to the crown, 1oz. Enables his
barons to break their entails and fell their
cllates, ib. Prohibits his barons keeping re
tainers, ib. Encourages argiculture and
commerce, ib.
llerebannum, the natire of this fine under the

feudal policy, explailucl, 216.
JlIrmandad, Santa, account ot that inflitutioD,

354.
lijtory, the most calmitous period of, pointed

out, 1 0.
Holy Brotherhood, an aIff)ciation in Spain un-

lecr that name, on what t4cafion lornmcl,
163.

, a
. L. J ..

. voy
' t I

Holy Land, the original inducements of the

Christians to rescue it from the hands of the
Infidels, 22. See Crusades, and Peter the
Hermit.
Honour, points of, the antient Swediih law for

determining, 291.
Hofpita!'ity, enforced by flatutes during the

middle ages, 326.
Huns, instance of their enthusiastic paflion for

war, 197. 0oteiii. Some account of their
policy and manners, 201, 206. See Goths.
:faniz2ries, origin, and formidable nature of

those troops, 189.
Imperial chamber of Germany, inffituted, 18o.

The oceafion of its institution, 384.
Indians, North American, a compariton drawn

between them and the antient Germans, 209.
Inditiry, the spirit of, how excited by the in-

franchifement of cities, 35.
Infantry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry,

taught to the reft of Europe by the Swiss,
114. Nationalbodies of, effablifhed in Ger-
many, ib. In France and Spain, x15.
I;heritance, and right of reprefcntation, be-

tween orphan grandsons and their uncles,
how decided in the tenth century, 293.
Interest of money, the neceflity of admitting,

in a commercial view, 332. Preposterously
condemned by the churchmen of the middle
ages, 333. The cause hence, of the exor-
bitant exactions of the Lombard bankers,
ib.
Italy, when the cities of them began to form

themselves into bodies politic, 32. Com-
merce firfi improved there, and the reasons
of it, 78. The revolutions in Europe oc-
cafioned by the invasion of, by Charles VIII.
of France, 107. The slate of, at the time
of this invasion, 109. The rapid success of
Charles, Io. A combination of the States
of, drives Charles out of, and gives birth to
the balance of power in Europe, i . The
political situation of, at the commencement
of the sixteenth century, 124. 'I'he papacy,
ib. Venice, 132. Florence, 135. Naples,
136. Milan, 14o. Evidences of the defo-
lation made there by the northern invaders
of the Roman Empire, 203. How the cities
of, obtained their municipal privileges, 247.

Note xv. State of, under Frederick I. 248.
Treaty of Constance between the free cities
of, and the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
250.
judgment of God, modes of acquittal by, in

the law proceedings during the middle ages,
50. 289. Note xxii.

yudicium Crucrs, method of trial by, 290.
Julius II. Pope, forms a confederacy, against

the Venetians at Cambray, 118. Seizes
part of the Venetian territories, ib. The
confederacy difllved, 119. Turns his
schemes against France, and England, ib.
Jurisprudence, ecclesiastical, more perfet in its

plan, than the civil courts of the middle
a ges, 46. S.e Law.
JuJiice, an inquiry into the administration of,

under the feudal policy, 42. The steps to-
ward the improvement of, as civil liberty
advanced, 43. Redress chiefly pursued by
private wars, 44. Me;hods taken to sup-
press private wars, 46. Judicial combats
prohibited, 47. Thedefe&s of judicial pro-
ceedings in the middle ages, 48. Compur-
gators, the nature of that kind of evidence,
49. Methods of trial by ordeal, or acquittal
by Judgment of God, 50. Origin of the
fupream independantjurifdiaions of the feu-
dal barons, 57. The extent and bad effects
of their privileges, 58. The fleps taken by
monarchs to reduce the barons courts, 6o.
The growth of royal courts of justice, 6I.
Inquiry into the canon law, 62. How im-
proved by the revival of the Roman law, 66.
When the administration of, became a di-
flin& profellion, 68.
Jufliza, or supreme judge of Aragon, his of-

fice and privileges, 152. An inquiry by
whom this officer was cleted, 339. Who
was eligible to this office, 3o0. Nature of
the tribunal appointed to controul his ad-
ministration, 341. Infiance of his extensive
power, 342.

K
King, his power how circumscribed by the

barons, under the feudal system, 16. By
what means the Crusades tended to enlarge
the regal authority, 28.
Koran, its influence in checking the Sultans

of the Ottoman empire, 189.

Land,

S

L
Land, how held at the'eflablifhment of the

feudal system, 15. See Feudal Jyflem.
Land, the property or, how confidered by the

antient barbarous nations, 213. Note viii.
Allodial pofieflion of, explained, 214. The
proprietors how fubjeted to military ser-
vice, 215. Allodial and beneficiary polfef-
ficn diftinguilhed, ib. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 222.
Law, when the fludy of it, became a diftinC

employment, 68.
Law, Canon, an inquiry into, 62. The

maxims of, more equitable than the civil
courts of the middle ages, 64. When first
compiled, 315.
Law, Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 65.

Circumstances which favoured the revival of
it, 66. Its effects in improving the admi-
niftration of jufftice, ib. Its rapid spread
over Europe, 316. Note xxv.
Lawburrows, in the Scottish law, explained,

254.
Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of, traced,

32. How favoured by the ordinances of
Louis X. of France, and his brother Philip,
4o. The spirit o, how excited in France,
265. Note xix. The particulars included in
the charters of, granted to husbandmen, 268.
Note xx. The influence of the Christian re-
ligion in extending, ib. The several op-
portunities of obtaining, 280.
Limoges, council of, its endeavours to extin-

guiih private wars, 279.
Lite-atine, the cultivation of, greatly inflru-

mcntal in civilizing the nations of Europe,
72. AWhy the first efforts of, ill dirccdtc,
77. The good effects nevcrthi 't:s (of the
lpirit of inquiry exerted, 75. low check-
ed in i:s prourctf, lb. Its influence on man-
ners and governlmenlt, 76.
Lilriry, the prcfireiice between the Mufarabic,

a;id Romifll, how afccrtoiiied in Spain,
294.
Lombards, the first bankers in Europe, 332.

'l'he motive of their exacting cxoibiltnt
interest, 32?3.
l.oition, its flourithing state at the time of

HI-nry I. 264.
Louis Ic (Gloss, of France, his inducement to

gr nt privileges to towns within his own do-
ul;,iis, 33. See CIharttrs.

Louis, St. the great attention he paid to the

adminifiration of juflice, in appeals which
came before him, 308.
Louis X. of France, his ordinances in favour

civil liberty, 40.
Louis XI. of France, his chara&er, 97. His

schemes for depressing the nobility, ib. Sows
divisions among them, 99. Increases the
standing forces, ib. Enlarges the revenues
of the crown, ib. His address in overruling
the assembly of flates, loo. Extends the
bounds of the French monarchy, IoI. The
activity of his external operations, ib. His
treacherous baseness toward the heirers of
Burgundy, Io5. The effets of his con-
duct, 107.
Louis XII. his hesitation in carrying on war

against the Pope, 132. Note. Asserts his
right to the dutchy of Milan, and retains
Ludovico Sforza in prison, 143.

M
Maafrecd, his firuggles for the crown of Naples,

138.
Mankind, the most calamitous period in the

history of, pointed out, io.
Manners, the barbarity of, under the feudal

establishments, after the overthrow of the
Roman empire, 18. When they began to
improve, 21. Effedts of the Crusades on,
25. low improved by the infranchiiemcnt
of cities, 3('. How improved by the erec-
tion of royal courts ofjuilice, in oppofitinn
to the barons courts, 61. Effccis of the
revival of the Roman law on, 65. The
beneficial tendency of the fpilit of chivalry
on, 69. Plow influenced by the progress of
fcicnce, 72. 76. How polilhed by the re-
vival of commerce, 81.
Manumitfion, particulars included in the char-

ters of, granted to husbandmen or slaves,
268. Nont xx. The folm nof, 269.
Maximilian, archduke of Auflria, narried to

Maiy h sirc(i of Hurgundy, 107. The in-
flience of this match on the itate of Europe,
ib.
AJi.imilian, Emperor, inflitutes the Imperi.l

chamber, 80o. Retfons the Aulic council,
ib.
Mtidii, C,,fmo di, the Arfl of the name, the

influence he acquired in Florence, 136.
Ali/an, tlh flite of tile dutcly of, at the corn-

1:' 1
k 2 ilecrreement

mencement of the fifteenth century, 140.
Rife and progress of the disputes concern-
ing the succession to, 141.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the first

eflablifhment of the feudal policy in Europe,
20. The aera of its ultimate depression,
and commencement of its improvement,
21. The progress of its operations, before
the full exertion of it, 73.
Alinilcriales, a class of the Oblati, or volun-

tary slaves, the pious motives of the obliga-
tions they entered into, 172.
Moors, make a conquest of Spain, 144. By

what means weakened during their efla-
blifhment there, 145. Remarks on their
conduct in Spain, 147.
Municipal privileges, how obtained by the

cities of Italy, 247. oate xv. Secured to
them by the treaty of Conftince, 250. The
favourite state of, under the Roman govern-
ment, 259.

N
Naples, a view of the constitution of that

kingdom, at the commencement of the
sixteenth century, 136. The turbulent un-
fettled slate of that kingdom, 137. State
of the disputes concerning the fucceflon to
the crown of, 138. The pretensions of the
French and Spanilh monarchs to the crown
of, 139.
Narbonne, community of, preamble to the writ

of fumrnons of Philip the Long, to, 265.
Note xix.
Navigation, proof of the imperfct slate of,

during the middle age', 334.
Nftherlands, vigorous pronfic ution of the mannl-

ficturcs of lemp and flax there, on the re-
vival of comeirce in lEurope, So.
Normans, why so f'w traces of their ufl.gcs

andi language, to he found in England, in
comlparlfoii with tllofl of the Saxons, 167
Note iv.
Oblati, or voluntary flves, the cl.fl:es of, fpc-

cificd, ?.71.
Ordeal, methods of trial by, during the middle

ages, 50. 'he influlnce of fuperftitioni
in dictating thesi means, 51.
Otto Frifingcinfis, his account of the tfate of

Itly under Frcdlcric I. 248.

Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic nature

of, 187. Becomes formidable to the Chri-
flian powers, 192.

P

Papacy. See Popedom.
Paper, when firit made of the present mate-

rials, 235.
Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurif-

diction of its parliament over the other par-
liaments of France, 171. Its origin traced,
370. Note xxxix. The royal edits re-
giflered by, before admitted to be laws,
373.
Parliaments, or legislative assemblies, how

formed under the feudal policy, 36. How
altered 'by the progress of civil liberty, 37.
People, their wretched servile state under the

feudal system, I6. 39. Released from their
flavilh state by the infranchifement of cities,
34. How they obtained a representation in
national councils, 36. Those who lived in
the country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the feudal
policy, 227. Note ix.

Persia, murder, how punished there, 302.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European Princes

to undertake the Holy War, 24.
Peter IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders

of the Aragonefe union, and destroys the
privilege of these aflociations, 344.
Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of fum-

mons to the community of Narbonne, 265.
ANotr xix.
PIioJo/iyly, cultivated by the Arabians, when

loft in Europe, 321. ANote xxviii. Its pro-
/icfb; from then into Europe, 322.
Pie.rimu. <is to the Holy Land,. when first un-

(icr.akell, 22. See Crusades, and Peter the

-I,'r '2.;t.
Pui..'ctia, council of, the Holy war resolved

on by, 24. See Peter the Hermit, and Cru-
P/nlder, how divided among the antient

northern nations, 13. llluftratcd in an
anecdote of Clovis, 212. Note vii.
Pthlpedo, the highest d(li'nity in Europe at the

commencement of the fixtecith century,
124. Origin and progress of the papal
power, 125. '[he territories of the Popes
unequal to the support of their spiritual
jurifdlition, iib. 'heir authority in their

own

·own territories extremely limited, x26. The
check they received from the Roman barons,
ib. Nicolas Rienzo attempts to establish a
democratical government in Rome, and to
defiroy the papal jurifdicion, z28. The
papal authority considerably strengthened by
the Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. i 29.
See Julius 11. The permanent nature of
ecclesiastical dominion, ib. The civil ad-
ministration of, not uniform or confifient,
130. Rome the school of political intrigue
during the sixteenth century, ib. The ad-
vantages derived from the union of spiritual
and temporal authority, 13r. A view of
the contefis between the Popes and the Em-
perors of Germany, 176.
Populousness of the antient northern nations,

an inquiry into, 4.
Priscus, extraft from his account of the Ro-

man embassy to Attila King of the Huns,
197. Note iii.
Procopius, his account of the cruel devafta-

tions made by the irruption of the northern
nations, 198. Note v. 201, 202.
Property, the poffeflion of, how secured by the

French charters of communities, 254.
Proveditori, in the Venetian policy, their

office, 134.

R
Rsis'n, how corrupted by the northern na-

tions efcablifhed in Europe under the feudal
policy, 19. Its influence in freeing mankind
fron the feudal servitude, 268.
Rcpedlging, the right of, in the law of Scot-

Il.nd, explained, 305.
Reproa;h, words of, the antient Swedish law

of f;tisfac&ion for, 291.
Rit'ntIes, royal, very finall under the feudal

policy, 85. By what means increaed,

I5.
Rhine, ori! in and intention of the league of,

288.
Rilnzo, Nicolas, endeavours to rescue Rome

from the papal authority, and establish a
dcmocratical form of government there,
128.
Robbers, the anathema, pronounced againfl

thi mn during the midhll ages, 329.
Rodul/ph of l;Ipflbtligh, how he attained elec-

tion to the Empire of Germany, 177.
Rom,.ns, an inquiry into those advant.ges

Vr LU M E.

which enabled them to conquer the ref of
Europe, 2. The improvements they co'n-
municated in return for their conquests, ib.
The disadvantages the provinces laboured
under, from their dominion, ib. Their
Empire overturned by the- irruption of the
barbarous natiors, 3. The concurrern
causes of their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn
between them and the northern nations, 8.
All the civil arts established by them obli-
terated, 18. The monuments of their artu
industriously destroyed by their batbaroui
invaders, 72.

Rome, papal. See Popedom.
Royal truce, an account of, 282.

S
Salic laws, the manner in which they were er-

a&ced, 358.
Saxons, why so many traces of their laws, lan-

guage and cufloms to be found in England,
197. Note iv. Inquiry into their laws for
putting an end to private wars, 285.
Science, the revival and progress of, how far

infirumcntal in civilizing the nations of
Europe, 72. A summary view of the're-
vival and progress of, in Europe, 321. Note
xxviii.
Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his preten-

sions, to the dutchy of Milan, 142. Is mur-
dered by his uncle Ludovico, ib.
*-- Ludovico, his private views in engag-

ing Charles VIII. of France to invade Italy,
io8. See Charles VIII. Murders his ne-
phew Francis, and seizes Milan, 142. Is
flripped of his d nriiuions by Louis XII. of
France, and dies in prison, 143.
Shi/ wrecks, the right, lords of manors claim to,

whence derived, 328.
Silk, the rarity of, and the hiWrh price it bore

in antient Rome, remarked, 331. Tho
breeding of silk worms, when introduced
into Greece, ib.
Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland, what,

301.
Slaves under the feudal policy, their wretched

itate, 226. Oblati, or voluntary naves,
the several clafles of, 7 1.
Society, civil, the rude ltate of, under the feu-

dal cftahlifhments after the downfal of the
Roman Empire, 18. The influence of the
Crusades on, 25. How improved by the

ecablifhmcnt

eflablifhment of municipal communities,
30. The effe&s the infranchifements of
the people had on, 41. Private wars how
decfruaive to, 45. These intefline hoflili-
ties, how suppressed, 46. The adminiflra-
tion of juflice improved by the prohibition
of judicial combats, 47. The growth of
royal courts of juflice, in opposition to the
barons courts, 60. How advanced by the
revival of the Roman law, 65. The effcts
of the spirit of chivalry in improving, 69.
The revival of commerce and its influences,
78.
ol,man, Sultan, his character, 191.
S/ain, a summary view of its situation, at the

commencement of the fifteenth century,
89. The power of the crown of, how
extended by Ferdinand, 103. National in-
fantry eflablilhed in, 15. Is conquered by
the Vandals, 144. and after by the Moors,
ib. The empire of the Moors in, how
weakened, 145. Rife of the kingdoms of
Castile and Aragon, 146. Their union
into the Spanish monarchy, ib. The an-
tient cuftcms still retained amidst all its
revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its confli-
tution and laws remarked, 148. See dra-
gon and Cafiile. Various caules which ton-
tributed to limit the regal power in, 156.
The cities of, how they attained their con-
fideration and power, 157. The schemes
of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt the
regal power, 160. The grand mafleifhips
of the three orders, annexed to the crown,
16i. The aflociation of the HIoly Brother-
hood, on what occasion formed, 163. The
tendency of this alrociation to abridge the
territorial jurisdictions of the barons, 164.
1The cruel dev.itations made by the Vandals,
in the iinvafioll of that province, 199.
When the ities of, acquired municipal
privilcgVs, 263. Note xviii. The long
coiitmiu;iice of the practice of private wars
therc, '187. The total a;nnual revenue of
Ihe nobility, in the time of Ch(arles V.
350. An inquiry in'o the origin and of
conmluniIties ,o free cities in, 35 1
St. ago, the military order of, when and

(on what occalioun iuiitutcd, 352. 'Note
xx^v.

Standing armies. See rfrniLs.
'ati gellcrdl of France, taufcs which r n-

dered their authority imperfet, i67. When
they loft their legislative authority, ib.
When first assembled, 369. The form of
proceeding in them. ib.
Stephen earl of Chartres and Blois, his account

of the progress of the Crusaders, 242.
Siernhlok, his account of the antient Swedish

law of fatisfaaion for words of reproach,
291.
Strangers, in what light confidered, and how

treated during the middle ages, and under the
feudal policy, 327.
Sugar canes, when firit brought from Asia

into Europe, and thence carried to Ame-
rica, 331.
Sultans, Turkish, their despotic power, i88.

How nevertheless limited, 189.
Superjiition, its influence in the legal proceed-

ings during the middle ages, 51.
Swiss, the superior discipline of their troop-,

in the fifteenth century, 13. Teach other
nations the advantages of infantry over ca-
valry, 114.

T
Tacitus, his account of the antient Germans

compared with that of Caesar, 206.
Tenures, feudal, the origin of, 15. See Feudal

St7oem, and Land.
Theology, scholastic, the first literary pursuits

at the revival of learning in Europe, 74.

Truce of God, an account of, 280.
'Tilkey, origin of, its government, 187. The

dlcpotic genius of this government, ib. No
hereditary nobility in, 188. The authority
of the Sultans, how checked, I189. Oiigin
of the Janizaries, ib. Becomcs formidable
to the Chliliian Princes, 192.

V
//nl/lri/, their cruel devaitations in the illvafion

of Spain, J99. The havoc niade by them
in Afiica, 200. See (;tls.
I'ifidj under the ifeudal {lyfcm, a view of thcir

ilavifh coudition, 16. 39. 11ow they ob-
tained infirancliifenclt, 40. How anitient-
ly diflinguiflled f ioni fiecmcen, 216. 'Their
wretchcd slate under their fcudal nmafic,,
226. NSte ix.
V,"nice, the long duration of its civil conlli-

tution, and its flourifsling Htate at the time
of the league of Callbray, 17. I:s p

C ')i Jlls

sessions dismembered by the confederates,
I18. Dissolves the confederacy, 119. Its
rife and progress, 132. Defecs in its con-
ititution, 133. The excellency of its
naval institutions, 134. Its extensive com-
merce, 135.
Pifconti, rife of the family of, in Milan,

141.
Union of the Aragonefe nobles to controul the

undue exercise of regal power, explained,
343. This privilege abrogated by Peter IV.
344.
Universities, the first establishment of, in Eu-

rope, 323.

W
t1ar, a comparison between the manner of

carrying on, by barbarous and by civilized
nations, 9. How rendered feeble in its
operations by the feudal policy, x7. The
profeflion of arms, the most honourable, in
uncivilized nations, 67. The rife of fland-
ing armies traced, 92. By what means
flanding forces became general, I12. The
superiority of infantry in, how taught,
113.
WVars, private, for the redrefling personal in-

juries, under the feudal policy, an inquiry
into, 43. Methods taken to abolish this
hostile practice, 46. Judicial combat pro-
hibited, 47. Inquiry into the sources of
these cufloms, 274. Note xxi. Who in-
titled to the privileges of exercising, ib.
On what occasions undertaken, 275. Who
included, or bound to engage in these dif-
putes, 276. Who excluded from under-
taking, ib. The cruel manner of prose-
cuting them, 277. A chronological ac-
count of the expedients made use of, to
suppress them, 278. Truce of God, an ac-
count of, ib. Brotherhood of God, an ac-
count of, 282. Royal truce, what, ib.
Saxon laws of England, for putting an end
to them, 285. 'he obstinate attachment
of the Spaniards to this pracice, 287.
The calamities occasioned in Germany by,
288.
sel/h, antient, firangers killed with impunity

by them, 328.
Yi/lla, widow of duke Hugo, extrac from her

charter of manumiflion, granted to Cleriza,
one of her slaves, 270.
IVillermus, archbishop of Tyre, his account

of Conflantinople, 245.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
