MEW.~~~~~
,VY~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'

THE
ST ORYH E

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCrAL of the Univedty of EDINBURGH, and HISTOw

RIOGRAPHZIr to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. IV.

LONDON:
Printed for W. S T RAH A N; T. C A D L L, in the

Strand; and J. B AL O r a, at Edinbugh,

MDCCLXXXII.

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.
W HI LE Charles laboured, with uch BO O

unwearied industry, to overcome the -
obstinacy of the Protestants, the effeAs Tbh49'
of his ftRadinofs in the execution of his plan were fIthm

' * iainit the

rendered lets considerable by his rupture with the Imperr.
Pope, which daily increased. The firm refo-
lution which the Emperor seemed to have taken
against restoring Placentia, together with his re-
peated encroachments on the ecclefiatical jurif-
diction, not only by the regulations contained in
the Interim, but by his attempt to re-assemble a
council at Trent, exasperated Paul to the utmost,
who, with the weakness incident to old age, grew
more attached to his family, and more jealous of
his authority, as he advanced in years, Pulhed
on by there paRsons, he made new efforts to draw

VOL. IV. B the

I 0 0 K the French King into an alliance againf the

X.
G-~-m Emperor': But finding that Monarch notwith-

549' standing his hereditary enmity to Charles, and

dread of his growing power, as unwilling as for-
merly to involve himcilf in immediate hoftili-
ties, he was obliged to contrac his views, and to
think of preventing future encroachments, since
it was not in his power to inflic vengeance on ac-
count of those which were palt. For this purpose,
he determined to recal his grant of Parma and
Placentia, and after declaring them to be re-
annexed to the Holy See, to indemnify his grand-
son Oaavio by a new establishment in the eccle-
fialical state. By this expedient, he hoped to
gain two points of no finall consequence. He,
firt of all, rendered his poTefion of Parma
more secure; as the Emperor would be cautious
of invading the patrimony of the church, though
he might seize without scruple a town belonging
to the house of Farnese. In the next place, he
would acquire a better chance of recovering
Placentia, as his solicitations to that effeE might
decently be urged with greater importunity, and
would infallibly be attended with more weight,
when he was confidered not as pleading the cause
of his own family, but as an advocate for the
intereit of the church. But while Paul was
priding himself on this device, as a happy refine-
ment in policy, O&favio, an ambitious and high-
spirited young man, who could not bear with
patience to. be poiled of one half of his terri-

, Mem. de Ribier, ii. 230.

tories

tories by the rapaciousness of his father-in-law, B R
and to be deprived of the other by the artifices of -.
his grandfather, took measures in order to pre- 4
vent the execution of a plan fatal to his interest.
He et out secretly from Rome, and having first
endeavoured to furprize Parma, which attempt
was frustrated by the fidelity of the governor to
whom the Pope had entrusted the defence of the
town, he made overtures to the Emperor, of re-
nouncing all connexion with the Pope, and of
depending entirely on him for his future fortune.
This unexpeted defedion of one of the Pope's
own family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
almoRt to madness, a mind peevish with old
age; and there was no degree of severity to
which Paul might not have proceeded against a
grandson whom he reproached as an unnatural
apostate. But happily for Otavio, death pre-
vented his carrying into execution the harsh refo-
lutions which he had taken with respect to him,
and put an end to his pontificate in the sixteenth
year of his adminifration, and the cighty-fecond
of his age*.

As

* Among many intances of the credulity or weakness of

hillorians in attributing the death of illustrious personages to
extraordinary causes, this is one. Almofi all the historians of
the sixteenth century affirm, that the death of Paul III. was
occasioned by the violent passions which the behaviour of his
grandson excited; that being informed, while he was refrelh.
ing himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of Otavio's
attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with the
Emperor by means of Gonzaga, h fainted away, continued

B a ome

B 0 K As this event had been long expe&ed, there

X. --,--' was an extraordinary concourse of Cardinals at

Rome;

Conhe hours in a swoon, then became feverifhb and died with-
in three days. This is the account given of it by Thuanus,
lib. vi. 21 i. Adriani Ilor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and
by Father Paul, 28o. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better in-
formed than any writer with regard to the events which hap-
pened in the papal court, and when not warped by prejudice
or system, more accurate in relating them, agrees with their
narritivein its chief circumilances. Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta,
who wrote his hifory by command of the senate of Venice,
relates it in the fame manner. Hiforici Venez. vol. iv. z2.
But there was no occasion to search for any extraordinary
cause to account for the death of an old man of eighty-two.
There remains an authentic account of this event, in which
we find none of those marvellous circumstances of which the
hilorians are so fond. The cardinal of Ferrara, who was
entrusted with the affairs of France at the court of Rome,
and M. D'Urfe, Henry's ambalTador in ordinary there, wrote
an account to that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of
the Pope's death. By there it appears, that Ocavio's attempt
to furprize Parma, was made on the twentieth of October;
that next day in the evening, and not while he was airing
himself in the gardens of Monte-Cavallo, the Pope received
intelligence of what he had done; that he was seized with
such a transport of pallion, and cried so bitterly, that his
voice was heard in several apartments of the palace; that
iext day, however, he was so well as to give an audience to
the cardinal of Ferrara, and to go through business of differ-
ent kinds; that Otavio wrote a letter to the Pope, not to
cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his resolution of
throwing himself into the arms of the Emperor; that the
Pope received this on the twenty-firf without any new fymp-
toms of emotion, and returned an answer to it ; that on the
twenty-fecond of Oftober, the day on which the cardinal of
Ferrara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his usual fRate of
health. Mem. de Ribier, ii. z47. By a letter of M. D'Urfe,
Nov. 5. it appe !.s that the Pope was in such good health,

+ that

Rome; and the various competitors having had 8 °° K
time to form their parties, and to concert their L J
measures, their ambition and intrigues protraaed ''50
the conclave to a great length. The Imperial
and French facions strove, with emulation, to
promote one of their own number, and had, by
turns, the profpet of success. But as Paul
during a long Pontificate had raised many to the
purple, and those chiefly persons of eminent
abilities, as well as zealously devoted to his fa-
mily, Cardinal Farnese had the command of a
powerful and united squadron, by whose address Feb 7h.

The elec.

and firm nes he exalted to the papal throne the tion of
Cardinal di Monte, whom Paul had employed as J
his principal legate in the council of Trent, and
trusted with his most secret intentions. He as-
fumed the name of Julius III. and, in order to
expres his gratitude towards his benefator, the
first at of his administration was to put O&tavio
Farnese in pofleflion of Parma. When he was
told of the injury which he did to the Holy See

that on the third of that month he had celebrated the anni-
verfary of his coronation with the usual folemnities. lbidem,
z51. By another letter from the fame person, we learn,
that on the sixth of November a catarrh or defluxion fell
down on the Pope's lungs, with fiuch dan erous symptoms,
that his life was immediately despaired of, Ibid. z25. And
by a third letter we are informed, that he died November the
tenth. In none of there letters is his death imputed to any
extraordinary cause. It appears, that more than twenty days
elapsed between Otavio's attempt on Parma, and the death
of his grandfather, and that the disease was the natural
effec of old age, not one of those occasioned by violence of
pallion.

B 3 by

B o0o K by alienating a territory of such value, he briskly
'-v--. replied, That he would rather be a poor Pope,

'55' with the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich

one, with the infamy of having forgotten the
obligations conferred upon him, and the promises
which he had made ." But all the lustre of this
candour or generosity he quickly effaced by an

fHis hac a.tion moR hockingly indecent. According to
ter di:d conl-
duci. an ancient and established pratice, every Pope

upon his election claims the privilege of beflow-
ing, on whom he pleases, the Cardinal's hat,
which falls to be disposed of by his being invest-
ed with the triple crown. Julius, to the aftonith-
ment of the sacred college, conferred this mark
of diRlinc&ion, together with ample ecclesiastical
revenues, and the right of bearing his name and
arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of sixteen,
born of obscure parents, and known by the name
of the Ape, from his having been truRed with
the care of an animal of that species, in the Car-
dinal di Monte's family. Such a prostitution of
the highest dignity in the church would have
given offence, even in those dark periods, when
the credulous fupcrftition of the people em-
boldened eccltiafticks to venture on the most
flagrant violations of decorum. But in an en-
lightened age, when, by the progress of know-
ledge and philosophy, the obligations of duty
and decency were better understood, when a blind
veneration for the Pontifical character was every

h IMcl. de Ribier.

where

where abated, and one half of Christendom in a °O° K
open rebellion against the Papal See, this ation --
was viewed with horror. Rome was immediately Isso
filled with libels and pasquinades, which im-
puted the Pope's extravagant regard for such an
unworthy object to the most criminal pafions.
The Proteltants exclaimed against the absurdity
of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine
truth could dwell in a breafl so impure, and call-
ed more loudly than evar, and with greater ap-
pearance of justice, for the immediate and tho-
rough reformation of a church, the Head of
which was a disgrace to the Christian name c
The reft of the Pope's condut was of a piece
with this first specimen of his dispositions. Hav-
ing now reached the summit of ecclesiastical
ambition, he seemed eager to indemnify himself,
by an unrestrained indulgence of his desires, for
the felf-denial or dissimulation which he had
thought it prudent to pra&ise while in a fubordi-
nate station. He became careless, to so great a
degree, of all serious business, that he could fel-
dom be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of
extreme necessity; and giving up himself to
amusements and diflipation of every kind, he
imitated the luxurious elegance of Leo rather than
the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of which
it was necefary to display, in contending with a
fee which derived great credit from the rigid and
austere manners of its teachers'.

c Scid. 492. F. Paul, 281. Pallav. ii. 76. Thuan.
lib. vi. 215. d F. Paul, ibid.

B T._

B O°X THE Pope, however ready to fulfil his engage.

X.
v-,-' ments to the family of Farnese, discovered no
1550' inclination to oblerve the oath, which each car-

.i views
a .nd pro. dinal had taken when he entered the conclave,
ings, ith
,.epea to that if the choice should fall on him, he would

.the l immediately call the council to re-aflume its

deliberations. Julius knew, by experience, how
difficult it was to confine such a body of men
within the narrow limits which it was the interest
of the church of Rome to prescribe; and how
easily the zeal of some members, the rashness of
others, or the suggestions of the Princes on whom
they depended, might precipitate a popular and
ungovernable assembly into forbidden inquiries,
as well as dangerous decisions. He wilhed, for
these reasons, to have eluded the obligation of
his oath, and gave an ambiguous answer to the
first proposals which were made to him by the
Emperor, with regard to that matter. But
Charles, either from his natural obstinacy in ad-
hering to the measures which he had once adopt-
ed, or from the mere pride of accomplishing
what was held to be almost impoflible, persisted
obstinately inhis refolufion of forcing the Pro-
teftants to return into the bosom of the church.
Having persuaded himself, that the authoritative
decisions of the council might be employed with
efficacy in combating their prejudices, he, in
consequence of that persuasion, continued to so-
licit earnestly that a new bull of convocation
might be issued; and the Pope could not, with
decency, rejea that request. When Julius found

that

that he could not prevent the calling of a council, B o °
he endeavoured to take all the merit of having -
procured the meeting of an assembly, which was '
the objet of such general desire and expectation.
A congregation of Cardinals, to whom he re-
ferred the consideration of what was neceflry for
restoring peace to the church, recommended, by
his diretion, the speedy convocation of a coun-
cil, as the molt effetual expedient for that pur-
pose; and as the new herefies raged with the
greatest violence in Germany, they proposed Trent
as the place of its meeting, that, by a near infpec-
tion of the evil, the remedy might be applied with
greater discernment and certainty of success. The
Pope warmly approved of this advice, which he
himself had dictated, and ent nuncios to the Im-
perial and French courts, in order to make known
his intentions'.

ABOUT this time, the Emperor had summoned A de.,

a new diet to meet at Auglburg, in order to en- enforce th
force the observation of the Interim, and to pro- Intem.
Cure a more authentick at of the Empire, ac-
knowledging the jurifdidion of the council, as
well as an explicit promise of conforming to its
decrees. He appeared there in person, together ju s.
with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the
Electors were present, but all sent deputies in
their name. Charles, notwithstanding the de-
fpotick authority with which he had given law in

e F. Paul, z81. Pallav. ii. 77.

the

B Oo K the Empire during two years, knew that the

X.

-- ifpirit of independence among the Germans was
'5so not entirely subdued, and for that reaobn took

care to over-awe the diet by a considerable body
of Spanish troops which escorted him thither.
The first point submitted to the consideration of
the diet, was the necefity of holding a council.
All the Popish members agreed, without diffi-
culty, that the meeting of that assembly should
be renewed at Trent, and promised an implicit
acquiescence in its decrees. The Protestants, in-
timidated and disunited, must have followed their
example, and the resolution of the diet would
have proved unanimous, if Maurice of Saxony
had not begun at this time to disclose new inten-
tions, and to at a part very different from that
which he had so long assumed.

Sn,,ce be. BY an artful difimulation of his own sentiments;

gins to form
dfin the by address in paying court to the Emperor;
Empuor. and by the seeming zeal with which he forward-

ed all his ambitious chemes, Maurice had raised
himself to the Ele&oral dignity; and having
added the dominions of the elder branch of the
Saxon family to his own, he was become the
mos powerful Prince in Germany. But his long
and intimate union with the Emperor, had afford-
ed him many opportunities of observing narrowly
the dangerous tendency of his tshemes. He saw
the yoke that was preparing for his country; and
from the rapid as well as formidable progress of
the Imperial power, was convinced that but a

few

few Reps more remained to be taken, in order B 0 o K
to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in Ger- .
many as he had become in Spain. The more 5*
eminent the condition was to which he himself
had been exalted, the more solicitous did he na-
turally become to maintain all its rights and pri-
vileges, and the more did he dread the thoughts
of descending from the rank of a Prince almoit
independent, to that of a vassal fubje& to the
will of a master. At the fame time, he perceiv-
ed that Charles was bent on exacting a rigid con-
formity to the doctrines and rites of the Romilh
church, instead of allowing liberty of conscience,
the promise of which had allured several Protest-
ant Princes to aift him in the war against the
confederates of Smalkalde. As he himself, not-
withstanding all the compliances which he had
made from motives of interest, or an excess of
confidence in the Emperor, was sincerely at-
tached to the Lutheran tenets, he determined
not to be a tame fpedator of the overthrow
of a system which he believed to be founded in
truth.

THIS resolution, flowing from the love ofTheiptii.

cal motim

liberty, or zeal for religion, was strengthened by which inu
political and interested considerations. In that C'I m
elevated station, in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more extensive prospects opened
to his view. His rank and power entitled him to
be the head of the ProteRants in the Empire.
His predecefor, the degraded Elector, with in-

ferior

B o0 K ferior abilities, and territories less considerable,

X.
-^ had acquired such an ascendant over the councils
'5S"- Of the party; and Maurice neither wanted discern-

ment to fee the advantage of this pre-eminence,
nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But he
found himself in a situation which rendered the
attempt no less difficult, than the objec of it was
important. On the one hand, the connexion
which he had formed with the Emperor was so
intimate, that he could scarcely hope to take any
ftep which tended to dissolve it, without alarm-
ing his jealousy, and drawing on himself the
whole weight of that power, which had crushed
the greatest confederacy ever formed in Germany.
On the other hand, the calamities which he had
brought on the Protestant party were so recent,
as well as great, that it seemed almost impossible
to regain their confidence, or to rally and re-
animate a body of men, after himself had been
the chief instrument in breaking their union and
vigour. These considerations were sufficient to
have discouraged any person of a spirit less adven-
turous than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur
and vastness of the enterprize were allurements;
and he boldly resolved on measures, the idea of
which a genius of an inferior order could not
have conceived, or would have trembled at the
thoughts of the danger that attended the execu-
tion of them.

irheph^ions His pallions concurred with his interest in con-
lich o.

operated firming this resolution and the resentment ex-
with Ihf. her

ciced

cited by an injury, which he sensibly felt, added B o o K
new force to the motives for opposing the Em- -
peror, which found policy suggested. Maurice, 1550
by his authority, had prevailed on the Landgrave
of Hesse to put his person in the Emperor's
power, and had obtained a promise from the Im-
perial ministers that he should not be detained a
prisoner. This had been violated in the manner
already related. The unhappy Landgrave ex-
claimed as loudly against his fon-in-law as against
Charles. The Princes of HeTfe required Maurice
incessantly to fulfil his engagements to their fa-
ther, who had loft his liberty by trusting to him;
and all Germany fufpe&ed him of having betray-
ed, to an implacable enemy, the friend whom he
was mot bound to prote&. Roused by these
solicitations or reproaches, as well as prompted
by duty and affe&ion to his father-in-law, Mau-
rice had employed not only entreaties but remon-
itrances in order to procure his release. All these
Charles had disregarded; and the hame of hav-
ing been first deceived, and then flighted, by a
Prince whom he had served with zeal as well as
success, which merited a very different return,
made such a deep impreflion on Maurice, that he
waited with impatience for an opportunity of be-
ing revenged.

THE utmost caution as well as delicacy were Theciution

requisite in taking every ftep towards this end; wjhaddhh
as he had to guard, on the one hand, against he haris
giving a premature alarm to the Emperor; while, scheme».

on

B 0 K on the other, something considerable and explicit

X. ,_-- was necessary to be done, in order to regain the
5s5° confidence of the Protestant party. Maurice had

accordingly applied all his powers of address and
diflimulation to attain both there points. As he
knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to the
submission which he required to the Interim, he
did not hesitate one moment whether he hould
eftablilh that form of dotrine and worship in
his dominions: But being fenfibe how odious it
was to his fubjets, instead of violently imposing
it on them by the mere terror of authority, as
had been done in other parts of Germany, he en-
deavoured to render their obedience a voluntary

He enfora deed of their own. For this purpose, he had
the n'crim
iSaSony. afembled the clergy of his country at Leipfick,

and had laid the Interim before them, together
with the reasons which made it necessary to con-
form to it. He had gained rome of them by
promises, others he had wrought upon by threats,
and all were intimidated by the rigour with which
obedience to the Interim was extorted in the
neighbouring provinces. Even Mlelanfthon,
whose merit of every kind entitled him to the
first place among the Protefant divines, being
now deprived of the manly counsels of Luther,
which were wont to inspire him with fortitude,
and to preserve him Ready amidst the torms and
dangers that threatened the church, was educed
into unwarrantabie concefflons, by the timidity
of his temper, his fond desire of peace, and his
exccffive complaisance towards persons of high

6 rank.

rank. By his arguments and authority, no less OX0 R
than by Maurice's arts, the assembly was prevail-
ed on to declare, that, in points which were Is0'
purely indifferent, obedience was due to the com-
mands of a lawful superior. Founding upon this
maxim, no less uncontrovertible in theory, than
dangerous when carried into practice, epecially
in religious matters, they proceeded to class,
among the number of things indifferent, several
doarines, which Luther had pointed out as gross
and pernicious errors in the Romih creed; and
placing in the fame rank many of those rites which
diftinguilhed the Reformed from the Popish wor-
ship, they exhorted their people to comply with
the Emperor's injunctions concerning these par-
ticulars '.

BY this dextrous condu, the introduction of Maik pro.

fefslons of
the Interim excited none of those violent con- ai for the

Protestant

vulfions in Saxony which it occasioned in other rSegion.
provinces. But though the Saxons ubmitted,
the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed againf
Melanfthon and his aociates, as false brethren,
who were either so wicked as to apo(tatize from
the truth altogether; or so artful as to betray it
by subtle diftintions; or so feeble-fpirited as to
give it up from pusillanimity and criminal com-
plaifance to a prince, capable of sacrificing to his
political interest that which he himself regarded

f Sleid. 481. 485. Jo. Laur. Mofhemii Inftitutionum Hist.

EcclefiaRica, lib. iv. Helmt. 1755, 4. p. 748. J. And.
Schmidii Hilforia lnterimiRica, p. 70, &c. Helmft. 1730.

as

B oo K as most sacred. Maurice, being conscious what

X.
_i- .- a colour of probability his past condut gave to

150'. those accusations, as well as afraid of losing en-

tirely the confidence of the Proteflants, issued a
declaration containing profellions of his zealous
attachment to the Reformed religion, and of his
resolution to guard against all the errors or en-
croachments of the Papal fee '.

At the ame HAVING gone so far in order to remove the
time urts
the EMpc fears and jealousies of the Protestants, he found

it necessary to efface the impression which such a
declaration might make on the Emperor. For
that purpose, he not only renewed his profellions
of an inviolable adherence to his alliance with
him, but as the city of Magdeburg still persisted
in rejecing the Interim, he undertook to reduce
it to obedience, and infantly set about levying
troops to be employed in that service. This
damped all the hopes which the Protestants begun
to conceive of Maurice, in consequence of his de-
claration, and left them more than ever at a loss
to guess at his real intentions. Their former
suspicion and difiruft of him revived, and the di-
vines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings
in which they represented him as the most formi.
dable enemy of the Protestant religion, who trea-
cherouny assumed an appearance of zeal for its
interest, that he might more effecually execute
his schemes for its deftru&ion.

g Slcid. 485.

THIs

THIS charge, supported by the evidence of re- B O o K

cent fads, as well as by his present dubious con- '--
du&, gained such universal credit, that Maurice Prot.its
was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in his own goaofe
vindication. As oon as the re-aflembling of the cedin i
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his
ambalradors protested that their master would
not acknowledge its authority, unless all the
points which had been already decided there, were
reviewed, and confidered as entire; unless the
Protestant divines had a full hearing granted
them, and were allowed a decisive voice in the
council; and unless the Pope renounced his pre-
tensions to preside in the council, engaged to
submit to its decrees, and absolve the bihfops
from their oath of obedience, that they might
deliver their sentiments with greater freedom.
These demands, which were higher than any
that the Reformers had ventured to make, even
when the zeal of their party was warmest, or
their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced,
in some degree, the impression which Maurice's
preparations against Magdeburg had made upon
the minds of the Protetants, and kept them in
fupence with regard to his designs. At the fame
time, he had address enough to represent this
part of his conduct in such a light to the Empe-
ror, that it gave him no offence, and occasioned
no interruption of the firift confidence which
fubfited between hem. What the pretexts were
which, he employed, in order to give such a bold
declaration an innocent appearance, the contem-

VOL. IV. C porary

B o o K porary historians have not explained; that they-

.i-._ imposed upon Charles is certain, for he fill con-
s'50' tinued nor only to prosecute his plan, as well

concerning the Interim as the council, with the
fame ardour, but to place the fame confidence in
Maurice, with regard to the execution of both.

The dietre- THE Pope's refulution concerning the council
makewar not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
on the dcy bullnefs of the diet was to enforce the obferva-
of Magdc-

tion of the Interim. As the 1inate of Magde-,
burg, notwithstanding various endeavours to
frighten or to ooth them into compliance, not
only persevered obstinately in their opposition to
the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortili-
cations of their city, and to levy troops in their
own defence, Charles required the diet to assist
him in quelling this audacious rebellion againlt a
decree of the Empire. Had the members of the
diet been left to a agreeably to their own in-
clination, this demand would have been rejeced
without hesitation. All the Germans who fa-
voured, ii; any degree, the new opinions in reli-
gion, and many who were influenced by no other
consideration than jealousy of the Emperor's
growing power, regarded this effort of the citi-
zens of Magdeburg, as a noble stand for the
liberties of their country. Even such as had not
resolution to exert the fame spirit, admired the
gallantry of their enterprize, and wished it fuc-
cess. But the presence of the Spanish troops,
together with the dread of the Enperor's dif-

pleasure,

pleasure, over-awed the members of the diet to B K
fich a degree, that, without venturing to utter .
their own sentiments, they tamely ratified, by '5SJ'
their votes, whatever the Emperor was pleased to
prescribe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles
had issued by his own authority against the Mag-
deburgers, were confirmed; a reiolution was
taken to raise troops in order to besiege the city
in form; and persons were named to fix the con-
tingent in men or money to be furnifled by each
slate. At the fame time, the diet petitioned that Appont
Maurice might be entrusted with the command general.
of that army; to which Charles gave his conent
with great alacrity, and with high encomiums
upon the wisdom of the choice which they had
madeh. As Maurice condu&ed all his schemes
with profound and impenetrable secrecy, it is pro-
bable that he took no Rep avowedly in order to
obtain this charge. The recommendation of his
countrymen was either purely accidental, or flow-
ed from the opinion generally entertained of his
great abilities; and neither the diet had any
foresight, nor the Emperor any dread, of the
consequences which followed upon this nomi-
nation. Maurice accepted, without hesitation,
the trust committed to him, instantly discern-
ing the important advantages which he might
derive from it.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull for Theroun-
the convocation of the council, observed all thoe mI',,I o

rce.af'mble
h Sleid. 503. 512. at Ten.

C 2 teious

B 0 0 K tedious forms which the court of Rome can em-
.*,- ploy, with wonderful dexterity, to retard any
5ss5o disagreeable measure. At last it was published,

and the council summoned to meet at Trent on
the first day of the ensuing month of May. As
he knew that many of the Germans reje&ed or
disputed the authority and jurifdi&ion which the
Papal Sec claims with refpec to general councils,
he took care, in the preamble of the bull, to as-
fert, in the trongeft terms, his own right, not
only to call and preside in that assembly, but to
diret its proceedings; nor would he sosen these
exprefflons, in any degree, in compliance with
the repeated solicitations of the Emperor, who
foresaw what offence they would give, and what
conftrudion might be put on them. They were
-ensured accordingly with great severity, by fe-
veral members of the diet; but whatever disgust
or suspicion they excited, such absolute dire&ion
of all their deliberations had the Emperor ac-
'i5- quired, that he procured a recess, in which the

authority of the council was recognised, and de-
clared to be the proper remedy for the evils which
;:t that time afilided the church; all the Princes
and itates of the Empire, stich as had made in-
novations in religion, as well as those who ad-
hered to the system of their forefathers, were
required to fend their representatives to the coun-
cil; the iEmtperor engaged to grant a fafe-conduc
to fuich as demanded it, and to secure them an
impartial hearing in the council; he p:omifed to
fx his residence in ome city of the Empire, in

the

the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might pro- B ° K
te the members of the council by his pretence, i
and take care that, by conduAing their delibera- '5;'
tions agreeably to scripture and the dotrine of
the fathers, they might bring them to a desirable
issue. In this recess, the observation of the In-
terim was more ftritly enjoined than ever; and
the Emperor threatened all who had hitherto ne-
gleced or refuted to conform to it, with the
severest effe&s of hs vengeance, if they perfilted
in their disobedience'.

DURING the meeting of this diet, a new at- Anot.er

fr.inlest-
tempt was made, in order to procure liberty to tempro

procure 'he

the Landgrave. That Princc, nowile reconciled L^n"r.¢
by time to his situation, grew every day more lberty
impatient of restraint. Having often applied to
Maurice and the Ele&or of Brandenburg, who
took every occasion of soliciting the Emperor in
his behalf, though without any effet, he now
commanded his sons to summon them, with legal
formality, to perform what was contained in the
bond which they had granted him, by surrender-
ing themselves to be treated with the iame rigour
as the Emperor had used him. This furnilhed
them with a fresh pretext for renewing their )ap-
plication to the Emperor, together with an addi-
tional argument to enforce it. Charles firmly
resolved not to grant their requelt; though, at
the fame time, being extremely deir'ous to g.

Sleid. ;12. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldafli Conflit. mr.
priales, vol. ii. 340.

C 3 rid

B 0 0 K rid of their incessant importunity, he endeavoured
*..--.. to prevail on the Landgrave to give up the obli-
'"'' gation which he had received from the two Elec-

tors. But that Prince refusing to part with a
security which he deemed essential to his safety,
the Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could
not untie; and by a public deed annulled the
bond which Maurice and the Ele&or of Bran-
denburg had granted, absolving them from all
their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre-
tension to a power so pernicious to society as that
of abrogating at pleasure the most sacred laws of
honour, and molf formal obligations of publick
faith, had hitherto been formed by any but the
Roman Pontiffs, who, in consequence of their
claim of infallibility, arrogate the right of dif-
pensing with precepts and duties of every kind.
All Germany was filled with astonishment, when
Charles aflurned the fame prerogative. The state
of fubjetion, to which the Empire was reduced,
appeared to be more rigorous, as well as into-
lerable, than that of the molt wretched and en-
ilaved nations, if the Emperor, by an arbitrary
decree, might cancel those solemn contrafs,
which are the foundation of that mutual confi-
dence whereby men are held together in social
union. The Landgrave himself now gave up all
hopes of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's
content, and endeavoured to procure it by his
own address. But the plan which he had formed
to deceive his guards being discovered, such of
his attendants as, he had gained to favour his

escape,

escape, were put to death, and he was confined in B o0 K
the citadel of Mechlin more clofly than everk. -~

55ss1.
ANOTHER tranfation was carried on during Ciia'i,'

planof pti.

this diet, with respect to an alfair more nearly in- curing the
teresting to the Emperor, and which occasioned ,^n ,or,
likewise a general alarm among the Princes of i',;,"
the Empire. Charles, though. forined with ta-
lents which fitted him for conceiving and con-
du&ing great deligns, was not capable, as has
been often observed, of bearing extraordinary
success. Its operation on his mind was so violent
and intoxicating, that it elevated him beyond
what was moderate or attainable, and turned his
whole attention to the purfuic of vail but chime-
rical obje&s. Such had been the effect of his
victory over the confederates of Smalkalde. He
did not long relt ftisfied with the substantial and
certain advantages which were the result of that
event, but, despising these, as poor or inconfide-
rable fruits of such great s'uccess, he had aimed
at bringing all Germany to an uniformity in reli-
gion, and at rendering the Imperial power de-
fpotick. These were objeas extremely splendid,
indeed, and alluring to an ambitious mind; the
pursuit of them, however, was attended with ma-
nifefl danger, and the attainment of them very
precarious. But the steps which he had already
taken towards them, having been accompanied
with lich success, his imagination, warmed with

Sleid. 5o4. Tiuan. 1. vi. z.1., .

C 4. ronlltel

B ox contemplating this vast design, overlooked or

despised all remaining difliculties. As he con-
5' ceived the execution of his plan to be certain, he

began to be solicitous how he might render the
poflfffion of fuich an important acquisition per-
petual in his family, by trarinitting the German
Empire, as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and
his dominions in Italy and the Low-Countries,
to his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, withcut conmmunicating it, even
to those miniltcrs whom he mo}t trufled, he had
called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that his pre-
fence would facilitate the carrying forward the
scheme.

're ',a- GREAT obstacles, however, and such as would

cles that

ood in is have deterred any ambition less accustomed to
<y*' overcome difficulties, were to be surmounted.

He had, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty, imprudently afilifed in procuring his
brother Ferdinand the dignity of King of the
Romans, and there was no probability that this
Prince, who was Itill in the prime of life, and
had a ofn grown up to the years of manhood,
would relinquil,, in favour of his nephew, the
near proll)pe of the Imperial throne, which
Charles's infirmities and declining lfate of health
opened to himsei. This did not deter the Em-
peror from venturing to make the proposition;
and when Ferdinand, notwithstanding his pro-
found reverence for his brother, and obsequious
fubifriion to .his will in other in(tances, rejeted

it

it in a peremptory tone, he was not discouraged B 0

:

by one repulse. He renewed his applications to --
him by his fitter, Mary Queen of Hungary, to
whom Ferdinand stood indebted for the crowns
both of Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her
great abilities, tempered with extreme gentleness
of difpolition, had acquired an extraordinary in-
fluence over both the brothers. She entered
warmly into a measure, which tended so mani-
feftly to aggrandize the house of Austria; and,
flattering herself that lhe could tempt Ferdinand
to renounce the reversionary poffeflion of the In-
perial dignity for an immediate establishment, she
assured him that the Emperor, by way of com-
penfation for his giving up his chance of fuccef-
lion, would inefantly bestow upon him territories
of very considerable value, and pointed out in
particular those of the Duke of Wurtemberg,
which might be confiscated upon different pre-
texts. But neither by her address nor intreaties,
could he induce Ferdinand to approve of a plan,
which would have degraded him from the highest
rank among the Monarchs of Europe to that of
a fbordinate and dependent Prince. He was,
at the fame time, more attached to his children,
than by a ralh conceflion to frustrate all the high
hopes, in profpe& of which they had been edu-
cated.

NOTWITHSTANDINC the immovable firmncfs ; an.''-

vtalis tiu fur.

which Ferdinand discovered, the Emperor did mon.,
not abandon his scheme. He flattered himself ,'er'.

that

B o 0 K that he might attain the objec in view by another

-- ch..nnd, and that it was not impoliible to prevail
,55' on the Electors to cancel their former choice of

Fetrdinand, or at leait to ele& Philip a second
K;n; of te Romans, substituting him as next ir
fijcceion to his uncle. With this view, he took
PiLlip along with him to the diet, that the Ger-
mans niinhc h.ave an opportunity to oblerve and
become .:qu.:inrti with the Prince, in behalf of
wh.ilm he cutrted their intercR; and he himnfelf
employed all the arts of add:'eis or irninuation to
gain thz Electors, and to prepare them for lend-
ing a favo'-..Lice ear to the propufal. But no
fooncr Jid he vnture upon mentioning it to
the;v: than they, at once, saw and trembled at
the con.quer.ces with which it vould be attend-
ed. Tl.ty had long Ielt all the inconveniencies
of having placed at the head of the Empire a
Prince whose power and dominions were o ex-
tenrive; if they thould now repeat the folly, and
continue the Inperial crown, like an hereditary
dignity, in the ia:ne family, they foresaw that
they would give the son an opportunity of car-
rying on that system of oppression which the
father had begun; and would put it in his power
to overturn whatever was yet left entire in the
ancient and venerable fabrick of the German
constitution.

Pilip',* TIE chara&ter of the Prince, in whose favour.
dfSireble this extraordinary proposition was made, rendered
,,,r,, . it still less agreeable. Philip, though pofflered

with

with an insatiable desire of power, was a stranger B O0O
to all the arts of conciliating good-will. Haughty, i
reserved, and severe, he, instead of gaining new XS'5.
friends, disgusted the ancient and most devoted
partizans of the Aultrian interef. He scorned
to take the trouble of acquiring the language of
the country to the government of which he afpir-
ed; nor would he condcfcend to pay the Germans
ti: compliment of accommodating himself, dur-
ing his residence among them, to their nanners
and customs. He allowed the Electors and most
illustrious Princes in Germany, to remain in his
presence uncovered, affecting a stately and dif-
tant demeanour, which the greatef of the Ger-
man Emperors, and even Charles himself, amidst
the pride of power and victory, had never affum-
ed'. On the other hand, Ferdinand, from the
time of his arrival in Germany, had fludied to
render himself acceptable to the people, by a
conformity to their manners, which seemed to
flow from choice; and his son Maximilian, who
was born in Germany, poffcffed, in an eminent
degree, such amiable qualities as rendered him
the darling of his countrymen, and induced them
to look forward to his election as a mo desirable
event. Their esteem and affeEtion for him, for-
tified the resolution which found policy had fug-
gested; and determined the Germans to prefer
the popular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to

; Frediman Andrea Zulich Differtatio politico.hillorica de
NTxvis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 4to. p. z2.

the

B °0 K the stubborn aufierity of Philip, which interest

.-_- could not fofren, nor ambition teach him to dif-

Charls guise. All the EleAors, the ecclefiaflical as well
obliged to
e'linqi, as secular, concurred in expressing such strong
thisichbe. disapprobation of the measure, that Charles, not-

withtanding the reluctance with which he gave
up any point, was obliged to drop the scheme as
impi'acicable. By his unseasonable perseverance
in pulhing it, he not only filled the Germans
vith niw jealousy of his ambitious designs, but
laid the foundati;n of rivalfhip and discord. in the
AulRrian family, au;d ibrced his brother Ferdinand,
in felf-defence, tu court the Eleclors, particu-
larly Ma1uricc of Saxony, and to frmn such con-
nexions with them, as cut off all prolpeEt of re-
newing the proposal with success. Philip, owered
by his dilhppo;ntment, was sent back to Spain, to
be calie. thence when any new scheme of ambi-
tian rfnuld render his presence neceffaryn.

TheP.pe I.AV'NG relinquiflied this plan of domefick
and Empc-
ro, r..rn . a!nbition, which had long occupied and engrossed
-efig Ir rx-
co P.r , him, Carles imagined that he would now have
:r*,. [L ]ci'u. rco tn:'n all his attention towards his grand

scheme o ecilabliiliing uniformity of religion in
the Empire, by forcing all the contending parties
to acrluiecce in the decisions of the council of
Trent. But such was the extent of his domi-
nions, the variety of conneHtions in which this

" Sleid. 505. Tman. 180. z?.. Memoir. de Ribier, ii,
".r9. 8». 4.. driani Iior. lib. vii, 'i. c 57.

entangled

entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to B O°°
which these gave rife, as seldom allowed him to i -- .
apply his whole force to any one obje&. The '55SS
machine which he had to conduft was lo great
and complicated, that an unforeseen irregularity
or obltruAion in one of the inferior wheels, often
disconcerted the motion of the whole, and difap-
pointed him of the molt considerable efficts which
he expe&ed. Such an unlooked-for occurrence
happened at this juncture, and created new ob-
lacles to the execution of his schemes with regard
to religion. Julius III. though he had confirmed
Otavio Farnese in the possession of the dutchy of
Parma, during the first effusions of his joy and
gratitude on his promotion to the papal throne,
soon began to repent of his own generosity, ani
to be apprehensive of consequences which either
he did not foresee, or had disregarded, while the
sense of his obligations to the family of Farneei
was recent. The Emperor still retained Placcn-
tia in his hands, and had not relinquilhed his
pretensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire.
Gonzaga, the governor of Milan, having, by the
part which he took in the murder of the late Duke
Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the finily
of Farnese, which he knew could never be for-
given, had, for that reason, vowed its deftruc-
tion; and employed ail the influence which his
great abilities, as well as long lfrvices, gave hi:n
with the Emperor, in perfiading him to seize Par-
ma by force of arms. Charles, in compliance
with is fulicitations, and that he might gratify

his

i0 0O K his own desire of annexing Parma to the Mila-

_ nefe, liflened to the proposal; and Gonzaga,
'55'' ready to take encouragement from the flightef

appearance of approbation, began to assemble
troops, and to make other preparations for the ex-
ecution of his fchemc.

oy;vio OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger,
orts the found it necessary, for his own safety, to encreafe
fflancf the garrilbn of his capital, and to levy soldiers

for defending the reft of the country. But as the
expence of such an effort far exceeded his scanty
revenues, he represented his situation to the Pope,
and implored that protection and assistance which
was due to him as a vassal of the church. The
Imperial minister, however, had already pre-oc-
cupied the Pope's ear; and by discoursing conti-
nually concerning the danger of giving offence
to the Emperor, as well as the imprudence of
ftipporting Oftavio in an usurpation so detrimen-
tal to the Holy See, had totally alienated him
from the family of Farnese. Oaavio's remon-
ftrance and petition met, of consequence, with a
cold reception; and he, despairing of any as-
fiftance from Julius, began to look round for
protection from some other quarter. Henry II.
of France was the only Prince powerful enough
to afford him this protection, and fortunately he
was now in a situation which allowed him to un-
dertake it. He had brought his tranfaaions with
the two British kingdoms, which had hitherto di-
verted his attention from the affairs of the Con-

6 tinent,

tinent, to such an issue as he desired. This he 3 O O K
lhad effeted partly by the vigour of his arms, .-.
partly by his dexterity in taking advantage of the '551'
political factions which r;!gcd in both kingdoms to
firch a degree, as rendered the councils of the
Scots violent and precipitate, and the operations
of the Englifn feeble and unsteady. He had pro-
cured from the English favourable conditions of
peace for his allies the Scots; he had prevailed on
the nobles of Scotland not only to affiance their
;'oung Queen to his ion the Dauphin, but even
to fend her into France, that she might be edu-
:ated under his eye; and had recovered Boulogne,
-ogether with its dependencies, which had been
conquered by Henry VIII.

HAVING gained points of so much consequence His league

ith

to his crown, and disengaged himself with such Henry I.
honour from the burden of supporting the Scots,
and maintaining a war against England, Henry
was now at full leisure to pursue the measures
which his hereditary jealouy of the Emperor's
power naturally fuggelted. He lisened, accor-
dingly, to the first overtures which O&avio Far-
nefe made him; and embracing eagerly an uppor-
tunity of recovering footing in Italy, he initantly
concluded a treaty, in which he promised to
espouse his caure, and to furnish him all the as-
fftance which he desired. This tranfadion could
not be long kept secret from the Pope, who, fore-
feeing the calamities which muff follow if war
were rekindled so near the ecclesiastical slate, im-

mediately

aB o°° mediately issued monitory letters, requiring Oc-
'-r--» tavio to reiinquifl his new alliance. Upon his

'55S' refusal to comply with the requisition, he oon

after pronounced his fief to be forfeited, and de-
clared war against him as a disobedient and re-
bellious vassal. But as, with his own forces alone,
he could not hope to subdue Octavio while sup-
ported by such a powerful ally as the King of
France, he had recourle to the Emperor, who
being extremely solicitous to prevent the eftablih-
ment of the French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga

orca'.on to second Julius with all his troops. Thus the
otllon.,is French took the field as the allies of Otavio; the

'hani Imperialits as the protectors of the Holy See;
'"'Uy. and hofilities commenced between them, zwhile

Charles and Henry themfclves till affieed to
give out that they would adhere inviolably to the
peace of Crtfpy. The war of Parma was not dif-
tinguifliled by any memorable event. Many fiall
rencountres happened with alternate success the
French ravaged part of the ecclesiastical territo-
ries; the Imperialists laid waste the Parmesan;
and the latter, after having begun to besiege Par-
ma in form, were obliged to abandon the enter-
prize with disgrace".

Retrds the BUT the notions and alarm which this war, or
mneti;ne .f
tccouzcii. the preparatiuns for it, occasioned in Italy, pre-

vented moilf of t:; Italian prelates from repairing

"Adriar.I lor. li viii. 50;. 514. 524. Sieid. 513. Pa.

ruta, p. 2o. Lettere del Caro flritte al nome del Card.
Farncfc, tom. ii . . 1, &c.

8 to

to Trent on the first of May, the day appointed B O00 K
for re-affmbling the council; and though the '---.
papal legate and nuncios retorted thither, they 5'
were obliged to adjourn to the first of September,
hoping such a number might then affcmble, that
they might with decency begin their deliberations.
At that time, about ixty prelates, mostly from
the ecclefiaflical flatc, or from Spain, together
with a few Germans, convened,. The fefniop r.nry pn.
was opened with the accuflomed formalities, and las.^'s:
the fathers were about to proceed to bufinel,
when the abbot of Bellozane appeared, and pre-
senting letters of credence as ambafll.cor from
the French King, demanded audience. Having
obtained it, he protested, in Henry's name,
against an assembly called at such an improper
junaure, when a war, wantonly kindled by the
Pope, made it impossible for the deputies from
the Gallican church to resort to Trent in safety,
or to deliberate concerning articles of faith and
discipline with the requisite tranquillity; he de-
clared, that his master did not acknowledge this
to be a general or oecumenick council, but mull
confider, and would treat it, as a particular and
partial convention '. The legate affected to de-
fpife this protest; and the prelates proceeded,
notwithfanding, to examine and decide the great
points in controversy concerning the sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme
untion. This mcalrc of the French Monarclh.

° F. Paul, 268.

Slcid. 51g. Thuan. z82. F. ranI, 3 .
VOL. IV. D however

B °o K however, gave a deep wound to the credit of the

.

--- council, at the very commencement of its deli-
'5S' berations. The Germans could not pay much

regard to an afrembly, the authority of which the
ftcond Prince in Christendom had formally dif-
claimed, or feel any great reverence for the de-
cifions of a few men, who arrogated to themselves
all the rights belonging to the representatives of
the church universal, a title to which they had
such poor pretensions.

thVilence THE Emperor, nevertheless, was raining his
the Empe.
ror po- authority to the utmost, in order to establish the
cedingt
against the reputation and jurifdiaion of the council. He

had prevailed on the three ecclesiastical Elecors,
the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the
church next to the Pope, to repair thither in per-
son. He had obliged several German bilhops of
inferior rank, to go to Trent themfe!ves, or to
iend their proxies. He granted an Imperial safe-
conduf to the ambassadors nominated by the
Elecor of Brandenburg, the duke of Wurtem-
berg, and other ProteRant ates, to attend the
council; and exhorted them to fend their divines
thither, in order to propound, explain, and de-
fend their dotrine. At the fame time, his zeal
anticipated the decrees of the council; and as if
the Proteltant dotrines had already been con-
demned, e took large ftcps towards extermi-
nating them. With this intention, he called
together the ministers of Augsburg; and after
interrogating them concerning several contro-

verted

verted points, enjoined them to teach nothing B o° K
with refpet to there, contrary to the tenets of
the Romiih church. Upon their declining to '55'
comply with a requisition so contrary to the dic-
tates of thcir consciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without reveal-
ing to any person the cause of their banifnment;
he prohibited them to preach for the future in any
of the countries subjed to the Imperial jurifdic-
tion; and obliged them to take an oath that they
would pun&ually obey there injunfcions. They
were not the only victims to his zeal. The Pro-
teftant clergy, in most of the cities in the circle
of Swabia, were ejeted with the fame violence;
and in many places, such magistrates as had dif-
tinguilhed themselves by their attachment to the
new opinions, were dismissed with the most abrupt
Irregularity, and their offices filled, in consequence
of the Emperor's arbitrary appointment, with the
most bigoted of their adversaries. The Re-
formed worship was almost entirely suppressed
throughout that extensive province. The an-
cient and fundamental privileges of the free cities
were violated. The people were compelled to
attend the ministration of priests, whom they re-
garded with horror as idolaters; and to submit to
the jurifdicion of magistrates, whom they detetR-
ed as usurpers9.

THiE Emperor, after this discovery, which was FMi endear
more explicit than any that he had hitherto made, u°ott

q Seid. 516. 528. Thuan, 276. cuncil,

D 2 of

B 0 0o of his intention to subvert the German conftitu-

X.

tion, as well as to extirpate the Protestant reli-
Nultcr. gion, set out for lnfpruck in the Tyrol. He

fixed his residence in that city, as, by its situation
in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on the con-
fines of Italy, i appeared a commodious station,
whence he might infpe& the operations of the
council, and observe the progress of the war in
the Parmesan, without losing fight of such oc-
currences as might happen in Germany'.

rher;eof DURIN:G there tranfa&ions, the iege of Mag-
.'aduburg. 0

deburg was carried on with various luccefs. At
the time when Charles proscribed the citizens of
Magdeburg, and put them under the ban of the
Empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all the
neighbouring flates to take arms against them,
as rebels and common enemies. Encouraged by
his exhortations as well as promises, George of
Mecklenburg, a younger brother of the reigning
Duke, an active and ambitious Prince, collected
a considerable number of those soldiers of fortune
who had accompanied Henry of Brunswick in all
his wild enterprizes; and though a zealous Lu-
theran hiinfelf, invaded the territories of the
Magdeburgers, hoping that, by tie merit of this
service, he might procure omre part of their do-
mains to be allotted to him as an eltabliflment.
The citizens, unaccutomed as yet to endure pa-
tiently the calamities of war, could not be re-
rtrainc fiom sallying out in order to 1ive their

Sleid. 329.

lands

lands from being laid waf!e. They attacked the o0 K
Duke of Mecklenburg with .- -. .,;,ln than .--.
condut, and were repulfcl with great slaughter. 'sji
But as they were animated with that unconquer-
able spirit, which sows from zeal for religion
co-operating with the love of civil liberty, far
from being dilheartened by their misfortune, they
prepared to defend thernelves with vigour. Many
of the veteran soldiers who had served in the long
wars between the Emperor and King of France,
crowding to their standards under able and expe-
rienced officers, they acquired military kill by
degrees, and added all the advantages of that to
the efforts of undaunted courage. The Duke of
Mecklenburg, notwithltanding the revere blow
which he had given the Magdeburgers, not dar-
ing to invelt a town strongly fortified, and defend-
ed by such a garrison, continued to ravage the
open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers Maurice

to the camp of this young Prince, Maurice of coma of
Saxony began to be jealous of the power which 'whichm
he poffefled by being at the head of such a nume- e , th
rous body, and marching towards Magdeburg
with his own troops, afrumed the fipreme com-
mand of the whole army, an honour to which his
high rank and great abilities, as well as the no-
mination of the diet, gave him an inditputable
title. With this united force, he invested the
town, and began the siege in form; claiming
great merit with the lEmperor on that account,

D 3 as,

B o°° K as, from his zeal to execute the Imperial decree,

'--- he was expo(ing himself once more to the censures

and maledictions of the party with which he
agreed in religious sentiments. But the ap-
proaches to the town went on slowly; the gar-
rifon interrupted the besiegers by frequent rallies,
in one of which the Duke of Mecklenburg was
taken prisoner, levelled part of their works, and
cut off the soldiers in their advanced posts.
While the citizens of Magdeburg, animated by
the discourses of their pastors, and the soldiers
encouraged by the exanple of their officers, en-
dured all the hardships of a siege without mur-
muring, and defended themselves with the fame
ardour which they had at sirss discovered; the
troops of the besiegers aed with extreme re-
minffefs, repining at every thing that they sus-
sered in a ervice which they disliked. They
broke out, more than once, into open mutiny,
demanding the arrears of their pay, which, as the
Germans ent in their contributions sparingly,
and with great relucance, towards defraying the
expences of this war, amounted to a considerable
fum'. Maurice, too, had particular motives,
though such as he durf not avow at that juncture,
which induced him not to push the siege with vi-
gour, and made him chuf rather to continue at
the head of an army exposed to all the imputa-
tions which his dilatory proceedings drew upon
him, than to precipitate a conquest that might

' Thuan. 277. Sleid. 514.

have

have brought him some acceflion of reputation, B o°° K
but would have rendered it necessary to disband .- -
his forces. s551'

AT lalt, the inhabitants of the town beginning The city

to susser difrefs from want of provisions, and to Ma:iC,.
Maurice finding it impoflible to protrat matters
any longer without filling the Emperor with such
iiffpicions as might have disconcerted all his mea-
fures, he concluded a treaty of capitulation with
the city upon the following conditions; that the
Magdeburgers hould humbly implore pardon of
the Emperor; that they hould not for the future
take arms, or enter into any alliance against the
house of Austria that they should submit to the Novcmb. 3.
authority of the Imperial chamber; that they
ihould conform to the decree of the diet at Augf-
btlrg with refpe& to religion; that the new forti-
fications added to the town should be demolished;
that they hfould pay a fine of fifty thousand
crowns, deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to
the Emperor, and et the Duke of Mecklenburg,
together with their other prisoners, at liberty,
without ransom. Next day their garrison march-
ed out, and Maurice took poffcffln of the town
with great military pomp.

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were fettled, M.,rice',

vie at thi'

Maurice had held many conferences with Albert j,,Bu,
count Mansfeldt, who had the chief comirand in
Magdeburg. He conuired lilewife with count
Heideck, an officer who had served with great

D 4 reputation

B o , K reputation in the army of the league of Smaikalde,

. v- whom tle Emperor had profcri)ed on account of

5 his zeal for that cause, bu: whom Maurice had,

notwithltanding, fecrctly engaed in his fcrvice,
and admitted into the moP intimate confidence.
To them he communicated a fclieme, which he
had long revol.cd in his mind, for procuring li-
berty to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vin-
dicating the privileges of the Gcrmanick body,
and letting bounds to the dangerous encroach-
li:ents of the Imperial power. Having delibe-
rated with them concerning the inealurcs which
rmight he ncceffry for securing the iuccefs of such
an arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt fecrer
assurances that the fortifications of Magdeburg
should not be destroyed, and that the inhabitants
Ihould neither be disturbcd in the exercise of
their religion, nor be deprived of any of their an-
cient immunities. In order to engage Maurice
more thoroughly from considerations of interest
to fulfil these engagements, the senate of Magde-
burg eleced him their Burgrave, a dignity which
,lad formerly belonged to the electoral house
of Saxony, and which entitled him to a very

'· ai:,mplc jurifdidlion not only in the city but in its
, depcndcncies'.

.*., .,. Tr-HUS the citizens of Magdeburg, after en-
t .... 1'- during a ficge of twelve months, and struggling

Ie ,.\ ..

ti. ;. .',- t Sleid. 5z3. Thuan. 276. Oionis Magleburgici
LU',":. l;,fc;iptio per Scbal. cfliclmcicr um, p. Scand. ii. 5S8.

for

for their liberties, religious and civil, with an in- B 0° K
vincibit fortitude, worthy of the cause in which -
i was exerted, had at lalI the good fortune to '55'
conclude a crea'.. :ich left them in a better
con.;i:.on th .. :.c reft of their countrymen, whom
their timi' - or want of publick spirit had be-
trayed i'.o such mean ubnrr .lions to the Empe-
ror. Belt while a ea: part of Germany ap-
plau.'-d the gllant con;u' of the Ma;deburgers,
and rjoiced in their naving escaped the defruc-
tion with which they had bci Lhireacened, ail
admired Maurice's address in the conduc of his
negociation wvith them, as well as the dexterity
with which he converted every event to his own
advantage. They ftw, with amazement, that
after having affliied the M-gdeburgers during
many months with all the caiamities of war, he
was at lass, by their voluntary election, vested
with supreme authority in that city which he had
fL lately besieged ; that after having been so long
the obje&t of their satirical invectives as an apof.
tate, and an enemy to the religion which he pro-
icfed, they seemed now to place unbounded con-
fidence in his zeal and good-will . At the fame
time, the publick articles in the treaty of capi-
tulation were so perfectly conformable to thofil
which the Emperor had granted to the other Pro-
reliant cities, and Maurice took flich care to
magnify his merit in having reduced a place which
had defended itself with so much obltinacy, that

" Arnoldi vita Maurit. spud Menken, ii. 227.

Charles,

o °x K Charles, far from fufpeaing any thing fraudulent
u---.a or collusive in the terms of accommodation, rati-

15''. fled them without hefitarion, and absolved the

Magdeburgers from the lenience of ban which had
been denounced against them.

1;Se-iTii- THE only point that now remained to embar-
;,, "", rafs Maurice was how to keep together the vete-

"c ran troops which had served under him, as well

as those which had been employed in the defence
of the town. For this, too, he found an expe-
dient with singular art and felicity. His schemes
against the Emperor were not yet so fully ripened,
that he durst venture to disclose them, and pro-
ceed openly to carry them into execution. The
winter was approaching, which made it impoflible
to take the field immediately. He was afraid
that it would give a premature alarm to the Em-
peror, if he flould retain such a considerable body
in his pay until the season of action returned in
the spring. As oon then as Magdeburg opened
its gates, he ent home his Saxon subje&s, whom
he could command to take arms and re-allemble
on the hortefl warning; and at the fame time,
paying part of the arrears due to the mercenary
troops, who had followed his standard, as well as
to the soldiers who had served in the garrison, he
absolved them from their refperivc oaths of
fidelity, and dlifbanded them. But the moment
he gave them their discharge, George Duke of
lM~ecklenburg, who was now set at liberty, offer-
ed to take them into his service, and to become

surety

surety for the payment of what was fill owing to B o X K
them. As such adventurers were accustomed ---.
often to change masters, they instantly accepted 'ss,'
the offer. Thus these troops were kept united,
and ready to march wherever Maurice Ihould call
them, while the Emperor, deceived by this arti-
fice, and imagining that the Duke of Mecklen-
burg had hired them with an intention to assert
his claim to a part of his brother's territories by
force of arms, fufered this tranfaition to pass
without observation, as if it had been a matter of
no consequence .

HA.ING ventured to take these steps which niTaddr^f

n con eat-
were of so much consequence towards the execu- i g his in-

tentions

rion of his schemes, Maurice, that he might di- from he
vert the Emperor from observing their tendency Emperor.
too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions which
that must have excited, saw the necessity of em-
ploying some new artifice in order to engage his
attention, and to confirm him in his present fe-
curity. As he knew that the chief obje&t of the
Emperor's solicitude at this jun&ure, was how
he might prevail with the Protestant States of
Germany to recognize the authority of the coun-
cil of Trent, and to fend thither ambassadors in
their own name, as well' as deputies from their
refpetive churches, he took hold of this predomi-
nating pafllon in order to amuse and to deceive

' Thuan. 278. Struv. corp. hiRf. Germ. 1064. Arnoldi
",ta Mauritii apud Menken, ii. 1227.

him.

B 0 0 K him. He assEted a wonderful zeal to gratify

X.

* ' Charles in what he desired with regard to this
£55. matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom he

empowered to attend the council; he made choice
of Melanthon and ome of the most eminent
among his brethren to prepare a confeflion of
faith, and to lay it before that assembly. After
his example, and probably in consequence of his
Solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the city
of Strafburg, and other Protestant States appoint-
ed amba.adors and divines to attend the council.
They all applied to the Emperor for his safe-
conduct, which they obtained in the most ample
form. This was deemled ftufficient for the fecu-
rity of the ambafiai ors, and they proceeded ac-
cordingly on their journey; but a separate safe-
conduct from the council itfclf was demanded for
thle Plroteflant divines. The fate of John Huss
and Jerome of Prague, whom the council of
Conflance, in the preceding century, had con-
demned to the flames without regarding the Im-
perial fife-condu&t which had been granted them,
rendered this precaution prudent and necessary.
But as the Pope was no lets unwilling that the
Proteflants flould be admitted to an hearing in
the council, than the Emperor had been eager in
bringing them to demand it, the legate by pro-
mises and threats prevailed on the fathers of the
.uuncil to decline issuing a fafe-condu& in the
lame form with that which the council of Basil
had granted to the followers of Huis. The Pro-
teftants, on their part, inffted upon the council's

8 copying

copying the precise words of that instrument. B K
The Imperial ambafladors interposed, in order to '-
obtain what would satisfy them. Alterations in 's'
the form of the writ were proposed; expedients
were suggested ; protests and counter-protefts
were taken: the legate, together with his aflo-
ciates, laboured to gain their point by artifice and
chicane; the Protestants adhered to theirs with
firmness and obstinacy. An account of every
thing that passed in Trent was transmitted to the
Emperor at Infpruck, who, attempting, from an
excess of zeal, or of confidence in his own ad-
dress, to reconcile the contending parties, was
involved in a labyrinth of inextricable negocia-
tions. By means of this, hovwver, Maurice
gained all that he had in view; the Emperor's
time was wholly engrossed, and his attention di-
verted; while he himlelf had leisure to mature
his schemes, to carry on his intrigues, and to
finish his preparations, before he threw off the
malk, and struck the blow which he had so long
meditated r.

BUT previous to the history of Malrice's ope- Th- A'.irs

o fiultljt y- .

rations, some account mult be given of a new .
revolution in Hungary, which contributed not a
little towards their producing such extraordinary
effects. When Solyman, in the year S 5r, by a
firatagem, which suited the bas a iniidious
policy of a petty usurper, rather than r:e m. anu-

Y Sleid. 526. 529. F. Paul, 33. 3 h:::. 'Th . 86.

nimnity

B 0 0 K nimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived the

X.* young King of Hungary of the dominions which
·5s his father had left him, he had granted that un-

fortunate Prince the country of Transylvania, a
province of his paternal kingdom. The govern-
ment of this, together with the care of educating
the young King, for he still allowed him to retain
that title, though he had rendered it only an
empty name, he committed to the Queen and
Martinuzzi bishop of Waradin, whom the late
King had appointed his sons guardians and regents
of his dominions, at a time when those offices
were of greater importance. This co-ordinate
jurifdicion occasioned the fame dissentions in a
finall principality as it would have excited in a
great kingdom; an ambitious young Queen,
conscious of her capacity for governing, and an
high-fpiried prelate, fond of power, contending
who hould engross the greatest hare in the ad-
ministration. Each had their partizans among the
nobles; but as Martinuzzi, by his great talents,
began to acquire the acendant, Iabella turned
his own arts against him, and courted the protec-
tion of the Turks.

Marinzai THE neighbouring Balhas, jealous of the bi-
favours Ser.
dinrnd's lhop's power as well as abilities, readily promised
ipn ""' her the aid which the demanded, and would oon
kingdom. have obliged Martinuzzi to have given up to her

the sole direction of affairs, if his ambition, fertile
in expedients, had not fuggelled to him a new
measure, and one that tended not only to pre-

serve

serve but to enlarge his authority. Having con- B X K
cluded an agreement with the Queen, by the me- -
diation of some of the nobles, who were solicitous 's;'
to save their country from the calamities of a
civil war, he secretly dilpatched one of his confi-
dents to Vienna, and entered into a negociation
with Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to
persuade Ferdinand, that the fame man whole
enmity and intrigues had driven him out of a
great part of his Hungarian dominions, might,
upon a reconciliation, become equally inltru-
mental in recovering them, he listened eagerly to
the first overtures of an union with that prelate.
Martinuzzi allured him by uch profpeas of ad-
vantage, and engaged, with so much confidence,
that he would prevail on the most powerful of
the Hungarian nobles to take arms in his favour,
that Ferdinand, notwithstanding his truce with
Solyman, agreed to invade Transylvania. The
command of the troops destined for that service,
consisting of veteran Spanilh and German fol-
diers, was given to Caftaldo Marquis de Piadena,
an officer formed by the famous Marquis de Pes-
cara, whom he strongly resembled both in his
enterpriDng genius for civil business, and in his
great knowledge in the art of wa;. This army,
more formidable by the discipline of the soldiers,
and the abilities of the general, than by its num-
bers, was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and
his fation among the Hungarians. As the Turk-
ifn Barhas, the Sultan himself being at the head
of his army on the frontiers of PeriL., could not

6 afford

B 0 ( K aTo'rd the Q(een fiich immediate or effeLual

X. _--- aafliance as the exigeincy of her flairs required,

f'' ie quiicklv lofil all hopes of being able to retain
any longer tie utlthority which Ine poffffed as
regent, and even began to deflair of her son's
f-c-;.

TI - !tf'!s M.A!:TrNiUz7r did not susser this favourable
ts !:' .-. :a-
iuI,. opipo;luniLy of accomplilhn;g his own designs to

pas rlni:provcd, .and ventured, while fle was in
this state of d.iec:jion, to lay before her a propo-
J'a, wlich at any other time ihf would have re-
jc ed with dif.'- ain. He rcprefented how impof-
,iibe it Vas fur her to refif Fcriinand's vicltorious
arn.s ti!2t even if the Turks ihould enable her
to mna:e head ag;inlt them, she would be far
from changing her condition to the better, and
could not confider them as deliverers, but as mal-
terS, to vhole commands he must submit he
conjured Iher, therefore, as fihe regarded her own
dignity, lle fa'ety of her son, or the security of
iChriflendo:.i, rather to give up Transylvania to
.l'erdiinar., and to make over to him her son's
title to the crown of Hiungary, than to allow both
ro be usurped by the invterate enemy of the
Chriialn sith. At the fame time he promiieid
ler, in l:crlinand's name, a compensation for
hlcrfllf, as v;ell as for her son, suitable to their
rank, and proportional to the value of wlat they
were to faciiice. Ifabelia, delrted by some of
her adherents, dill:rufling others, de(fiture of
friends, and surrounded by Caltaldo's and Marti-

nuzzi's

nuzzi's troops, subscribed there hard conditions, B O O K
though with a reluctant hand. Upon this, she '-
surrendered such places of firength as were still
in her pofietTion, file gave up all the ensigns of
royalty, particularly a crown of gold, which, as
the Hungarians believed, had descendcd from
heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an un-
doubted right to the throne. As she could not
bear to remain a private person, in a country
where she had once enjoyed fuvereign power,
he instantly set out with her son for Silrfia, in
order to take polffcion of the principaliies of
Oppelan and Ratibor, the investiture of which
Ferdinand had engaged to grant her fun, and like-
wife to bestow one of his daughters upon him in
marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Mar- Appointed

g ivernor of

tinuzzi, and after his example the reft of the tlt .-rtu.
Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Ser- .hiha,,-.
dinand; who, in order to teflify his grateful sense aJp^
of the zeal as well as success witl which that
prelate had served him, affected to diftinuifh
him by every possible mark of favour and confi-
dence. He appointed him governor of Tran-
fylvania, with almolt unlimited authority ; he
ordered Caufaldo to pay the greatct deference to
his opinion and commands; he increafced his re-
venues, which were already very great, by new
appointments; he nominated him archbishop of
Gran, and prevailed on the Pope to raise him to
the dignity of a Cardinal. All this ostentation

Vol.. IV. E of

B o0 Kos good-will, however, was void of sincerity, and
L-. calculated to conceal sentiments the most perfet-

s151. ly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's

abilities; diftrulted his fidelity; and foresaw,
that as his extensive authority enabled him to
check any attempt towards circumscribing or
abolishing the extensive privileges which the Hun-
garian nobility poffcfled, he would stand forth, on
every occa5ion, the guardian of the liberties of his
country, rathcr than a the part of a viceroy de-
voted to the will of his fovercign.

Fr.iiand FOR this reason, he fecrctly gave it in charge
begins to
torm defing-. to Caftaldo to watch his motions, to guard against
agal:R hlo.

his designs, and to thwart his measures. But
Martinuzzi, either becaule he did not perceive
that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his ations,
or becaufc he despised Ferdinand's insidious arts,
assumed the direction of the war against the
Turks with his usual tone of authority, and con-
du&ed it with great magnanimity, and no less
success. He recovered some places of which the
Infidels had taken pofl'eflion; he rendered their
attempts to reduce others abortive; and establish-
ed Ferdinand's authority not only in Tranfyl-
vania, but in the Bannat of Temefwar, and several
of the countries adjacent. In carrying on these
operations, he often differed in sentiments from
Ca(laldo and his officers, and treated the Turkish
prisoners with a degree not only of humanity, but
even of gcllerofty, which Caftaldo loudly con-
demned. This was represented at Vienna as an

5 artfu

artful method of courting tie friendihip of the B K
Infidels, that, by ficuring their protecion, he - -
Ilight lhake ofi all dependence upon the fove- 55t'
rcign whom he now acknowledged. Tough
Martinuzzi, in juftilication of his own conduct,
contended that it was impolitick to eafperatc an
enemy prone to revenge by unnecfsary fevcrities,
Ca.ftalo's accusations gained credit with Ferdi-
nand, prepofriiCed aircady a:ainfl: nMartinuzzi,
;iid jealous of every thing tlha. could endanger
his own authority in I unG;' , ini proportion as
hie knew it to be precarious a;d ill clablifhed.
Theft fufr)icions Cailaldo coniir;ncd and ilrengthi-
ened, by the iiitellig'.nce whic he tranfrmitred
continually to his confidcnts at Vienna. By mif-
rcprelnting vwhat was innocent, and putting the
worst conftruio n on what feremed dubious in
Martinuzzi's condut; by imputing to him designs
which he never formed, and charging him with
a3ions of which he was not guilty, he at last
convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to prelfrve
his I-Iungarian crown, he must cut off that ambi-
tious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it
would be dangerous to proceed in the regular
course of law againit a fubje& of flich exorbitant
power, as enabled him to flet his sovereign at de-
fiance, determined to employ violence, in order
to obtain that fatisfation which the laws were too
feeble to aliord him.

HI issued his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, ,:;,, a..
w'ho willingly undertook that infamous service. ";I, ',l *"'

L 2 Havigl

B oXo K Having communicated the design to iome Italian
1---- and Spanilh offccrs whom he could trust, and

't concerted with them the plan of executing it,
DSc. . they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early one

mrnring, under pretence of presenting to hitm
foiln dilpatches which were to be fnt off imme-
diately to Vienna; and while he perused a paper
with attention, one of their number ITruck ini
with his poignard in the throat. The blow was
not mortal. Martinuzzi Itarted up with the in-
trepidity natural to him, and grappling the al-
sasin, threw him to the ground. But the other
conspirators rushing in, an old man, unarmed,
and alone, unable long to sustain such an un-
equal conflict, funk under the wounds which he
received from so many hands. Their dread of
the foreign troops restrained the Transylvanian?
fiom rising in arms, in order to take vengeance
on the murderers of a prelate who had long been
the objec of their love as well as veneration.

Tilheffr They spoke of the deed, however, with horror
of lhat vio-
i;lt ;a:on. and execration; and exclaimed againlt Ferdinand,

whom neither gratitude for recent and important
fcrvices, nor reverence for a character conidered
as acred and inviolable among Christians, could
restrain from sledding the blood of a man, whole
only crime was attachment to his native country.
The nobles, detesting the jealous as well as cruel
policy of a court, wlich, upon uncertain and
improbable furmifi;s, had given tip a person, no
less conspicuous for his merit than his rank, to
be butchered by affafllns, either retired to their

own

own estates, or if they continued with the Auffrian B °0° K
arl.y, r.w cold to the service. The Turks, en- ----
couraged by the death of an enemy whose abilities 5'i'
tey knew and dreaded, prepared to renew Ihofi-
1 ci; early in t;i: fring; and inftcad of the
flcurity which Ferdinand had expcted fromn the
reinoval of Martinuzzi, it was evident tlhat his
territories in Hungary were aout to be attacked
',vtil greater vigour, and defended with Icls zeal,
:an ever'.

BY this time, Maurice having almof: inifhed Mfatirr
his intriguies and preparations, was on the point tptralna

= of the

of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking :,,n,
t he field againil the Emperor. HIis irit care, K"
after he came to this resolution, was to dilclairn
that narrow and bigoted maxim of the confede-
rates of Smalkalde, which had led them to finun
all connexion with foreigners. He had obfirved
how fatal this had been to their catfe; and in-
ilruccd by their error, he was as eager to court
the protedtion of Henry [I. as they had been so-
licitous to prevent the interposition of Francis I.
Happily for him, he found Henry in a diflofi-
t.:o to liften to the first overture on his part, and
in a situation which enabled him to bring the
whole force of the French monarchy into ation.
Ilenrv had long oblrved the progress of the Eni-
i)cror's arms with jealoul'y, and wilhed to diftin-

" Sleid. :35. Thuan. lib. iv. 309, & c. Iuanhaffi Hill.
1 ngn [Hungarici, lib. xvi. , &c. Mern. de Ribier, ii. 8 l.
;;^Ialis Comitis Il1iria;, lib. iv. S.., &-c.

E 3 guin

o K guifh hii-mfelf by trying his itrength aainft tle si ir
- _-- enemy, whom it had been the glory of his father's
'';- rei'gn t opofe. I-e had laid hold on tie fir;

op'o! tutnitv in his pwer of thwarting the E!Tt:-
ror's dl.Jn::s, by taklin the Duke of Parma un;.';
his protction ; and h,.llilities were already 'c-
gun, not only in that dutchy but in Piedmpo;..,
Having termnateld t'.e wvar with England by :
peac, no less advantageous to himf!lf than I:,.
noutrabl3c for his allies the Scots, the rtrilei;s ;n
enterprizing couri.i:e cf his nobles wns inlpatic:i:
to diiplay itilir on lome theatre of aion iliO;c
conipicuous than ti:L p tty operations in Parn:i:
or Piedmont affor(de themi.

vi; trr:,y JOHN DE FtIESSE, biflop of Bayonne, whom
.,:, : . T I '

l

.' Henry had lent into Germany, under pretence ot
hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was em-
powered to conclude a treaty in form with Mau-
rice and his aifT)ciates. As it would have been
verv indlecent in a King of France to have under-
taken tiic cdelence of the Protefrant church, the
initcirfLs of religion, how much soever they might
be .atcld by the treaty, were not once mention-
ed in any of the articles. Religious concerns,
they pretci-ded to commnit cntirely to the difpo-
fition f Divine Providence; the only motives
;aigned for their prefiern confedelracy asaiil
Chal lcs, were ;to procure thc Landgrave liberty,
and .; .'.vent tie subversion of the ancient con-
1'" ," ;' - 1 'iv.s of the Geiran iEmpire. Ini
clrdcr to accoinpliih thelec ends, it was agrceel,

thz:'.

that all the contracting parties hould, at the fame 0 0 K
time, declare war against the Emperor that .
neither peace nor truce mfould be made but by '5'
common consent, nor with.out including each of
the confederates; th.a, in order to guard againtt
the inconveniencics of anarchy, or of pretensions
to joint commniant, M.lurice ihould be acknow-
ledged as head of the German confederates, with
ablolute authority in all miii:ary aliirs; thal
Maurice and his aTrociaces ihould bring into the
field seven thoul-nd horse, with a proportional
number of ini.iiry; that, to;vards thei ifubfience
of this army, during the tlree ril nio!ithis of the
war, Henry fl;ould contribute two hllndred and
forty thouland crowns, and afterwards sixty thou-
sand crowns a-month, as long as they continued
in arms that Henry Ihuuld attack the Emperor
on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful army;
that if it were found reqifite to elet a new Em-
peror, such a person hould be nominated as fiall
be agreeable to the King of Frances, This
treaty was concluded on the fifth of Oobcr,
iome time before Magde)brg surrendered, and
the preparatory ncgociations were conrduhtcd with
such profound secrecy, that, of all the Pincc.
who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice caminu-
nicated what he was carrying on to two only,
John Albert, the reigning Duke of Mecklen-
burg, and William of Illefe, the Landgrave's
eldest son. The league itself was no less anx:iounly

b Recueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 2,;'l. Thunn. lib. iii. 79).

F .,1 once;lcPd,

B o0o 0 concealed, and with such fortunate care, that no

X.
t .- rumour concerning it reached the ears of the

'J5' Emperor or his miniflers; nor do they seem to

have conceived the mott ditfant flpicion of such
a tranfaclion.

s ct's AT the fame time, with a solicitude which was
th ad of
E.-,d, Vl. careful to draw fomne accession of firength from

of EnIa:. every quarer, Maurice applied to E,.ward VI. of

England, and requested a subsidy of four hundred
thoufin:l crowns for the support of a confederacy
formed in defence of the Protestant religion. But
the fCtions which prevailed in the Engliih court
during the minority of that Prince, and which
deprived both the councils and arms of the na-
tion of their wonted vigour, left the Englilh mi-
nifters neither time nor inclination to attend to
foreign affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtain-
ing that aid, which their zeal for the Reforma-
tion would have prompted them to grant him'.

Demands MAURICE, however, having secured the pro-
tha-t",e tciion of fucl a powerful Monarch as Henry II.
'"i'e et proceeded with great confidence, but with equal
* in:y. caution, to execute his plan. As he judged it

necefary to make one effort more, in order to
obtain the Emperor's content that the Landgrave
December. flould be set at liberty, he ent a solemn embafly,

in his own name, and in that of the Elector of
Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After resuming, at

e Burnet's Hifl. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

6 great

great length, all the fats and arguments upon B K
which they founded their claim, and representing, -
in the firongeft terms, the peculiar ergagements
which bound them to be so aiduous in their so-
licitations, they renewed the requeff in behalf of
the unfortunate prisoner, which they had ib often
preferred in vain. The Elector Palatine, the
Duke of Wurtemberg, the Dukes of Mecklen-
burg, the Duke of Dcuxponts, the Marquis of
Brandenburg Bareith, and the Marquis of Baden,
by their ambalfadors, concurred with them in
their suit. Letters were likewise delivered to the
fame efTec: from the King of Denmark, the Duke
of Bavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even
the King of the Romans joined in this applica-
tion, being moved with compassion towards the
Landgrave in his wretched situation, or influenced,
perhaps, by a secret jealousy of his brother's power
and designs, which, since his attempt to alter the
order of succession in the Empire, he had come
to view with other eyes, and dreaded to a great
degree.

BUT Charles, conflant to his own system with

regard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand urged
by such powerful intercessors; and having de-
clared that he would communicate his rcfolution
concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as he
arrived at Infpruck, where he was every clay ex-
pc&ed, he did not deign to delfccnd into any more
particular explication of his intentions". This

d Sleid. 531. Thuan. lib. viii. 280.

applica-

B Co0 a1,caliCation, though of no bcneFlt to the Land-

C.-,- ...' 'ave, wvas o great advantage to Maurice. It
'; ' lerved to ji;lir, his fubicq'.nr proceedings, and

to dci. onfrate thie necc,'ity of enpi.loing arms
in order to t",tt)rt t;::z c'ui;ablc conce.fon, which
his nmcd.iatin or intreaty could not obtain. It
vas of tu!i, t.,, to confirm the Emperor in his
.ccuritv, as both the uicnnity of the applica-
tion, and the solicitude with which lb many
P;.inccs were drawn in to enforce it, led him to
conclude, that Maurice placed all his hopes of
reftlcrin, the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining his
confint to diiinifs him.

- . MAURICE employed artifices still more reiined
cn..s 1o to conceal his maciinations, to amuse the Empe-

-. ror, and to gain time. He affeed to be more

solicitous than ever to find out fume expedient for
removing the dificulties with regard to the safe-
conduzt for the Protefant divines appointed to
attend the council, lb that they might repair
ti 'ther v.ithou: any a;prchcnon of danger. I-is
ambaff.dcors at Trent had frequen: conferences
co.ncrning this matter with the Iperial ambaf-
fidors in that city, and laid open their fentimcnts
to them with the appearance of the mnofl unre-
fc:ved confidence. I--e vwas wiling, at last, to
havc it bclievcd, that lc tlho;lht all differences
wi:h rei;ca&; to this prc lim.inry article were on
t:;c point of beinE adju'li ;; and in order to give
credit to this opilion, ii, commandeed Melanc-
t.':', togcther wi.h hlis brc:hiren, to set out o

thlei

their journey to Trent. At the fame tine, he B 0 0 K

X.

held a close corre'pondence with the Imperial -
court at Infpruck, and renewed on every occasion '5i*
his profcfions nt only of fioelit) but of attach-
n:ent to the ' ;iprr. S-Ic talked contInually of
his intention of o;,:n, I, l;r; ruk: in peri'n ; he
ordered a hou'c to be hired for him in that city,
and to be fittel up i t' the ,rr-te-t diflp:ltch for
hiS rception' .

BuT, profoundly fiilled as M.:uricc was in te ThcEErme.

r(,r conil

arts of deceit, and impenct'a': ..s lie tlought ciV.s Inse
the veil to be, uitner which he; cncealed( his de- ,,,,.,,,rin,
filgs, there were lveral thins in his conduct ho't
vwhich alarmled the nEmprcor aniidll- his security,
and tempted him frequently to i;iafecdt that he
was meditating something extraordinary. As
these tlfpicions took their rife from circun-
ftancesinconfiderable inthernfelves, or of an ambi-
guous as well as uncertain nature, they were
more than counterbalanced by MIaurict's addtlfl;;
and the Emperor would not, lightly, give up hi"
conlidcnce in a man, whom he had once trufied
and loaded with favours. One particular alone
seemed to be of such ciil'cqlnce, that he thoulhit
it nectf'airy to demand an explanation with rcgard
to it. The troops, which George of Mecklen-.
burg had taken into pay after the capitulation of
Mangdeburg, having fixed their quarters in Thu-
r;inia, lived at difcrction on the lands of the rich

" Arnoldi via Mlaurit. ap. Menlkcc, ii .
ti29.

ccclfi.

B o o K eccleliafticks in their neighbourhood. Their li-

X.

_.-,-- ctnce and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
1is as felt or dreaded their exations, complained

luudly to the Emperor, and reprr-fented them as
a body of mren kept in readincfs fr fm( dcifpe-
rate enterprize. Buc Maurice, partly by exte-
nuating te enormities of' which they had been
guilty, partly by representing the inpoflibility of
difbandin:t thrtl troops, or of keeping them to
regular diicipline, unless the arrears lill due to
them by the Emperor were paid, either removed
the apprehensions which this had occasioned, or,
as Charles w.:s not in a condition to iatisfy the
dmrnands of tlhefi soldiers, obliged himir to be fllent
with rcgard to the matter'.

a,; Tir.- TK time of aion was now approaching.
er":'f .r i,.iurice had privately dispatched Albert of Bran-

dtenburg to Paris, in order to confirm his league
wilh Henry, and to haften the march of the French
army. He had taken measures to bring his own
iu.bjtdUs together on the firil summons; he had
provided for the Ifcurity of Saxony while he
ihould be abfcnt with the army; and he held the
troops in Thuringia, on which he chiefly depend-
ed, ready to advance on a moment's warning.
A!1 hel'e complicated operations were carried on
with' ;ut being dilcovcred by the court at Infpruck,

In!. the E:inm ror remained tlere in perfec tran-
quilit,, buied entirely in cunteracting the in-

f Slcit. 549. Thuan. 3j.9.

trigues

trigues of the Pope's legate at Trent, and in B O° K
fettling the conditions on which the Proteflant *-
divines Ihould be admitted into the council, as if '55s
there had not been any tranfation of greater mo-
ment in agitation.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, who, by circumff*R.
his sagacity in obfcrving the conduct of ail around c enriute

o deceive

him, was commonly led to an excess of diftrufl, the mpe.
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed 'or
to infatuation. But betides the exquisite addrels
with which Maurice concealed his intentions, two
circumflances contributed to the delusion. The
gout had returned upon Charles oon after his ar-
rival at Infpruck, with an increase of violence;
and his constitution being broken by such fre-
quent attacks, he was seldom able to exert his
natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs
with his usual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bishop of Arras, his prime minister,
though one of the molt subtle fiatefinen of that,
or perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the
dupe of his own craft. IHe entertained such an
high opinion of his own abilities, and held the
political talents of the Germans in such contempt,
that he despised all the intimations given him
concerning Maurice's secret machinations, or the and hi,
dangerous designs which he was carrying on. miaiCler.
When the Duke of Alva, whose dark fiifpicious
mind harboured many loubrs concerning the
Ele&or's sincerity, proposed calling him imme-
diately to court to answer for his condu~, Gran-

v clle

B o0 K velle replied with great scorn, That there appre-

X.
---' 1 henfions were groundiers, and that a drunken
ss5S German head was too gross to form any scheme

which he could not eafly penetrate and baffle.
Nor did he afiumne this peremptory tone merely
from confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and received
from them frequent and minute information con-
cerning all their mafler's motions. But through
this very channel, by which he expected to gain
access to all Maurice's counels, and even to his
thoughts, such intelligence was conveyed to him
as completed his deception. Maurice fortunately
discovered the corr.fpondence of the two traitors
vuith Granvelle, but instead of punishing them
for their crime, he dexterously availed himself of
their fraud) and turned his own arts againt the
bishop. He affe&ed to treat these ministers with
greater confidence than ever; he admitted them
to his conlultations; he seemed to lay open his
heart to them; and taking care all the while to
let them be acquainted with nothing but what it
was his interest flould be known, they transmit-
ted to Infprucl such accounts as poflefled Gran-
velle with a firm belief of his sincerity as well as
good intentions'. The Emperor himself, in the
fulness of security, was so little moved by a me-
morial, in name of the ecclcfiallical electors, ad-
monifliig him to be on his guard against Mau-
rice, that he made light of this intelligence; and

t Melvil's Memoirs, fol. edit. p. 1:.

his

his answer to them abounds with declarations of B °0 K

X.

his entire and confident reliance on the fidelity as -A-
well as attachment of that Princeh. 1552.

AT last Maurice's preparations were completed, M.,u;,
and he had the atisfation to find that his intrigues field agailt

the Enpe-

and designs were still unknown. But, though o. E
now ready to take the field, he did not lay aside
the arts which he had hitherto employed ; and by
one piece of craft more, he deceived his enemies
a few days longer. He gave out, that he was
about to begin that journey to Infpruck of which
he had so often talked, and he took one' of the
ministers whom Granvelle had bribed, to attend
him thither. After travelling pofl a few ifages,
he pretended to be indisposed by the fatigue of
the journey, and dispatching the fufpeded mini-
fter to make his apology to the Emperor for this
delay, and to assure him that he would be at In-
fpruck within a few days; he mounted on horse-
back, as soon as this spy on his acions was gone,
rode full speed towards Thuring;a, joined his March S.
army, which amounted to twenty thousand foot
and five thousand horse, and put it immediately
in motion'.

Slcid. 535.
Melv. Memi. p. 13. Thcfe circumstances concerning the

Saxon minilters whom Granvelle h:Ld bribed, are ot mentioned
by the German hiRorians; but as Sir James Mclvil received
his information fiom the Eleor Palatine, and as they are per-
fetly agreeable to the ret of Maiurice's conduCt, they may be
confidered as authentick.

AT

B o0 K AT the fame time he published a manifeto con-

x.

_.- taining his reasons for taking arms. These were
Prbils a three in number; That he might secure the Pro-

ijtfog e tcflant religion, which was threatened with imme-
hiscondua. diate deftruaion; That he might maintain the

conRitution and laws of the Empire, and five
Germany from being fubje&ed to the dominion
of an absolute monarch; That he might deliver
the Landgrave of Hcffe from the miseries of a
long and unjust imprisonment. By the firif, he
routed all the favourers of the Reformation, a
party formidable by their zeal as well as num-
bers, and rendered desperate by oppreflion. By
the second, he interested all the friends of liberty,
Catholicks no less than Protestants, and made it
their interest to unite with him in aflerting the
rights and privileges common to both. The
third, besides the glory which he acquired by his
zeal to fulfil his engagements to the unhappy pri-
soner, was become a cause of general concern,
not only from the compafnion which the Land-
grave's sufferings excited, but from indignation
at the injuflice and rigour of the Emperor's pro-
ceedings against him. Together with Maurice's
manifetlo, another appeared in the name of Al-
bert Marquis of Brandenburg Culmbach, who
had joined him with a body of adventurers whom
he had drawn together. The fame grievances
which Maurice had pointed out are mentioned in
it, but with an excels of virulence and animosity
suitable to the characer of the Prince in whose
name it was published.

TH

THE King of France added to these a manifeto B 0 o K

in his own name; in which, after taking notice of
the ancient alliance between the French and Ger- ei55*.
man nations, both dtfcended from the fame an- ,.t;
ceftors; and after mentioning the applications, e French
which, in consequence of this, ome of the most
illultrious among the German Princes had made
to him for his protection; he declared, that he
now took arms to re-eftablilh the ancient confti-
tution of the Empire, to deliver ome of its
Princes from captivity, and to secure the privi-
leges and independence of all the members of
the Germanick body. In this manifesto, Henry
assumed the extraordinary title of Protetor of the
Liberties of Germany, and of its captive Princes; and
there was engraved on it a cap, the ancient sym-
bol of freedom, placed between two daggers, in
order to intimate to the Germans, that this blef-
sing was to be acquired and secured by force of
arms .

MAURICE had now a very different part to at, Mfaur;ce'

but his flexible genius was capable of accommo- ?t''i,,
dating itself to every situation. The moment he
took arms, he was as bold and enterprizing in the
field, as he had been cautious and crafty in the
cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards
the Upper Germany. All the towns in his way
opened their gates to him. He reinsfated the

Sleid. 549. Tuan. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
371.

VOL. IV. F magifrates

B 0 0 K magistrates whom the Emperor had deposed, and

gave poffeflion of the churches to the Proteftanc
55' ministers whom he had ejcted. He direced his

march to Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison,
which was too inconsiderable to think of defend-
ing it, retired immediately, he took pofeflion of
April . that great city, and made the fame changes there

as in the towns through which he had pairedk.

The Empe. No words can express the Emperor's aftonilh-
ror's Aso-
niflment ment and conternaticn at events so unexpeced.
nJ die f.

He saw a great number of the German Princes in
arms against him, and the ref either ready to
join them, or wishing success to their enterprize.
He beheld a powerful Monarch united with them
in close league, seconding their operations in per.
son at the head of a formidable army, while he,
through negligence and credulity, which exposed
him no less to scorn than to'danger, had neither
made, nor was in condition to make, any effec-
tual provision, either for crushing his rebellious
fubjeds, or resiling the invasion of the foreign
enemy. Part of his Spanith troops had been or-
dered into Hungary agair.n the Turks the ref
had marched back to Italy upon occasion of the
war in the dutchy of Parma. The bands of ve-
teran Germans had been difiniffed, because he
was not able to pay them or had entered into
Maurice's service after the siege of Magdeburg;
and he remained at Infpruck with a body of fol-

Slcid. S55. Tuan. 342.

diers

diers hardly strong enough to guard his own per- B o ° K
son. His treasury was as much exhausted, as his *-"
army was reduced. He had received no remit-
tances for ome time from the new world. He
had forfeited all credit with the merchants of Ge-
noa and Venice, who refused to lend him money,
though tempted by the offer of exorbitant inte-
reft. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the most
considerable potentate in Christendom, and ca-
pable of exerting the greatest strength, as his
power, notwithstanding the violent attack made
upon it, was ffill unimpaired, found himself in a
situation which rendered him unable to make such
a sudden and vigorous effort as the junAure re-
quired, and was neceftary to have saved him from
the present danger.

Im this situation, the Emperor placed all his tmeaaoun

hopes on negociating; the only resource of such tbo ,ne imo
as are conscious of their own weakness. But mtos".
thinking it inconsistent with his dignity to make
the first advances to subje&s who were in arms
againt him, he avoided that indecorum by em-
ploying the mediation of his brother Ferdinand.
Maurice confiding in his own talents to conduc
any negociation in such a manner as to derive ad-
vantage from it, and hoping that, by the appear-
ance of facility in hearkening to the first overture
of accommodation, he might amuse the Empe-
ror, and tempt him to flacken the ativity with
which he was now preparing to defend himself,
readily agreed to an interview with Ferdinand in

F the

3 X0 K the town of Lintz in Austria: and having left his

Lr__~' army to proceed on its march under the com-
'5j*' mand of the Duke of Mecklenburg, he repaired

thither.

Pes' ofh MEANWHILE the King of France pun&tually

the French
Asyu. fulfilled his engagements to his allies. He took

the field early, with a numerous and well appoint-
ed army, and marching diretly into Lorrain,
Toul and Verdun opened their gates at his ap-
proach. His forces appeared next before Metz,
and that city, by a fraudulent stratagem of the
Constable Montmorency, who having obtained
permiflion to pass through it with a small guard,
introduced as many troops as were sufficient to
overpower the garrison, was likewise seized with-
out bloodshed. Henry made his entry into all
these towns with great pomp; he obliged the in-
habitants to swear allegiance to him, and annexed
those important conquests to the French Mo-
narchy. He left a trong garrison in Metz.
From thence he advanced towards A!face, in order
to attempt new conquests, to which the success
that had hitherto attended his arms invited him '.

The neen. THE conference at Lintz did not produce any
tn";,i''-' accommodation. Maurice, when he consented
FP:,iro to it, seems to have had nothing in view but to
.rnd M uzrice
o:' A, f:.l, amuse the Emperor; for he made such demands,

both in behalf of his confederates and their ally

T Than. 349.

the

the French King, as he knew would not be ac- B O O 1:
cepted by a Prince, too haughty to submit, at --
once, to conditions dictated by an enemy. But, Iss'
however firmly Maurice adhered during the ne-
gociation to the interests of his aflociates, or how
steadily soever he kept in view the obje&s which
had induced him to take arms, he often profctled
a strong inclination to terminate the differences
with the Emperor in an amicable manner. En-
couraged by this appearance of a pac:fic difpofi-
tion, Ferdinand propored a second interview at
Paffau on the twtncy-fixth of May, and that a
truce should commence on that day, and con-
tinue to the tenth of June, in order to give them
leisure for adjusting all the points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the Mautice d.

ninth of May, which had now advanced to Gun- w,!d.
delfingen. He put his troops in motion next e'ck
morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
a&ion before the commencement of the truce, he
resolved, during that period, to venture upon an
enterprize, the fuccels of which would be so de-
cifive, as would render the negociations at Paflau
extremely short, and entitle him to treat upon his
own terms. He foresaw that the profpec& of a
cessation of arms, which was to take place so
soon, together with the opinion of his earnestness
to re-establish peace, with which he had artfully
amused Ferdinand, could hardly fail of inspiring
the Emperor with such false hopes, that he would
4turally become remiss, and relapse into fume

F 3 degree

B Ox K degree of that security which had already been so

fatal to him. Relying on this conje&ture, he
'55*' marched directly at the head of his army towards

Infpruck, and advanced with the most rapid mo-
tion that could be given to so great a body of
troops. On the eig; :enth, he arrived at Fieffen,
a poit of great consequence, at the entrance into
the Tyrolefe. There lie found a body of eight
hundred men, whom the Emperor had assembled,
strongly intrenched, in order to oppole his pro-
grefs. He attacked them inRsantly with such vio-
lence and impetuosity, that they abandoned their
lines precipitately, and, falling back on a second
body posted near Ruten, communicated the pa-
nick terror with which they themselves had been
seized, to those troops, so that they likewise took
to flight, after a feeble reiftance.

Ta-te, th, ELATED with this success, which exceeded his
lJi,,bgh. molt sanguine hopes, Maurice pressed forward to

Ehrenbergh, a caRle situated on an high and
steep precipice, which commanded the only pass
through the mountains. As this fort had been
Surrendered to the Protefiants at the beginning
of the Smalkaldick war, because the garrison was
then too weak t defend it, the Emperor, sensible
of its importance, had taken care, at this junc-
ture, to throw into it a body of troops sufficient
to maintain it against the greatest army. But a
hepherd, in pursuing a goat which had strayed
from his flock, having discovered an unknown
path by which it was poflible to facend to the top

of

of the rock, came with this seasonable piece of B O O K
intelligence to Maurice. A finall band of chosen -.-
soldiers, under the command of George of Meck- ss*'
lenburg, was infiantly ordered to follow this guide.
They set out in the evening, and clambering up
the rugged track with infinite fatigue as well as
danger, they reached the summit unperceived;
and at an hour which had been concerted, when
Maurice began the aault on the one fide of the
castle, they appeared on the other, ready to scale
the walls, which were feeble in that place, be-
cause it had been hitherto deemed inaccessible.
The garrison, struck with terror at the fight of
an enemy on a quarter where they had thought
themselves perfectly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without blood-
flied, and which was of greater consequence to
him, without loss of time, took poffeflion of a
place, the redu&ion of which might have retard-
ed him long, and have required the utmost efforts
of his valour and fill.

MAURTICE was now only two days march from A mutinyof

h; troops

Infpruck, and without losing a moment he order- retards his
ed his infantry to advance thither, having left his march.
cavalry, which was unserviceable in that moun-
tainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the mouth
of the pats. He proposed to advance with such
rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of the loss
of Ehrenbergh, and to surprise the Emperor, to-

* Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1:3.

F 4 gether
Cs/

B °x° K gether with his attendants, in an open town in.
Ec^, capable of defence. But jult as his troops began

'JS' to move, a battalion of mercenaries mutinied,

declaring that they would not tir until they had
received the gratuity, which, according to the
custom of that age, they claimed as the recom-
pence due to them for having taken a place by
assault. It was with great difliculty, as well as
danger, and not without sone considerable loss
of time, that Mauricc quieted this infurreftion,
and prevailed on the folcdirs to follow him to a
place where he proniid them such rich booty as
would be an ample reward for all their services.

The Fipe. To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen ac.
ror flie ;
confiftn cident, the Eperor owed his safety. He was
fom fu
Prk.:" informed of the approaching danger late in the

evening, and knowing that nothing could save
him but a speedy fight, he instantly left Infpruck,
without regarding the darkness of the night, or
the violence of the rain which happened to fall at
that time; and notwithfanding the debility oc-
cafioned by the gout, which rendered him unable
to bear any motion but that of a litter, he tra-
velled by the light of torches, taking his way
over the Alps, by roads almost impaflible. His
courtiers and attendants followed him with equal
precipitation, some of them on fuich horses as
they could hastily procure, many of them on foot,
and all in the utmost confusion. In this miserable
plight, very unlike the pomp with which Charles
had appeared during the five preceding years as

the

the conqueror of Germany, he arrived at length B o°° s
with his deje&ed train at Villach in Carinthia, and w-
fcarcly thought himself fccure even in that re- S'S*
mote inaccelfible corner.

MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after Murcee~

the Emperor and his attendants had left it; and ,.
enraged that the prey flould escape out of his
hands when he was just ready to 1tize it, he pur-
fled them some miles; but finding it impossible
to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave
specd, he returned to the town, and abandoned
all the Emperor's baggage, together with that of
his ministers, to be plundered by the soldiers;
while he preserved untouched every thing belong-
ing to the King of the Romans, either because
he had formed some friendly connexion with that
Prince, or because he wiihed to have it believed
that such a connexion subsisted between them.
As there now remained only three days to the
commencement of the truce (with such nicety
had Maurice calculated his operations), he set
out for Paffau, that he might meet Ferdinand on
the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew The npe.

for (eta the

the guards placed on the degraded Ele&or of ealcr of
'Saxony, whom, during five years, he had car- lib.yl.
ried about with him as a prisiner; and set him
entirely at liberty, either with an intention to em.
'arrals Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and dig-

nity,

B o t nity, or from a sense of the indecency of detain-

-. ing him a prironer, while he himself run the risk
552S' of being deprived of his own liberty. But that

Prince, eeing no other way of escaping than
that which the Emperor took, and abhorring the
thoughts of falling into the hands of a kinfinan,
whom he juitly confidered as the author of all
his misfortunes, chore rather to accompany
Charles in his flight, and to expect the final de-
cifion of his fate from the treaty which was now
approaching.

ThT uncil THESE were not the only effeds which Mau-
of Trent
bre.ktupin rice's operations produced. It was no sooner
Ireat con-
inatin. known at Trent that he had taken arms, than a

general consternation seized the fathers of the
council. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the
safety of their refpe&ive territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the
legate, who had hitherto disappointed all the en-
deavours of the Imperial ambassadors to procure
an audience in the council for the Protestant di-
vines, laid hold with joy on such a planfible pre-
text for dismissing an assembly, which he had
found it so difficult to govern. In a congrega-
tion held on the twenty-eighth of April, a decree
was issued proroguing the council during two
years, and appointing it to meet at the expiration
of that time, if peace were then re-established in
Europe". This prorogation, however, continued

F. Paul, 353.

no

no les than ten years; and the proceedings of the B 0 KI
council, when re-aflembled in the year one thou- <-
sand five hundred and fixty-two, fall not within 'ss*
the period prescribed to this history.

THE convocation of this assembly had been Theffeft

paflionately delired by all the states and Princes cm.
in Christendom, who, from the wisdom as well
as piety of prelates representing the whole body
of the faithful, expeled ome charitable and effi-
cacious endeavours towards composing the dif-
fentions which unhappily had arisen in the church.
But the several Popes by whose authority it was
called, had other obje&s in view. They exerted
all their power or policy to attain these; and by
the abilities as well as address of their legates,
by the ignorance of many of the prelates, and by
the servility of the indigent Italian bishops, ac-
quired such influence in the council, that they
ditated all its decrees, and framed them not with
an intention to restore unity and concord to the
church, but to etablifh their own dominion, or
to confirm those tenets, upon which they ima-
gined that dominion to be founded. Do&rines,
which had hitherto been admitted upon the credit
of tradition alone, and received with tome latitude
of interpretation, were now defined with a fcru-
pulous nicety, and confirmed by the fancion of
authority. Rites, which had formerly been ob-
served only in deference to custom supposed to be
ancient, were etablifked by the decrees of the
fhurch, and declared to be eflcntial parts of its

4 worship.

B o0 K worship. The breach, inflead of being closed,

X. -_n- was widened, and made irreparable. In place of
J55* any attempt to reconcile the contending parties,

a line was drawn with such studicd accuracy, as
ascertained and marked out the diflinftion be-
tween them. This still serves to keep them at a
distance; and, without some signal interposition
of Divine Providence, must render the eparation
perpetual.

Chafaee OUrR knowledge of the proceedings of this
of the histo,
ians of ti assembly, is derived from three different authors.

Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of the
Council of Trent, while the memory of what had
passed there was recent, and ome who had been
members of it were fill alive. He has exposed
the intrigues and artifices by which it was con-
du&ed, with a freedom and severity which have
given a deep wound to the credit of the council.
He has described its deliberations, and explained
its decrees, with such pefpicuity and depth of
thought, with such various erudition and such
force of reason, as have juRly entitled his work
to be placed among the molt admired historical
compositions. About half a century thereafter,
the Jesuit Pallavicini published his history of the
council, in opposition to that of Father Paul, and
by employing all the force of an acute and refining
genius to invalidate the credit, or to confute the
reasonings of his antagonit, he labours to prove,
by artful apologies for the proceedings of the
council, and subtile interpretations of its de-

crees,

crees, that it deliberated with impartiality, and B °o°
decided with judgment as well candour. Vargas, «
a Spanilh docor of laws, who was appointed to bss'
attend the Imperial ambassadors at Trent, ent
the bilhop of Arras a regular account of the
tranfations there, explaining all the arts which
the Legate employed to influence or over-awe
the council. His letters have been publilfed, in
which he inveighs against the papal court with
that asperity of censure, which was natural to a
man whoe situation enabled him to observe its
arts thoroughly, and who was obliged to exert
all his attention and talents in order to disappoint
them. But whichsoever of thefc authors an in-
telligent person takes for his guide, in forming a
judgment concerning the spirit of the council, he
must discover ol much ambition as well as artifice
among ome of the members, so much ignorance
and corruption among others; he must observe
such a large infusion of human policy and paflions,
mingled with such a scanty portion of that fim-
plicity of heart, san&ity of manners, and love of
truth, which alone qualify men to determine what
dotrines are worthy of God, and what worship is
acceptable to him; that he will find it no easy
matter to believe, that any extraordinary influ-
ence of the Holy Ghost hovered over this assem.
bly, and ditated its decrees.

WHILE Maurice was employed in negociating The Frenh

with the King of the Romans at Lintz, or in e:*"Cup °
making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol, the stalurh

French

X oo 0 French King had advanced into Alsace as far as

X.

L-_- Strafburgh; and having demanded leave of the
35)'S Senate to march through the city, he hoped that,

by repeating the fame fraud which he had prac-
tifed at Metz, he might render himself master of
the place, and by that means secure a paflage
over the Rhine into the heart of Germany. But
the Stralburghers, inRruded and put on their
guard by the credulity and misfortune of their
neighbours, hut their gates; and having asem-
bled a garrison of five thousand soldiers, repaired
their fortifications, rafed the houses in their
suburbs, and determined to defend themselves to
the utmost. At the fame time they sent a depu-
tation of their most refpe&able citizens to the
King, in order to divert him from making any
hostile attempt upon them. The Electors of
Treves and' Cologn, the Duke of Cleves, and
other Princes in the neighbourhood, interposed in
their behalf; beseeching Henry that he would
not forget so oon the title which he had gene.
roufly assumed; and instead of being the De-
liverer of Germany, become its Oppressor. The
Swiss Cantons seconded them with zeal, soliciting
Henry to spare a city which had long been
conneted with their community in friendship and
alliance.
btiri bout POWERFUL as this united interceflion was it

would not have prevailed on Henry to forego a
prize of so much value, if he had been in a con-
dition to have seized ir. Bu%, in that age, the

method

method of fubfifing numerous armies at a dif- B °OX°
tance from the frontiers of their own country, ---J
was imperfeacly underfood, and neither the re- 5
venues of Princes, nor their experience in the
art of war, were equal to the great and compli-
cated efforts which such an undertaking required.
The French, though not far removed from their
own country, began already to susser from scar-
city of provisions, and had no sufficient maga-
zines collected to support them during a siege,
which must necessarily have been of great length".
At the fame time, the Qeen of Hungary, go-
vernefs of the Low Countries, had affnmbled a
considerable body of troops, which, under the
command of Martin de Rolfem, laid wate Cham-
pagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces of
France. Thef- concurring circunmfances obliged
the King, though with relutance, to abandon
the enterprize. But being willing to acquire
some merit with his allies, by this retreat which
he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss
that he had taken the resolution merely in com-
pliance with their request P; and then, after giv-
ing orders that all the horses in his army hould
be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his
having pushed his conquests so far, he marched
back towards Champagne.

WHILE the French King and the main army The opera.
of the confederates were thus employed, Albert tbt' of Al-

Branden-

Thuan. 351, 352. P Sleid. 557. Brantome, burg.
tom. vii. 39.

of

s o o K of Brandenburg was entrusted with the cor-

.- - mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,
'ss' conifting chiefly of mercenaries who had resort-

ed to his flandard, rather from the hope of plun-
der, that the expetation of regular pay. That
Prince, feeing himself at the head of such a
number of desperate adventurers, ready to follow
wherever he should lead them, oon began to dif-
dain a slate of subordination, and to form such
vast schemes of aggrandizing himself, as feldor
occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when civil
war or violent facions route them to bold exer-
tions, by alluring them with immediate hopes of
success. Full of these aspiring thoughts, Albert
made war in a manner very different from the
other confederates. He endeavoured to spread
the terror of his arms by the rapidity of his mo-
tions; as well as the extent and rigour of his de-
vaflations i he exaaed contributions wherever he
came, in order to amass such a rum of money, as
would put it in his power to keep his army to-
gether; he laboured to get possession of Nurem-
berg, Ulm, or some other of the free cities in
Upper Germany, in which, as a capital, he might
fix the feat of his power. But, finding there
cities on their guard, and in a condition to resist
his attacks, he turned all his rage against the
popilh ecclefiafticks, whose territories he plun.
dered with such wanton and merciless barbarity,
as gave them a very unfavourable imprefilon of
the spirit of that reformation in religion, with
zeal for which he pretended to be animated. The

bilhops

bilhops of bambergh and Wurzburgh, by their B O o K
situation, lay particularly exposrd to his ravages; --
he obliged the former to transfer to him, in pro- JS'
perty, almost one half of his extensive diocese;
and compelled the latter to advance an immense
fum in order to save his country from ruin and
desolation. During all those wild sallies, Albert
paid no regard either to Maurice's orders, whose
commands as Generaliflimo of the league he had
engaged to obey, or to the remonstrances of the
other confederates; and manifcftly discovered,
that he attended only to his own private emolu-
ment, without any solicitude about the common
cause, or the general obje&s which had induced
them to take arms q.

MAURICE having ordered his army to march The nego.

ciations of
back into Bavaria, and having publihed a pro- peace t

Patha.

clamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and in-
ftrufodrs of youth, to resume the exercise of their
functions in all the cities, chools, and univer-
fities from which they had been ejected, met
Ferdinand at Paflau on the twenty-fixth day of
May. As matters of the greatest consequence
to the future peace and independence of the Em-
pire were to be fettled in this congress, the ees
of all Germany were fixed upon it. Beides
Ferdinand and the Imperial ambafladors, the
Duke of Bavaria, the bishops of Saltzburgh and
AichRadt, the ministers of all the Eletors, to-

t Sleid. 561. Tiuan. 357.
VOL. IV. G gether

B 0 0 K gethcr with deputies from molt of the confider.

able Princes and free cities, retorted to Paflau.
'jSs' Maurice, in name of his associates, and the King

of the Romans as the Emperor's representative,
opened the negociation. The Princes who were
present, together with the deputies of such as were
absent, aed as intercessors or mediators between
them.

'rTh .er, MAURICE, in a long discourse, explained the
wi hLce motives of his own condu&. After having enu-
M unce
propolid. merated all the unconfitutional and oppressive

a&s of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to the manifesto which he had published
when he took arms against him, limited his de-
mands to three articles. That the Landgrave
of Hesse hould be immediately set at liberty;
That the grievances in the civil government of
the Empire should be rcdreffed ; and that the
Protestants Ihould be allowed the publick exer-
cife of their religion without molestation. Ser-
dinand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering
their unwillingness to gratify him with regard to
all these points, the mediators wrote a joint letter
to the Emperor, befeecli.;.g him to deliver Ger-
many from the calamities of a civil war, by giv-
ing such fatisfaftion to Maurice and his party as
might induce them to lay down their arms; and
at the fame time they prevailed upon Maurice to
grant a prolongation of the truce for a flort time,
during which they undertook to procure the Em-
peror's final answer to his demands.

THIS

THIS request was presented to the Emperor in B O O K

the name of all the Princes of the Empire, ---.
Popish as well as Proteltant, in the name of such p,,55;
as had lent an helping hand to forward his am- (pported by

the Pnces

bitious schemes, as well as of thufe who had oftheEm.
viewed the progress of his power with jealousy pire
and dread. The uncommon and cordial unani-
mity with which they concurred at this juncture
in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in recom-
mending peace, flowed from different caures.
Such as were most attached to the Roman catho-
lick church could not help observing, that the
Protestant confederates were at the head of a
numerous army, while the Emperor was but juil
beginning to provide for his own defence. They
foresaw that great efforts would be required of
them, and would be neceiTary on their part, in
order to cope with enemies, who had been allow-
ed to get the start so far, and to attain such for-
midable power. Experience had taught them,
that the fruit of all there efforts would be reaped
by the Emperor alone, and the more complete
any vi&ory proved which they Ihould gain, the
flter would they bind their own fetters, and
render them the more intolerable. Thele refec-
tions made them cautious how they contributed a
second time, by their indilcreet zeal, to put the
Emperor in pollion of power which would be
fatal to the liberties of their country. Notwith-
il.anding the implacable fierceness of the fpiric of
bigotry in that age, they chore rather that the
Protestants flould acquire that ficurity for their

G religion

B °X K religion which they demanded, than by aiRing

.*- Charles to oppress them, to give such additional
55"2. force to the Imperial prerogative, as would over-

turn the conllitution of the Empire. To all these
considerations, the dread of secing Germany laid
waste by a civil war, added new force. Many
states of the Empire already felt the deftru&ive
rage of Albert's arms, others dreaded it, and all
wilied for an accommodation between the Ekm-
peror and Maurice, which they hoped would save
them from that cruel scourge.

rhemti-,, Sucr were the reasons that induced so many
which.nfiu.
rnere the Princes, notwithlfanding the variety of their po-
Emp'sor ·Sjnc- litical interests, and the opposition in their reli-

gious fenti!nents, to unite in recommending to
the Emperor an accommodation with Maurice,
not only as a salutary, but as a necessary mearure.
The motives which prompted Charles to derre it,
were not fewer or of ltfs weight. He was per-
feEtly sensible of the superiority which the confe-
derates had acquired through his own negligcnce;
and he now felt the inflifFciency of his own re-
sources to oppose them. His Spanish fibje&s,
disgusted at his long abcence, and weary of eldi-
less wars, which were of no benefit to thlir
country, refused to furnish him any cnfdcrable
supply either of men or money and aiiltioughi by
his addrers or importuniry he nig'ir have ho;m('
to draw from them at laln mor; .'..';Ll ,ii.';
that, he knew, wo r,: a ,;lti ; .*f ;m, .lit) i
vice in thc p:'.nt .:.y Li !.'i .... ii

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.. .;

treasury was drained; his veteran forces were dif- B 0 00
perid, or disbanded, and he could not depend
much either on the fidelity or courage of the new S'
levied soldiers whom he was collcdting. There
was no hope of repeating with success the fame
artifices which had weakened and ruined the
Smalkaldick league. As the end at which he
aimed was now known, he could no longer em-
ploy the specious pretexts, which had formerly
concealed his ambitious designs. Every Prince
in Gerinany was alarmed and on his gu rd; and
it was vain to think of blinding then a ;cond
time to such a degree, as to make one part of
themn inltru!lcnts to enllave the other. The spirit
of a confederacy, whereof Maurice was the head,
experience had taught him, to be very diff;:rent
from that of the league of Smalkalde; and from
what he had already felt, he had no reason to flat-
ter himself that its counsels would be as irrclb-
lute, or its efforts as timid and feeb!e. if he
should resolve on continuing the war, he might
be assured, that the mft considerable Ltates in
Germany would take part in it against him; and
a dubious neutrality was the utmoll he could x-
peet from the relt. While the confederates found
full employment for his arms in one quarter, the
King of France would seize the favourable op-
portunity, and push on his operations in another,
with almost certain fuccels. That monarch had
already made onquefts in the Empire, which he
was no less eager to recover, than impatient to
be revenged on him for aiding his nalecontent

G 3 Iubjects.

B ox° K fubjeas. Though Henry had now retired from
- r -a the banks of the Rhine, he had only varied the
'5:. scene of hostilities, having invaded the Low-

Countries with all his forces. The Turks, routed
by the solicitations of the French King, as well
as stimulated by resentment against Ferdinand for
having violated the truce in Hungary, had pre-
pared a powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of
Naples and Sicily, which he had left almost de-
fenceless, by calling thence the greatest part of
the regular troops to join the army which he wa.
now assembling.

Fcrdlllan FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, in
zeiJI,us to
pronote ,, order to lay before the Emperor the result of the
datios. conferences at Patfau, had likewise reasons pecu-

liar to himself for desiring an accommodation.
These prompted him to second, with the greatest
earnetnefs, the arguments which the Princes as-
fembled there had employed in recommending it.
He had observed, not without secret fatisfaaion,
the fatal blow that had been given to the defpo-
tick power, which his brother had usurped in the
Empire. He was extremely solicitous to pre-
vent Charles from recovering what he had loft,
as he foresaw that he would immediately resume,
with fresh eagerness, and with a better chance
of success, his favourite scheme of tranfiitting
that power to his son, by excluding him from the
right of lifccefiion to the Imperial throne. On
this account, he was willing to contribute towards
circumscribing the Imperial authority, in order

to

to render his own possession of it certain. Be- B O°° K
lides, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Tran- I---J
fylvania, and fill more at the fraudulent arts by 'sS'
which it had been seized, had ordered into the
field an army of an hundred thousand men, which
having defeated a great body of Ferdinand's
troops, and taken several places of importance,
threatened not only to complete the conquest of
the province, but to drive them out of that part
of Hungary which was still subjec to his jurif-
di&ion. He was unable to resist fich a mighty
enemy; his brother, while engaged in a donel-
tick war, could afford him no aid; and he could
not even hope to draw from Germany the con-
tingent, either of troops or money, usually fur-
nifled to repel the invasions of the Infidels. Mau-
rice, having observed Ferdinand's perplexity with
regard to this last point, had offered, if peace
were re-eftablified on a secure foundation, that he
would march in person with his troops into Hun-
gary against the Turks. Such was the efxft' of
this well-timed proposal, that Ferdinand, deRfitute
of every other prospect of relief, became the inoft
zealousadvocate whom the confederates co'.ld have
chosen to urge their claims, and there was hariily
any thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have choi:n to grant, rather than have
retarded a pacification, to which he trutled as the
only means of fiving hiis Hungarian cr)ov'n.

WHEN so many cauf's conspired in rcndeIring c;rillunl-
an accommodation eligible, it might aIvve L)bn , ,',.1,

G e4 Cxpcal-d

B o0o K expected that it would have taken place imme-
----> diately. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's

5si.' temper, together with his unwillingness at once

to relinquish objets which he had long pursued
with such earnetlnefs and afliduity, counterba.
lanced, for ome time, the force of all the mo-
tives which disposed him to peace, and not only
put that event at a distance, but seemed to render
it uncertain. When Maurice's demands, to-
gether with the letter of the mediators at Paffau,
were presented to him, he peremptorily refused to
redress the grievances which were pointed out, nor
would he agree to any stipulation for the imme-
diate ecurity of the Protestant religion, but pro-
posed referring both these to the determination of
a future diet. On his part, he required that
instant reparation hould be made to all who,
during the present war, had fiffered either by the
licentioufnes of the confederate troops, or the
exactions of their leaders.

M,,rice', MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the

I.gWU'S Emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he
fciitie it had nothing in view by these overtures but to

amuse and deceive; and therefore, without lif-
tening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau
abruptly, and joining his troops which were en-
camped at Mergentheiin, a city in Franconia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonick order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hostilities.
As three thousand men in the Emperor's pay had
thrown hemfelves into F rankfort on the Maine,

and

and might from thence insef the neighbouring B o o r
country of Hefle, he marched towards that city --
and laid siege to it in form. The briskness of ja7s.
this enterprize, and the vigour with which Mau-
rice carried on his approaches against the town,
gave such an alarm to the Emperor, as disposed
him to lend a more favourable ear to Ferdinand's
arguments in behalf of an accommodation. Firm
and haughty as his nature was, he found it ne-
ceffary to bend, and signified his willingness to
make conceflions on his part, if Maurice, in re-
turn, would abate somewhat of the rigour of his
demands. Ferdinand, as soon as he perceived
that his brother began to yield, did not deficf
from his importunities, until he prevailed on him
to declare what was the utmost that he would
grant for the security of the confederates. Hav-
ing gained this difficult point, he instantly dif-
patched a messenger to Maurice's camp, and
imparting to him the Emperor's final resolution,
conjured him not to frustrate his endeavours for
the re-establishment of peace; or, by an unfea-
fonable obstinacy on his fide, to disappoint the
wilhes of all Germany for that salutary event.

MAURICE, notwithtanding the prosperous situ- M.auire

ation of his affairs, was ifrongly inclined to liften "o.,r,,." f
to his advice. The Emperor, though over ml"0ion.
reached and surprised, had now begun to afemble
troops, and however flow his motions might be,
while the first effecs of his conflernation remain-
ed, he was sensible that Charles must at last at

with

B o0 K with vigour proportional to the extent of his
L.- v power and territories, and lead into Germany an

'15t army. formidable by its numbers, and fill more

by the terror of his name, as well as the remem-
brance of his paRs vitories. He could carcely
hope that a confederacy composed of so many
members would continue to operate with fuffi-
cient union and perseverance to refilt the con-
fiftent and well-direced efforts of an army, at
the absolute disposal of a leader accustomed to
command and to conquer. He felt already, al-
though he had not hitherto experienced the flock
of any adverse event, that he was the hea:d of a
disjointed body. He saw, from the example of
Albert of Brandenburg, how difficult it would be,
with all his address and credit, to prevent any
particular member from detaching himself from
the whole, and how impossible to recal him to
his proper rank and subordination. This filled
him with apprehentions for the common cause.
Another consideration gave him no less disquiet
with regard to his own particular interests. By
setting at liberty the degraded Ele&tor, and by
repealing the at depriving him of his hereditary
honours and dominions, the Emperor had it in
his power to wound him in the mot sensible part.
The efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient
subje&s, and revered by all the Protestant party,
in order to recover what had been unjustly taken
from him, could hardly have failed of exciting
commotions in Saxony, which would endanger
all that he had acquired at the expence of so

much

much dilfimulation and artifice. It was no less in B K
the Emperor's power to render vain all the folici- --.-.
tations of the confederates in behalf of the Land- s5.
grave. He had only to add one at of violence
more to the injuitice and rigour with which he had
already treated him; and he had accordingly
threatened the sons of that unfortunate Prince,
that if they perfilted in their present enterprize,
instead of feeing their father relored to liberty,
they hould hear of his having fuflered the punifll-
ment which his rebellion had Inerited'.

HAVING deliberated upon all theft points with Thep.ce

of lie!iilun

his associates, Maurice thought it more prudent ,,nciuded
to accept of the conditions offered, though less atiP u
advantageous than those which he had propoled,
than again to commit all to the doubtful issue of
war'. He repaired forthwith to Paflau, and
signed the treaty of peace; of which the chief
articles were, That before the twelfth day of
August, the confederates (hall lay down their
arms, and disband their forces; That on or be- Ag,,'n a.
fore that day the Landgrave hall be let at liberty,
and conveyed in safety to his cattle of Rheinfels;
That a diet hall be held within fix onths, in
order to deliberate concerning the most proper
and effe&ual method of preventing for the future
all disputes and dilfentions about religion ; That,
in the mean time, neither the Emperor, nor any
other Prince, (hall, upon any pretext whatever,

r Sleid. 571. * Sleid. Hil. 563, &c. Thuan.
lib. x. 59, &c.

offer

B o0 K offer any injury or violence to such as adhered to
.-- the confeflion of Augsburg, but allow them to

'55'* enjoy the free and undisturbed exercise of their

religion; That in return, the Protestants shall
not molest the Catholicks either in the exercise of
their ecclesiastical jurifdi&ion, or in performing
their religious ceremonies; That the Imperial
chamber shall administer jufice impartially to
persons of both parties, and Protestants be admit-
ted indifcrirrinately with the Catholicks to fit as
judges in that court; That if the next diet
lhould not be able to terminate the disputes with
regard to religion, the stipulations in the present
treaty in behalf of the Protestants, hall continue
for ever in full force and vigour; That none of
the confederates shall be liable to any ation on
account of what had happened during the course
of the war; That the consideration of those en-
croachments which had been made, as Maurice
pretended, upon the conffitution and liberties of
the Empire, hall be remitted to the approaching
diet; That Albert of Brandenburg hall be com-
prehended in the treaty, provided he shall accede
to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth of
August'.

Reeaetins SUCH was the memorable treaty of Paffau, that
upon this
pe.re ani overturned the vast fabrick, in erewing which
,.tluacf Charles had employed so many years, and had
Mwiuit. exerted the utmost efforts of his power and policy;

Reccuil des Traitez, ii. 261.

that

that annulled all his regulations with regard t B °° K
religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the '._
Imperial authority absolute and hereditary in his 5
family; and eftablfhed the Protestant church,
which had hitherto fubilfted precariously in Ger-
many, through connivance, or by expedients,
upon a firm and secure basis. Maurice reaped all
the glory of having concerted and completed this
unexpeeted revolution. It is a singular circun-
ilance, that the Reformation flould be indebtcd
for its security and full cfrablihinmci,- in Ger-
many, to the fame hand which ;had formerly
brought it to the brink of dcrtruftion, and that
both events fliould have been accomplilhed by
the fame arts of difinlulation. The ends, how-
ever, which Maurice had in view, at those dif-
ferentjuntures, feern to have been more attend-
ed to than the means by which he attained them;
and he was now as universally extolled for his
zeal and publick spirit, as he had lately been
condemned for his indifference and intereted
policy. It is no less worthy of observation, that
the French King, a monarch zealous for the
Catholick faith, should employ his power in order
to protec and maintain the Reormation in the
Empire, at the very time when he was perse-
cuting his own Protestant fibjel&s with all the
fierceness of bigotry, and that the league for this
purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romifl
church, lhould be negociated and signed by a
Roman Catholick bilhop. So wonderfully doth

the

B o0 K the wisdom of God superintend and regulate the
..i caprice of human paflions, and render them sub-
5ss5' servient towards the accompliihment of his own

purposes.

Littleten- LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of
tlon paid to
the French the French King during the negociations at Pas-
King in th is
tuty. h fau. Maurice and his aflociates, having gained

what they had in view, discovered no great so-
licitude about an ally, whom, perhaps, they
reckoned to be overpaid for the afliftance which
he had given them, by his acquisitions in Lor-
rain. A hort clause which they procured to be
inserted in the treaty, importing that the King of
France might communicate to the confederates
his particular pretensions or causes of hostility,
which they would lay before the Emperor, was
the only sign that they gave of their remembering
how much they had been indebted to him for
their success. Henry experienced the fame treat-
menr, which every Prince who lends his aid to
the authors of a civil war may expec. As oon
as the rage of fation began to subside, and any
prorpe&t of accommodation to open, his services
were forgotten, and his aflociates made a merit
with their sovereign, of the ingratitude with
which they abandoned their protector. But how
much fuever Henry might be enraged at the per-
fidy of his allies, or at the impatience with which
they haliened to make their peace with the Em-
peror at his expenc, he was perfedly sensible that

it

it was more his interest to keep well with the B O O K
Germanick body, than to relent the indignities '---
offered him by any particular members of it. For '55"
that realbn he difiniled the hostages which he had
received from Maurice and his associates, and
asseted to talk in the fame firain as formerly,
concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient
conflitution and liberties of the Empire.

# BOOK XI.

THE
HISTORY

OF TIIE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK Xl.
AS soon as the treaty of Pafau was signed, B 0 0 I:.

Maurice, in conlfquence of his engage- .

nents with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary at a.u.5'
the head of twenty thouland men. But the vast Murc,:
fiperiority of the Turkish armies, the frequent .ung.r y

r / - a-g.inst thi

mutinies both of the Spanifll and Germian fol- Tur"'.
diiers, occasioned by their v.wa; of pay, together
with the diflentions between M:lurice and Catal-
do, who was piqued at being obliged to resign the
chief command to him, prevented his perform-
ing any thing in that country fuiiablc to his
firmer fame, or of great bcnefit to the King of
the Romans .

Illuanhtii HiRt. Hungar. 2S8. Thuan, lib. x. 371.
VOL. IV. H WHEt

a 0 0 K WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the

- Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces

'5s'. under his command, and marched back into his
reL'of own country, that he might be ready to receive
C.' .~. his father upon his return, and give up to him
-bcnry. the reins of government which he had held during

his absence. But fortune was not yet weary
of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of
mercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Hefle, being seduced by Reifenberg their colo-
nel, a soldier of fortune, ready to engage in any
enterprise, secretly withdrew from the young
Prince as he was marching homewards, and join-
ed Albert of Brandenburgh, who still continued
in arms against the Emperor, refuting to be in-
cluded in the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily for
the Landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was dismissed from the
citadel of Mechlin where he had been confined,
but before he had got beyond the frontiers of that
country. The Queen of Hungary, who govern-
ed there in her brother's name, incensed at such
an open violation of the treaty to which he owed
his liberty, commanded him to be arreRed, and
committed him again to the custody of the fame
Spaniih captain who had guarded him for five
years with such severe vigilance. Philip beheld
all tie horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and
his spirits lubfiding in the fame proportion as they
had rilen during the short interval in which he
had enioyed liberty; he funk into del`pair, and
believed himfeil to be doomed to perpetual cap-

4 tivity.

tivity. But the matter being explained to the B o°
Emperor's full fatistaion, that the revolt of -v
Rcifenberg's mercenaries could be imputed neitler '5s
to the Landgrave nor to his son, he gave or!( rs
for his release; and Philip at las obtained the
liberty for which he had so long languished b. But
though he recovered his freedom, and was re-
inflated in his dominions, his sufferings seem to
have broken the vigour, and to have extinguilh.
ed the aivity of his mind: From being the
boldest as well as most enterprising Prince in the
Empire, he became the molt timid and cautious,
and paifcd the remainder of his days in a pacifick
indolence.

THE degraded Eleor of Saxony, likewise, Likewfe

th,. Ec&u

procured his liberty in consequence of the treaty ufSaa..
of Pafflau. The Emperor having been obliged
to relinquish all his schemes for extirpating the
Protestant religion, had no longer any motive for
detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely
solicitous, at that junture, to recover the confi-
dence and good-will of the Germans, whose afi
filance was essential to the success of the enter-
prize which he medicated against the King of
France, he, among other expedients for that pure
pose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a
Prince whose merit entitled him no le's to fteem,
than his sufferings rendered him the object of
companilon. John Frederick took poffcflion ac.

b Slid. 73. Belcarii Comment. 834.

H 2 tr4ingly

B o r cordingly of that part of his territories which had

XI.
-, been reerved for him, when Maurice was invefR-

5'Z ed with the Electoral dignity. As in this fitua-

tion, he continued to display the fame virtuous
magnanimity for which he had been conspicuous
in a more prosperous and splendid ltate, and which
he had retained amidst all his sufferings, he lived
1iveral years in that high reputation to which he
had fojuft a title.

r!:c Etrr- THE los of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had
3'~r r.folv;s

t., mike made a deep imprefiion on the Emperor. Ac-
Ir.:" customed to terminate all his operations against

France with advantage to himlfif; he thought
that it nearly concerned his honour not to allow
Henry the superiority in this war, or to susser his
own adminifRration to be fained with the intamy
of having permitted territories of such cunfe-
quence to be dilinembered from the Empire.
This was no less a point of interell than oi ho-
nour. As the frontier of Champagne was more
naked, and lay more exposed than that of any
province in France, he had frequently, during
his wars with that kingdom, made inroads upon
it with great success and effec t; but it Henry
were allowed to retain his late conquells i'rance
would gain such a formidable barrier on it ide,
as to be altogether secure, where fort ly (he
had been weakest. On the other hand, le Em-
pire had now loft as much, in point v. Iecurity,
as France had acquired; and being ltripped of
the defence which those cities afforded it, lay open

ro

to be invaded on a quarter, where all the towns B 0o, K
having been hiclerto conlidercd as interior, and -- -
rem:f.e from any enemyi, were but llightly fortifi- '5'
ecd. These considerations determined Charles to
arteinpt rec;vering tilhe three towns of which
Henry had made hilllf m.iltCr ; and the prepa-
rations which he had made aain:' M'a.urce aid
his aToc;i.:':s, cnl.iled iliin to carry his rc-rfJtion
into iini:c'i.te execuion.

As oon, then, as the peace was crclided at H',;nl-

PafTatl, he ic. iis inlorious rctrcal at Vilach, thi,5 urpofe.
and dvanced .o Au'^.ofirg, at ti !headl of a con-
fiderable bdy oif Grnl:in; wiv-li he had levied,
[ogetiler wii: aii the iroops which he had drawn
out of Italy and Spain. To telce he added several
battalions, which having been in the pay of the
confederates, encered into his service when dif-
mniled by tm nl and he prevailed likewise on
some Princes of the Empire to join him with
their vals. In order to conceal the deffationl
of this formidable army, and to guard againit
alarming the French so as to put them on pre-
paring for their defence, he gave out that he was
to march forthwith into Hulngary, in order to
second Maurice in his operations againll the In-
fidels. When he began to advance towards the
Rhine, and could no longer employ t!Cat prctcxt,
he tried a new artifice, and spread a report, that
he took this route in order to challife Albert of
Brandenburgh, whose cruel exations in that part

H 3 of

°

o 0o of the Empire called loudly for his interposition
XI.

- -.

. to check them.

55ss2.

The p rC!h BUT the French having grown acquainted, at
rel h " t last, with arts by which they had been so often
the d, ence
of Mtz. deceived, viewed all Charles's motions with dif-

truf. Henry immediately discerned the true ob-
ject of his vast preparations, and reollved to
defend the important conquests which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which they
were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that
the whole weight of the war would be turned
against Metz, by whose fate that of Toul and
Verdun would be determined, he nominated

Th' 'ke Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, to take the
appo.n.d command in that city during the siege, the iue
iiverlor '

s
t; tona. oi which would equally affe& the honour and in-

terelt ot his country. His choice could not have
fallen upon any pe-fon more worthy of that trufR.
The Duke of Guile possessed, in a high degree,
all the talents of courage, sagacity, and presence
of mind, which render men eminent in military
command. He was largely endowed with that
magnanimity of foul which delights in bold enter-
prizes, and aspires to fame by splendid and extra-
ordinary ations. He repaired with joy to the
dangerous flation assigned him, as to a theatre
on which he might display his great qualities un-
der the immediate eye of his countrymen, all
ready to applaud him. The martial genius of
the French nobility in that age, which confidered
it as the greatest reproach to remain ina&tive,

when

when there was any opportunity of signalizing B 0 o Ks
their courage, prompted great numbers to follow ---r
a leader who was the darling as well as the patterni z
of every one that courted military fame. Several
Princes of the blood, many noblemen of the
higheRf rank, and all the young officers who could
obtain the King's permilion, entered Metz as
volunteers. By their prefcnce they added Ipirit
to the garrison, and enabled the Duke of Guise
to employ, on every emergency, pertbns eager to
diftinguilh themselves, and sic to conduC any
service.

BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise Prep",e so

a vitie'roue

undertook the defence of Metz, he found every defence.
thing, upon his arrival there, in such a situation,
as might have induced any person of less intrepid
courage to despair of defendi.ng it with success.
The city was of great extent, with large suburbs;
the walls were in many places feeble and without
ramparts; the ditch narrow and the old towers,
which projected instead of bastions, were at too
great distance from each other to defend the space
between them. For all these defe&ts he endea-
voured to provide the best remedy which the
time would permit. He ordered the suburbs,
without sparing the monafleries or churches, not
even that of St. Arnulph, in which several Kings
of France had been buried, to be levelled with
the ground; but in order to guard against the
imputation of impiety, to which such a violation

H 4 of

3 0 K of so many sacred edifices, as well as of the afhie

XI.
W --` of the dead, might expose him, he executed this
55j2. with much religious ceremony. Having ordered

all the holy vestments and utensils, together with
the bones of the Kings, and other perfbns de-
posited in these churches, to be removed, they
were carried in solemn proceflion to a church
within the walls, he himself walking before them
uncovered, with a torch in his hand. He then
pulled down such houfcs as stood near the walls,
cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired the
ruinous fortifications, and erected new ones. As
it was neccflary that all these works flould be
finished with the utinoft expedition, he labourci
at them with his own hands: the officers and vo-
lunteers imitated his example, and the soldiers
submitted with cheerfulness to the most evere
fatigues, when they aw that their superiors did
not decline to bear a part in these together with
them. At the ame time he compelled all uiUlcis
persons to leave the place; he filled the maga-
zines with provisions and military ilores; burnt
the mills, and deRtroyed the corn and frage for
several miles round the town. Such were his
popular talents, as well as his arts, of acquiring
an ascendant over the minds of men, that the citi-
zens seconded him with no less ardour than the
foldicrs; and every other palffon being iwallowed
up in the zeal to repulse the enemy, with which
he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their
estates, together with the havock which he made

amorng

among their publick and private buildings, with- B K
out any emotion of relcntment '. <

153».

MEANTIME the Emperor, having collcted all Charlrs d-

his forces, continued his march towards Metz. w a i..sM,t .
As he pasTed through the cities on the Rhine, he
saw the difinal e,.cts of that licentious and wiie-
ful war which Albert had carried on in these
parts. Upon his approach, that Prince, though
at the head of twenty thouland men, withdrew
into Lorrain as if he had intended to join the
French King, whose arms he had quartcred with
his own in all his landards and ensigns. Albert
was not in a condition to cope with the Im.perial
troopsd, which amounted at lea{t to sixty thou-
find men, forming one of the most numerous and
beit appointed armies which had been brought
into the field during that age, in any of tie wars
among Christian Princes.

THE chief command, under the Emperor, was I vns ti,

committed to the Duke of Alva, al'ed I) i:?e '"the
Marquis de Marignano, together with the n,'r
experienced of the Italian and Spanilll generals.
As it was towards the end of October, thel in-
telligent officers represented the great danger of
beginning, at such an advanced i albn, a siege
which could not fail to prove very tedious. But
Charles adhered to his own opinion with his usual
obstinacy, and being confident that he had made

Thuan. xi. 387. . Natal. Cinmitil, -ill. z17.

fu cT

B ° K such preparations, and taken such precautions, as

-v-j would ensure success, he ordered the city to be
553. invested. As oon as the Duke of Alva appeared,
oa. 9. a large body of he French allied out and attack-

ed his van-guard with great vigour, put it in
confusion, and killed or took prisoners a con-
fiderable number of men. By this early specimen
which they gave of the conduEt of their officers,
as well as the valour of their troops, they hew-
ed the Imperialitis what an enemy they had to en-
counter, and how dear every advantage mutl cost
them. The place, however, was completely in-
vested, the trenches were opened, and the other
works begun.

Both parti, THE attention both of the besiegers and be-
endeavour
to ain Al- fieged was turned for some time towards Albert
dmburg. of Brandenburg, and they strove with emulation

which hould gain that Prince, who ill hovered
in the neighbourhood, flutuating in all the un-
certainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who,
being swayed by no principle, was allured differ-
ent ways by contrary views of interest. The
French tempted him with offers extremely bene.
ficial; the Imperialifs scrupled at no promile
which they thought would make an impreflion
upon him. After much hesitation he was gained
by the Emperor, from whom he expeted to re-
ceive advantages which were both more imme-
diate and more permanent. As the French King,
who began to furpe& his intentions, had appoint-
ed a body of troops under the Duke of Aumale,

brother

brother to the Duke of Guil, to watch his mo- B °o 0
tions, Albert fell upon them unexpe&cedly with ,
such vigour that he routed them entirely, killed NoJ.5"
many of the officers, wounded Au!nale himfetlf,
and took him prisoner. Immediately after this
vitory, he marched in triumph to Metz, and
joined his army to that of the Emperor. Charles,
in reward for this lervice, and the great acceflion
of strength which he brought him, granted Al-
bert a formal pardon of all past offences, and con-
firmed him in the poffefion of the territories
which he had violently usurped during the war.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affe&ed T'e almant
with his brother's misfortune, did not renmi, in ofti,;eluke

of G life

any degree, the vigour with which he deiended a,, hilgat.
the town. He harassed the beiegers by frequent i"".
sallies, in which his officers were so eager to dif-
tinguifh themselves, that his authority being hard-
ly lufficient to refrain the impetuosity of their
courage, he was obliged at different times to ihut
the gates, and to conceal the keys, in order to
prevent the Princes of the blood, and noblemen
of the first rank, from exposing themselves to
danger in every dally. He repaired in the night
what the enemy's artillery had beat down during
the day, or ereoded behind the ruined works new
fortifications of almost equal trength. The Im-
perialilts, on their part, puihed on the attack
With great pirit, and carried forward, at once,

Sleid. 575. Thuan, lib. xi. 389. 392.

approaches

r o o K approaches againlt different parts of the tow;?.
_.--.. Euct the art of attacking fortified places was nt

il*' then arrived at that tideree of perfection to which

it was carried tow.!rds the clolu of the fixteenti;
century, during the long war in the Nethcrlnai.
The befic,-crs, afrer the unwearied labour of maiv
weeks, fountd that they had made but little ro-
grefs; and although their batteries had m.lde
briaches in di;:-;cnt places, they 1.v, to their
aftoi:iii;:e:tr, w:iirks ftiddcnly appear, in demo-
linlfhli wlich their ftigues and dangers would be
rcnt wedv. ''ihe Eliperor, enraged at the obstinate
refitl.ncc which his army met with, lcft Thion-
vi!ll, where he hd been confined by a violent it
of the gout, and tio :gh lill so infirm that he was
No.16. obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired t

the camll; thar, by is prefcnce, he might ani-
mate the fuldiilrs, and urge on the attack witi
greater f U

irir. Upon his arrival, new bateriecs

were ere, dJ, and new efoirts were made with re-
doubied aridoi lr.

Trh.n !rs t 'r', I:'. this time, the witer had et in with
;.1;..; c*i-:

,;:..
. ':: i;.;, ta: camp was alternately delugedl

v;ii: r.iin or covered with fnowv at the fam!e
time proviiors werc become extremely icarce, as
a body of French cavlry which hovered in the
neighbourhood, often interrupted the convoys,
or rendered their arrival difficult and uncertain.
Difeares began to spread among the soldiers, ee-
cially among the Italians and Spaniards, unac-
cultoinmd to such inclement weather; great nunm

ber,

bers were disabled from serving, and many died. B 0°o K
At length, flch breaches were made as seemed --V
pra..ticable, and Charles refClved to haz.rd a ge- '5'
ncral alrault, in lfite of all the remonfirances of
his generals concerning the imprudence of at-
tacking a numerous g:rrifon, conducted and ani-
mated by the molt gal:nt of the French nobility,
w.ith an army weakened by difeafcs, and dif-
heartened with ill fuccfs. The Duke of Guile,
ftulpeting the Emp'ror's intentions from the ex-
traordinary hurry which he observed in the ene-
my's camp, ordered all his troops to tilr Irl'iltc-
tive pofis. They appeared imliediatIcly (c the
walls, and behind the breachts, wvith fiuci a dc-
termined countenance, so eager for te coimbat,
and so well prepared to give the ailants a warm
reception; that the Imprialis, inflead of ad-
vancing to the charge when the word of com-
mand was given, hfood Imotion.Iei in a timid de-
jected silence. The Einpe:-or, perceiving that
he could not trui' troops whl;o iirits were so
much broken, retired abruptly o his quarters,
complaining that he was now dei"rtcyd 'i, his Icl-
diers, who deserved no lo:;lgr tn a nimn of men'.

DEEPL as this behaviour of Ihis trc,)n-ps or:'- T'e. '.n.-

sied and affeEted Charles, he would not I';cr oh

f I,:1.

abandoning the siege, tholu!h ihe fiw the necclSity
of chanving the method of' art: i:. He ':li'cn(l-
cd the fury of his barrcris, and prc;poi; d to pro-

r ThuanC. 3-7.

CCr'.:

s 0 0 K ceed by the more secure but tedious method of

X.
_~ sapping. But as it still continued to rain or to
55s 1hnow almost incefantly, such as were employed

in this service endured incredible hardships: and
the Duke of Guise, whose induitry was not infe-
rior to his valour, discovering all their mines,
counterworked them, and prevented their effect.
At last, Charles finding it impossible to contend
any longer with the rigour of the season, and
with enemies whom he could neither overpower
by force, nor subdue by art, while at the fame
time a contagious distemper raged among his
troops, and cut off daily great numbers of the
officers as well as soldiers, yielded to the folici-
tations of his generals, who conjured him to save
the remains of his army by a timely retreat;
" Fortune," fays he, " I now perceive, resembles
other females, and choofes to confer her favours
on young men, while he forsakes those who are
advanced in years."

Dec. as. UpoN this, he gave orders immediately to raise
_aibsethe the siege, and submitted to the disgrace of aban-

doning the enrerprife, after having continued
fifty-fix days before the town, during which time
he had loft upwards of thirty thousand men, who
died of diseases, or were killed by the enemy.
The Duke of Guise, as oon as he perceived the
intention of the Imperialists, took measures to
prevent their retiring unmolested, and lent out
Several bodies both of cavalry and infantry to in-
fest their rear, to pick up stragglers, and to seize

every

every opportunity of attacking them with advan- B 0 0 K

X9.

tage. Such was the confusion with. which they i-.--
made their retreat, that the French might have 3sa.'
annoyed them in the most cruel manner. But
when they allied out, a fpe&acle prelented itself Ruin of the

·

, .., Imperial
to their view, which extinguished at once all ,ry, Pan

bhumaniy of

hodfile rage, and melted them into tenderness the Frnca
and compaiflon. The Imperial camp was filled
with the ick and wounded, with the dead and the
dying. In all the different roads by which the
army retired, numbers were found, who, having
made an effort to escape, beyond their strength,
were left, when they could go no farther, to perish
without assistance. This they received from their
enemies, and were indebted to them for all the
kind offices which their friends had not the power
to perform. The Duke of Guise immediately
ordered proper refreshments for such as were
dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons to at-
tend the sick and wounded; he removed such as
could bear it into the adjacent villages; and
those who would have suffered by being carried
so far, he admitted into the hospitals which he
had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers. As
soon as they recovered, he sent them home under
an escort of soldiers, and with money to bear their
charges. By there aas of humanity, which were
uncommon in that age, when war was carried on
with greater rancour and ferocity than at present,
the Duke of Guise completed the fame which he
had acquired by his gallant and fucceiful defence
of Metz, and engaged choe whom he had van-

quiihed

B 0o x quifhed to vie with his own countrymen in ex-

-,-.. tolling his name .
'55'-

BAd fii- To there calamities in Germany, were added
tioq of the
Empror's such unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered this the
t,;. n molt difaifrous year in the Emperor's life. Dur-

ing his reidlence at Villach, Charles had applied
to Cofino di Medici for the loan of two hundred
thousand crowns. But his credit at that time was
fr low, that in order to obtain this inconsiderable
ium, he was obliged to put him in poffiefion of
the principality of Piombino, and by giving up
that, he loft the footing which he had hitherto
maintained in Tuscany, and enabled Cofino to
assume, for the future, the tone and deportment
of a Prince altogether independent. Much about
the time that his indigence constrained him to
part with this valuable territory, he loft Siena,
which was of still greater consequence, through
the ill condu& of Don Diego de Mendoza.h
The rvolt SIETA, like most of the great cities in Italy,

had long enjoyed a republican government, under
the proteftion of the Empire; but being torn in
pieces by the difilntions between the nobility and
the people, which divided all the Italian common-
wcaltl,, the faLtion of the people, which gained

e Sleid. 75. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Dnniel,

Hitl. de France, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of this
ficge is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac, who
was present. Natal. Comit. ll. 129..

h Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

I the

the ascendant, besought the Emperor to become B o KC
the guardian of the administration which they '-
had etablifhed, and admitted into their city a aSs'
mnall body of Spanish soldiers, whom he had ent
to countenance the execution of the laws, and to
preserve tranquillity among them. The direc.
tion of there troops was given to Mendoza, at
that time ambassador for the Emperor at Rome,
who persuaded the credulous multitude, that it
was necessary for their security against any future
attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a
citadel in Siena; and as he flattered himself that
by means of this fortress he might render the Em-
peror matter of the city, he pushed on the works
with all poflible dispatch. But he threw off the
mask too oon. Before the fortifications were
completed, he began to indulge his natural
haughtiness and severity of temper, and to treat
the citizens with great insolence. At the fame
time the soldiers in garrison being paid as irre-
gularly as the Emperor's troops usually were,
lived almost at discretion upon the inhabitants,
and were guilty of many as of licence and op-
preflon.

THESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a sense The Si.nfct

of their danger. As they saw the neceffiry of 7"l2r''
exerting themselves, while the unfinilhed fortifi- .I"C
cations of the citadel left them any hopes of fuc-
cess, they applied to the French ambassador at
Rome, who readily promised them his master's
protetion and afliftince. At the fame time, for-

VOL. IV. I getting

B °
o K getting their domeftick animofities when such a

XI. mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and existence
'Si'* of the republick, they lent agents to the exiled

nobles, and invited them to concur with them in
saving their country from the servitude with which
it was threatened. As there was not a moment
to lose, measures were concerted speedily, but
with great prudence; and were executed with
equal vigour. The citizens rose suddenly in
arms; the exiles flocked into the town from dif-
ferent parts with all their partisans, and what
troops they could draw together; and several
bodies of mercenaries in the pay of France ap-
peared to support them. The Spaniards, though
surprised, and much inferior in number, defended
themselves with great courage, but feeing no
profpea of relief, and having no hopes of main-
taining their station long in a half-finilhed fort-
refs, they oon gave it up. The Sienefe, with
the utmost alacrity, levelled it with the ground,
that no monument might remain of that odious
ftru&ure, which had been raised in order to en-
slave them. At the fame time renouncing all
connexion with the Emperor, they sent ambaf-
fadors to thank the King of France as the restorer
of their liberty, and to entreat that he would
secure to them the perpetual enjoyment of that
blefling, by continuing his protetion to their re-
publick'.

i Pecci Mcmoric do Siena, vol. iii. p. 230. 261. Thuan.

375. 377, &c. Paruta. Hilt. Venct. 267. Mem. de Ribier,
4:4, &c.

5 To

To these misfortunes, one still more fatal ;id B 0 K

almot succeeded. The severe adminiltration of
Don Pedro de Toledo, vic.roy of Naples, hav- Dcrleof
ing filled that kingdom with murmuring and dif- !i:' T;,
affclion, the Prince of Salerno, the head of the d"m of
malecontents, had fled to the court of France,
where all who bore ill-will to the Emperor or his
ministers, were sure of finding protection and
afiftance. That nobleman, in the usual style of
exiles, boasting much of his partisans, and of his
great influence with them, prevailed on Henry
to think of invading Naples, from expeEtation of
being joined by all those with whom the Prince
of Salerno held correlpondence, or wJio were dif-
satisfied with Toledo's government. Buc though
the first hint of this enterpriic was liiggefted by
the Prince of Salerno, Henry did not cloofe that
its success hould entirely depend upon his being
able to fulfil the promises which he had made.
He applied for aid to Solyman, whom he court-
ed, after his father's example, as his most vi-
gorous auxiliary against the Emperor, and solicited
him to second his operations by fending a power-
ful fleet into the Mediterranean It was not dif.
ficult to obtain what he requested of the Sultan,
who, at this time, was highly incensed against the
house of Austria, on account of the proceedings
in Hungary. .He ordered an hundred and fifty
ships to be equipped, that they might fail towards
the coast of Naples, at whatever time Henry
should name, and might co-operace with the
French troops in their attempts upon that king-

I 2 dom.

B o K dom. The command of this fleet was given to
-_1~ the corsair Dragut, an officer trained up under

53.' Barbarofla, and scarcely inferior to his malfer in

courage, in talents, or in good fortune. le- ap.
peared on the coast of Calabria at the time iwhich
had been agreed on, landed at fcvcral places,
plundered and burnt several villages; and at laz.
calling anchor in the bay of Naples, filled the:
city with consternation. But as the French fleet,
detained by ome accident, which the contempo.
rary hiaorians have not explained, did not join
the Turks according to concert, they, after wait-
ing twenty days, without hearing any tidings of
it, set fail for Constantinople, and thus delivered
the viceroy of Naples from the terror of an in-
varian, which he was in no condition to have re-
fiftedk.

r;n;. As the French had never given so severe a
orrfenribly check to the Emperor in any former campaign,
ffeited they epreffld immoderate joy at the fccefs of
with th eyc
are ofhis their arms. Charles himself, accustomed to a

tong series of prosperity, felt the blow most fen-
sibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-Coun-
tries, much deje&ed with the cruel reverse of
fortune which affeEted him in his declining age,
when the violence of the gout had increased to
ifch a pitch, as entirely broke the vigour of his
constitution, and rendered him peevish, difficult
of access, and often incapable of applying to

k Thuan. 375. 380. Mem. deRibier,ii. 4o. Ganone.

6 business.

business. But whenever he enjoyed any interval B 3O o 1
of ease, all his thoughts were bent on revenge; - -
and he deliberated, with the utmost solicitude, S53
concerning the most proper means of annoying
France, and of effacing the fain which had ob-
fcured the reputation and glory of his arms. All
the Ichemes concerning Germany, which had en-
gro.sTd him so long, being disconcerted by the
peace of Paffau, the affairs of the Empire be-
came only secondary objects of attention; and
enmity to France was the predominant paflion
which chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran- The violent

roceedinq;;
denburg excited violent commotions, which dif- of Albert of

Branden.

turbed the Empire during this year. ThatPrince's brg.
troops having shared in the calamities of the siege
of Metz, were greatly reduced in number. But
the Emperor, prompted by gratitude for his dif-
tinguifhed services on that occasion, or perhaps
uith a secret view of fomenting divisions among
the Princes of the Empire, having paid up all
the money due to him, he was enabled with that
furn to hire so many of the soldiers difiniffed from
the Imperial army, that he was soon at the head
of a body of men as numerous as ever. The
bi!hops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg having soli-
cited the Imperial chamber, to annul, by its au-
thority, the iniquitous conditions which Albert
had compelled them to sign, that court unani-
moufly found all their engagements with him to
b; void in their own nature, because they had

I 3 been

B o K been extorted by force; enjoined Albert to re-
-_- nounce all claim o the performance of them;
'i53' and, if he hould persist in such an unjust de-

mand, exhorted all the Princes of the Empire to
take arms againfl him as a disturber of the pub-
lick tranquillity. To this decision, Albert op-
posed the confirmation of his rranfaAions with
the two prelates, which the Emperor had granted
him as the reward of his having joined the Ilnpe-
rial army at Metz; and in order to intimidate
his antagonists, as well as to convince them of
his resolution nor to relinquish his pretensions, he
put his troops in motion, that he might lecue
the territory in question. Various endeavours
were employed, and many expedients proposed,
in order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the ame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enterpriz-
ing, inspiring him with the moi sanguine hopes
of success, even in his wildest undertakings, he
disdainfully rejected all reasonable overtures es
accommodation.

-T;,Citn- UPON this, the Imperial chamber issued its
drnne. by
Ithtmnpei.a decree against him, and required the Eletor of
cbambcr.

Saxony, together with several other Princes men-
tioned by name, to take arms in order to carry it
into execution. Maurice, and those afrociated
with him, were not unwilling to undertake this
service. They were extremely solicitous to main-
tain publick order by supporting the authority of
the Imperial chamber, and saw the neceflity of

giving

giving a timely check to the usurpations of an B 00 K
ambitious Prince, who had no principle of aftion
but regard to his own intcreft, and no motive to 1
direa him but the impulse of ungovernable pas-
sions. They had good rcalon to ulped-, that the
Emperor encouraged Aibert in his extravagant
and irregular proceedings, and secretly afforded
him afliftance, that, by raising him up to rival
Maurice in power, he might, in any future broil,
make use of his assistance to counterbalance and
control the authority which the other had acquired
in the Empire '.

THESE considerations united the most powerful Apr1 ,.
princes in Germany in a league againt Albert, r,' frrIn

:a: nt him.
of which Maurice was declared generaliflimo. of hie.

rviauri t.

This formidable confederacy, however, wrought w,,as, e,
no change in Albert's sentiments; but as he knew
that he could not resist so many Princes, if he
flould allow them time to afremble their forces,
he endeavoured, by his ativity, to deprive them
of all the advantages which they might derive
from their united power and numbers; and for
that reason marched directly against Maurice, the
enemy whom he dreaded nloft. It was happy for
the allies that the conduet of their affairs was
committed to a Prince of fi.ch abilities. He, hy
his authority and example, had inspired them with
vigour and having carried on their preparations

'Sleid. 585. Mem. d Ribi.r, ii. 44z. Arnoldi vita
Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 1242.

I 4 wilh.

B 0 0 K with a degree of rapidity, of which confederate

I.- bodies are seldom capable, he was in condition
j153' to face Albert before he could make any confi-

derable progress.
He ataccs THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in

r number, each confining of twenty-four thousand

men, met at Sieverhaufcn, in the duchy of Lu-
nenburgh; and the violent animosity against each
other, which possessed the two leaders, did not
susser them to continue long inactive. The troops,
inflamed with the fame hostile rage, marched
June 9. fiercely to the combat; they fought with the

greatest obstinacy; and as both generals were
capable of availing themselves of every favour-
able occurrence, the battle remained long doubt-
fil, each gaining ground upon the other alter-

and dereats nately. At last vi&ory declared for Maurice,
is my, y who was superior in cavalry, and Albert's army

fled in confusion, leaving four thousand dead in
the field, and their camp, baggage and artillery,
in the hands of the conquerors. The allies
bought their victory dear, their befl troops sus-
fcred greatly, two sons of the duke of Brunswick,
a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many other persons
of diftintion, were among the number of the

hui illid slain . But all there were soon forgotten; for
in the bat.
the. Maurice himself, as he led up to a second charge

a body of horse which had been broken, receiv-

m Hiftoria pugpea infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thmm.

Wintzero auflore apud Scard. ii. 559 Sleid. 583. Rufcelli
epitlres aux Princes, i.5. Arnoldi vita Maurit. x245.

ed a wound with a piftol-bullet in the belly, of °o° K
which he died two days after the battle, in the .--
thirty-fecond year of his age, and in the sixth I5s53
after his attaining the elecoral dignity.

OF all the personages who have appeared in the i; cllarac-

history of this active age, when great occurren-
ces, and sudden revolutions, called forth extra-
ordinary talents to view, and afforded them full
opportunity to difp!ay themclves, Maurice may
jultly be confidered as the most remarkable. If
his exorbitant ambition, his profound diflimula-
tion, and his unwarrantable usurpation of his
kinfinan's honours and dominions, exclude him
from being praised as a virtuous man; his pru-
dence in concerting his measures, his vigour in
executing them, and the uniform success with
which they were attended, entitle him to the ap-
pellation of a great Prince. At an age, when
impetuosity of spirit commonly predominates over
political wisdom, when the highest effort even of
a genius of the first order is to fix on a bold
scheme, and to execute it with promptitude and
courage, he formed and condu&ed an intricate
plan of policy, which deceived the most artful
Monarch in Europe. At the very juncture when
the Emperor had attained to almost unlimited
defpotifn, Maurice, with power seemingly in-
adequate to such an undertaking, compelled him
to relinquish all his usurpations, and etablilhed
not only the religious but civil liberties of Ger-
many on such foundations as have hitherto re-

mained

°X0 K mained unshaken. Although, at one period of
XI his life, his conduct excited the jealousy of the
5i3' Protfeants, and at another, drew on him the re-

fentment of the Roman Catholicks, such was his
maflerly address, that he was the only Prince of
the age who, in any degree, pofliffed the confi-
dence of both, and whom both lamented as the
most able as well as faithful guardian of the con-
ftitution and laws of his country.

,tr' enn. THE consternation which Maurice's death oc-

t."u' the
wa.. cafioned among his troops, prevented them from

making the proper improvement of the victory
which they had gained. Albert, whose ative
courage, and profuse liberality, rendered him the
darling of such military adventurers as were little
bolicitous about thejuftice of his cause, oon re-
assem.bled his broken forces, and made frelh levies
with such success, that he was quickly at the head
of fifteen thousand men, and renewed his depre-
dations with additional fury. But Henry of
Brunswick having taken the command of the al-
sp.,pt . lied troops, defeated him in a second battle,

scarcely less bloody than the former. Even then
his courage did not fink, nor were his resources
exhaufled. He made several efforts, and ome
of them very vigorous, to retrieve his affairs:
But being laid under the ban of the Empire by
the Imperial chamber; being driven by degrees
out of all his hereditary territories, as well as
thole which he had usurped; being forsaken by
many of his offcers, and overpowered by the

number

number of his enemies, he fled for ref,,e into 3 O O O
France. After having been, for a considerable ---
time, the terror and scourge of Germany, he 1553'

1 e is diven

lingered out ofme years in an indignt and de- o oocr-
pendent flare of exile, the mifries of which his "',na
refefs and arrogant spirit endured with the most
indignant impatience. Upon his death without j:,,,,,,,
i.sue, his territories, which had been seized by the Xjs7.
p inces who took arms againit him, were restored,
by a decree of the Emperor, to his collateral heirs
of the house of Brandenburg %

MAURICE having left only one daughter, who r,,,;c...

was afterwards married to William Prince of g,,'u''' -
Orange, by whom fle had a bn who bore his ',e,.li in
grandfather's name, and inherited the great ta- disaty.
lents for which he was conspicuous, a violent dif-
pute arose concerning the fuccefflon to his ho-
nours and territories. John Frederick, the de-
graded ele&tor, claimed the electoral dignity, and
that part of his patrimonial estate of which he
had been violently stripped after the Smalkal-
dick war. Auguilus, Maurice's only brother,
pleaded his right not only to the hereditary pof-
sessions of their family, but to the eleEtoral dig-
nity, and to the territories which Maurice had
acquired. As Augustus was a Prince of con-
fiderable abilities, as well as of great candour
and gentleness of manners, the states of Saxony,
forgetting the merits and sufferings of their for-

" led. 2. 594. S599 Struv. Corp. his. Germ. 107;.

met

B O o mer malter, declared warmly in his favour. His

XI.
E---_ pretensions were powerfully supported by the

'553. King of Denmark, whose daughter he had mar-

ried, and zealously espoused by the King of the
Romans, out of regard to Maurice's memory.
The degraded EleEtor, though secretly favoured
by his ancient enemy the Emperor, was at last
obliged to relinquish his claim, upon obtaining a
small addition to the territories which had been
allotted to him, together with a stipulation, li-
curing to his family the eventual fucceflion, upon
a failure of male heirs in the Albertine line. That
unfortunate, but magnanimous Prince, died next
year, soon after ratifying this treaty of agreement;
and the electoral dignity is fill poffffed by the
descendants of Augultus o.

Rofilites DURING thee tranfations in Germany, war
½i the Lw.
Countries. was carried on in the Low-Countries with con-

liderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the stain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an
army early in the field, and laid siege to Terouane.
Though the town was of such importance, that
Francis used to call it one of the two pillows on
which a King of France might sleep with security,
the fortifications were in disrepair: Henry, trust-
ing to what had happened at Metz, thought no-
thing more was necessary to render all the efforts
of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce the gar-

o Sleid. 587. Thuan. 409. Struv. Corp. hin. Gerr.

rison

rifon with a considerable number of the young o o K
nobility. But d'Efls, a veteran officer who com-
manded them, being killed, and the Imperialists 1s
pulhing the siege with great vigour and perse-
verance, the place was taken by afsaulk. That it June 2r.
might not fall again into the hands of the French,
Charles ordered not only the fortifications but
the town to be rated, and the inhabitants to be
(lifperfed in the adjacent cities. Elated with this
success, the Imperialifs immediately invefled
Hefdin, which, though defended with great bra-
very, was likewise taken by assault, and such of
the garrison as escaped the sword were made
prisoners. The Emperor entrusted the conduct
of this siege to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince
of Piedmont, who, on that occasion, gave the
first display of those great talents for military com-
mand, which oon entitled him to be ranked
among the firll generals of the age, and facilitated
his re-eftablifllment in his hereditary dominions,
the greater part of which having been over-run
by Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were fill
occupied by Henry P.

THE loss of there towns, together with so many T!heprogres

persons of diftin&ion, either killed or taken by rs the'i
the enemy, was no inconfiderab!e calamity to Fiench
France, and Henry felt it very fenibly; but he Kin'.
was still more mortified at the Emperor's having
aflumed his wonted superiority in the field so soon

P Thu3an i.
4. Har.i Annalcs Brib.nt. 669.

after

°0 0
l after the blow at Metz, which the French had
X!.
v-z -' represented as fatal to his power. He was ashamed,
5' too. of his own remissness and exceflive security

at the opening of the campaign and, in order to
repair that error, he assembled a numerous army,
and led it into the Low Countries.

ROUSED at the approach of such a formidable

enemy, Charles left Bruffils, where he had beer
shut up so clofcly during seven months, that it
came to be believed in many parts of Europe that
he was dead; and though he was so much de-
bilitated by the gout that he could hardly bear
the motion of a litter, he hafRened to join his
army. The eyes of ail Europe were turned with
expectation towards those mighty and exasperated
rivals, between whom a decisive battle was now
thought unavoidable. But Charles having pru-
dently declined to hazard a general engagement,
and the violence of the autumnal rains rendering
it impofible for the French to undertake any
siege, they retired, without having performed any
thing suitable to the great preparations which
they had made q.

The rmpe- THE Imperial arms did not make the fame pro-
ftiter.fia grefs in Italy. The narrowness of the Emperor's
LIly. finances seldom allowed him to at with vigour

in two different places at the fame time; and
having exerted himself to the utmot in order

Haraeus, 672. Thuan. 414.

to

to make a great effort in the Low Countries, his B o 0 K
operations on the other fide of the Alps were pro- --~
portionally feeble. The viceroy of Naples, in 155s'
conjuntion with Cofino di Medici, who was
greatly alarmed at the introduction of French
troops into Siena, endeavoured to become master
of that city. But, inflead of reducing the Sienefe,
the Imperialists were obliged to retire abruptly,
in order to defend their own country, upon the
appearance of the Turkish fleet, which threatened
the coalt of Naples; and the French not only
eftablilhed themselves more firmly in Tuscany, but,
by the affiflance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, subject, at that time,
to the Genoefc .

THE affairs of the house of Austria declined no and in

less in Hungary during the courie of this year. H""7'r
As the troops which Ferdinand kept in T'ranfyl-
vania received their pay very irregularly, they
lived almost at discretion upon the inhabitants;
and their insolence and rapaciousness greatly dilt
gusted all ranks of men, and alienated cthem
from their new sovereign, who, instead of pro-
tefing, plundered his fubjeds. Their indigna-
tion at this, added to their desire of revenging
Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much upon a tur-
bulent nobility, impatient of injury, ani upon a
fierce people, prone to change, that they were
ripe for a revolt. At that very jundture, their

r Thuan. 417.

late

B o°x late Queen Isabella, together with her son, ap.

-I,^ peared in Transylvania. Her ambitious mind
553. could not bear the solitude and inactivity of a

private life; and repenting quickly of the ceflion
which he had made of the crown in the year one
thousand five hundred and fifty-one, he left the
place of her retreat, hoping that the diffatisfac-
tion of the Hungarians with the Austrian govern-
ment would prompt them once more to recognise
her son's right to the crown. Some noblemen of
great eminence declared immediately in his fa-
vour. The Balha of Belgrade, by Solyman's
order, espoused his cause, in opposition to Ser-
dinand; the Spanilh and German soldiers, in.
ifead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied
for want of pay, declaring that they would march

rd;inmd back to Vienna; so that Caftaldo, their general,
indo* was

o bliged to abandon Transylvania to Iabella
Tranfyl. and the Turks, and to place himself at the head

of the mutineers, that by his authority he might
restrain them from plundering the Austrian terri-
tories, through which they pafied'.

Iymn FRDINAND's attention was turned so

entirely1

Solyman's FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entirely
^Zit,. towards the affairs of Germany, and his treafurei

so much exhausted by his late efforts in Hungary,
that he made no attempt to recover this valuable
province, although a favourable opportunity for
that purpose presented itself, as Solyman was then
engaged in a war with Persia, and involved be-

, Thuan. 43o.

fides

fides in domeftick calamities which engrofed and Bi K0
difiurbed his mind. Solyman, thotgh diftin- t.-
guifhed by many accomplishments from the '553
other Ottoman Princes, had all the paflions pe-
culiar to that violent and haughty race. He was
jealous of his authority, sudden as well as furious
in his anger, and susceptible of all that rage of
love, which reigns in the East, and often pro-
duces the wildest and molt tragical effe&s. His Th-etratai
favourite miftres was a Circallian save of ex- , fol,,
quifite beauty, who bore him a fun called Mul- Muna""a.
tapha, whom, both on account of his birth-right
and merit, he destined to be the heir of his crown.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, sion supplanted
the Circassian, and gained the Sultan's heart.
Having the addrcfs to retain the conquest which
he had made, fle kept poffefslon of his love
without any rival for many years, during which
{he brought him several sons and one daughter.
All the happiness, however, which he derived
from the unbounded sway that she had acquired
over a monarch whom one half of the world re-
vered or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual
reflections on Muflapha's accession tb the throne,
and the certain death of her sons, who, he fore-
saw, would be immediately sacrificed, according
to the barbarous jealousy of Turkish policy, to
the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling
continually on this melancholy idea, she came
gradually to view Muftapha as the enemy of her
children, and to hate him with more than a ftep-
mother's ill-will. This prompted her to wilh his

VOL. IV. K deftruc-

B 0 X0 defruion, in order to secure for one of her own

XI.
-v-' sons the throne which was deflined for him. Nor
1553' did fie want either ambition to attempt such a

high enterprise, or the arts requisite for carrying
it into execution. Having prevailed on the Sul-
tal to give her only daughter in marriage to
Ruflan the Grand Vizier, she disclosed her scheme
to that crafty minister, who perceiving that it was
his own interest to co-operate with her, readily
promised his afliltance towards aggrandizing tllt
branch of the royal line to vwhich he vas so neally
allied.

As oon as Roxalana had concerted her mea-

fures with this able confident, file began to acct
a wonderful zeal for the Mahometan religion, ti
which Solyman was fuperfitioufly attached, and
proposed to found and endow a royal mosque, a
work of great expence, but deemed by the Turks
meritorious in the highelt degree. The Mufti
whom fne consulted, approved much of her
pious intention but, having been gained and in-
fruded by Ruftan, told her, that fie being
have could derive no benefit herself from that
holy deed, for all the merit of it would accrue to
Solyman, the malter whose property fie was.
Upon this flie Ieemed to be overwhelmed with
sorrow, and to fink into the deepest melanch!oly,
as if fle had been disgusted with life and all it,
enjoyrnens. Solyman, who was absent with the
army, being informed of this djeaion of minl.
and of the cause from whiclh it proceeded, dil

2 COVCi :.

covered all the solicitude of a lover to remove it, B o 0 K
;a.d by a writing under his hand declared her a - -.
free woman. Roxalana having gained this point, I
proceeded to build the Mosque, and re-affumed
her usual gaiety of spirit. But when Solyman,
on his return to Conllantinople, sent an eunuch,
according to the custom of the seraglio, to bring
her to partake of his bed, she, seemingly with
deep regret, but in the most peremptory manner,
declined to follow the eunuch, declaring that
what had been an honour to her while a slave, be-
came a crime as she was now a free woman, and
that she would not involve either the Sultan or
herself in the guilt that must be contracted by
such an open violation of the law of their prophet.
Solyman, whose pafiion this difficulty, as well as
the affe&ed delicacy which gave rife to it, height-
ened and inflamed, had rccourfe immediately to
the Mufti for his diretion. He replied, agree-
ably to the Koran, that Roxalana's scruples were
well founded; but added, artfully, in words
which Rullan had taught him to use, that it was
in the Sultan's power to remove there difficulties,
by espousing her as his lawful life. The amorous
monarch closed eagerly with the proposal, and
solemnly married lier, according to the form of
the Mahometan rittal; though, by doing si, he
disregarded a axim of policy which the pride of
the Ottoman blood had taught all the Sultans
since Bajazet I. to confider as inviolable. From
his time, none of the Turkish monarchs had
married, because, when he was vanquiflcd and

Ka aken

8 0 0 K taken prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been

XI.

--v abused with barbarous insolence by the Tar-
'5;3' tars. That no finilar calamity might fubje& the

Ottoman family to the like disgrace, the Sultans
admitted none to their bed but slaves, whose dif-
honour could not bring any such slain upon their
house.

BUT the more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it convinced Roxalana, of the unbounded
influence which he had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute,
with greater hope of success, the scheme that he
had formed in order to destroy Muflapha. This
young Prince having been entrulted by his father,
according to the practice of the Sultans in that
age, with the government of several different pro-
vinces, was at that time invested with the admi-
niftration in Diarbequir, the ancient Mesopotamia,
which Solyman had wrelled from the Perians, and
added to his empire. In all these different com-
mands, Muftapha had conduced himself with
such cautious prudence as could give no offence
to his father, though, at the fame time, he go-
verned with so much moderation as well as jus-
tice, and displayed fiich valour and generosity, as
rendered him equally the favourite of the people
and the darling of the soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice to

his charge, that could impair the high opinion
which his fairer entertained of him. Roxalana's

3 male-

malevolence was more refined; fle turned his B 00 K
virtues against him, and mnade use of these as en-
gines for his detlruaion. She often mentioned, s53.
in Solyman's prfeence, the splendid qualities of
his son ; fe celebrated his courage, his liberality,
his popular arts, with malicious and exaggerated
praise. As loon as fte perceived that the Sultan
heard theIe encomiums, which were often repeat-
ed, with uneasiness ; that suspicion of his son be-
gan to mingle itfclf with his former esteem; and
that lby degrees he came to view him with jealousy
and fear; lhe introduced, as by accident, some
ii'courfe concerning the rebellion of his father
Sclim againif B.jazet his grandfather: ile took
notice of the bravery of the veteran troops un-
der Muftapha's command, and of the neighbour-
hood of Diarbequir to the territories of the Per-
fian Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy. By these
arts, whatever remained of paternal tenderness
was entirely extinguished, and such passions were
kindled in the breast of the Sultan, as gave all
Roxalana's malignant suggestions the colour not
only of probability but of truth. A deep-rooted
hatred succeeded, now, to his suspicions and fear
of Muftapha. He appointed spies to observe and
report all his words and ations; he watched and
stood on his guard against him as his mos dan-
gerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart from
Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon another flep.

K3 She

s 0 0 K She entreated Solyman to allow her own sons the

XI.

---- liberty of appearing at court, hoping that by
*5;' gaining access to their father, they might, by

their good qualities and dutiful deportment, in-
sinuate themselves into that place in his affe& ions
which Muflapha had formerly held; and, though
what he demanded was contrary to the practice
of the Ottoman family in that age, the uxorious
monarch granted her request. To all these fe-
male intrigues Ruftan added an artifice till more
subtle, which completed the Sultan's delusion,
and heightened his jealousy and fear. I-e wrote
to the Bashaws of the provinces adjacent to
Diarbequir, inftru&ing them to fend him regular
intelligence of Muftapha's proceedings in his
government, and to each of them he gave a
private hint, flowing in appearance from his zeal
for their interest, that nothing would be more
acceptable to the Sultan than to receive favour-
able accounts of a son whom he deflined to ful-
tain the glory of the Ottoman name. The
Bashaws ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and
eager to pay court to their sovereign at such an
easy price, filled their letters with studied but fatal
panegyricks of Muftapha, representing him as
a Prince worthy to succeed such an illustrious
father, and as endowed with talents which might
enable him to emulate, perhaps to equal his
fame. These letters were industriously hewn to
Solyman, at the seasons when it was known that
they would make the deepest impreflion. Every

cxprefl on

expretion in recommendation of his son wound- B oO K
ed him to the heart; he fufpeaed his principal I-..
officers of being ready to favour the most defpe- '553
rate attempts of a Prince whom they were so fond
to praise; and fancying that he saw them already
assaulting his throne with rebellious arms, he de-
termined, while it was yet in his power, to anti-
cipate the blow, and to secure his own safety by
his son's death.

FOR this purpose, though under pretence of

renewing the war against Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
of a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
whose life he deemed inconfiffent with his own
lafety. But that crafty minister did not choose to
be loaded with the odium of having executed this
cruel order. As oon as he arrived in Syria he
wrote to Solyman, that the danger was so immi-
nent as called for his immediate pretence; that
the camp was full of Muftapha's emissaries; that
many of the soldiers were corrupted; that the
affections of all leaned towards him that he had
discovered a negociation which had been carried
on with the Sophi of Persia in order to marry
Muftapha with one of his daughters; that he al-
ready felt his own talents as well as authority to
be inadequate to the exigencies of such an arduous
conjun&ure; that the Sultan alone had sagacity
to discern what resolution hould be taken in those
circumstances, and power to carry that resolution
into execution.

K 4 THIS

B 0 0 K THIS charge of courting the friendship of the

XI.
---. Sophi, Roxalana and Ruflan had reftrved as the

353. last and most envenomed of all their calumnies.

It operated with the violence which they expead,
from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of the Pcr-
sians, and threw him into the wildest transports
of rage. He set out instantly for Syria, and
haflened thither with all the precipitation ad
impatience of fear and revenge. As soon as h:
joined his army near Aleppo, and had concerted
measures with Ruftan, he ent a Chiaus, or mef-
fenger of the court, to his son, requiring him to
repair immediately to his pretence. Muftapha,
though no stranger to his step-mother's machina-
tions, or to Rultan's malice, or to his father'.
violent temper, yet relying on his own innocence,
and hoping to discredit the accusations of his ene-
mies by the promptitude of his obedience, fol-
lowed the messenger without delay to Aleppo.
The moment he arrived in the camp, he was in-
troduced into the Sultan's tent. As he entered
it, he observed nothing that could give him any
alarm; no additional crowd of attendants, no
body of armed guards, but the fame order and
silence which always reign in the Sultan's apart-
ments. In a few minutes, however, several mutes
appeared, at the fight of whom Muftapha, know-
ing what was his doom, cried with a loud voice,
" Lo, my death!" and attempted to fly. The
mutes rushed forward to seize him ; he refltled
and struggled, demanding with the utmost ear-
nefnefs to fee the Sultan; and despair, together

with

v:ith the hope of finding protection frorn the fol- B 0 K
diers, if he could escape out of the tent, ani- '--
mated him with such extraordinary strength, that, 1553.
for ibme time, he baffled all the efforts of the ex.
ecutioners. Solyman was within hearing of his
on 's cries, as well as of the noise which the
struggle occasioned. Impatient of this delay of
his revenge, and struck with terror at the thoughts
of Muftapha's escaping, he drew aside the curtain
which divided the tent, and thrufcing in his head,
darted a fierce look towards the mutes, and, with
wild and threatening gestures, feetned to chide
them for sloth and timidity. At fight of his
father's furious and unrelenting countenance,
Muftapha's strength failed, and his courage for-
sook him; the mutes faflened the bow-string
about his neck, and in a moment put an end to
his life.

THE dead body was exposed before the Sultan's

tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and con-
templating that mournful obje& with aonith-
ment, and sorrow, and indignation, were ready,
if a leader had not been wanting, to have broke
out into the wildest excesses of rage. After giv-
ing vent to the firit expreifons of their grief, they
*etired each man to his tent, and hutting them-
i.lves up, bewaile'l in secret the cruel fate of
their favourite; n,)r was there one of them who
tatced food, or even water, during the remainder
of that day. Next morning the fame solitude and
silence reigned in the camp; and Solyman, being

afraid

B o0 K afraid that some dreadful storm would follow this

XI.
. ay-- fullen calm, in order to appease the enraged ibl-
J;;3' diers, deprived Ruftan of the eals, ordered him

to leave the camp, and raised Achmet, a gallant
officer much beloved in tle army, to the dignity
of Vifier. This change, however, was made in
concert with Ruftan himself; that crafty minister
fuggeffing it as the only expedient which could
save himself or his mafier. But within a few
months, when the resentment of the soldiers be-
gan to subside, and the name of Muftapha to be
forgotten, Achmet was itrangled by the Sultan's
command, and Ruftan reinstated in the office of
Vifier. Together with his former power, he re-
assumed the plan for exterminating the race o£
Muftapha which he had concerted with Roxa-
lana; and as they were afraid that an only son
whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to
avenge his death, they redoubled their ativity,
and by employing the fame arts against him which
they had pra&iscd against his father, they inspired
Solyman with the lame fears, and prevailed on
him to ile orders for putting to death that
young innocent Prince. These orders were ex-
ecuted with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch, who
was dispatched to Bursa, the place where th2
Prince resided; and no rival was left to difpu.e
the Ottoman throne with the funs of Roxalana;

' Augerii Gifnenii Efbequii Legationis Turcic: Epilolr

iv. Franc. 1615. p. 37. Thuan. lib. I:. p. 432. Mem, d:
Ribier, ii. 457. Mauroccni Hiltor. V'eneta, lib. vii. p. 6r

Su;>

SUCH a tragical scene, producive of so deep B o o K

XI.

distress, seldom occurs but in the history of the .
great monarchies of the Eaff, where the force of Cha,'5r3.
the climate works up and sublimes all the pas- j, "

a mar

sions of the human mind into the greatest fury, ""eenhi
and the absolute power of sovereigns enables them Mamr of
to a with uncontrolled violence; while it passed
in the court of Solyman, and engaged his whole
attention, Charles was pursuing, with the utmost
ardour, a new scheme for aggrandizing his fa-
mily. About this time, Edward the Sixth of
England, after a hort reign, in which he dif-
played such virtues as filled his fubjeds with fan-
guine hopes of being happy under his govern-
ment, and made them bear with patience all that
they suffered from the weaknels, the dissensions
and the ambition of the ministers who assumed
the adminitration during his minority, was seized
with a lingering diflemper which threatened his
life. The Emperor no sooner received an ac-
count of this, than his ambition, always atten-
tive to seize every opportunity of acquiring an
increase of power, or of territories, to his son,
suggested the thought of adding England to his
other kingdoms, by the marriage of Philip with
the Princess Mary, the heir of Edward's crown.
Being apprehensive, however, that his son, who
was then in Spain, might decline a match with a
Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven
years older than himself"; Charles determined,

Palav. hill. Concil. Trid. v. ii. c. 1a. p. 15o.

notwitlh-

B o X K notwithstanding his own ae and infirmities, ta

A-_-- make offer of hinmfelf as a husband to his cousin.
,553.

T, which BUT though Mary was so far advanced in years,
Phili'a givcs e
i'ConCDt. and destitute of every charm either of perion or

of manners that could win affection, or commacnd
esteem, Philip, without hesitation, gave his con-
ient to the match proposed by his father, and was
willing, according to the usual maxim of Princes,
to sacrifice his inclination to his ambition. In
order to ensure success, the Emperor, even be-
fore Edward's death, began to take such steps a;
might facilitate it. Upon Edward's demnis,
Mary mounted the throne of England; the pre-
tensions of the lady Jane Gray proving as unfor-
tunate as they were ill founded . Charles fen;
immediately a pompous embassy to London to
congratulate Mary on her acceflion to the throne,
and to propose the alliance with his son. The

The rent. Queen, dazzled with the profpel of marrying
Mal, an-lof the heir of the greatest Monarch in Europe;
ihE aJ fond of uniting mare closely with her mother's
'toi' family, to which she had been always warmly at-

tached; and eager to fccure the powerful aid
which he knew would be neceflary towards car-
rying on her favourite fheme of re-eftablilhing
the Romilh religion in England, listened in the
most favourable manner to the proposal. Among
her fiulje&s, it met with a very different recep-
tion. Philip, it was well known, contended for

x Carte's hitl. of England, iii. 287.

all

ail the tenets of the church of Rome with a fan- B
guinary zeal which exceeded the measure even of --.
Spanish bigotry: this alarmed all the numerous 3
partisans of the Reformation. The Castilian
haughtiness and reserve were far from being ac-
ceptable to the Englilh, who, having fiveral
times seen their throne occupied by persons who
were born fubjcts, had become accustomed to
an unceremonious and familiar intercourse with
their sovereigns. They could not think, without
the utinof uneasiness, of admitting a foreign
Prince to that influence in their councils, which
the husband of their Queen would naturally pof-
fcfs. They dreaded, both from Philip's over-
bearing temper, and from the maxims of the
Spaniih monarchy which he had imbibed, that he
would infuse ideas into the Queen's mind, dan-
gerous to the liberties of the nation, and would
introduce foreign troops and money into the
kingdom, to afflt her in any attempt against
them.

FULL of these apprehensions, the House of TheHouf

Commons, though in that age extremely obfc- n, 0ri,
quious to the will of their Monarchs, presented ~aiic.
a warm address against the Spanilh match; many
pamphlets were published, representing the dan-
gerous consequences of the alliance with Spain,
and describing Philip's bigotry and arrogance in
the most odious colours. But Mary, inflexible
in all her rerolutions, paid no regard to the re-
monfirances of her Commons, or to the senti-

mens

B o ° K ments of the people. The Emperor, having

.. secured, by various arts, the ministers whom he
'553' trulted most, they approved warmly of the match,

and large furns were remitted by him in order to
gain the reft of the council. Cardinal Pu!e,
whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's ac-
cellion, had dfpatched as his legate into England,
in order to reconcile his native country to the fle
of Roine, was detained by the Emperor's com-
mand at Dillinghen in Germany, left by his pre-
fence he should thwart Philip's pretensions, and
employ his interest in favour of his kinsman
Courtnay Earl of Dcvonfhire, whom the English
ardently wiflhed their overeign to choose for a
husband .

The mr. As the negociation did not admit of delay,
riage treaty
concluded, it was carried forward with the greatest rapidity,

the Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to every
article in favour of England, which Mary's mi-
nifters either represented as necessary to sooth the
people and reconcile them to the match, or that
was fuggetled by their own fears and jealousy of
a foreign master. The chief articles were, that

,ss4 Philip, during his marriage with the Qeen,
J""y " should bear the title of King of England, but the

entire adminittration of affairs, as well as the sole
disposal of all revenues, offices, and benefices,
hlould remain with the Queen; that the heirs of
the marriage flould, together with the crown of

r Carte, iii. 2SS.

England,

England, inherit the dutchy of Burgundy and B o K
the Low-Countries; that if Prince Charles, Phi- *.
lip's only fun by a former marriage, hould die 1i54
without iffuc, his children by the Queen, whether
male or female, hould succeed to the crown of
Spain, and all the Emperor's hereditary domi-
nions; that, btfore the consummation of the
Inarriage, Philip should swear solemnly, that he
would retain no domeflick who was not a subject
of the Queen, and would bring no foreigners
into the kingdom that might give umbrage to
the English; that he would make no alteration
in the conffitution or laws of England; that he
would not carry the Qieen, or any of the chil-
dren born of this marriage, out of the kingdom;
that if the Queen fliould die before him without
issue, he would immediately leave the crown to
the lawful heir, without claiming any right of
administration whatever; that in consequence of
this marriage, England hould not be engaged
in any war fubflting between France and Spain;
and that the alliance between France and England
ihould remain in full force'.

BuT this treaty, though both the Emperor and rir.ontcnt

Mary's ministers employed their utmost addrcfs 1if,,r,2.tnf
in framing it so as to please the Englill, ,was far thEls'"lh.
from quieting their fears and jalousies. They
saw that words and promises were a feeble fecu-

' Rymer's Fed. vol xv. 377. 393. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
498.

rity

B 0 K rity against the encroachments of an ambitious

XI.
-- Prince, who, as oon as he got poflefion of the
';5i' power and advantages which the Queen's husband

must necessarily enjoy, could easily evade any of
the articles which either limited his authority or
obstructed his schemes. They were convinced
that the more favourable the conditions of the
present treaty were to England, the more Philip
would be tempted to violate them; and they
dreaded that England, like Naples, Milan, and
the other countries annexed to the Spanish crown,
would loon feel the intolerable weight of its op-
preflive dominion, and be constrained, as theli
had been, to waste its wealth and vigour in wars
wherein it had no interef, and from which it
could derive no advantage. These sentiments
prevailed so generally, that every part of the
kingdom was filled with discontent at the match,
and with indignation against the advisers of it.

wyV,'sin. Sir Thomas Wyat, a gentleman of some note,
fuglon. and of good intentions towards the publick, took

advantage of this, and routed the inhabitants of
Kent to arms, in order to save their country from
a foreign yoke. Such numbers resorted in a
flort time to his Randard; he marched to Lon-
don with such rapidity; and the Queen was o
utterly unprovided for defence, that the afpeft
of affairs was extremely threatening; and if any
nobleman of diftintion had joined the malecon-
tents, or had Wyat possessed talents equal, in any
degree, to the boldness of his enterprize, the in-
furretion must have proved fatal to Mary's power.

But

But all his measures were concerted with so little B Q o K
prudence, and executed with such irresolution, -.-
that many of his followers forsook him the reft 'S5
were dispersed by an handful of men; and he
himself was taken prisoner, without having made
any effort worthy of the cause that he had under-
taken, or suitable to the ardour with which he
engaged in it. He suffered the punishment due
to his rashness and rebellion. The Queen's au-
thority was confirmed and increased by her fuc-
cess in defeating this inconsiderate attempt to
abridge it. The lady Jane Gray, whose title the
ambition of her relations had set up in opposition
to the Queen's, was, notwithstanding her youth
and innocence, brought to the scaffold. The
lady Elizabeth, the Queen's fitter, was observed
with the mos jealous attention. The treaty of
marriage was ratified by the parliament.

PHILIP landed in England with a magnificent The mat.

retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great folem- a*i1td
nity j and though he could not lay aside his na-
tural severity and pride, or aume gracious and
popular manners, he endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the Englilh nobility by his extra-
ordinary liberality. In cafe that hould fail of
acquiring him such influence in the government
of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining, the
Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand men on
the coast of Slanders, in readiness to embark for
England, and to support him in all his entera
prizes.

Vow. IV, L EMBQo

B o K EMBOLDENED by all these favourable circurn

.-- fances, Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating

Mary'4 the Protestant religion out of her dominions, with
,,etnthe the mofl precipitate zeal. The laws of Edward
Preftant the Sixth, in favour of the Reformation, were
religion in
ngs!ad. repealed; the Protefant clergy eje&ed; all the

forms and rites of the Popish worship were re-
cetablilhed; the nation was solemnly absolved
from the guilt which it had contrated during the
period of its apoftacy, and was publickly recon.
tiled to the church of Rome by cardinal Pol.,
who, immediately after the Queen's marriage,
was permitted to continue his journey to Eng-
land, and to exercise his legantine functions with
the most ample power. Not satisfied with having
overturned the Protestant church, and having
eflablifhed her own fyflem on its ruins, Mary in-
lifted that all her subje&s should conform to tle
fame mode of worlhip which the preferred;
Ihould profess their faith in the fame creed which
lhe had approved; and abjure every pra&ice or
opinion that was deemed repugnant to either of
them. Powers altogether unknown in the Eno-
lilh conlitu:ion, were vested in certain perfo:;:
appointed to take cognizance ofherefy, and tiri
proceeded to exercise them with more than inqI;-
ritorial severity. The profped of danger, how-
ever, did no. intimidate the principal teachers of
the Protel1ant dotrines, who believed that they
were-conccrning for truths of the utmost confe-
quence to the happincfs of mankind. They bold-
ly avowed their fentiints, and were condemned

)I

to that cruel death which the church of Rome B 00 K
reserves for its enemies. This shocking punish-
nent was inflicted with that barbarity which the '554
rancour of false zeal alone can inspire. The
English, who are inferior in humanity to no
people in Europe, and remarkable for the mild-
ness of their publick executions, beheld, with
astonishment and horror, persons who had filled
the most refpec.able stations in their church, and
who were venerable on account of their age, their
piety, and their literature, condemned to endure
torments to which even the mot atrocious crimi-
nals were not flubjeied.

THIS extreme rigour did not accomplish the Thenot.a.

end at which Mary aimed. The patience and 'he,,hth
fortitude with which these martyrs for the Refor- furUoUt.
mation submitted to their sufferings, the heroick
contempt of death expressed by persons of every
rank, and age, and sex, confirmed many more
in the Protetlant faith, than the threats of their
enraged persecutors could frighten into apoftacy.
The bulinefs of such as were entrulted with try-
ing of hereticks multiplied continually, and ap-
peared to be as endless as it was odious. The
Queen's ablest ministers became sensible how im-
politick, as well as dangerous, it was to irritate
the people by the frequent spectacle of publick
executions, which they detested as no less unjuf:
than cruel. Even Philip was io thoroughly con-
vinced of her having run to an excels of rigour,
that on this occa.ion he assumed a part to which

I 2 lhe

°o0 K he was little accustomed, becoming an advocate
XI.

--- for moderation and lenity a*

'954.

rhe Engli& BUT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingratiate
vhilip. himself with the Englilh, they discovered a con-

tant jealousy and diltruft of all his intentions;
and when tome members, who had been gained
by the court, ventured to move in the House of
Commons that the nation ought to aflif the
Emperor, the Queen's father-in-law, in his war
against France, the proposal was rejeted with
general diffatisfa&ion. A motion which was
made, that the parliament should give its consent
that Philip might be publickly crowned as the
Queen's husband, met with such a cold reception,
that it was instantly withdrawn b.

The French THE King of France had observed the progrefa
Kingalarm-
ed.t tb, of the Emperor's negociation in England with
miatch be-
,w" Phi. much uneasiness. The great acceflion of terri-
S^duy. tories as well as reputation which his enemy

would acquire by the marriage of his son with
the Queen of such a powerful kingdom, was ob-
vious and formidable. He easily foresaw that the
Englilh, notwithstanding all their fears and precau-
tions, would be oon drawn in to take part in the
quarrels on the continent, and be compelled to
at in subserviency to the Emperor's ambitious
schemes. For this reason, Henry had given it

: Godwin's Annals of Q. Mary ap. Kennet, v. ii. p. 329.
Burnet's hill. ofReror. ii. 298. 305.

Carte's hill. of England, iii. 314.

3 in

in charge to his ambassador at the court of Lon- a 0 0 K
don, to employ all his address in order to defeat -..
or retard the treaty of marriage; and as there was '55*
not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in
France, whom he could propose to the Queen as
a husband, he inftru&ed him to co-operate with
such of the Englilh as wished their sovereign to
marry one of her own fubjets. But the Queen's
ardour and precipitation in closing with the first
overtures in favour of Philip, having rendered all
his endeavours ineffe&ual, Henry was so far from
thinking it prudent to give any aid to the Eng-
lilh malecontents, though earnestly solicited by
Wyat and their other leaders, who tempted him
to take them under his protection, by offers of
great advantage to France, that he commanded
his ambassador to congratulate the Queen in the
warmest terms upon the suppression of the in-
firre&ion.

BUT, notwithstanding there external profef- Hi;sptp-

rations for a

sions, Henry dreaded o much the consequence ¥eorol
of this alliance, which more than compensated for "m'"'"i.
all the Emperor had loft in Germany, that he
determined to carry on his military operations
both in the Low-Countries, and in Italy, with
extraordinary vigour, in order that he might com-
pel Charles to accept of an equitable peace, be-
fore his daughter-in-law could surmount the
aversion of her fubjets to a war on the continent,
and prevail on them to alft the Emperor either
with money or troops. For this purpose he exert-

L 3 e4

B o 0 K ed himself to the utnmof in order to have a nu-

XI.
-,-I merous army early aficmbled on the frontiers of
'5:4. the Netherlands, and while one part of it laid

wafe the open country of Artois, the main body,
under the Conflable Motrmorency, advanced to-
wards the provinces of Liege and Hainault by the
foref of Ardennes.

rhe ro- THE campaign was opened with the siege of
ill rm.s. Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen of Hun-

gary, the governess of the Low Countries, had
fortified at great expence; but, being destitute
of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in fix days.
June s. Henry, elated with this success, put himself at

the head of his army, and inveRting Bouvines,
took it by assault, after a hort resistance. With
equal facility he became master of Dinant; and
then turning to the left bent his march cowards

The Empe- the province of Artois. The vast fums which the
Lt,.io'b. Emperor had remitted into England had so ex-
,dC" it. haulted his treasury, as to render his preparations

at this jun&ure, flower and more dilatory than
usual. He had no body of troops to make head
against the French at their first entrance into his
territories; and though he drew together all the
forces in the country in the utmaft hurry, and
gave the command of them to Emanuel Philibert
of Savoy, they were in no condition to face an
enemy so far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his ativity and good con-
duct, made up for his want of troops. By
watching all the motions of the French at a di-

stance

fiance, and by chufing his own posts with fiill, B o00
he put it out of their power either to form any --J
liege of confcquence, or to attack him. Want iS4'
of subsistence soon. obliged them to fall back to-
wards their own frontiers, after having burnt all
the open towns, and having plundered the
country through which they marched with a
cruelty and licence more becomirig a body of
light troops than a royal army led by a great
mlonarch.

BUT Henry, that he might not difinifs his army The French

without attempting ome conquest adequate to inveRcnti.
the vast preparations, as well as sanguine hopes,
with which he had opened the campaign, invested
Renti, a place deemed in that age of great im-
portance, as, by its situation on the confines of
Artois and the Boulonnois, it covered the former
province, and proteted the parties which made
incursions into the latter. The town, which was
itrongly fortified and provided with a numerous
garrison, made a gallant defence; but being
warmly pressed by a powerful army, it must Toon
have yielded. The Emperor, who at that time
enjoyed a hort interval of cafe from the gout,
was o solicitous to save it, that, although he
could bear no other motion but that of a litter,
he infcantly put himself at the head of his army,
which having received several reinforcements was
now strong enough to approach the enemy. The
French were eager to decide the fate of Renti by

L 4 a battle,

B 0°o K a battle, and expected it from the Emperor's
A-, arrival in his camp; but Charles avoided a ge-

554' neral ation with great industry, and as he had

nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped
to accomplish that, without exposing himfilf to
the consequences of such a dangerous and doubt.
ful event.

An alion NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a dif-
between the
two armies. pute, about a post which both armies endeavour.
Ug. 3. ed to fcize, brought on an engagement which

proved aimoR general. The Duke of Guile,
who commanded the wing of the French which
tood the brunt of the combat, displayed valour
and condu& worthy of the defender of Metz;
the Imperialists after an obstinate Rtruggle were
repulsed; the French remained maters of the
pot in dispute, and if the Constable, either from
his natural caution and slowness, or from unwil-
lingnefs to support a rival whom he hated, had
not delayed bringing up the main body to second
the impression which Guise had made, the route
of the enemy mufl have been complete. The
Emperor, notwithstanding the loss which he had
sustained, continued in the fame camp; and the
French, being straightened for provisions, and
finding it impossible to carry on the siege in the
face of an hostile army, quitted their intrench-
ments. They retired openly, courting the ene-
my to approach, rather than Ihunning an en-
gagement.

· , _

BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered o0 o

them to march off unmolested. As oon as his , '
troops entered their own country, Henry threw The:mp.
garrisons into the frontier towns, and dismissed the ,ti, ib in.
reft of the army. This encouraged the Imperialists wrdy
to push forward with a considerable body of
troops into Picardy, and by laying waste the
country with fire and sword, they endeavoured to
revenge themselves for the ravages which the
French had committed in Hainault and Artois c.
But, as they were not able to reduce any place of
importance, they gained nothing more than the
enemy had done by this cruel and inglorious me.
thod of carrying on the war,

THE arms of France were till more unsuccess- Affin of

ful in Italy. The footing which the French had I''
acquired in Siena, occasioned much uneasiness to
Cosmo di Medici, the most sagacious and enter-
prizing of all the Italian Princes. He dreaded
the neighbourhood of a powerful people, to
whom all who favoured the ancient republican
government in Florence would have recourse, as
to their natural protectors, against that absolute
authority which the Emperor had enabled him
to ufirp; he knew how odious he was to the Cmao ai
French, on account of his attachment to the Im- ".,
perial party, and he foresaw that, if they were toh 'trg4
permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tuscany
would soon feel the effecs of their resentment.

* Thuan. 460, &c. Harxi Ann. Brab. 674.

For

B o0 K For there reasons, he wished with the utmost f.

Xi.
^.- _ licitude for the expulsion of the French out of

854' tie Sienefe, before they had time to etablifil

themselves thoroughly in the country, or to receive
such reinforcements from France. as would render
it dangerous to attack them. As this, however,
was properly the Emperor's business, who wa
called by his interest as well as honour to dif-
lodge those formidable intruders into the heart of
his dominions, Cofmto laboured to throw the
whole burden of the enterprize on him; and on
that account had given no affitance, during the
former campaign, but by advancing some small
fums of money towards the payment of the Im-
perial troops.

He negoi. BUT as the defence of the Netherlands cn-
aes wil h
the Empe- grossed all the Emperor's attention, and his re-
ror.' mittances into. England had drained his treasury,

it was obvious that his operations in Italy would
be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly perceiv-
ed, that if he himself did not take part openly
in the war, and at with vigour, the French
would scarcely meet with any annoyance. As his
situation rendered this refulution necessary and
unavoidable, his next care was to execute it in
such a manner, that he might derive from it some
other advantage, betide that of driving the
French out of his neighbourhood. With this
view, he dispatched an envoy to Charles, offer-
ing to declare war againlI France, and to reduce
Siena at his own charges, on condition that he

8 lhould

ihould be repaid whatever he flould expend in °o° o
the enterprize, and be permitted to retain all hlis
conquests until his demands were fully satisfied. '5ts
Charles, towhorn, at this junture, the war against
Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had
neither expedient nor resource that could enable
him to carry it on with proper vigour, closed
gladly with this overture; and Cofino, well ac-
qainted with the low Itate of the Imperial finances,
flattered himself that the Emperor, finding it im-
pofible to reimburse him, would susser him to
keep quiet poffefiron of whatever places he should
conquer d.

FULL of these hopes, he made great prepara- E:,.-. ,.0o

tions for war, and as the French King had turned F,,,.!
the strength of his arms against the Netherlands,
he did not despair of assembling iuch a body of
men as would prove more than a sufficient match
for any force which Henry could bring into the
field in Italy. He endeavoured to obtain ailt-
ance from the Pope, or at least to secure his re-
maining neutral, by giving one of his daughters
to that Pontiff's nephew. He attempted to de-
tach the Duke ofOrfini, whole family had been
long attached to the French party from his ancient
confederates, by beowing on him another of his
daughters; and what was of greater confequcnce
than either of there, he engaged John James Me- s;;j's ,.
dccino, Marquis of Marignano, to take the hilY °"

4 .driani ltoria de fnoi tmpi, vol. i. 662.

command

3 0 0 K command of his army . This officer, from a

XI very low condition in life, had railed himself,
'sst through all the ranks of service, to high com-

mand, and had displayed talents, and acquired
reputation in war, which entitled him to be placed
on a level with the greatest generals in that mar-
tial age. Having attained a Rfation of eminence
to disproportionate to his birth, he laboured with
a fond solicitude to conceal his original ob-
fcurity, by giving out that he was descended of
the family of Medici, to which honour the casual
resemblance of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such
an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point,
acknowledged him as a relation, and permitted
him to assume the arms of his family 1\Medecino,
eager to serve the head of that family of which
he now confidered himself as a branch, applied
with wonderful zeal and afliduity to raise troops;
and as, during his long service, he had acquir;c'
great credit with the leaders of those mercenary
bands which formed the frength of Italian armies,
he engaged the mot eminent of them to follow
Cosmo's standard.

Peter Stro, To oppose this able general, and the formi-
si etrufted
with the dable army which he had aflembled, the King of
comreend of
th French France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Floren-
tl.n tine nobleman, who had resided long in France,

as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to

Adriar.i oria, vol. i. p. 663.

high

high reputation, as well as command in the army. B 0 0 K
He was the fun of Philip Strozzi, who, in the ..v
year one thousand five hundred and thircy-feven, 5S4
had concurred with such ardour in the attempt to
expel the family of Medici out of Florence, in
order to re-eftablilh the ancient republican form
of government; and who had perilhed in the
undertaking. The son inherited the implacable
aversion to the Medici, as well as the fame en-
thufiaftick zeal for the liberty of Florence which
had animated his father, whose death he was im-
patient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that
his army would make rapid progress under a ge-
neral whose zeal to promote his interest was
routed and seconded by such powerful passions;
especially as he had allotted him, for the scene of
ation, his native country, in which he had many
powerful partisans, ready to facilitate all his ope-
rations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might Theimpru-

appear which i'nduced Henry to make this choice, dneofth19
it proved fatal to the interests of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal enemy
of his family was appointed to take the com-
mand in Tuscany, concluded that the King of
France aimed at something more than the pro-
teftion of the Sienefe, and saw the necellity of
making extraordinary efforts, not merely to re-
duce Siena, but to save himself from dectruction .

f Pecci Memerie di Siena, vol. iv. p. o03, &c.

At

B o0 K At the fame time, the Cardinal of Ferrara, w;,)

XI.

--* had the entire diretion of the French affairs in
i54'. Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formidable rival in

power, and in order to prevent his acquiring a:nr
increase of authority from success, he was ex-
tremely remiss in supplying him either with
money to pay his troops, or with provisions to
lupport them. Strozzi himself, blinded by his
resentment against the Medici, pushed on his ope-
rations with the ipetuofity of revenge, rather
than with the caution and prudence becoming a
great general.

th. hb 'e AT first, however, he attacked several towns in

of Miti-
ano. the territory of Florence with fich vigour as

obliged Medecino, in order to check his pro-
grefs, to withdraw the greater part of his army
from Siena, which he had invested before Strozzi's
arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained the whole
burden of military operations, the expence of
vshich muff soon have exhausted his revenues; as
neither the viceroy of Naples nor governor
of Milan were in condition to aflbrd him any es-
fl;&ual aid ; and as the troops which Medecino
1.;: left in the camp before Siena could attempt
nothing again i during his absence; it was
Scrozz's b)ufinlas to have prorratled the war, and
t;) have tra:-sferred the feat of it into the territo-
r;es of Florence; but the hope of ruining his
cnemy by one decilive blow, precipitated him
a, irto a general engagement not far from Mar-

a.;no. The armies were nearly equal in num-

ber;

ber; but a body of Italian cavalry, in which B °O K
Strozzi placed great confidence, having fled .-
without making any resistance, either through ,asLh
the treachery or cowardice of the officers who theFrn^.
commanded it, his infantry remained exposed to
the attacks of all Medecino's troops. Encou-
raged, however, by Strozzi's preence and ex-
ample, who, after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed him-
Iclf at the head of the infantry, and manifested
an admirable pretence of mind, as well as extra-
ordinary valour, they stood their ground with
great firmness, and repulsed such of the enemy
as ventured to approach them. But those gallant
troops being surrounded at last on every fide, and
torn in pieces by a battery of cannon which Me-
decino brought to bear upon them, the Floren-
tine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a gene-
ral rout ensued. Strozzi, faint with the los of
blood, and deeply affeteed with the fatal con-
sequences of his own raflnefs, found the utmost
difficulty in making his escape with a handful of
men

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege of MderIoo

Siena with his viCtorious forces, and as Strozzi s,,
could nor, after the greatest efforts of aivity,
collet as many men as to form the appearance
of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on his
approaches againit the town without molefation.

z Pccci Memorie della Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.

But

m 0 0 K But the Sienefe, iniead of finking into defpar
.-i.* upon this cruel disappointment of their only hope
whic is of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves
ialntlyd ' to the utmost extremity, with that undaunted for-
fended by
tbe citizen titude which the love of liberty alone can inspire.
and M~-
i-. This generous resolution was warmly seconded by

Monluc, who commanded the French garrison in
the town. The aive and cnterprifing courage
which he had displayed on many occasions, had
procured him this command; and as he had am-
bition which apired at the highest military dig-
nities, without any pretensions to attain them but
what he could derive from merit, he determined
to distinguish his defence of Siena by extraordi-
nary efforts of valour and perseverance. For this
purpose, he repaired and strengthened the fortifi-
cations with unwearied industry; he trained the
citizens to the use of arms, and accustomed them
to go through the fatigues and dangers of service
in common with the soldiers; and as the enemy
were extremely ftrit in guarding all the avenues
to the city, he husbanded the provisions in the
magazines with the most parsimonious economy,
and prevailed on the soldiers, as well as the ci-
tizens, to reftrit themselves to a very moderate
daily allowance for their subsistence. Medecino,
though his army was not numerous enough to
storm the town by open force, ventured twice to
assault it by surprise; but he was received each
time with so much spirit, and repulsed with such
lols, as discouraged him from repeating the at-

tempt,

tempt, and left him no hopes of reducing the B 0,0 K
town but by famine. X
J

1554.

WITH this view, he fortified his own camp Medeino

with great care, occupied all the potls of strength C, i.Tto
round the place, and having entirely cut off the bdl"u
besieged from any communication with the ad-
jacent country, he waited patiently until necellity
Ihould compel them to open their gates. But
their enthufiaftick zeal for liberty made the citi-
zens derpife the diltreffes occasioned by the scar-
city of provisions, and even supported them long
under all the miseries of famine: Monluc, by his
example and exhortations, taught his soldiers to
vie with them in patience and abstinence; and it
was not until they had withstood a liege of ten
months, until they had eaten up all the horses,
dogs, and other animals in the place, and were
reduced almolt to their last morsel of bread, that
they proposed a capitulation. Even then they S-.
demanded honourable terms and as Colino,
though no franger to the extremity of their con-
dition, was afraid that despair might prompt
them to venture upon some wild enterprize, he
immediately granted them conditions more fa-
vourable than they could have expeted.

THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's AprTl'i,

The t,,v',n

name, who engaged to take the republic of Siena aliird by
under the protecion of the Empire; he prolmi!' d c.lyluittr.
to maintain the ancient liberties of the city, to

VOL. IV. M allow

B o0 K allow the magistrates the full exercise of their
Ac_-y-j former authority, to secure the citizens in the
's5 undilturbed pofleffion of their privileges and pro-

perty; he granted an ample and unlimited par-
don to all who had born arms against him; he
refcrved to hinifllf the right of placing a gar.
rilbo in the town, but engaged not to rebuild
the citadel without the content of the citizens.
Monluc and his French garrison were allowed
to march out with all the honours of war.

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitula-

tion, as far as depended on him, with great ex-
aclnefs. No violence or insult whatever was of-
sered to the inhabitants, and the French garrison
was treated with all the refpea due to their fpiric

.,ry of he and bravery. But many of the citizens fufpeting,
tier lMn- from the extraordinary facility with which they
ti.A'lnoi had obtained such favourable conditions, that the

Emperor, as well as Cosmo, would take the firIt:
opportunity of violating them, and disdaining to
pofilfs a precarious liberty, which depended on
the will of another, abandoned the place of their
nativity, and accompanied the French to Mont'-
Alcino, Porto Ercole, and other ifmall towns in

an ea!lilh the territory of the republick. They etablilhed,
a fre g'
·rrnmcnt in Monltr-Alci:o, th e Ime model of govern-

ment to which they had been accufomed at Sic-
na, and appointing magifcrates with the fame
titles and jurirticaio., lolaced thenife-lves with
this il ;:lc of their ancient librty.

Til

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate of B OF K

their country were net imaginary, or their fufpi-
cion of the Emperor and Cofino ill-founded; for H,ndl,,to
no sooner had the Imperial troops taken poflRefion ,hiz,^'nst
of the town, than Cosmo, without regarding the st.j'^ .'
articles of capitulation, not only displaced the
magistrates who were in office, and nominated
new ones devoted to his own interest, but com-
manded all the citiz-ns to deliver up their arms
to persons whom he appointed to receive them.
They submitted to the former from neceflity,
though with all the rclutance and regret which
men accustomed to liberty feel in obeying the
first commands of a mafler. They did not yield
the fame tame obedience to the latter; and many
persons of dillinction, rather than degrade them-
lelves from the rank of freemen to the condition
of llaves, by surrendering their arms, fled to their
countrymen at Montc-Alciho, and chose to en-
dure all the hardships, and encounter all the
,!angtrs which they had reason to expct in that
rnw Il.tion, where they had fixed the feat of their
repubiick.

Cosmo, not reckoning himfelffecure while such C'Nrmoat.

' t a, :cks thfe
numbers of implacable and desperate enemies h,, halie.

tircd.

were fettled in his neighbourhood, and retained
any degree of power, solicited Medecino to at-
tack them in thir dilrtcrent places of retreat, be-
f)re they had time to recruit their strength and
lpirits, after the many calamities which they had
fuiFercd. He prevailed on him, though his larmy

M 2 WaS

D x0 K was much weakened by hard duty during the

X- siege of Siena, to invet Porto Ercole; and the
's555 fortifications being both flight and incomplete,

the besieged were soon compelled to open their
June 3. gates. An unexpected order, which Medecino

received from the Emperor to detach the greater
part of his troops into Piedmont, prevented far.
ther operations, and permitted the Sienefe exiles
to reside for ome time undisturbed in Monte-
Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen who re-
mained at Siena, were not yet at the end of their
sufferings; for the Emperor, instead of adhering
to the articles of capitulation, granted his foa
Philip the investiture of that city and all its de-
pendencies; and Francis de Toledo, in the name
of their new maler, proceeded to fettle the civi'
and military government, treated them like a
conquered people, and fubjeaed them to the
Spanish yoke, without paying any regard what-
ever to their privileges or cftablifhed forms of
policy .
ort.i, THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been so

o. feeble, for ome time, and its commander so in-

a&cive, that the Emperor, in order to give vigour
to his operations in that quarter, found it necef-
lary not only to call off Medecino's troops fro.n
Tuscany while in the career of conquest, but to

b Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv, ;:6. 537. Joan. Cai;:e-

rarii adnot. rer. pr.xcipuarum ab anno ;55o ad 1561 p.
Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pcci Mcmorie della Sicnn, iv.
:64, &Sc.

employ

employ in Piedmont a general of such reputa- B 0 ° K:
tion and abilities, as might counterbalance the ..- .
great military talents of the Marechal Brifac, S55
who was at the head of the French forces in that
country.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that pur- chles ,P.

points the

pose; but it was as much the effect of a court D.keof
inrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's merit, ralifimo

there.

which led him to this choice. Alva had long at-
tende' :-.i;p with the utmost assiduity, and had
ei .:avoured to work himself into his confidence
by all the insinuating arts of which his haughty
and inflexible nature was capable. As he nearly
reTembled that Prince in many features of his
charaer, he began to gain much of his good-
will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite,
who dreaded the progress which this formidable
rival made in his malter's affe&ions, had the ad-
dress to prevail with the Emperor to name Alva
to this command. The Duke, though sensible
that he owed this diftin&ion to the malicious arts
of an enemy, who had no other aim than to re-
move him at a distance from court, was of such
puncilious honour, that he would not decline a
command that appeared dangerous and difficult,
but, at the fame time, so haughty, that he would
not accept of it but on his own terms, insisting
on being appointed the Emperor's Vicar-general
in Italy, with the supreme military-command in
all the Imperial. and Spanifl trritories in that
country. Charles granted all his demands i and

B OX I ; he tool; poffeflion of his new dignity with almuft
_----.- unlimitccl authority.

'55.

;s. Hs sirs

opera His r erations, however, were neither

tienw thee
inco:.fiijcr proportioned to his former rputation and the ex-
able. tensive powers with which he was invefled, nor

did they come up to the Emperor's expe&ations.
Brit.ic had under his com;n:and an army which,
though inferior in number to the Imperialiits,
was cormpofcd of cho!:fn troops, which having
grown o!d in service in tlat country where every
town was fortified, and every cafle capable of
being defended, were perfclly acquainted with
the manner of carrying on war there. By
their valour, and his own good conduc, Briflic
not only defeated all the attempts of the Impe-
rialifts, but added new conquests to the territories
of which he was formerly master. Alva, after
having boasted, with his usual arrogance, that he
would drive the French out of Fiedmont, in a
few weeks, was obliged to retire into winter-quar-
ters, with the ignominy of being unable to pre-
serve entire that part of the country of *hich the
Emperor had hitherto kept poifeffion'.

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
vwere inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor
King of France being able to bring into the field
an army llrong enough to undertake any enter-

i Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenorn His. de Savoye,
tum. i. ,70o.

prize

prize of moment. But what Charles wanted in R o K
force, he endeavoured to fuptply by a bold strata- -
gem, the fuccels of which would have been A5sss
'-

. A confpi-
equal to that of the inof vigorous campaign. racytobe-

tray seMls

During the siege of Metz, Leonard, Father Guar- the In.
dian of a convent of Francilcans in that city, p"' i''
had insinuatcd himfclf far into the eeem and
favour of the Duke of Guifc, by his attachment
to the French. Being a man of an aive and in-
triguing spirit, he had ben extremely useful both
in animating the inhabitants to sustain with pa-
tience all the hardhips of the licge, and in pro-
curing intellienc' of the enemies dfcigns and
motions. The merit of th;fce important lbrvices,
together with the warm recommendations of the
Duke of Guise, secured him fcli high confi-
dence with Viellevilie, who was appointed gover-
nor of Metz when Guile left the town, that lie
was permitted to converse or correspond with
whatever persons he chose, and nothing that he
did created any suspicion. This monk, from
the levity natural to bold and projeEting adven-
turers ; or from rentment against the French,
who had not bestowed on him flich rewards as
he thought due to his own merit; or tempted
by the unlimnitd confidence which was placed
in him, to imagine that he might carry on and
accomplish any fihemne with perfict security,
formed a dign. of bt:'ay;g M:tz to the Ini-
perialifts.

AM 4 . 'i

XB K HE cuinmui;;: tet hi. iri i- : t , the ueen-

-,- dowaer I.;;;,. v.!:') ', :"'iat. ithe Low

~r'' Countries in namne of h.r bLucthr She a '..ov-

TI,.. ..a

n
of it. ing, without any crtuple, an at o treCa'..v,

fiom which the EmpleruJr Inght derive fuc' Fg-
nal advantage, aliiltrd the Father G'?.rdian in
concerting the m:.ft proper plan for ernfir'ng li
success. They agreed, that the F hicr G ir-
dian hould cndlavuur to grin his mon!s to con-
cur in pr..lncting the dcl;in that he should in-
troducc into the convent a certain numbtr of
chal-n soldiers, dirguited in the habit of friars;
that when every thing was ripe for execution, the
governor of Thioville should march towards
Metz in the night with a considerable body
of troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts;
that while the garrison was employed in relill-
ing the assailants, the monks hould set fire to
the town in different places; that the soldiers
who lay concealed hould sally out of the con-
vent, and attack those who defended the ram-
parts in the rear, Amidst the universal terrot
and confusion, which events so unexpeced would
occasion, it was not doubted but that the In-
perialifts might become mailers of the town. As
a recompence for this service the Father Guardian
ltipulated that he should be appointed biffop of
'lctz, and ample rewards were promised to fich
of his monks as should be m ) aive in co-ope-
rating with hiii.

THE Father Guardian accomplished what he B o°°

had undertaken to perform with great secrecy and * ^
dispatch. By his authority and arguments, as iS5S
well as by the profped of wealth or honours It prod
which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He in-
troduced into the convent, without being fufpe&-
ed, as many boldiers as were thought sufficient.
The governor of Thionville, apprized in due
time of the design, had aftembled a proper num-
ber of troops for executing it; and the moment
approached, which probably would have wrested
from Henry the molt important of all his con-
quests.

BUT, happily for France, on the very day that Is dia;coe

vas fixed for firiking the blow, Vielleville, an ed'
able and vigilant officer, received information
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionville,
that certain Franciscan friars retorted frequently
th.ther, and were admitted to many private con-
ferences with the governor, who was carrying on
preparations for rome military enterprize with
great dispatch, but with a moe mylterious
secrecy. This was sufficient to awaken Vielle-
ville's furpicions. Without communicating these
to any person, he instantly vicited the convent of
Franciscans; deteed' the soldiers who were con-
cealed there; and forced them to discover as
much as. they knew concerning the nature of the
cnterprize. The Father Guardian, who had gone

to

B o o K to Thionville that he might put the last hand to

X9. A_ *-- his machinations, was seized at the gate as he r-
'S5. turned; and he, in order to save himself from

the rack, revealed all the circumstances of the
conspiracy.

A Wbdy of VIELLEVILLE not satisfied with having seized
!mperialfti
scated. the traitors, and having fruitrated their Ichemes,

was solicitous to take advantage of the difcove-
ries which he had made, o as to be revenged on
the Imperialills. For this purpoie he marched
out with the belf troops in his garrilin, and
placing these in amburn near the road, by which
the Father Guardian had informed him that the
governor of Thionville would approach Metz,
he fell upon the Imperialilts with great fury, a;
they advanced in perfe&t security, without ful-
pesing any danger to be near. Confounded
at this sudden attack, by an enemy whom they
expected to surprise, they made little rellnance;
and a great part of the troops employed in this
service, among which were many pcrlbns of cili
tindion, was killed or taken priflners. Before
next morning, Vielleville returned to Metz in
triumph.

T;., cnr:. No resolution was taken for ome time con-
. .1.' cerning the fate of the Father Guardian and his

monks, the framers and conduclors of this dan-
gerous conspiracy. Regard fr the honour of
body so numerous and relpecable as the Francis-
cans, and unwillingnelf to afford a fubje& of

triumil;

triumph to the enemies of the Ronmifl church by Bs o
their (dil race, lem to have occasioned this delay. ..-
But at length, the necefity of infliting exem- I5ss*
plary puniiliment upon them, in order to deter
others from venturing to commit the fame crime,
became To evident, that orders were issued to pro-
ceed to their trial. Their guilt was made apparent
by the clearest evidence; and sentence of death
was passed upon the Father Guardian together
with twenty monks. On the evening previous to
the day fixed for their execution, the gaoler took
them out of the dungeons in which they had
hitherto been confined eparately, and hut them
all up in one great room, that they might con-
i'cs their fins one to another, and join together in
preparing for a future slate. But as oon as they
were left alone, instead of employing themselves
in the religious exercises suitable to their con-
dition, they began to reproach the Father
Guardian, and four of the senior monks who had
been most active in reducing them, for their in-
ordinate ambition, which had brought such misery
on them, and such disgrace upon their order.
From reproaches they proceeded to curses and
execrations, and at last, in a frenzy of rage and
drfpair, they fell upon them with such violence,
that they murdered the Father Guardian on the
ipot, and so disabled the other ur, that i be-
came necessary to carry'them next morning in a
cart, together with the dead body of the Father
Guardian, to the place of execution. Six of the

youngelt

B ° K youngest were pardoned, the reft fuffcred the pu.

X. nilhment which their crime merited .

z555.

A ruitir. THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length
Begtciati ,.1
iaorlerto of the war, carried it on in this anguilhing
,cbl. manner, neither of them shewed any difpofirion

to liften to overtures of peace. Cardin.l Pole
indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his
piety and humanity, to re-establish concord among
the Princes of Chrifltndom. He had not only
persuaded his mistress, the Qtien of England,
to enter armly into his fIntiments, and to offer
her mediation to the contending powers, but had
prevailed both on the Emper,r and King of
France to find their plenipotentiaries to a village
between Gravelines and Ardres. He himself,
together with Gardiner bishop of Winchester, re-
paired thither in order to preside as mediators in
the conferences, which were to be held for adjust-
ing all the points in difference. But though
each of the monarchs committed this negociation
to ome of their minifiers, in whom they placed
the greatest confidence, it was oon evident that
they came together with no sincere desire of ac-
,M. *. commodation. Each proposed articles so extra-

vagant that they could have no hopes of their
being accepted. Pole, after exerting, in vain,
all his zeal, address, and invention, in order to

Thliuan. lib. xv. p. Sz:. Bclcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 866.

IMemoirs du Marech. Vielleriilc, par M. Chair!oix, tom. iii.
P'. :49. &c. p. 347. Par. 7.;7.

persuade

persuade them to relinquilh such extravagant de- 3 °o, r
mands, and to content to the substitution of more -Y -
equal conditions, became sensible of the folly of 3sss
wafting time, in attempting to reconcile thole,
whom their obstinacy rendered irreconcileable,
broke off the conference, and returned into
England '.

DURINGo these tranfa&ions in other parts of Afftir of

Gcrmrny.

Europe, Germany enjoyed such profound tran-
quillity, as afforded the diet full leisure to deli-
berate, and to establish proper regulations con-
cerning a point of the greatest consequence to the
internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty of
Paffau in one thousand five hundred and fifty-two,
it had been referred to the next diet of the Em-
pire to confirm and perfec the plan of religious
pacification, which was there agreed upon. The
terror and confusion with which the violent com-
motions excited by Albert of Brandenburg had
filled the Empire, as well as the contlant atten-
tion which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the
affairs of Hungary, had hitherto prevented the
holding a diet, though it had been fuminoned,
soon after the conclusion of the treaty, to meet at
Augiburg.

BUT as a Diet was now neceflary on many ac- Diet hel at

counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this anl,,eri-
year had repaired to Augsburg. Thougl few of rpecb in it.

A Thuan. lib. xv . 523. Mem. de Ribicr, tcm. i.
p. 613.

the

3s 0 ° the Princes were present either in person or by

XI.
- 0 their deputies, he opened the assembly by a

555* speech, in which he proposed a termination of the

diffenrions, to which the new tenets and contro-
verfies with regard to religion had given rife, not
only as the first and great bufincfs of the diet,
but as the point which both the Emperor and he
had tno. at eart. He represented the innume-
rable obtlacles which the Emperor had to fur-
mount before he could procure the convocation
of a general council, as well as the fatal accidents
which had for foTe time retarded, and had t
lait suspended the consultations of that aembli.
He observed, that experience had already taught
them how vain it was to expect any remedy for
evils, which demanded immediate redress from a
general council, the assembling of which would
either be prevented, or its deliberations be inter-
rupted by the dissentions and hostilities of the
Princes of Christendom; That a national council
in Germany, which, as ome imagined, might
be called with greater ease, and deliberate with
more perfect fecuriry, was an assembly of an un-
precedented nature, the jurildiclion of which was
uncertain in its extent, and the form of its pro-
ceedings undefined: That in his opinion there
remained but one method or composing their un-
happy differences, which though it had been
often tried without ilccefs, might yet prove es-
fetual if it were attempted with a better and :nord
pacifick spirit than had appeared on former occa-
sions, and that was to chooe a few men of learn-

ing,

ing, abilities, and moderation, who, by difcusling B °° K
the disputed articles in an amicable conference, .--
might explain them in such a manner as to bring l55*
the contending parties either to unite in sentiment,
or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, Supi:con,

and difperlcd over the Empire, revived the fears the Prot-et
and jealousics of the Protestants; Ferdinand, ants
they observed with much surprise, had not once
mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty
of Paffau, the stipulations which they con-
fidered as the great security of their religious
liberty. The suspicions to which this gave rife
were confirmed by the accounts which they
daily received of the e::reme rigour with which
Ferdinand treated their Proteftaint brethren in
his hereditary dominions; and, .s it was natural
to confider his ations as the furefl indicationof
his intentions, this dimriniflcd their confidence in
those pompous rofeflions of moderation or of zeal
for the re-eftablilhiment of concord, to which his
practice was fj utterly repugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Metorone, whom the The'e in.

Pope had appointed to attend the diet as his ,hf,,rirai
nuncio, co:pleted their convid'ion, and left l ,';.,mT
them no room to doubt that fume dangerous ma- P," tu he

'- diet.

chination was forming againll the peace or safety
of the Proreftant culrch. Julius, elated with
the unexpeced return of the Englil nation from
apoftacy, began to flatter himself, that the fpiric

of

B o0 K of mutiny and revolt having now spent its force,

XI.

- the happy period was come when the church
"'*5 might resume its ancient authority, and be obey-

ed by the people with the fame tame submission
as formerly. Full of thele hopes he had sent
Morone to Augsburg, with inltruCtions to em.
ploy his eloquence in order to excite the Ger-
mans to imitate the laudable example of the Eng.
lilh, and his political address in order to pre-
vent any decree of the diet to the detriment of
the catholick faith. As Morone inherited from
his father, the chancellor of Milan, uncommon
talents for negociation and intrigue, he could
hardly have failed of embarrassing the measures of
the Protestants in the diet, or of defeating what-
ever they aimed at obtaining in it for their farther
Iccurity.
The Ocath BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from

all the danger which they had reason to apprehend
from Morone's pretence. Julius, by abandoning
himself to pleasures and amusements, no less
unbecoming his age than his charater, having
contracted fuich habits of diflipation, that any
serious occupation, especially if attended with
difficulty, became an intolerable burden to him,
had long relilted the solicitations of his nephew
to hold a confifory, bcaufe he expeted there a
violent opposition to his schemes in favour of thnt
young man. But when all the pretexts which he
could invent for eluding this request were ex-
haufted, and at the fame time his indolent aver-

lion

lion. to business continued to grow upon him, he B °

o

feigned indisposition rather than yield to his ne- 'v-
phew's importunity; and that he might give the 'ss'
deceit a greater colour of probability, he not only
confined himself to his apartment, but changed
his usual diet and manner of life. By persisting
too long in ating this ridiculous part, he con-
traaed a real disease, of which he died in a few
days, leaving his infamous minion the Cardinal de Match .
Monte to bear his name, and to disgrace the dig-
nity which he had conferred upon him . As The nnc;

f(tq out Iar

soon as Morone heard of his death, he set out Rone.
abruptly from Augiburg, where he had resided
only a few days, that he might be present at the
eleion.of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being Ferdniln,
thus removed, the Protestants soon became fen- w!in ,.
fible that their conjecures concerning Ferdinand's . -n.,
intentions, however specious, were ill-founded,
and that he had no thoughts of violating the
articles favourable to them in the treaty of Paflau.
Charles, from the time that Maurice had defeat-
ed all his schemes in the Empire, and overturned
the great syRem of religious and civil despotism,
which he had almot eltablifled there, gave
little attention to the internal government of
Germany, and permitted his brother to pursue

m Onuphr. Panvinius de vtis Pontificum, p. 320.
Thuan. lib. xv. 517.

VOL. IV. N whatever

B °0 K whatever measures he judged most alutary an

XI. ----.j' expedient. Ferdinand, lets ambitious and ei.
155' terprifing than the Emperor, iic cd of rlfu rm

a plan, which he, with power and resources o
far superior, had failed of acconplifhing, en.
deavoured to attach the Princes of the E.inire
to his family by an administration uniformly
moderate and equitable. To this he gave, at
present, particular attention, because his fitua.
tion at this junature rendered it nectcfary to court
their favour and support with more than uual
assiduity.

Chl3es ad CHAR LbS had again resumed his favourite pro.
refC.metd his
pl.- of a. jec: of acquiring the Imnperral crown for his son
teeing the
fulcterionto Philip, which the ill reception it had met w!th
the Empi. when first proposed had obliged him to interrr:r,

but had not persuaded him to relinquish. Tiis
led him warmly to renew his request to his bro-
ther that he would accept of fume compenfaton
for his prior right of succession, and sacrifice that
to the grandeur of the house of Auiiria. Ferdi-
nand, who was as little disposed, as formerly, to
give such an extraordinary proof of fef-denial,
being sensible that, in order to defeat this fclienie,
not only the most inflexible firmnef3 on his part,
but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the
Empire in behalf of his title, were requisite;
was willing to purchare their favour by gratifying
them in every point that they deemed intercfting
or essential,

O$

ON the other hand, the Turks, after having B °0 K

wrested from him great part of his Hungarian -v-
territories, were ready to attack the provinces Th ,usrks
till fubje& to his authority with a formidable to'"indy
army, against which he could bring no equal Hun"a
force into the field, unless the diet hould grant
him immediate and extraordinary aid. For this
he could not hope, if the internal peace of the
Empire were not established on a foundation solid
in itself, and which should appear, even to the
Protestants, so secure and so permanent, as might
not only allow them to engage in a diftanc
war with safety, but encourage them to a& with
vigour.

A STEP taken by the Protestants themselves, Hei;aiarm.

ed at rome

a short time after the opening of the diet, ren- ap,ken
dered him fill more cautious of giving them any ,h^ , o
new cause of offence. As soon as the publica-
tion of Ferdinand's speech awakened the fears
and suspicions which have been mentioned, the
Ele&ors of Saxony and Brandenburg, together
with the Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naum-
burgh, and confirming the ancient treaty of con-
fraternity which had long united their families,
they added to it a new article, by which the
contracting parties bound themselves to adhere to
the confeflion of Augsburg, and to maintain the
docrine which it contained in their refpctive
dominions .

Chytrmi Saxonia, 480.

N F'R-

B 0 0 K FERDINAND, influenced by all these confider.

XI.
- -- tations, employed his utmost address in con-

,FnSJd during the deliberations of the diet, o as not
ea"u to: to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friend-
pr mote an
ccommoe. ship he depended, and whose enmity, as they

had not only taken the alarm, but had begun to
prepare for their defence, he had so much reason
to dread. The members of the diet readily
agreed to Ferdinand's proposal of taking the state
of religion into consideration, previous to any
other business. But, as soon as they entered
upon it, both parties discovered all the zeal and
animosity which a fubje& so interesting naturally
engenders, and which the rancour of controverft,
together with the violence of civil war, had in-
flamed to the highest pitch.

Tlepreen. THE Protestants contended, that the security
loin, of the
ca,l,,,i,k,' which they claimed in consequence of the treaty

.d eo. of Paffau should extend, without limitation, to

all w*ho had hithcrto embraced the do&rine of
Luther, or who should hereafter embrace it. The
Catholicks, having first of all asserted the Pope's
right as the supreme and final judge with refpet
to all articles of faith, declared, that though, on
account of the prefcnt situation of the Empire,
and for the fake of peace, they were willing to
confirm the toleration granted by the treaty of
Paffau, to such as had adopted the new opinions;
they must insist that this indulgence should not be
extended either to those cities which had con-
formed to the Interim, or to such ecclefiaflicks

aS

is should for the future apolatize from the B o o r
church of Rome. It was no easy matter to re- -.-
ccncile such opposite pretensions, which were ,s5'
fupportd, on each fide, by the moll elaborate ar-
guinents, and the greatelt acrimony of exprcf-
sion, that the abilities or zeal of theologians long
exercised in disputation could fuggei. Ferdi-
nand, however, by his address and perreverance;
by softening some things on each fide; by put-
ting a favourable meaning upon others; by re-
presenting incessantly the necessity as well as
the advantages of concord; and by threatening,
on some occasions, when all other considerations
were disregarded, to diflolve the diet, brought
them at length to a conclusion in which they all
agreed.

CONFORMABLY to this, a Recess was framed, Set. i,.

approved of, and publihed with the usual for- of tigion
malities. The following are the chief articles ci'abled,
which it contained: That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confefion of Augburg, fliall be permitted to
profess the dotrine and exercifc the worship
which it authoriles, without interruption or mo-
leftation from the Emperor, the King of the Ro-
mans, or any power or person whatsoever; That
the Protestants, on their part, shall give no dif-
quiet to the Princes and States who adhere to the
tenets and rites of the church of Rome ; That,
for the future, no attempt shall be made towards
terminating religious differences, but by the

N 3 ge.tle

B oX0 K gentle and pacifick. methods of persuasion and

conference; That the Popish ecclefiaaicks lhall
55'5 claim no spiritual jurifdi&ion in such fates as re-

ceive the confeflion of Augsburg; That such as
had seized the benefices or revenues of the church,
previous to the treaty of Paflau, ihall retain
poffelfion of them, and be liable to no profecu.
tion in the Imperial chamber on that account;
That the supreme civil power in every slate shall
have right to eftablilh what form of dotrine
and worlhip it shall deem proper, and if any of
its fubjets refute to conform to these, shall per-
mit them to remove with all their effeets where-
ever they please; That if any prelate or eccle-
fiallick hall hereafter abandon the Romish re-
ligion, he fhiall instantly relinquish his diocese or
benefice, and it shall be lawful for those in whom
the right of nomination is vefied, to proceed
immediately to an election, as if the office were
vacant by death or translation, and to appoint a
fucceflbr of undoubted attachment to the ancient
system .

Refl.aaosn SucH are the capital articles in this famous
on thie Pro.
gles oihe RecesS, which is the bass of religious peace in
plitic-ple of
tolc,.'ion. Germany, and the bond of union among its va-

rious lates, the lentiments of which are so ex-
tremely different with rcfpeEt to points the motl
interesting as well as important. In our age adi
nation, to which the idea of Toleration is f.

Skid. 6Cr. F. Paul, 368 Pallav. P. 1I. i61.

miliaj

miliar, and its beneficial effetes well known, it B 0°o K
ma fem strange, that a method of terminating -v
their dissentions, so suitable to the mild ritd cha- J5s5
ritable spirit of the Christian reilon, did not
sooner occur to the contending parties. But
this expedient, however salutary, was so repug-
nant to the sentiments and praCtice of Chriltians
during many ages, that it did not lie obvious to
disc)very. Among the ancient heathens, all
whoft deities were local and tutelary, diversity of
frntiment concerning the obje& or rites of re-
ligious worlhip feerns to have been no source of
aaiinofity, because the acknowledging veneration
to be due to any one God, did not imply denial
of the exitence or the power of any other
God; nor were tie modes and rites of worship
e.Lablilhed in one country incompatible with
those which other nations approved of and ob-
served. Thus the errors in their system of
theology were of such a nature as to be produftive
of concord; and notwithstanding the amazing
number of their deities, as well as the infinite
variety of their ceremonies, a sociable and tole.
rating spirit subsisted almost universally in the
pagan world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared

one Supreme Being to be the sole objec& of re-
ligious veneration, prescribed the form of wor-
ship most acceptable to him, whoever admitted
the truth of it held, of consequence, every other
mode of religion to be absurd and impious.

N 4 Hence

B c o K Hence the zeal of the first converts to the Chris-
---, tian faith in propagating its doctrines, and the

ardour with which they laboured to overturn
every other form of worflip. They employed,
however, for this purpose no methods but such
as suited the nature of religion. By the force of
powerful arguments, they convinced the under-
flandings of men; by the charms of superior
virtue, they allured and captivated their hearts.
At length the civil power declared i favour of
ChriRianity; and though numbers, imitating the
example of their superiors, crowded into the
church, many fill adhered to their ancient super-
fitions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the mini.
iers of religion, whose zeal was ill unabated,
though their fantity and virtue were much
diminilhed, forgot so far the nature of their own
miflion, and of the arguments which they ought
to have employed, that they armed the Imperial
power against these unhappy men, and as they
could not persuade, they tried to compel them to
believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among Christians themselves, and the fame un-
hallowed weapons which had first been used
against the enemies of their religion, were turned
against each other. Every zealous disputant en-
deavoured to interest the civil magistrate in his
cause, and each in his turn employed the secular
arm to crush or to exterminate his opponents.

Not

Not long after, the bishops of Rome put in their B o o K
claim to infallibility in explaining articles of faith, _
and deciding points in controversy; and, bold as '35s-
the pretension wag, they, by their artifices and
perseverance, impoled on the credulity of man-
kind, and brought them to recognise it. To
doubt or to deny any doctrine to which there un-
erring inftru&ors had given the fantion of their
approbation, was held to be not only a refiting
of truth, but an a& of rebellion against their sacred
authority: and the ficular power, of which by
various arts they had acquired the absolute direc-
tion, was instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accuitomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth, were forgotten,
the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the idea
of toleration, but even the word itfclf, in the
sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A right
to extirpate error by force, was universally allow-
ed to be the prerogative of filch as poffeiiTd the
knowledge of truth; and as each party of
ChriRfians believed that they had got poit:ffion of
this invaluable attainment, they ail claincd and
exercised, as far as they were able, the rights
which it was fppofed to convey. The Roman
catholicks, as their system reledl on the decisions
of an infalliblejtid,, never doubted that truth v/as

on

X o0 K on their fide, and openly called on the civil

xt.
---' power to repel the impious and heretical innova-
l5i5' tors who had ril'en up against it. The Protestants,

no less confident that their dooine w;:s well
founded, required, with equal ardour, the S'i.nces
of their party to check such as prefun.ci to im-
pugn or to oppose it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer,
Knox, the founders of the reformed church in
their refpe&ive countries, inflited, as far as they
had power and opportunity, the fame punish-
ments which were denounced against their own
disciples by the church of Rome, upon such as
called in quetion any article in their creeds. To
their followers, and perhaps to their opponents, it
would have appeared a fymptoin of diffidence in
the goodness of their cause, or an acknowledg-
ment that it was not well founded, if they had not
employed in its defence all those means which it
was supposed truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth cen-

tury, before Toleration, under its present form,
was admitted sirs into the repuibiick of the United
Provinces, and from thence introduced into ng-
land. Long experience of the calamities flow-
ing from mutual persecution, the influence of
free government, the light and humanity acquired
by the progress of science, together with the pru-
dence and authority of the civil mnagiltrate, were
all requisite in order to eftablith a regulation, so
repugnant to the ideas which all the differ., t
fes had adopted, from mifiullen conceptions con-

cerning

cerning the nature of religion and the rights of o O K
truth, or which all of them had derived from -
the erroneous maxims eRfablifhed by the church 'sss
of Rome.

THE Recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was Advantagen
founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti- gthpelie
ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry, t.e thL"
or the nature of Toleration. It was nothing
more than a scheme of pacification, which poli-
tical considerations alone had fuggelted to the
contending parties, and regard for their mutual
tranquilliky and safety had rendered necessary.
Of this there can be no ifronger proof than an
article in the Recess itself, by which the benefits
of the pacification are declared to extend only to
the Catholicks on the one fide, and to such as ad-
hered to the confession of Augsburg on the other.
The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin remained,
in consequence of that exclusion, without any
protection from the rigour of the laws denounced
againit hereticks. Nor did they obtain any legal
fScurity, until the treaty of Westphalia, near a
century after this period, provided, that they
hould be admitted to enjoy, in as ample a man-
ner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and pro-
rction which the Recess of Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly an t.,he

pleased with the security which they acquired by Chaholak'.
this Recess, such as adhered to the ancient system
iad no lets reason to be satisfied with that article

in

B o o r in it, which preserved entire to the Roman ca.

_--. tiholick church the benefices of uch ecclefiafticks
55ss. as hould hereafter renounce its doctrines. This

article, known in Germany by the name of the
Ecc.l.frtical Rteervatioi, was apparently so con-
formable to the idea and to the rights of an efta-
blifhed church, and it seemed so equitable to
prcvent revenues, which had been originally ap-
propriated for the maintenance of persons attach-
ed to a certain systen, from being alienated to
any other purpose, that the Protestants, though
they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to
relinquihf their opposition to it. As the Roman
catholick Princes of the Empire have taken care
to lee this article exactly observed in every cafe
where there was an opportunity of putting it in
execution, it has proved the great barrier of the
Romith church in Germany against the Reforma-
tion; and as, from this period, the fame tempta-
tion of interest did not allure ecclefiafticks to
relinquish the established system, there have been
few of that order, who have loved truth with
such difinterelled and ardent affection, as for its
fake to abandon the rich benefices which they
had in poEllion.

Msriu, DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cer-
11. le/~ed
,or.e. vino, Cardinal of Santo Croce, was ele&ed Pope
Ap"'9. in room of Julius. He, in imitation of Adrian,

did not change his name on being exalted to the

Ht ha- papal chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in pu-
'ic' rity of intention, while he excelled him much in

the

the arts of government, and fill more in know- B 0 K
ledge of the state and genius of the papal court;
as he had capacity to discern what reformation it '5s'
needed, as well as what it could bear; such re-
gulations were expeced from his virtue and wis-
dom, as would have removed many of its grofleft
and molt flagrant corruptions, and have contri-
buted towards reconciling to the church fuclh as,
from indignation at thcfe enormities, had aban-
doned its communion. But this excellent Pontitf
was only shown to the church, and immediately
snatched away. The confinement in the conclave H;s deat.
had impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious
ceremonies upon his acceffon, together with too
intense and anxious application of mind to the
schemes of improvement which he meditated,
exhausted so entirely the vigour of his feeble
constitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and
died on the twentieth day after his eletionp.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, pe- Thee!rlnn

W ,

per i -iof

Pg* A V.

culiar to conclaves, were displayed in that which
was held for electing a fuccelIor to Marcellus;
the Cardinals of the Imperial and French fatlions
labouring, with equal ardour, to gain the necef-
fary number of suffrages for one of their own
party. But, after a struggle of no long duration,
though condu&ed with all the warmth and eager-
llers natural to men contending for so great an
objet, they united in chufing John Peter Caraf- Mays3.

P Thuan. 520 . . Paul. 36g. Oauph. Panvin. 321, &c.

I fa,

B o o K fa, the eldest member of the sacred college, and

. _'

. the son of Count Montorio, a nobleman of an
'Jss5 illustrious family in the kingdom of Naples.

The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese,
who favoured his pretensions, Caraffa's own merit,
and perhaps his great age, which toothed all the
disappointed candidates, with the near profpe&
of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing about
this speedy union of suffrages. In order to testify
his refpe& for the memory of Paul III. by whom
he had been created Cardinal, as well as his gra-
titude to the family of Farnese, he assumed the
name of Paul IV.

Hi, r;re and THE choice of a prelate of such a Angular cha-
cb.rter. ra&er, and who had long held a course extremely

different from that which usually led to the dig-
nity now conferred upon him, filled the Italians,
who had nearest access to observe his manners and
deportment, with astonishment, and kept them in
suspense and solicitude with regard to his future
conduE. Paul, though born in a rank of life
which, without any other merit, might have fe-
cured to him the highest ecclesiastical prefer-
ments, had, from his early years, applied to study
with all the aRfiduity of a man who had nothing
but his personal accomplishments to render him
conspicuous. By means of this, he not only ac-
quired profound flill in fcholaftick theology, but
added to that a considerable knowledge of the
learned languages and of polite literature, the
fiudy of which had been lately revived in Italy,

and

and was pursued at this time with great ardour. B 0o0 K
His mind, however, naturally gloomy and revere, ^
was more formed to imbibe the four spirit of the zsss
former, than to receive any tin&ure of elegance
or liberality of sentiment from the latrer; so that
he acquired rather the qualities and palfions of a
recluse ecclefiafick, than :he talents necessary for
the condu& of great affairs. Accordingly, when
he entered into orders, although several rich be-
nefices were beltowed upon him, and he was early
employed as nuncio in different courts, he oon
became disgustcd with that course of life, and
languished to be in a situation more suited to his
taste and temper. With this view, he resigned at
once all his ecclefi;ttical preferments, and having
instituted an order of regular prielss, whom he
denominated Theatines, from the name of the
archbifhoprick which he had held, he associated
himself as a member of their fraternity, conform-
ed to all the rigorous rules to which he had sub-
jeaed them, and preferred the solitude of a mo-
naftick life, with the honour of being the founder
of a new order, to all the vail objets which the
court of Rome preented to his ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until

Paul III. induced by the fame of his sanCtity and
knowledge, called him to Rome, in order to con-
fult with him concerning the measures which
might be mft proper and effe&tual for the sup-
prefing of herely, and re-eftablilhing the ancient
authority of the church. Having thus allured

4 him

B 0o K him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his
A_ -
m tentreaties, and partly by his authority, prevailed

on him to accept of a Cardinal's hat, to re-affume
the benefices which he had resigned, and to re-
turn again into the usual path of ecclesiastical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquiflied.
But, during two fucceflive Pontificates, under the
first of which the court of Rome was the most
artful and interested, and under the second the
most dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained
his monaftick austerity. He was an avowed and
bitter enemy not only of all innovation in opi-
nion, but of every irregularity in pracice; Ihe
was the chief inltrument in eftablifling the for-
midable and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in
the papal territories; he appeared a violent ad-
vocate on all occasions for the jurifdi&ion and
discipline of the church, and a severe censurer of
every measure which seemed to flow from motives
of policy or interest, rather than from zeal for
the honour of the ecclefiatical order, and the
dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate of
such a character, the Roman courtiers expected
revere and violent Pontificate, during which tlh
principles of found policy would be sacrificed to
the narrow prejudices of priefily zeal while the
people of Rome were apprehensive of feeing the
The lif fordid and forbidding rigour of monaftick man-

.Jini r. ners fubituted in place of the gaiety or magni-

ficence to which they had long been accustomed
in the papal court. These apprehensions Paul
was extremely solicitous to remove. At his firit

entrance

entrance upon the adminiRration, he laid aside B o K
that austerity which had hitherto diftinguifled --
his perlbn and family, and when the matter of 1555.
his household inquired in what manner he would
chufe to live, he haughtily replied, " As becomes
a great Prince." He ordered the ceremony of
his coronation to be condued with more than
uliial magnificence; and endeavoured to render
himself popular by fveral act3 of liberality and
indulgence towards the inhabitants of omel'.

His natural severity of temper, however, would Te eicer.
have oon returned upon him, and would have '.cilnt
juflified the conjectures of the courtiers, as well ,i,-.i
as the fears of the people, if he had not, imme-
diately after his election, called to Rome twvo of
his nephews, the sons of his brother the Count
of Montorio. The eldell he promoted to be Go-
vernor of Rome. The younget, who had hither-
to flrved as a soldier of fortune in the armies of
Spain or France, and whose disposition as well as
manners were still more foreign from the clerical
character than his profefflon, he created a Car-
dinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the
iecond office in power and dignity which a Pope
can bestow. Thcf: marks of favour, no less fud-
den than extravagant, he accompanied with the
most unbounded confidence and attachment, and
forgetting all his former revere maxims, he seem-

q Platin, p. 327. Callaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Roin. z61.
p. 70.

VOL. IV. O ed

B o o K ed to have no other objet than the aggrandizing

XI.

~-.j of his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately

Their mbi- for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any
jFr. moderate acquisition. They had seen the family

of Medici raised by the interest of the Popes of
that house to supreme power in Tuscany; Paul
III. had, by his abilities and address, secured the
dutchies of Parma and Placentia to the family of
Farnese. They aimed at ome eflablilhment for
themselves, no less considerable and independent;
and as they could not expet that the Pope would
carry his indulgence towards them so far as to
secularize any part of the patrimony of the
church, they had no profpe& of attaining what
they wilhed, but by difinembering the Imperial
dominions in Italy, in hopes of seizing some por-
tion of them. This alone they would have deem-
ed a sufficient reason for sowing the feeds of dif-
cord between their uncle and the Emperor.

..:,.n rUf BUT Cardinal Caraffa had, besides, private rea-
..ith tl, sions which filled him with hatred and enmity to
'l"'por. the Emperor. While he served in the Spanifli

troops he had not received such marks of honour
and diliinLion as he thought due to his birth and
merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had
abruptly quitted the Imperial service and enter-
ing into that of France, he had not only met with
such a reception as toothed his vanity, and at-
tached him to the French inrereft, but by con-
iraaing an intimate friendihip with Strozzi, who
commanted tic French army in Tuscany, he haid

.~~~~~3 bimbibet

imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor as the B K
great enemy to the liberty and independence of
the Italian states. Nor was the Pope himself in- '55'
disposed to receive impreflions unfavourable to the
Emperor. The opposition given to his elecion
by the Cardinals of the Imperial fa&ion, left in
his mind deep resentment, which was heightened
by the remembrance of ancient injuries from
Charles or his ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and em- Theyende.

our o alic.

ployed various devices, in order to exasperate him nate the
beyond a poflibility of reconciliation. They ag- PhOCe efm
gravated every circumstance which could be deem- ror
ed any indication of the Emperor's diffatisfation
with his promotion; they read to him an inter-
cepted letter, in which Charles taxed the Cardi-
nals of his party with negligence or incapacity in
not having defeated Paul's eletion: They pre-
tended, at one time, to have discovered a con-
fpiracy fArmed by the Imperial minister and
Cosmo di Medici against the Pope's life; they
alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a plot
for affalinating themselves. By there artifices,
they kept his mind, which was naturally violent,
and become suspicious from old age, in such per-
petual agitation, as precipitated him into measures
which otherwise he would have been the firs per-
son to condemn'. He seized ome of the Cardi-

Ripamoatii Hill. Patria, lib. iii. 146. Ap. Grav. Thcf.
'ol. ii. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 65. Adriani Itor. i. 906.

0 2 nals

B °0 K nals who were mofl attached to the Emperor, and

Xi.
-- ' -confined them in the castle of St. Angelo; he
;'5s perlfcuted the Colonnas and other Roman barons,

the ancient retainers to the Imperial faction, with
the nltloft: severity; and discovering on all oc-
cafions his diftrusl, fear, or hatred of the Empe-
ror, he began at lafl to court the friendflip of
the French King, and 1teumed willing to throw
himself ablolutely upon him for support and pro-
tection.

In.'ie him THIS was the very point to which his nephews
to court the
Kingof wilhed to bring him as inoio,2 avourable to their
Frnce. ambitious fcheines; and as the accomnplilhment

of these depended on their uncle's life, whose ad-
vanced age did not admit of loiing a moment
unneccfrarily in negociations, inflead of treating
at fecond-lland with the French' ambassador at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a
person of conidence dire&lv to the court of
France, with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rjeCed. IHe proposed an
alliance uoenfive and defensive between Henry
and the Pope; that they flho:isl attack the dutchy
of Tulcany and the kingdom of Naples with their
united forces; and if their arms flhould prove fuc-
cefsful, that the ancient republican form of go-
vernment llould be re-eftabliflled in the former,
and the inveltiture of the latter flould be granted
to one of the French King's sons, after reserving
a certain territory which Ihould be annexed to the
patrimony of the church, together with an inde-

5 pendent

pendent and princely eablifliment for each of B O P
:ie Pope's nephews. _.

J555.

THIE King, allured by thlce fpccious projcs, C."",-

gev a moit l!.vuLuriable audinicce to the envoy. re.i.ylppo.
Z- I,~ i ie ail;-
But w'en the matter was propafed in co!ncil, the ,. ^i.:
constable Montmorency, wvhole natu;ail caution "-'Iro.'
anti aversion to daring enterprifcs icr-eafid with
age and experience, remonfra.ted wi'ii great ve-
hemence against the alliance. l put Henry in
mind how fatal to France every expedition into
Italy had been during three f:cccfilve reigns, and
if such an enterprifl: had proved too great for
the nation even when its 'i'enith and finances
were entire, there was no realon to hope for fuc-
cess, if it flould be attempted now, when both
were exhaulted .by extraordinary efrorts during
twars, which had lalled, with little interruption,
almost half a century.. He represented the ma-
nifeft imprudence of entering into engagements
with a Pope of fourscore, as any fyleni which
refted on no better foundation than his life, must
be extremely precarious, and upon the event of
his death, which could not be distant, the face
of things, together with the inclination of the
Italian States, must instantly change, and the
whole weight of the war be left upon the King
alone. To these considerations he added the near
profpeE which they now had of a final accom-
modation with the Emperor, who, having taken
the resolution of retiring from the world, wilhed
to tranfnit his kingdoms in peace to his son; and

0 3 he

B 0 0 K he concluded with representing the absolute cer-

XI.
- .y tainty of drawing the arms of England upon

France, if it hould appear that the re-establish-
ment of tranquillity in Europe was prevented by
the ambition of its Monarch.

The uke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and
n' Guile fa.
Vours t. urged by a minister of great authority, would pro-

bably have determined the King to decline any
connexion with the Pope. But the Duke of
Guise, and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain,
who delighted no less in bold and dangerous un-
dertakings than Montmorency shunned them, de-
clared warmly for an alliance with the Pope. The
cardinal expeced to be entrusted with the conduAc
of the negociations in the court of Rome to which
this alliance would give rife; the duke hoped to
obtain the command of the army which would
be appointed to invade Naples; and confidering
themselves as already in these stations, vast pro-
jets opened to their aspiring and unbounded am-
bition. Their credit, together with the influence
of the King's mistress, the famous Diana of
Poitiers, who was, at that time, entirely devoted
to the interest of the family of Guise, more than
counterbalanced all Montmorency's prudent re-
monfrances, and prevailed on an inconsiderate
Prince to liften to the overtures of the Pope's
envoy.

Cardinal of THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected,

terrain ent
to nroiate was immediately sent to Rome with full powers
with the . . .
ris(. to

to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures B K
for carrying it into execution. Before he could -,- '
reach that city, the Pope, either from refleing 's''
on the danger and uncertain iue of all military
operations, or through the address of the Impe-
rial ambassador, who had been at great pains to
soothe him, had not only begun to lose much of
the ardour with which he had set on foot the ne-
gociation with France, but even discovered great
unwillingness to continue it. In order to rouse
him from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle
his former rage, his nephews had recourse to the
arts which they had already pratifed with so much
success. They alarmed him with new reprefen-
tations of the Emperor's hostile intentions, with
irelh accounts which they had received of threats
uttered against him by the Imperial ministers, and
with new discoveries which they pretended to have
made of conspiracies formed, and just ready to
take effe& against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, Paul eMrag.

ed at te

would not have operated a second time wizh the poeedings
fame force, nor have made the impreflion which o.fAu h dt
they wilhed, if Paul had not been excited by an
offnce of that kind which he ws least able to
bear. SI{ received avice of the recess of the
aiet of Auigbilrg, and of tha toleration which
was tereby granzld to the Protestants, and this
threw him ar once into fch tranf:,orts of paflion
againll the Emperor and King of the Romans, as
carried hlin headlong into all the violent measures

04 , of

B 0 r° of his nephews. Full of high ideas with refpec

-,-- to the papal prerogative, and animated widi ti,L
'S55i ficrce,' zeal againlt hercir, he confidered the li-

berty of deciding concerning religious n.atc;r:,
v.:hich had been aiTumed by an aiffimbly compofc.l
clich-y of liynen, as a preilnmptuous and unpar-
don.bl; eicrochmnent on tha: jurildiion whlic

ehlonged <it I;i.Ln alorne; and regarded the indlul-
grnce v.hic had ten:I givenl to the Protelanc as
an imlpio aLt ol f c.t power which the die: h..l
i.;urped. lic comrplained lou.liy of bJt': t !t.
:lnperial airlbalaTd:,: . tHe infiied that the rccci
of the diet f:ould ir.lcmdiately be declared ille..l
a:;J void. tie threate;ied the Einperor and King
of tie RoG.a;.s, in c::lf they lihtuld eicher refu2
or delay to gratify himl in this particular, withl
ile fcvereit efiecs of his vengeance. He talked
in a tone of authority and command which migh
have suited a pontiff of the twelfth century, when
a papal decree was fu.incient to have llaken, or to
have overturned, the throne of the greatest Mo-
narch; but which was altogether improper in that
age, epecially when addrefled to the minister of
a Prince who had so often made pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The
ambafadcr, however, heard all his extravagant
propositions anl menaces with much patience,
and endeavoured to soothe him, by putting him in
mind of the extreme diflref to which the Empe-
ror was reduced at Infpruck, of the engagements
which he had come under to the Protestants
in order to extricate himtelf, of the neceflity

of

of fulfilling these, and of accommodating his °Ox K
condut to the situation of his affairs. But . -_.
weighty as these considerations were, they made '555'
no imprellion on the mind of the haughty and
bigoted pontiff, who initantly replied, That he
would absolve him by his apoltolick authority
from those impious engagements, and even cornm
mand him not to perform them i that in carrying
on the cause of God and of the church, no re-
gard ougiht to be had to the maxims of worldly
!;rudence and poiicy; and that the ill ltccefs of
the Emperor's fc'.cmcs in Germany might juflly
bel deemed a mark of the divine difileare againf:
him, on account of his having paid little atten-
tion to the former, while he regulated his con-
dut entirely by the latter. Having said this, he
turned from the ambassador abruptly without
waiting for a reply.

His nephews took care to applaud and cerifl andetare.

ratd by hie

these sentiments, and easily wrought up his arro- nephcwi,
gant mind, fraught wich all the monkish ideas
concerning the extent of the papal supremacy,
to such a pitch of resentment againf: the house
of Aunlria, aid to fuchl ;In high opinion of his
own power, that he talked continually of his
being the fuccelfor of thofl who had deposed
Kings and Emperors ; that he was exalted as head
over them all, and would trample such as op-
posed him under his feet. In this difpolition, the D-. ?.
cardinal of Lorrain found the Pope, and easily treaty ith
persuaded him to sign a treaty, which had for its nrnc."'

objeCt

°0 K object the ruin of a Prince against whom he was
- - so highly exasperated. The Ripulations in te
'JS'S treaty were much the fame as had been proposed

by the Pope's envoy at Paris; and it was agreed
to keep the whole tranfation secret until their
united forces Ihould be ready to take the field'.

The Etmpe. DURING the negociation of this treaty at Rome
for resolves
t resign his and Paris, an event happened which seemed to
Miioys. render the fears which had given rife to it vain,

and the operations which were to follow upon it
unneceflary. This was the Emperor's refigna-
tion of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip;
together with his resolution to withdraw entirely
from any concern in business or the affairs of this
world, in order that he might spend the re-
mainder of his days in retirement and olitude.
Though it requires neither deep refletion nor ex-
traordinary discernment to discover that the state
of royalty is not exempt from cares and difap-
pointment; though most of those who are exalted
to a throne find solicitude, and fatiery, and dif-
gust to be their perpetual attendants in that en-
vied pre-eminence, yet, to descend voluntarily
from the supreme to a subordinate Rfation, and
to relinquish the polTefflon of power in order to
attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be
an effort too great for the human mind. Seve-
ral instances, indeed, occur in history, of Mo-

a Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 163. F. Paul, 365. Thuan. lib. xv.
5S5. lib. xvi. 540. Mn. de Ribier, ii, 609, &c.

narchs

narchs who have quitted a throne, and have B o° O
ended their days in retirement. But they were v.-~
either weak Princes who took this resolution 'S5
ratlly, and repented of it as soon as it was taken;
or unfortunate Princes, from whose hands ome
itrong rival had wrested their sceptre, and com-
pelled them to descend with reluctance into a
private station. Dioclefian is perhaps the only
Prince capable of holding the reins of govern-
ment, who ever resigned them from deliberate
choice, and who continued during many years to
enjoy the tranquillity of retirement without fetch-
ing one penitent sigh, or cating back one look
of desire, towards the power or dignity which he
had abandoned.

No onder, then, that Charles's resignation Them~ti

should fill all Europe with astonishment, and nfiga.
give rife, both among his contemporaries, and
among the historians of that period, to various
conjecures concerning the motives which deter-
mined a Prince, whose ruling pafion had been
uniformly the love of power, at the age of fifty-
fix, when objects of ambition operate with full
force on the mind, and are pursued with the
greatest ardour, to take a resolution so singular
and unexpected. But while many authors have
imputed it to motives To frivolous and fantastical,
as can hardly be supposed to influence any reason-
able mind; while others have imagined it to be
the result of some profound scheme of policy;

historians

B o o n; hilRorians more inteiiigent, and better informed,

XI. _-L.-' neither aferibe it to caprice, nor farch for mytte-

rious secrets of ifate, where finmle and obvious
causes will fully account for the Emperor's con-
dliut. Charles had been attacked early in lif:
with the gout, and not wihlxanding all the pre-
cautions of the mol fiilful phvyfcians, the vio-
lence of the diitemper increafid as he advanced
in age, and the its became evcry year more fre-
qcn t, as well as more intolerable. Not only
was the vigour of his conliituion broken, but
t!e tfcuities of his mind were impaired by the
cxcruci;aing torments which he endured. Dur-
ing the continuance of the fits, he was altogether
incapable of applying to bufincls, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals
that he could attend to what was serious, he gave
up a great part of his time to trifling and even
childifl occupations, which served to relieve or
to anmufl his mind, enfeebled and worn out with
cxcefs of pain. Under these circumstances, the
conduEt of such affairs as occurred of course, in
governing so many kingdoms, was a burden ipore
than sufficient; but to push forward and com-
plete the vast schemes, which the ambition of his
more aive years had formed, or to keep in view
and carry on the fame great system of policy,
extending to every nation in Europe, and con-
neced with the operations of every different
court, were functions which so far exceeded his
rccncgh, that they oppreltid and overwhelmed

his

his mind. As he had been long accuftoned to B IK

Xl.

view the business of every department, whether '
civil, or military, or eccicfaftical, with his own
eyes, and to decide concerning it according to
his own ideas, it gave him the utmof pain when
he felt his infirmities increase so fait upon him,
that he was obliged to commit the conduct of all
affairs to his miniflers. I-Ie imputed every mil-
fortune which besel him, and tvery milarriage
that happened, even when the son rnr was un-
avoidable and the latter ccidental, to his inabi-
lity to take the infpeaion of bu!incfs hiiiic!t;
He complained of his hard fortuie, in being
opposed, in his declining years, to a rival, who
was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henry could take and execute all his relblutions
in person, he should now be reduced, both in
council and in aion, to rely on the abilities of
other men. Having thus grown old before his
time, he wifely judged it more decent to conceal
his infirmities in some folicude, than to expose
them any longer to the publick eye; and pru-
dently determined not to forfeit the fame, or
lose the acquisitions of his better years, by trug-
gling, with a vain obstinacy, to retain the reins
of government, when he was no longer able to
hold them with steadiness, or to guide them with
address*.

BUT

* Dom Lcvefqluc, in his memoirs of Cardinal Granvei'e,
gives a reason fur the mpcror's rcfignution, which, as 1 r-

col A,

o
O K BUT though Charles had revolved this fclcier
XI.
^.. in his mind for several years, and had commu-
cu]S n- nicated it to his sifters the dowager Queens of
^i, which France and Hungary, who not only approved of
had ,etad-H

is. his intention, but offered to accompany him to

whatever place of retreat he Ihould chufe; feve-
ral things had hitherto prevented his carrying it
into execution. He could not think of loading
his son with the government of so many king-

collet, is not mentioned by any other hillorian. Iie fays,
that, the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon
his marriage with the Queen of England; Philip, notwith.
handing the advice and intreasies of his father, removed
mot of the minilters and officers whom he had employed in
those countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill
the places which they held. That he aspired openly, and
with little delicacy, to obtain a share in the adminifration of
affairs in the Low-Countries. That he endeavoured to thwart
the Emperor's measures, and to limit his authority, behaving
towards him sometimes with inattention, and sometimes with
hauhtinefs. That Charles finding that he mud either yield
to his son, or openly contend with him, in order to avoid
there, which were both disagreeable and mortifying to a
father, he took the resolution of resigning his crowns, and
of retiring from the world, vol. i. p. 24, &c. Dom Le-
vefque derived his information concerning there curious sass,
which he relates very briefly, from the original papers of car-
dinal Granvelle. But as that val collecion of papers, which
has been preserved and arranged by M. L'Abbe Boizot of
Befangon, though one of the most valuable hitorical monu-
ments of the sixteenth century, and which cannot fail of
throwing much light on the tranfE:tions of Charles V. i,
not published, I cannot determine what degree of credit
hiould be given to this account of Charlks's rcfignation.
have therefore taken no notice of it in relating this event.

doms,

doms, until he hould attain such maturity of age, I °°
and of abilities, as would enable him to sustain --
that weighty burden. But as Philip had now 5
reached his twenty-eighth year, and had been
early accustomed to business, for which he dif-
covered both inclination and capacity, it can
hardly be imputed to the partiality of paternal
affecion, that his scruples, with regard to this
point, were entirely removed; and that he
thought he might place him, without further he-
liration or delay, on the throne which he was
about to abandon. His mother's situation had
been another obftru&ion in his way. For al-
though he had continued almost fifty years in
confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her husband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain
was still vested in her jointly with the Emperor j
her name was inserted together with his in all
the publick writs issued in that kingdom; and
such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to
her, that they would probably have scrupled to
recognise Philip as their fovcreign, unless ihe had
consented to assume him as her partner on the
throne. Her utter incapacity for business render-
ed it impossible to obtain her conient. But her
death, which happened this year, removed this
difficulty; and as Charles, upon that event, be-
came sole Monarch of Spain, it left the fucceflion
open to his son. The war with France had like-
wife been a reason for retaining the administration
of affairs in his own hand, as he was extremely

solicitous

a o o K solicitous to have terminated ir, that he min!t

- 'i have given up his kingdoms to his son at p-t;l:,-
'5S5 with all the world. But as Henry had .dilctrve-Irc

no disposition to close with any of his overtures,
and had even rejeced proposals of peace, wv!::Ih
were equal and moderate, in a tone that eemcd
to indicate a fixed purpose of continuing holili-
tics, he saw that it was vain to wait longer in ex-
pectation of an event, which, however desirable,
was altogether uncertain.

The f.rrma. As this, then, appeared to be the proper junc-
which he ture for executing the scheme which he hadl lor.
xecutedit. meditated, Charles resolved to resign his king-

doms to his son, with a folcmnity suitable to th'
importance of the tranfation, and to perform
this lalt aft of sovereignty with Iuch formal pomp,
as might leave a lading impression on the minds
not only of his uiabjeds but of his filcceffor.
With this view he called Philip out of England,
where the peevifi temper of his Queen, which
increared with her despair of having issue, ren-
dered him extremely unhappy; and the jealousy
of the English left him no hopes of obtaining
the direction of their affairs. Having aemblcd
the States of the Low Countries at Brul'els, on
the twenty-fifth of O.tober, Charles feated him-
self, for the last time, in the chair of ate, on
one fide of which was placed his son, and on the
other his filler the Queen of Hungary, regent of
the Netherlands, with a splendid retinue of the
grandees of Spain and princes of the Empire

standing

standing behind him. The president of the coun- B °o K
cil of Slanders, by his command, explained, in a ^
few words, his intention in calling this extra- tj
ordinary meeting of the States. He :Ki read
the inltrument of resignation, by which Charles
surrendered to his Ton Philip all his territories,
jurifdidion, and authority in the Low-Countries,
ablolving his subje&s there from their oath of al-
legiance to him, which he required them to tranf-
ser to Philip his lawful heir, and co serve him with
the fame loyalty and zeal which they had manifest-
ed, during so long a course of years, in support
of his government.

CHARLES then rote from his feat, and leaning

on the shoulder of the Prince of Orange, because
he was unable to stand without support, he ad-
dressed himself to the audience, and from a paper
which he held in his hand, in order to assist his
memory, he recounted, with dignity, but with-
out ostentation, all the great things which he had
undertaken and performed since the commence-
ment of his administration. He observed, thac
from the seventeenth year of his age, he had de-
dicated all his thoughts and attention to publick
objects, reserving no portion of his time for the
indulgence of his ease, and very little for the en-
joyment of private pleasure; that either in a
pacifick or hostile manner, he had visited Ger-
many nine times, Spain fix times, France four
times, Italy seven times, the Low Countries ten
times, England twice, Africa as often, and had

VOL. IV. P made

B 0 o K made eleven voyages by sea; that while his health

XI.
Ai%4-.. permitted him to discharge his duty, and the

55 vigour of his constitution was equal, in any de-

gree, to the arduous office of governing such
extensive dominions, he had never ihunned la-
bour, nor repined under fatigue; that now when
his health was broken, and his vigour exhaulted
by the rage of an incurable diltemper, his grow-
ing infirmities admonished him to retire, nor was
he so fond of reigning, as to retain the sceptre in
an impotent hand, which was no longer able to
protet his fubjeEs, or to render them happy;
that inflead of a sovereign worn out with dif-
eases, and scarcely half alive, he gave them one
in the prime of life, accustomed already to go-
vern, and who added to the vigour of youth all
the attention and sagacity of maturer years; that
if, during the course of a long administration,
he had committed any material error in govern-
ment, or if, under the prcffure of so many and
great affairs, and amidst the attention which he
had been obliged to give to them, he had either
ncle&ed or injured any of his fubjets, he now
implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he
Ihould ever retain a grateful fenle of their fidelity
and attachment, and would carry the remem-
brance of it along with him to the place of his re-
treat, as his sweetest consolation, as well as the
best reward for all his services, and in his lail
prayers to Almighty God would pour forth his
ardent wishes for their welfare.

2 T£r ;

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his B O0o K

knees and kissld his father's hand, I" If, fays he, a- -
I had left you by my death this rich inheritance, sss
to which I have made such large additions, some
regard would have been justly due to my memory
on that account but now when I voluntarily re-
sign to you what I might have fRill retained, I
may well expec the warmed expressions of thanks
on your part. With these, however, I dispense,
and Ihall confider your concern for the welfare
of your subje&s, and your love of them, as the
best and mod acceptable tefimony of your gra-
titude to me. It is in your power, by a wife and
virtuous administration, to justify the extra-
ordinary proof which I, this day, give of my pa-
ternal affection, and to demonstrate that you are
worthy of the confidence which I repose in you.
Preserve an inviolable regard for religion;
maintain the Catholick faith in its purity; let
tile laws of your country be sacred in your eyes;
encroach not on the rights and privileges of your
people and if the time hall ever come, when
you hall wish to enjoy the tranquillity of private
life, may you have a son endowed with such
qualities, that you can resign your sceptre to him,
with as much fatisfa&ion as I give up mine to
you."

As oon as Charles had finilhed this long ad-

dre's to his fubjets and to their new sovereign,
he funk into the chair, exhaulted and ready to
faint with the fatigue of such an extraordinary

P ' effort.

B o OK effort. During his discourse, the whole au-

_ - dience melted into tears, some from admiration
Xs5-' of his magnanimity, others softened by the ex-

prefflins of tendcrnefs towards his son, and of
love to his people; and all were affeited with the
deepest frrow at lofong a sovereign, who had
ditinguifhed the Netherlands, his native coun-
try, with particular marks of his regard and
attachment.

PHILTP then arose from his knees, and after

returning thanks to his father, with a low and
submissive voice, for the royal gift which his un-
txampled bounty had bestowed upon him, he
addrefled the assembly of the States, and regret-
ting his inability to speak the Flemish language
with such facility as to express what he felt on this
interesting occasion, as well as what he owed to
his good fubjefs in the Netherlands, he begged
that they would permit Granvelle bishop of Arras,
to deliver what he had given him in charge to
speak in his name. Granvelle, in a long dif-
course, expatiated on the zeal with which Philip
was animated for the good of his fubje&tsj on his
resolution to devote all his time and talents to the
promoting of their happiness, and on his inten-
tion to imitate his father's example in diftin-
guifling the Netherlands with peculiar marks of
his regard. Mas, a lawyer of great eloquence,
replied, in name of the States, with large pro-
feflions of their fidelity and affction to their new
sovereign.

4 THE(N

THEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary, re- B O K

ligned the regency, with which The had been en- %- ,
trusted by her brother during the space of twenty- s156'
five years. Next day Philip, in presence of the J«tuy 6.
States, took the usual oaths to maintain the rights
and privileges of his l'ubjects; and all the mem-
bers, in their own name, and in that of their con-
ftituents, swore allegiance to him'.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an asem-

bly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally
pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain,
with all the territories depending on them, both
in the old and in the new world. Of all these
vall pofleflions, he reserved nothing for himself
but an annual pension of an hundred thousand
Crowns, to defray the charges of his family, and
to afford him a finall fum for as of benefi-
cence and charity.

As

'Godleveus Rlatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldal.
Polit. Imper. p. 377. Strada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

' The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of such

importance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of it,
one would expeRt, hould have been ascertained by historians
with the greatet accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diversity amo g them with regard to this
point. All agree, that the deed by which Charles transfer-
red to his son his dominions in the Netherlands, bears date
at Bruflds the z;th of Otober. Sandoval fixes on the 28ti
of Otober as the day on which the ceremony of reGgnation
happened, a d he was present at the tranfattion, vol. ii. p.
592. Godleveus, who published a treatise de Abdication*
Caroli V. fixes the publick ceremony, as well as the date of

P3 thy

B 0o 0 As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain,
* .,a hoping that the dryness of the air and warmth of
R.os6to the climate in that country might mitigate the
d, h.,,rfi violence of his disease, which had been much in-
deuce in
Spain. creased by the moisture of the air and the rigour

the instrument of resignation, on the 25th. Pere Barre, I
know not on what authority, fixes it on the 4th of Novem.
her, Hit. D'Alem. viii. 976. Herrera agrees with Godle.
veus in entiment, tom i. tiS. as likewise does Pallavicini,
whose authority with refpe& to dates, and every thing where
a minute accuracy is requisite, is of great weight, Hid. lib.
xvi. p. 168. HiRforians differ no less with regard to the day
on which Charles resigned the crown of Spain to his son.
According to M. de Thou, it was a month after his having
resigned his dominions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the
a5th of November, Thuan. lib. xvi. p. 57. According to
Sandoval, it was on the 6th of January, 1556, Sand. ii.
603. Antonio de Vera agrees with him, Epitome del Vida
del Car. V. p. i to. According to Pallavicini, it was on the
17th, Pal. lib. xvi. p. 169. and with him Herrera agrees,
Vida del D. Felipe, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras fixes it on
the sirs day of January, Hil. Gener. tom. ix. p. 371. M.
de Beaucaine supposes the resignation of the crown of Spain
to have been executed a few days after the resignation of the
Netherlands, Corn. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is remarkable,
that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles, though Charles had
made over all his dominions to his on ome weeks previous
to the conclusion of it, all the tipulations are in the Empe-
ror's name, and Philip is only designed King of England
and Naples. It is certain Philip was not proclaimed King of
CaRile, &c, at Valladolid sooner than the 24th of March,
Sandov. ii. p. 606; and previous to that ceremony, he did
not choose, it would seem, to aume the title of King of
any of his Spanish kingdoms, or to perform any a of royal
jurisdiction. In a deed annexed to the treaty of truce, dated
April 19, he aumes the title of King of Calltile, &c. in the
usual tfyle of the Spanifi monarchs in that age. Corps Dipl.
tom. iv. Append. p. 85.

or

of the winters in the Netherlands, he was ex- B 0 0
o

XI.

tremely impatient to embark for that kingdom, '.-v,
and to disengage himself entirely from business, 56'
which he found to be impolfible while he remain-
ed in Brussels. But his physicians remonstrated Oblged to

re~main for

so rongly against his venturing to sea at that ome time
cold and boiflerous season of the year, that he thierd.,
conented, though with reluctance, to put off his
voyage for ome months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, he had the fa- Promow

tisfadion, before he left the Low-Countries, of cirion'fo
taking a considerable ftep towards a peace with peA'
France, which he ardently wilhed for, not only
on his son's account, but that he might have the
merit, when quitting the world, of re-establish-
ing that tranquillity in Europe, which he had
banished out of it almost from the time that he
assumed the administration of affairs. Previous
to his resignation, commifioners had been ap-
pointed by him and by the French King, in order
to treat of an exchange of pritbners. In their
conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles, near Cam.
bray, an expedient was accidentally proposed for
terminating hostilities between the contending
monarchs, by a long truce, during the subsistence
of which, and without dircuffing their refpecive
claims, each hould retain what was in his pof-
fefion. Charles, sensible how much his king.
doms were exhausted y the expensive and alrmol
continual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his son a hort interval

P of

B o° K of peace, that he might establish himself firmly
k-»J on his throne, declared warmly for closing with
'656' the overture, though manifcflly dilhonourable as

well as disadvantageous; and such was the refpec&
due to his wisdom and experience, that Philip,
notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchase
peace by such concessions, did not prelume to
urge his opinion in opposition to that of his
father.

A tmce HENRY could not have hesitated one moment
soclu.:cd.

about giving his conlent to a truce on such con-
ditions, as would leave him in quiet pofelion of
the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's domi-
nions, together with the important conquests
which he had made on the German frontier. But
it was no easy matter to reconcile such a flep with
the engagements which he had come under to the
Pope, in his late treaty with him. The Con-
stable Montmorency, however, represented in
such a firiking light, the imprudence of facri-
sicing the true interests of his kingdom to there
r:ith obligations, and took such advantage of the
abs'ence of the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had fe-
duced the King into his alliance with the Caraffas,
that Henry, naturally fiuctuating and unfleady,
and apt to be influenced by the advice last given
sh Fcb. him, authorized his ambafl'idors to sign a treaty

of truce with the Emperor for five years, on the
terms which had been proposed. But that he
might not seem to have altogether forgotten his
ally the Pope, who, he foresaw, would be highly

exafpc-

exasperated, he, in order to soothe him, took B o o K
care that he hould be expressly included in the ---
truce'. z5;6.

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and Rifi-rdby

bo' o.

the Admiral Coligny to Bruflels, the former to nacih.
be prelent when the King of France, and the
latter when the Emperor and his son, ratified the
treaty and bound thernfelves by oath to observe
itr. When an account of the conferences at Th-Ponne'
Vaucelles, and of the conditions of truce which le, nd
had been propored there, were first carried to il"'cis
Rome, it gave the Pope no manner of disquiet.
He trusted so much to the honour of the French
monarch, that he would not allow himself to
think that Henry could forget so oon, or violate
lb hamefully, all the stipulations in his league
with him. He had such an high opinion of the
Emperor's wisdom, that he made no doubt of
his refusing his consent to a truce on such une-
qual terms and on both these accounts he con-
fidently pronounced that this, like many pre-

Mecm. de Ribicr, ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv.
App. 8 .

; One of Admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote to

the court of France an account of what happened while they
residcd at Bruflels, takes notice, as an inflance of Philip's
impoliteness, that he received the French ambaflador in an
apartment hung with tapeflry, which represented the battle
of Pavia, the manner in which Francis I. was taken prisoner,
his voyage to Spain, with all the mortifying circumflances
of his captivity and imprifonmcnt at Madrid. Mem. de Ri-
bier, ii. 634.

ceding

B 0 K ceding negociations, would terminate in nothing.

But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
'iS' vinced him that in political affairs no reasoning

is more fallacious, than, because an event is im-
probable, to conclude that it will not happen.
The sudden and unexpe&ed conclusion of the
truce filled Paul with aftonilhment and terror.
The Cardinal of Lorrain durst not encounter
that storm of indignation, to which he knew
that he hould be exposed from the haughty
Pontiff, who had so good reason to be incensed;
but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to
the Cardinal Tournon the difficult task of at-
tempting to soothe Paul and his nephews. They
were fully sensible of the perilous ituation in
which they now flood. By their engagements
with France, which were no longer secret, they
had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the
violence of his implacable temper. The Duke
of Alva, a minister fitted, as well by his abili-
ties as by the severity of his nature, for exe-
cuting all Philip's rigorous schemes, had ad-
vanced from Milan to Naples, and began to
assemble troops on the frontiers of the Ecclefi-
aflical State. While they, if deserted by France,
must not only rclinquih all the hopes of domi-
nion and sovereignty to which their ambition
aspired, but remain exposed to the resentment of
the Spanish monarch, without one ally to prote&
them against an enemy with whom they were o
little able to contend,

UNDER

UNDER there circumstances, Paul had recourse 8a o00

to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which .-
the Papal court knows how well to avail itself in Het,.p

to rekiadi

order to ward off any calamity threatened by an he",wd.
enemy superior in power. He affected to approve
highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for
putting a top to the effufson of Christian blood.
He expressed his warmedl wishes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He
exhorted the rival Princes to embrace this favour-
able opportunity of setting on foot a negociation
for that purpose, and offered, as their common
father, to be mediator between them. Under
this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his
nuncio to the court of Brussels, and his nephew
Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The publick
inftru&ions given to both were the fame; that
they hould use their utmost endeavours to pre-
vail with the two monarchs to accept of the
Pope's mediation, that, by means of it, peace
might be re-eftablilhed, and measures might be
taken for assembling a general council. But
under this specious appearance of zeal for attain-
ing objects so desirable in themselves, and o
becoming his sacred charater to pursue, Paul
concealed very different intentions. Caraffa, be-
fides his publick inftru&ions, received a private
commiflion to lblicit the French King to re-
nounce the treaty of truce, and to renew his en-
gagements with the Holy See; and he was em-
powered to spare neither entreaties, nor promises,
nor bribes, in order to gain that point. This,

both

B oO K both the uncle and the nephew confidered as the

XI.
I, -~.. real end of the embassy; while the other 1frvcd

I5s" i; amIuls; the vi r, or to deceive the Emp.ror
Irth ly : 'is fun. T:.e Cardinal, accordingly, 1cE

ct , ;laircfly for Paris, ad travel:d wi;th ti
g. -. ex,c.lition, while Rebiba was cit-aincd
f:;;: ..c

. s at Ro:me; and when it bec.i:ue ne-

ccti.:' ;j:, hi'n to begin his journey, he received
fecrct orders to protract it as much as poflible,
that the issue of Caraffa's negociation might be
known before he hould reach Brussels, and ac-
cording to that, proper directions might be
given to him with regard to the tone which he
ihould assume, in treating with the Emperor and
his son .

H'.segcia. CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with extra.
t.",eeorc. ordinary pomp; and having presented a confe.

crated sword to Henry, as the Prote&tor, on
whose aid the Pope relied in the present exigency,
he besought him not to disregard the entreaties
of a parent in distress, but to employ that wea-
pon which he gave him in his defence. This he
represented not only as a duty of filial piety, but
as an at of justice. As the Pope, from confi-
dence in the assistance and support which his late
treaty with France entitled him to expet, had
taken such tReps as had irritated the King of
Spain, he conjured Henry not to fufTer Paul and
his family to be crulhed under the weight of that

· Pallay. lib. xiii. p. Br19. "err,¢t Fill. of Reform. ii.
App. 309.

trefntrrenI

resentment which they had drawn on themselves B O,°0
merely by their attachment to France. Together
with this argument addresscd to his generosity, 'S6"
he employed another which he hoped would
work on his ambition. He affirmed that now
was the time, when, with the moil certain pro-
fpet of success, he might attack Philip's do.
minions in Italy; that the flower of the veteran
Spanilh bands had perilhed in the wars of Hun-
gary, Germany, and the Low Countries; that
the Emperor had left his fun an exhaufled trea-
fury, and kingdoms drained of men that he had
no longer to contend with the abilities, the ex-
perience, and good fortune of Charles, but with
a monarch scarcely feated on his throne, un-
pra&ised in command, odious to many of the
Italian states, and dreaded by all. He promised
that the Pope, who had already levied soldiers,
would bring a considerable army into the field,
which, when joined by a sufficient number of
French troops, might, by one brisk and sudden
effort, drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and
add to the crown of France a kingdom, the con-
quest of which had been the great obje& of all his
pr dcceffors during half a century, and the chief
motive of all their expeditions into Italy.

EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deep im- Their f.

fed.

preflion on Henry; ctnfcious, on the one hand, July 3,.
that the Pope had jut cause to reproach him
with having violated the laws not only of gene.

rofity

o o K roficy but of decency, when he renounced his
XL
%-v league with him, and had agreed to the truce of
·556. Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, not

only to ditinguilh his reign by a conquest, which
three former monarchs had attempted without
tuccefs, but likcwife to acquire an eftablilhment
of such dignity and value for one of his sons.
Reverence, however, for the oath, by which he
had so lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles
the extreme old age of the Pope, whose death
might occasion an entire revolution in the politi-
cal system of Italy together with the represent-
ations of Montmorency, who repeated all the
arguments he had used against the first league
with Paul, and pointed out the great and imme-
diate advantages which France derived from the
truce; kept Henry for some time in fufpence,
and might possibly have outweighed all Caraffa's
arguments. But the Cardinal was not such a
novice in the arts of intrigue and negociation, as
not to have expedients ready for removing or fur-
mounting all these obstacles. To obviate the
King's scruple with regard to his oath, he pro-
duced powers from the Pope to absolve him from
the obligation of it. By way of security against
any danger which he might apprehend from the
Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle would
make such a nomination of Cardinals, as should
give Henry the absolute command of the next
ele&ion, and enable him to place in the Papal chair
a person entirely devoted to his interest.

IN

IN order to counterbalance the effect of the B °o0 K

Constable's opinion and influence, he employed %
not only the aive talents of the Duke of Guise, ,5s6.
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided by
the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who,
unfortunately for France, co operated with Ca-
tharine in this point, though he took pleasure,
on almost every other occasion, to thwart and
mortify her. They, by their united solicitations,
easily swayed the King, who leaned, of his own
accord, to that fide towards which they wished
him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent re-
monstrances were disregarded; the nuncio ab-
Jolved Henry from his oath; and he signed a new
league with the Pope, which rekindled the
flames of war both in Italy and in the Low-
Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew July r.

that there was a fair profpe& of his succeeding in olt pro.
this negociation, he dilpatched a messenger after Agcdis*
the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to return to Phi,'
Rome, without proceeding to Bruflfls. As it
was now no longer necessary to preserve that tone
of moderation, which suited the character of a
mediator, and which he had affected to afrume,
or to put any farther restraint upon his resent.
ment against Philip, he boldly threw off the
mask, and cook such violent fleps' as rendered a
rupture unavoidable. He seized and imprisoned
the Spanih envoy at his court. He excommuni.

cated

B 0 o K cated the Colonnas; and having deprived Mark

X4.
A_>~ Antonio, the head of that family, of the duke-

536. dom of Paliano, he granted that dignity, toge.

ther with the territory annexed to it, to his nephew
the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal in-
formation to be presented in the consistory of
Cardinals againit Philip, setting forth that he,
notwithstanding the fidelity and allegiance due by
him to the Holy See, of which he held the
crown of Naples, had not only afforded a retreat
in his dominions to the Colonnas, whom the
Pope had excommunicated and declared rebels,
but had furniflhed them with arms, and was ready,
in conjunction with them, to invade the Eccle-
fiaftical State in an hostile manner; that such
condut in a vassal was to be deemed treason
against his liege lord, the punishment of which
was the forfeiture of his fief. Upon this the con-
filtorial advocate requested the Pope to take cog-
nizance of the cause, and to appoint a day tor
hearing of it, when he would make good every
article of the charge, and expect from his justice
that sentence which the heinoulnefs of Philip's
crimes merited. Paul, whose pride was highly
flattered with the idea of trying and paflingjudg.
July 7. mcnt on o great a King, affentedio his requelt;

and as if it had been no less ealy to execute than
to pronounce fcnrence, declared that he would
consult with the Cardinals concerning the forma-
lities requifice in conducting the trial'.

a Pallav. lib. xiii. 171.

BL:T

BUT while Paul allowed his pride and refrnt- B o K

.icnt to drive him on with such headlong impe- --
uofity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation phipS56,,
on his part. He had been taught bLv the Spanish "'lri
ecclefiarticks, who had the charge of his educa-
tion, a profound veneration for the H-oly See.
This fcntimenr, which had been early infuscd,
grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full pofferion of his mind, which was na-
turally thoughtful, serious, and prone to li:ptr-
flition. When he foresaw a rupture wit: the
Pope approaching, he had such violent icruples
with refpet to the lawfulness of taking arms
against the Vicegerent of Christ, anid the co:nmmo
father of all Chriltians, that he consulted ome
Spanini divines upon that point. They, with te
!fual dexterity of casuists in accommodating their
responses to the circumstances of thofc who apply
to them for direetion, assured him thar, after em-
ploying prayers and remonstrances in order to
bring the Pope to reason, he had fill righr, both
by the laws of nature and of Christianity, not
only to defend himself when attacked, but to be-
gin hostilities, if that were judged the mollt
proper expedient for preventing the effcdts of
Paul's violence'and injustice. Philip nevertheless
continued to deliberate and delay, cunfitring it
as a most cruel misfortune, that his adminilira-
tion flioull open with an attack on a person,
whole sacred function and characer he so highly
Icrfpc&ed .

b Ferrer. Hilt. de Efpagne, ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.
VOL. IV. Q. AT

B 0 0 K AT lall the Duke of Alva, who, in compli-

XI.

<». -c » ance with his matter's Icruples, had con:i,:. . i o
T,556 negociate long after he lhould have begun tu act,
o; ': finding Paul incxor.blr, and that every rc ,;ure
^,c':.," of peace, and every apparince of heiitation ,n

his part increal-cd the Pontiff's natural arrcg.irce,
scat. s- took the field and entered the ecclcfif.i.adi ,tr i-

tories. Ilis .,r.iy dtid not exceed twelve L!:ouland
men, but it w.as coini'oi(d of ve:eran fildiers,
and comminanded chiefly by thole Roman banns,
whom P.,ul's violence had driven into exil,-. T'fe
valour of the troops, to cher with the aniiirofity
of their leaders, who fougfit in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own ef-ates, fi:plied the
want of numbers. As none of the French frces
were yet arrived, Alva oon became maser c.f t.e
Campagna Romana fioe cities being surrender-
ed through the covwardc' of the pirrifons, which
conr;fifid .f raw soldiers, ill dilciplineu, and worse
comnna:;ded ; the gates of others being opened by
the inhabitants, who were ea-cr to receive back
their ancient matlers. Alva. ti;l; ,te might not
be taxed with impie!' in Ifizing the patrimony of
the church, took pofffm'in of the towns which
capitul.tcd, in the name of the college of carninals,
to which, or to the Pope that fhotuld be chosen to
ficc:ed I'aul, he declar t that he would inme-
diately rietore tl.cm.

A -I:p.. THE rapid rorrfTs of the Spaniards, whose
' #'',1 :he
P, a.d light troops made inroad;; to the gares of Rone,
"v''. filled that city with conilernation. Paul, thrth

in f. xille

inflexible and undaunted himself, was obliged to 3 °o K
give wav so far to the fears and solicitations of - -
the Cardinals, as to lend deputies to Alva in order I5ss)
to propose a ccfltrion of arms. The Pope
yielded the more readill, as he was f(-nibie of a
double advan:a-g which might be derived from
obtining thdt point. It would deliver the inha-
bita:ts of Rone from their present terror, and
would alord time fur the arrival of the succours
which he expe&ed from; France. Nor was Alva
unwilling to cloie with the overture, both as he
knew how drous his mater was to terminate a
war, which he had undertaken with relutance,
and as his army was so much weakened by gar-
rilbning the great nu.;;ber of towns which'he had
reduced, th:it it was hardly in a condition to keep
the field without frefll recruits. A truce was
accordingly concluded first for ten, and afterwards Nov. i9.
for forty days, during which, various schemes of
peace were proolied, and perpetual negociations
were carried on, but with no incerity on the part
of the Pope. The return of his nephew the Car-
dinal to Rome, the receipt of a considerable ibm
remitted by the King of France, the arrival of one
body of French troops, together with the expet-
ation of others which had begun their march, ren-
dered him more arrogant than ever, and banished
all thbughts from his mind, but those of war and
revenge .

Pallav. lib. xiii. 17-. Thuan. lib, xvii. 588. Mem. de
. bierl, ii. 664.

Q2 THF.

# BOOK XII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XII.
,W HILE these operations or intrigues kept B o o

the Pope and Philip busy and attentive, X,.

the Emperor disentangled himself finally from all .s56.
the affairs of this world, and set out for the place new attenpt
of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Im- ' c; ir. of
perial dignity, not from any unwillingness to re- tl Empi,.
linquifh it, for, after having resigned the real and
extensive authority that he enjoyed in his here-
ditary dominions, to part with the limited and
often ideal jurisdiction which belongs to an
eletive crown, was no great sacrifice. His ole
motive for delay was to gain a few months, for
making one trial more, in order to accomplih
his favourite scheme in behalf of his son. At the
,very time Charles seemed to be most sensible of

Q3 the

B o0 K the vanity of worldly grandeur, and when he ap-

Xi.

- peared to be quitting it not only with indiffer-

ence, but with contempt, the vast schemes of
ambition, which had l long occupied and en-
grossed his mind, fiil Ikept poTeffion of it. He
could not think of leaving his fbn in a rank in-
ferior to that which he himself had held among
the Ptinces of Europe. As he had, some years
before, made a fruitless attempt to secure the
Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it to
the kingdios of Spain, and the dominions of the
houf, of Burgundy, he might put it in his power
to proCrcute, with a better prolpe&t of success,
thotl great plans, which his own infirmities had
obliged hinl to aband.on, he was still unwilling to
rclinquifl this flaztering project as chimerical or
unattainabie.
Which NOTWITHSTAN.DING' the repulse which he had

ccriful. formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,

he renewed his solicitations with fre(h importu-
nity; and during the summer, had tried every
art, and employed every argument, which he
thought could induce him to quit the Imperial
throne to Philip, and to accept of the invefriture
of some province, either in Italy, or in the Low
Countries, as an equivalent'. But Ferdinand,
who was to firm and inflexible with regard to this
point, that he had paid no regard to the Iblicira-
tions of the Emperor, even when they were en-

Ambafflades des Nzaills, tom. v. ..

8 folrccd

forced with all the weight of authority which ac- B °o° K
companies supreme power, received the overture, ----'
that now came from him in the situation to which r556
he had descended, with greater indifference, and
would hardly deign to liften to it. Charles,
alhamed of his own credulity in having imagined
that he might accomplish that now, which he
had attempted formerly without success, defited
finally from his scheme. He then resigned the go-
vernment of the Empire, and having transferred
all his claims of obedience and allegiance from
the Germanick body, to his brother the King of A "saR 7.
the Romans, he executed a deed to that ecet,
with all the formalities requisite in such an im-
portant tranfadion. The instrument of refig-
nation he committed toWilliam Prince of Orange,
and empowered him to lay it before the college
of electors .

NOTHING now remained to detain Charles from Charies fct

that retreat for which he languished. The pre- skii.
parations for his voyage having been made for
fbmc time, he set out for Zuitburg in Zealand,
where the fleet had orders to rendezvous. In his
wiy,thither he paired through Gent, and after
flopping there a few days, to indulge that tender
and pleasant melancholy, which arises in the mind
of every man in the decline of life, on visiting
the place of his nativity, and viewing the ticnes
and objetts familiar to him in his early youth, he

b Goldlat. Confllt. Imper. pars i. 576.

Q4 pursued

B OX o K pursued his journey, accompanied by his son

-, Philip, his daughter the archduchess, his fitlers
S5ó' the dowager Queens of France and Hungary,

Maximilian his fon-in-law, and a numerous re-
tinue of the Flemish nobility. Before he went on
board, he dismissed them, with marks of his at-
tention or regard, and taking leave of Philip with
all the tenderness of a father who embraced his
:bn for the last time, he set fail on the seventeenth
of September, under convoy of a large fleet of
Spanish, Flemish, and English fllips. He de-
alined a prefng invitation, from the Queen of
England, to land in tome part of her dominions,
in order to refre.h himself, and that he might
have the comfort of feeing him once more. It
cannot surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen
to receive a visit from a father-in-law, who is
n:'. nothing more than a private gentleman.

r: , .,a If:s voyage was prosperous,. and he arrived at
; , ih'. Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he left

Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell prostrate
on the groun&d and confidering himself now as
dead to the world, he kified the earEb, and laid,
' Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and
naked I now return to thee, thou common mo-
thcr of mankind." From Laredo he purllued his
,ourney to Burgos, carried by his attendants some-
times in a chair, and ometimes in a horse litter,
iufFering exquisite pain at every flep, and ad-
vancing wich the greatest difficulty. Some ofife
Spanih nobility repaired to Burgos, in order to

4 . pay.

pay court to him, but they were so few in num- B o00 K
ber, and their attendance was so negligent, that - -
Charles observed it, and felt, for the first time, l56
that he was no longer a Monarch. Accullomed
from his early youth to the dutiful and officious
respect with which those who poflefs sovereign
power are attended, he had received it with the cre-
dulity common to Princes, and was weak enough
to be mortified, when he now discovered, that
he had been indebted to his fortune for much of
that obsequious regard which he had fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But
though he might have soon learned to forget the
levity of his fubjets, or to have despised their
negle&, he was more deeply afflicted with his
son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how
much he owed to his father's bounty, obliged
him to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he
paid him the first moiety of that fnall pension,
which was all that he'had reserved of so many
kingdoms. As without this rum, Charles could
not dismiss his domefticks with such rewards as
their services merited, or his generosity had
destined for them, he could not help expressing
both furprize and diflatisfation . At last the
money was paid, and Charles having dismissed a
great number of his domefticks, whose attend-
ance he thought would be uperfiuous or cum-
berfome in his retirement, he proceeded to Valla-
dolid. There he took a last and tender leave of

c Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.

his

B o o K his two fifiers, whom he would not permit to ac.

- cornp.ny him to his flinrule, though they en.
1556 treated it with tears, not only rli.;: they might

h ve the c,:; fi'ltion of contributing by their at-
tendance ;nfl r..:e r, mrrigat or to sooth his ,js-
ferings, b t tha.i thi.v !n;ght reap inftruation and
brn ;t bv * ::i; .rh.itri him in those pious exer-
cii t, t ...ii:ch he had consecrated the renamndcr
of his days.

ThpR.p or FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to
s-il rc.rejt.

Piazencia in E remadura. He had passed through
this place a great many years before, and having
been Itruck at that time with the delightful fitua-
tioun of he rmonaery of St. Juftus, belonging to
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant
from the town, he had then observed to some of
his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dio-
cletian might have retired with pleasure. The
impreflion had remained so strong on his mind,
that he pitched upon it as the place of his retreat.
It was feated in a vale of no great extent, water-
ed by a fiall brook, and surrounded by rising
grounds, covered with lofty trees; from the
nature of the foil, as well as the temperature of
the climate, it was efleemed the mftl healthtul
and (dc.cious situation in Spain. Sonic months
before his relignation he had lent an architect
thither, to add a new apartment to the mnonattery,
for his accoinmod.'tion ; but he gave tirict orders
that the style of the building floul.i be such as
fuiced his present ftaion, rather than his orner

dinity.

dignity. It confifed only of fix rooms, four of B °0 K
them in the form of Friars cells, with naked ^
walls; the other two, each twenty feet square, 1557.
were hung with brown cloth, and furnished in the
most simple manner. They were all on a level
with the ground; with a door on one fide into a
garden, of which Charles himself had given the
plan, and had filled it with various plants, which
he intended to cultivate with his own hands.
On the other fide they communicated with the
chapel of the monastery, in which he was to per-
form his devotions. Into this humble retreat,
hardly sufficient for the comfortable accommo-
dation of a private gentleman, did Charles enter,
with twelve domelticks only. He buried there, February4.
in solitude and silence, his grandeur, his am-
bition, together with all those vast projects, which,
during half a century, had alarmed and agitated
Europe, filling every kingdom in it, by turns,
with the terror of his arms, and the dread of being
fubjeaed to his power'.

THE contrast between Ciarles's condut and Contra he.

that of the Pope at this junture, was so obvious, be'Ri' unf
that it struck even the most carolefs observers; Cn ep"Ai.
nor was the comparison which they made much
to Paul's advantage. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accustomed to the splendor
which accompanies lilprene power, and to those
bury and intereffing scenes in which an aive

d Sandov. ii. 607. & Zunig, oo. Thuan. lib. xvii.

609.ambition

ambition

0
o K ambition had engaged him, quitted the world at
- j an early period of life, that he might close the
'557· evening of his days in tranquillity, and secure

fame interval for fber thought, and serious re-
colletion. The latter, a priest, who had paled
the early part of his life in the hade of the
schools, and in the study of the speculative
sciences, who was seemingly so detached from the
world, that he had fliut himself up for many
years in the solitude of a cloyfter, and who was
not raised to the papal throne until he had reach.
ed the extremity of old age, discovered at once
all the impetuosity of youthful ambition, and
engaged in vast schemes, in order to accomplish
which, he scrupled not to scatter the feeds of dif-
cord, and to kindle the flames of war, in every
corner of Europe. But Paul, regardless of the
opinion or censures of mankind, held on his
own course with his wonted arrogance and vio-
lence. These, although they seemed already to
have exceeded all bounds, rose to still a greater
height, upon the arrival of the duke of Guise in
Italy.

TIe ,keos THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain fore-
3uife !eids
thF,nch Taw and desired, had happened. The duke of
rmtlyiu Guise was entrusted with the command of the

army appointed to march to the Pope's aiftance.
It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the belt
troops in the service of France. So high was the
Duke's reputation, and such the general expet-
ation of beholding ome extraordinary exertion of

his

his courage and abilities in a war into which he B O o
had precipitated his country, chiefly with the de- -r
sign of obtaining a field where he might display 55
his own talents, that many of the French no-
bility, who had no command in the troops em-
ployed, accompanied him as volurnteers. This
army passed the Alps in a rigorous season, and
advanced towards Rome, vitchout any opposition
fron the Spaniards, wV!j, as they were not strong
enough to ac in lriffer-nt parts, had collected all
their forces in one body e:n the frontiers of
Naples, for the defence of that kingdom.

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, ThePop

the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment "ni"
against Philip, which, notwithstanding the na- ip.
tural violence of his temper, prudential confider-
ations had hitherto obliged him to keep under
some restraint. He named commififoners, whom
he empowered to pass judgment in the fuir,
which the confiflorial advocate had commenced
against Philip, in order to prove that he had for-
feited the crown of Naples, by taking arms rFb. ,.
against the Holy See, of which he was a vassal.
He recalled all the nuncios resident in the courts
of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies.
This was levelled chiefly against Cardinal Pole, Ap.
the papal legate in the court of England, whose
great merit, in having contributed so successfully
to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Rome,
together with the expe&tation of farther services
he might perform, was not sufficient to freen

hinm

B o o K him from the resentment which he had incurred
A_

-- by his zealous endeavours to re-eftablilh peace
'57 between the house of Austria and France. He

commanded an addition to be made to the ana-
themas annually denounced against the enemies
of the church on Maundy-Thurfday, whereby he
infHiEed the censure of excommunication on the
authors of the late invasion of the ecclefiatical
territories, whatever their rnk or dignity might
be; and, in confcqu!lence of this, tie usual prayers
for the Emperor were omitted next day in the
Pope's chapel .

Him;li.Wtay BUT while te Pope indulged himfclf in those
pie atons
indqu.:e. wild and childilh sallies of rage, either he ne-

glected, or found that it exceeded his power, to
take such measures as would have rendered his
resentment really formidable, and fatal to his
enemies. For when the Duke of Guise entered
Rome, where he was received with a triumphal
pomp, which would have been more fuitdble if
he hai becen returning from having terminated the
war with glory, than when he was going to be-
gin it with a doubtful chance of fuccels, he found
none of the preparations for war in such forward-
nels as Carafa had promised, or he had expet-
ed. The papal troops were far inferior in num-
ber to the quota stipulated; no magazines sus-
ficient for their subsistence were formed; nor was
money for paying them provided. The Vene-

c PIl. lib. xiii. 0o. Mem. dc Ribicr, ii. 678.

tians,

tian, agreeably to that cautious maxim which B o

0 K

the mis.'orcunes of their state had fire led tem to --
adopt, and wihich was now become a fundamerntil :i
principle in their policy, declared th, ir resolution
to preserve an ex;iat ntrality, w.iihout taking
any part in the qu-,rrels of Princes, lb fr ilperi.r
to themselves in power. 1 lie other Italian ates
vwre erthtr openly united in league with Philip, or
fecrct!y wished fuccet's to his arms aglini a Pon-
tii', wloe inconiiderate ambition had rendered
Italy once more the feat of war.

THE duke of Guiic perceived :'iat th .'le P',. of

C.'ifc's ope,

wei.ht of the war would dvoive on hun; a.d r, loas.
bcc.,- e sensible, though too late, how imprudent
it is to rely, in the execution of great enterprizes,
on the aid of fcble allies. Pulhed n. however, A,;1l 13.
by the Pope's impatience for acAiun, as well s
by his own desire of performing something of
what he had To confidently undertaken, he march-
ed towards Naples, and began his operations.
But the success of these fell far flort of his former
reputation, of what the world expetted,, and of
what he himlelf had promiled. He opened the
campaign with the liege of Civitella, a town of
fume importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But
the obstinacy vwi:h wshich the Spanifli governor
defended it, baffled all the impetuous eilbrts of
the French valour, and obliged Guilf, after a
siege of three weeks, to retire trom the town with
dilrace. He endeavoured to wipe off that lain,
by advancing boldly towards the duke of Alva's

canip,

a o K camp, and offering him battle. But that pru,

r2. dent commander, sensible of all the advantages
557. of standing on the defensive before an invading

enemy, declined an engagement, and kept within
his intrenchments; and adhering to his plan with
the feadinefs of a Castilian, eluded, with great
address, all Guise's stratagems to draw him into
ation '. By this time sickness began to waste
the French army; violent dissentions had arisen
between Guise and the commander of the Pope's
forces; the Spaniards renewed their incursions
into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope, when he
found, inflead of the conquefis and triumphs
which he had fondly expe&ed, that he could not
'ecure his own territories from depredation, mur-
mured, complained, and began to talk of peace.
The duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree
with having ated such an inglorious part, not
only solicited his court either to reinforce his
army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to fulfil
his engagements; and called on Cardinal Caraif.,
sometimes with reproaches, sometimes with
threats, to make good those magnificent promises,
from a rash confidence in which he had advised
his master to renounce the truce of Vaucelles,
and to join in league with the Pope S.

HBniT;t;e, BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in
ci.,h it.. this wretched situation, an unexpected event hap-

pened in the Low Countries, which called the

f Hrrcra vida de Felipe, ilR. g Thuan. lib.
?:ó:viii . 6. Pals . lib. xiii. iSi. Burn. ii. app. 317.

duk

iuke of Guile from a station wherein he could ac- B 1° K
quire no honour, to the most dignified and im- -
rorrant charge which could be committed to a Js;'7
sl'l-tje&. As oon as the French had discovered
!htir purpole of violating the truce of Vaucelles,
not only by fending an army into Italy, but by '
ttempting to furprize ome of tie frontier towns
in Slanders, Philip, though willing to have
avoided a rupture, determined to prosecute the
war with such spirit, as should make his enemies
(rnfible, that his father had not erred, when he
judged him to be so cap?.ble of government, that
he had given up the reins into his hands. As he
knew that Henry had been at great expence in
fitting out the army under the duke of Guile, and
that his treasury was hardly able to answer the
exorbitant and endless demands of a distant war,
he foresaw that all his operations in the Low
Countries must, of consequence, prove feeble,
and be confidered only as secondary to those in
Italy. For that realbn, he prudently resolvcd to
make his principal effort in that place where he
expeted the French to be weakell, and to bend
his chief force again(t that quarter where they
would feel a blow mofi sensibly. With this view,
he aembled in the Low Countries an army of
about fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving
him on this occasion with that aive zeal which
fubjecs are wont to exert in obeying the com-
mnands of a new sovereign. But Philip, cautious
and provident, even at this early period of life,

VOL. IV. R did

o 0 0 K did not retl all his hopes of flccefs on that torrri.

xM.

--.- l- dable force alone.

1557.

Philip en- I-IE had been labouring for some time to e.
tngaRLr.g- gage the English to efioufe his quarrel ; and
,,w r." though it was manifefly the interet of that Iking.

dom to maintain a itrift neutrality, and the
people themselves were sensible of the advantages
which they derived from it; though he knew,
how odious his name was to the Engli.h, ard
how averse they would be to co-operate with him
in any measure, he nevertheless did not d'lcair (it
accomplilhing his point. He relied on the as-
feEtion wherewith the Queen doated on hir,
which was o violent, that even his coldness and
neglec had not extinguilhed it; he knew her
implicit reverence for his opinion, and her fond
desire of gratifying him in every particular.
That he might work on there with greater facility,
and more certain success, he set out for England.
The Queen who, during her husband's abifncc,
had languished in perpetual dejeation, refiimed
frefli spirits on his arrival; and, without paying
the leat attention either to the interest or to the
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into
all his schemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonstrate against the imprudence as well as
danger of involving the nation in an unnecessary
war; in vain did they put her in mind of the bto
lemn treaties of peace subsisting between EnglinA
and France, which the condu& of that nation

3 h!

had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary, B

o r'

soothed by Philip's careses, or intimidated by ---
the threats which his alcendant over her c:n- 5s7.
boldened him at ome times to throw our, was
deaf tr every thing that could be urged in oppo-
fition to his fcntiments, and infilled \ itli the
greatest vehemence on an immediate declarati;n
of war against France. The council, thogh
all Philip's addrels and Mary's authority swev
employed to gain or overawe them, aftr ftr.-
gling long, yielded at lait, not fi-om conviiin,
but merely from deference to the will of teir
sovereign. War was declared against Francc, Ju.e:.
the only one perhaps against that kingdom intto
which the English ever entered with reluaance.
As Mary knew the aversion of the nation to this
measure, ihe durst not call a parliament in order
to raise money for carrying on the war. She sup-
plied this want, however, by a train of preroga-
tive; and levied large ums on her fbje&s by
her own authority. This enabled her to assemble
a sufficient body of troops, and to fend eight
thousand men under the conduct of the earl of
Pembroke to join Philip's army h.

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military or'n,;on:

glory, gave the command of his army to Ema- nmy i ;i
nuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his own ,iC,,u
residence at Cambray, that he might be at hand
to receive the earliest intelligence of his motions,

b Carte, iii. 337.

R and

o rK and to aid him with his counfcls. The du!e
i _1 opened the campaign with a masterly oroke of
J557- address, which jufftified Philip's choice, and diil

covered such a superiority of genius over th
French generals, as alincof ensured success in his
Iubfequent operations. He appointed the g'nc-
ral rendezvous of his troops at a place confile-
rably distant from the country which he defined
to be the scene of asticn; and having kept the
enemy in fufpence for a good time with regard to
his intentions, he at last deceived them so effec-
tually by the variety of his marches and counter-
marches, as led them to conclude that he meant
to bend all his force against the province of
Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into
the kingdom on that fide. In consequence of
this opinion, they drew all their firength towards
that quarter, and reinforcing the garrisons there,
left the towns on other parts of the frontier deili-
tute of troops sufficient to defend them.

Iv-,nt St. EMANUEL, as soon as he perceived that thi
< """' ffeint had its full effect, turned suddenly to the

right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy,
and fending his cavalry, in which he was ex-
tremely trong, before him, invested St. Quintin.
This was a town deemed in that age of confider-
able strength, and of great importance, as there
were few fortified cities between it and Paris.
The fortifications, however, had been much ne-
gleted ; the garrison, weakened by draughts feats
towards Champagne, did not amount to a tit'fi

p.l^

part of the number requisite for its defence; and ° '1 K
the governor, though a brave officer, was neither .-*
of rank, nor authority, equal to the command in s55s7
a place of so much consequence, besieged by
such a formidable army. A few days must have
put the Duke of Savoy in pofeffion of the town,
ii the Admiral de Coligny, who thought it con-
,crned his honour to attempt saving a place of
such importance to his country, and which lay
ichlin his juriiciiaion as governor of Picardy, had
not taken the gallant resolution of throwing him-
fcf into it, with such a body of men as he could
,oicct of a sudden. This resolution he executed
,'ith great intrepidity, and, if the nature of the
ern:crprize be cnfidered, with no contemptible
;ilccefs; for though one half of his fiall body of
troops was cut off, he, with the other, broke
:hIough the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpected arrival of an officer of such high rank
and reputation, and who had exposed himself to
iuch danger in order to join them, inspired the
desponding garrison with courage. Every thing
that the admiral's great skill and experience in
the art of war could suggest, for annoying the
enemy, or defending the town, was attempted;
and the citizens, as well as the garrison, fccond-
ing his zeal with equal ardour, flemed to be de-
termined that they would hold out to the last,
and sacrifice themselves in order to save their
country'.

Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

R 3 THr

B O O K THE Duke of Savoy, whom the Englifl, under
...--- the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this time,
r .'r7 .:h pufledl on the iege with the greatest vigour. An
'":l , ' army so numerous, and lb well supplied with every
ihc.. l thing requisite, carried on its approaches with

great advantage againlt a garrison which was lfili
so feeble that it durfi seldom venture to difhurb
or retard the enemy's operations by sallies. The
admiral, feinible of the approaching danger, and
unable to avert it, acquainted his uncle the con-
flable Montmorency, who had the command of
the French army, with his situation, and pointed
out to him a method by which he might throw
relief into the town. The conflable, solicitous
to save a town, the lots of which would open a
paslage for the enemy into the heart of France;
and eager to extricate his nephew out of that
perilous situation, in which zeal for the publick
had engaged him; resolved, though aware of the
danger, to attempt what he desired. With this
view, he marched from La Fere towards St.
Quintin at the head of his army, which was not
by one half so numerous as that of the enemy,
and having given the command of a body of
chosen men to Coligny's brother Dandelot, who
was colonel general of the French infantry, he
ordered him to force his way into the town by
that avenue which the admiral had represented as
mioft pracicable, while he himself, with the main
army, would give the alarm to the enemy's camp
on the opposite fide, and endeavour to draw all
their attention towards that quarter. Dandelot

executed

executed his orders with greater intrepidity than B oXl K
conduct. His fildiers rushed on with such head- ^
long ipetuofity, that, though it broke the first An'io,
body of the enemy which stood in their way, it
threw thcmclves into the utmost confusion; and
being attacked by fresh troops which closcd in
upon them on every fide, the greater part of them
were cut in pieces, Dandelot, with about five
hundred of the most adventrous, and most for-
tunatc, making good his entrance into the town.

M EA.wvr-I:.a the Constable, in executing his Tr- bi

part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of tin. 'L'"
the befiegrrs, as rendered it impoffibic to retreat
with ifcty i the face of an enemy so much u-
perior in number. The Duke of Savoy intantly
perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared,
with the presence of mind and abilities of a great
general, to avail himself of it. He drew up his
army in order of battle, with the greatest expedi-
tion, and watching the moment when the French
began to tile off towards La Fere, he detached
all his cavalry, under the command of the count
of Egmont, to fall on their rear, while he him-
self, at the head of his infantry, advanced to sup-
port him. The French retired at first in perfect
order, and with a good countenance i but when
they saw L'gmont draw near with his formidable
body of cavalry, the (hock of which they were
conscious that they could not withstand, the
protfpe of imminent danger, added to ditruft of
their general, whose imprudence every follier

R 4 now

B °0 K now perceived, truck them with general confter-

..-.-' nation. They began insensibly to quicken their
1557' pace, and tho:e ;n the rear pressed so violently on

such as were before them, that in a hort time
their march remld bled a flight rather than a retreat.
Egmont, observing their confusion, charged them
with the greatef: fury, and in a moment all thcir
men at arms, the pride and strength of the French
troops in that age, gave way and fled with pre-

Tta' d.t cipitation. The infantry, however, whom the
feat .f the
French. Ccn.;ible' , by his pretence and authority, kept to

their colours, ftiil continued their retreat in ood
order, until the enemy brought ome pieces of
cannon to bear upon their centre, which threw
them into such confusion, that the cavalry, renew-
ing their attack, broke in, and the rout became
universal. About four thousand of the French
fell in the field, and among these the Duke of
Anguyen, a Prince of the blood, together with
fix hundred gentlemen. The Constable, as lbon
as he perceived the fortune of the day to be ir-
retrievable, rufled into the thickest of the ene-
my, with a resolution not to survive the cala-
mity which his ill-condu&t had brought upon his
country; but having received a dangerous wound,
and being wafted with the los of blood, he was
surrounded by some Flemish officers, to whom he
was known, who protected him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender.
Besides the Constable, the Dukes of Montpenlier
and Longueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many
officers of diftinaion, three hundred gentlemer;,

and

and near four thousand private soldiers were taken B 0o0 K
prilbners. All the colours belonging to the in- * '
tantry, all the ammunition, and all the clnnon, '5'7'
two pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's hands.
'Ille vil-orious army did not lose above fourtcore
men.

THIS battle, no 1rSs fatal to France than tihe p., Frfnr

ancient vitories of C rccy and Agincour,, gained f'"; "
by the Inglilh on te fare frontier, bore a near
resemblance to those diia;-ous ev:;..s, i: the fud-
dennefs of the rout; in the rafhrnc! c" tric co;m-
mander in chief; in the nnber' ofc peribns of
note lain or taken; and in the fr.nal los inin-
ed by the enemy. I: filled 1'rancc v.ith equal
consternation. Many inhabitants of Paris, with
the fame precipitancy and trepidation as if the
enemy had been already at their gares, quitted
the city, and retired into the interior provinces.
The King, by his presence and exhortations, en-
deavoured to console and to anilmate stich as re-
mained, and applying himself witlh the greaeft
diligence to repair the ruinous fortifications of
the city, prepared to defend it at:.inft the attack
which he instantly expeeted. 1t)it happily for
France, Philip's caution, together with the in-
trepid firmness of.the Admiral de Coligny, not
only saved the capital from the danger to which
it was exposed, but gained the nation a fIort in-

k Thuan. 650. I-Ixrei Annal. Bialant. ii. 69?. -Icr-
)rera, 29 .

terval

B3 o K terval, during which the people recovered from

*L

_ the terror and dejection occasioned by a blow no
'557 less revere than unexpected, and Henry had leisure

to take measures for the publick security, with
the spirit which became the sovereign of a powcr-
ful and martial people.

Phlip re PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visitcd
pairs to his
wars. the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received

with all the exultation of military triumph; and
such were his transports of joy, on account oi an
event which threw so much lustre on the begin-
ning of his reign, that they softened his flvcre
and haughty temper into an unusual flow of cour-
tefy. When the Duke of Savoy approached, and
was kneeling to kits his hands, he caught him in
his arms, and embracing him with warmth, " It
becomes me, fays he, rather to kif, your hands,
which have gained me such a gloriouS and almoli
bloodless victory."

Hisdeli)e. As oon as the rejoicings and congratulations
rat ons cnn-
cerning the on Philip's arrival were over, a council of war
t'tht wr. was held, in order to determine how they might

improve their vitory to the best advantage. The'
Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the ablest
officers formed under Charles V. insisted that tlhec
should immediately relinquilh the siege of Sr.
Quintin, the redu&ion of which was now a ob-
jed' below their attention, and advance dirc.t!'
cowards Paris; that as there were neither trooQ's
to oppose, nor any town of frength to retard

tlh(."

their march, they might reach that capital while B K
under the full impreftion of the aftonifllment and .-
terror occasioned by the rout of the army, and '557'
tike poTcflion of it without refiflance. But Phi-
lip, less adventrous or more prudent than his ge-
rerals, preferred a moderate but certain advan-
tage, to an enterprize of greater splendour, but of
more doubtful liiccefs. He represented to the
council the infinite resources of a kingdom so
powerful as France; the great number as well as
martial firit of its nobles; their attachment to
their sovereign the vast advantages with which
they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable deftru&ion which mun be
the consequence of their penetrating too rafily
into the enemy's country, before they had fcurcd
such a communication with their own as might
render a retreat safe, if, upon any disastrous event,
that measure should become necessary. On all
thefl accounts, he advised the continuance of the
siege, and his generals acquiefred the more readi-
ly in his opinion, as they made no doubt of being
malers of the town in a few days, a lols of time
of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might easily repair it by their sub-
sequent activity'.

THE weakness of the fortifications, and the st. o,,,iiT

small number of the garriFn, which could no A^mii..'
longer hope either for reinforcement or relief, col.iny,
seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's

1 Belcar. Commentar. de Reb. Gallic. 90o.

generals.

B oP K generals. But, in making it, they did not attend
- - sufficiently to the character of Admiral de Co-
'557 ligny, who commanded in the town. A courag

undismayed and undifconcerted amidst the greateil
dangers, an invention fruitful in resources, a ge-
nius which roused and seemed to acquire new
force upon every difaiter, a talent of governing
the minds of men, together with a capacity ot
of maintaining his ascendant over them eve:
under crcumftances the mod adverse and dUf-
trefsful, were qualities which Coligny pofiffci
in a degree superior to any general of that adz.
These qualities were peculiarly adapted to tili
flation in which he was now placed; and as !:
knew the .infinite importance to his country of
every hour which he could gain at thisjunture,
he exerted himself to the utmot' in contriviin
how to protrat the siege, and to detain the ene-
my from attempting any enterprize more dange-

which is rous to France. Such were the perseverance and
aflit. Ikkill with which he conducted the defence, and

such the fortitude as well as patience with which
he animated the garrison, that thotigh the Spa-
niards, the Flemings, and the Englilh, carried
on the attack with all the ardour which national
emulation inspires, he held out the town fevenreen
Augunz7. days. He was taken prisoner, at lal, on the

breach, overpowered by the superior number of
the enemy.

Hrenry's HENRY availed himself, with the utmot ai-
firthedc. vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well-
fence of his
kingdom, tl111

;in:ed obstinacy had afforded him. He appoint- B o Kl
e! officers to collct the scattered remains of the · --
Constable's army; he issued orders for levying '5s7,
i.lLdiers in every part of the kingdom; he com-
nalnded the ban and arriere ban of the fionticr
provinces instantly to take the field, and to jin
the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he re-
called the greater part of the veteran troops
viich served under the Marechal Briffic in Pied-
mnont; he sent courier after courier to the Duke
of Guise, requiring him, together with all his
army, to return intantly for the defence of their
country; he dispatched one envoy to the Grand
Signior, to solicit the ai'lance of his fleet, and
the loan of a fumn of money; he sent another
into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the
north of England, that, by drawing Mary's at-
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the King were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his Ifuje&ts. The city
of Paris granted him a free gifc of three hundred
thousand livres. The other great towns imitated
the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of ditinEtion en-
;aged, at their own expence, to garrison and de-
fend the towns which lay moll exposed to the
enemy. Nor was the general concern for the
publick confined to communities alone, or to
those in the higher sphere of life, but diffuring
itfclf among persons of every rank, each indivi-
dual seemed disposed to as with as much vigour

as

B 0o K as if the honour of the King, and the safety r.

XMI. i,--.i the ate, had depended solely on his prfon,!

3557. efforts.

T!u.c vev PHILIP, who was no stranger either to the pru-
tin pro,.uc- dent measures taken by the French monarch fr
live o iv
br,,ficIa.i the security of his dominions, or to the spirit wi:h
.: n-s which his subjeCts prepared to defend themfeves,

perceived, when it was too late, that he had lol
an; opportunity which could never be recalicd,
and that it was now vain to think of penetrati!:-
into the heart of France. He abandoned, there.
fore, vithout much reluctance, a scheme which
was too bold and hazardous to be perfetly agree-
able to his cautious temper; and employed his
army, during the remainder of the campaign, ia
the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of there, hi
soon became master; and the reduction of two
such petty towns, together with the acquifitio::
of St. Qintin, were all the advantages which he
derived from one of the most decisive vi&ories
gained in that century. Philip himself, howe-
ver, continued in high exultation on account of
his success; and as all his passions were tinged
with superstition, he, in memory of the battle of
Sr. Quintin, which had been fought on the dy
consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a
church, a monastery, and a palace, sacred to that
faint and martyr. Before the expiration of the
year, he laid the foundation of an edifice, in
which all these were united, at the Escurial in the

m Mem, de Ribier, ii. 70o. 703.

neighbour-

neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame prin- B 0 0 K

XnI.

ciple which dilated the vow, directed the build- .
ing. For the plan of the work was so formed as '557.
to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the
legendary tale, had been the inllrument of St.
Laurence's martyrdom. Notwithstanding the vail
and expensive schemes in which his restless am-
bition involved him, Philip continued the build-
ing with such perseverance for twenty-two years,
and reserved such vast sims for this monument
of his devotion and vanity, that the monarchs of
Spain are indebted to him for a royal residence,
which, though not the most elegant, is certainly
the mot sumptuous and magnificent of any in
Europe".

THE first account of that fatal blow which the The Fench

army recal!,.

French had received at St. Qintin was carried to ei out of
Rome by the courier whom Henry had sent to taly.
recal the Duke of Guise. As Paul, even with
the alfilance of his French auxiliaries, had hardly
been able to check the progress of the Spanifi
arms, he foresaw that, as oon as he was depriv-
ed of their protetion, his territories mult be
over-run in a moment. He remonstrated there-
fore with the greatest violence against the depar-
ture of the French army, reproaching the Duke
of Guise for his ill-condu&t, which had brought
him into such an unhappy situation; and com-
plaining of the King for deserting him so unge-

n Colnenar Annales d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

neroufl)

B 0 , K neroufly under such circumstances. Guise's or
*.-.. ders, however, were peremptory. Paul, inflexib!L

Ai57 as lie was, found it necessary to accommod(te his

conduct to the exigency of his affairs, and to
employ the mediation of the Venetians, and of
Cofino di Medici, in order to obtain peace.
Philip, who had been forced unwillingly to a
rupture with the Pope, and who, even while fuc-
ccls crowned his arms, doubted so much the ju,-
tice of his own cause, that he had made frequent
overturs of pacification, listened eagerly to the
tirft proposals of this nature from Paul, and di-
covered such moderation in his demands, as cot;ld
hardly have been expected from a Prince elated
with vicory.

treaty of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, r.nt'

peace be-

veell the the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle,
Pope and
P-..ip. met at Cavi, and both being equally ditlofed to

peace, they, after a hort conference, terminated
the war by a treaty, on the following terms:
That Paul hoold renounce his league with France,
and maintain for the future such a neutrality as be-
came the common father of Christendom; That
Philip hould instantly restore all the towns of the
ecclcfiaftical territory of which he had taken pof-
fetlion; That the claims of the Caraffas to the
dutchy of Paliano, and other demesnes of the
Colonnas, hould be referred to the decision of
the republic of Venice; That the Duke of Alva
lhould repair in person to Rome, and after alking
pardon of Paul in his own name, and in that of

. hi

his malter, for having invaded the patrimony of o °
the church, lhould receive the Pope's abolblurion --
from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's 15S7.
i'crupulous timidity, finilhed an unprofperous war
without any detriment to the Papal See. The
conqueror appeared humble, and acknowledged
his error; while he who had been vanquished re-
tained his usual haughtiness, and was treated with
every mark of fuperiorityo. The Duke of Alva,
in terms of the treaty, repaired to Rome, and,
in the posture of a supplicant, kiled the feet, and
implored the forgiveness of that very person
whom his arms had reduced to the last extremity.
Such was the fuperfiitious veneration of the Spa-
niards for the papal character, that Alva, though
perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accuf-
tomed from his infancy to a familiar intercourse
with Princes, acknowledged that when he ap-
proached the Pope, he was o much overawed,
that his voice failed, and his presence of mind
forsook him P.

BUT though this wnr, wh:ch at its commence- p!,ltr:

ment threatened mighty revolutions, was brought .:,,,i,.,,
to an end without occAfioniing any alteration in i^i;,,
those States which were its immediate objed, t
produced effecs of considerable confctqucnc in
other parts of Italy. As Philip vwas extremncly
solicitous to teriina': his quarrel with Paul as

"Pnllav. lib. xir. 83. . . 3go. IHerrera, vol. .
,lo. Pallay. ib. xiii. 185. Sumnonte Illori di
:;apoli, i. 286.

V'o,. \V. S fiedily

B O oK speedily as posible, he was willing to make any
a-=- sacrifice in order to gain those Princes, who, by

1557. joining their troops to the Papal and French

army, might have prolonged the war. With this
view, he entered into a negociation with Ocavio
Farnese, Duke of Parma, and, in order to re-
duce him from his alliance with France, he re-
f:ored to him the city of Placentia, with the ter-
ritory depending on it, which Charles V. had
seized in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-feven, had kept from that time in his pof-
felion, and had transmitted, together with his
other dominions, to Philip.

cofMdti THIS itep made such a discovery of Philip's
mer.ures characler and views to Cofio di Medici, the most
_$ ostino
ing sicra. sagacious as well as provident of all the Italian

Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplifi:-
ing his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his
success in this attempt depended entirely on the
delicacy of address with which it hould be con-
duted, he employed all the refinements of policy
in the negociation which he set on foot for this
purpose. He began with soliciting Philip, whose
treasury he knew to be entirely drained by the ex-
pence of the war, to repay the great ums which
he had advanced to the Emperor during the fiegc
of Scna. When Philip endeavoured to elude a
demand which Cofino was unable to satisfy, he
aeffted to be extremely disquieted, and m;akin,
no secret of his difguil, infruCted his ambalaridol

at

at Rome to open a negociation with te Pope, B o0 K
which seemed to be the effet of it. The ambaf- -
fador executed his conmillion with such dexte- ,57.
rity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienated from the Spanish interelt, proposed to
him an alliance with France, which should be
cemented by the marriage of his eldest on to one
of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the over-
ture with such apparent fatisfation, and with
so many profefions of gratitude for the high
honour of which he had the profpe, that not
only the Pope's minifsers, but the French envoy
at Rome, talked confidently, and with little re-
serve, of the acceflion of that important ally, as
a matter certain and decided. The account of
this was quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo,
who foresaw how much it would alarm him, had
dispatched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into
the Netherlands that he might be at hand to
observe and take advantage of his consternation,
before the first impreflion which it made flould
in any degree abate, Cofino was extremely for-
tunate in the choice of the instrument whom hie
employed. Toledo waited, with patience, unti!
he discovered with certainty, that Philip had re-
ceived such intelligence of his uncle's negoci·-
tions at Rome, as must have filled his lilpicioua
mind with fear and jealousy; and then craving
an audience, he required payment of the money
which had been borrowed by the Emperors in the
most earnest and peremp.ory terms. In urging
that point, he artfully threv out fcveral dark

S J hints

B O i K hints and ambiguous declarations, concerning the

extremities to which Cofino might be driven by
s557' a refusal of this jull demand, as well as by other

grievances of which he had good reason to corn.
plain.
·rht rue- PHILIP, aftonifled at an address in such a strain,

from a Prince so far his inferior as the Duke of
Tuscany, and comparing what he now heard witri
the information which he had received from Italy,
immediately concluded that Cosmo had ventured
to assume this bold and unusual tone on the prof-
pe& of his union with France. In order to pre-
vent the Pope and Henry from acquiring an all,
who, by his abilities, as well as the fituatio or
his dominions, would have added both reputation
and strength to their confederacy, he offered to
grant Cofino the investiture of Siena, if he would
consent to accept of it as an equivalent for ilic
fums due to him, and engage to furnilh a body
of troops towards the defence of Philip's tcrri-
tories in Italy, against any power who hould at-
tack them. As loon as Cofino had brought Phi-
lip to make this conceflion, which was the obj'cL
of all his artifices and intrigues, he did no: pro-
tra&L the negociation by any unnecesihry delay, or
any excess of refinement, but closed eagerly x.ith
the proposal, and Philip, in spite of the rei:lon-
flrances of his ablest counsellors, signed a tr'cty
with him to that eflfet.

q Thuan, lil?. xiii. 64. IIcrrera, i. 2s3. 2;. Pa;i:v.
sib. xiii. 18o.

,\$

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his B 0 o K

XIL.

rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquish
any territory which he pofleffed, by what tenure '557
soever he held it, these unusual concefions to the
Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he wan-
tonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defend-
ing which his father had employed many years,
and wafted much blood and treasure, cannot be
accounted for from any motive, but his fuperfli-
tious desire of extrica:ing hi.nfelf out of the war
which he had been forced to wage against the
Pope. By there treaties, however, the balance
of power among the Italian States was poised
vwith greater equality, and rendered lets valuable
than it had been since it received the first violent
flock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of
Fsance. From this period, Italy ceased to be
the great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain,
France, and Germany, contended for power or
for fame. Their dissensions and holtilities, though
as frequent and violent as ever, being excited by
new objects, stained other regions of Europe with
blood, and rendered them miserable, in their turn,
by the devastations of war.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the iame day sep,. ,9

that his adversary the Duke of Alva made his hu- Th ;tl';.
miliating submission to the Pope. He was re- r,"ti"n
ceived in France as the guardian angel of the
kingdom. His late ill success in Italy seemed to
be forgotten, while his former services, particu-
larly his defence of Metz, were recounted with

S 3 cxagge-

B 0 K eagerated praile; and he was welcomed in every

v ~_ city through which he pafied, as the restorer of

publick security, who, after having ser bounds
by his conduf and valour to the victorious arms
of Charles V. returned now, at the call of his
country, to check the formidable protgrci of
Philip's power. The reception which he met
with from Henry was no less cordial and honour-
able. New titles were invented, and new digni-
ties created, in order to distinguish him. He
was appointed lieutenant-general in chief both
within and without the kingdom, with a jurif-
dition almost unlimited, and hardly inferior to
that which was possessed by the King himn:lf.
Thus, thr'ugh the Angular felicity which attended
the Princes of Lorrain, the miscarriage of their
own schemes contributed to aggrandize thei'.
The calamities of his country, and the ill-conduc:
of his rival the Constable, exalted the Duke of
Guise to a height of dignity and power, hicl
he could not have expeced to attain by the most
fortunate and mofi complete success of his own
ambitious projects.

Tr.ket the THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform some-
Qei hiumy. thing suitable to the high expectations of lhi

countrymen, and that he might justify the extra-
ordinary confidence which the King had reposed
in him, ordered all the troops, which could be
got together, to aflemble at Compeigne. Though
the winter was well advanced, and had set in with
extreme rigour, he placed himself at their head,

and

and took the field. By Henry's acivity and the B
zeal of his fubjets, so many soldiers had been a,
railed in the kingdom, and such considerable re- '5S7
inforcements had been drawn from Germany and
Swifferland, as formed an army refpetable even
in the eyes of a vidtorious enemy. Philip,
alarmed at feeing it put in motion at such an un-
common season, began to tremble for his new
conquests, particularly St. Quintin, the fortifi-
cations of which were hitherto but imperfectly
repaired.

BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more im- Ce ,;rCRs

portant enterprize; and after amusing the enemy CJ','s.
with threatening fucceflively different towns on Jan""u' 't.
the frontiers'of Slanders, he turned suddenly to
the left, and invested Calais with his whole army.
Calais had been taken by the Englilh under Ed-
ward III. and was the fruit of that monarch's
glorious viaory at Crecy. Being the only place
that they retained of their ancient and extensive
territories in France, and which opened to them,
at all times, an easy and secure paflagc into the
heart of that kingdom, their keeping possession
of it soothed the pride of the one nation as much
as it mortified the vanity of the other. Its ficua-
tion was naturally so strong, and its fortifications
deemed so impregnable, that no monarch of
France, how adventurous foevcr, had been bold
enough to attack it. Even when the domeltick
strength of England was broken and exhaulled
by the bloody wars between the houses of York

S 4 and

B o o K and Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted
-.- from freign oects, Calais had remained un-

dillurbed and unthreatered. Ma:y and her coun.
cil, composed chiefly of ecclefiaflicks, unac-
quainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating herelv
out of the kingdo.m, had not only negicted to
take any precautions for the fafetv of this in-
portant place, but seemed to think that the rpu-
tation of its strength alone was sufficient for its
security. Full of this opinion, they ventured,
even after the declaration of war, to continue a
pracice which the low. f ate of the QO:in'i
finances had introduced in times of peace. As the
country aacent to Calais was overflowed during
the winter; and the marfhcs around it became
impafable, except by one avenue, which th
forts of St. Agatha and Newnham-bridge com-
manded, it had been the custom of the Englifl
to difiniis the greater part of the garrison towarh
the end of autumn, and to replace it in thl
i;cic;,:- spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the o-

vernor o' Calais, remonirate against this ill-
timed .arfmrony, and rcprefent the poflbili:y o
his being artac!;ed fudden'y, v'hi!e he had no!
troops sufficient to man the works. The p;iv;-
council treated these remonstrances with scorn, as
if they had flowed from the timidity or the rapa.
cioufnefs of the governor; and ome of the:;;,
with that confidence which is the companion of
ignorance, boasted that they would defend Calais
with their white rods against any enemy who

houl'll

:hould approach it during winter'. In vain did
Philip, who had passed through Calais as he re- .-~
turned from England to the Netherlands, warn *55'
the Queen of the danger to which it was exposed
and acquainting her with what was necessary for
its security, in vain did he offer to reinforce the
garrison during winter with a detachment of his
own roops. Mary's couin!cllors, though obfe-
quious to her in all points wherein religion was
concerned, diltrufted, as much as the reft of their
countrymen, every proporition that came from
her husband; and suspecting this to be an artifice
of Philip's, in order to gain the command of the
town, they nglecled his intelligence, declined
his offer, and left Calais with less than a fourth of
the men requifire for its defence.

IT was his knowledge of this whith encouraged cuifepouea

the iege

the Duke of Guile to venture on an enterprize, withvigour.
that furprized his own countrymen no less than
his enemies As he knew that its success depend-
ed on conduting his operations with such rapidity
as would afford the Englifl no time for throwing
relief into the town by sea, and prevent Philip'
from giving him any interruption by land, he
pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little
known in carrying on sieges during that age.
He drove the Englilh from fort St. Agatha at the
firt aault. He obliged them to abandon the
fort of Newnham-bridge after defending it three

Carte, iii. 345.

days,

B O0 K days. He took the cafle which commanded the

_ , harbour by storm; and on the eighth day after
'Ss' he appeared before Calais, compelled the gover-

nor to surrender, as his feeble garrison, which did
not exceed five hundred men, was worn out with
the fatigue of fultaining so many attacks, and de-

tk the fending such extensive works.

and likewire THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the Eng.
Gines ad

d
ae. nlilh time to recover from the consternation occa-

sioned by this blow, immediately inverted Guifnes,
the garrison of which, though more numerous,
defended itself with less vigour, and after stand-
ing one brisk afiault, gave up the town. The
castle of Hames was abandoned by the troops
posted there, without waiting the approach of the
enemy,

The IPa. THus, in a few days, during the depth of
&Wan4
etfea of winter, and at a time when the fatal battle of St.
thereo. Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit of

the French, that their utmost aim was to protect
their own country, without dreaming of making
conquests on the enemy, the enterprizing valour
of one man drove the English out of Calais,
after they had held it two hundred and ten years,
and deprived them of every foot of land in a
kingdom, where their dominions had been once
so extensive. This exploit, at the fame time
that it gave an high idea of the power and re-
sources of France to all Europe, set the Duke of
Guise, in the opinion of his countrymen, far

above

above all the generals of the age. They cele- B O o
braced his conqucfts with immoderate transports -.^
of joy; while the F;'glifh gave vent to all the 'ss'
pafions which animate a high-fpirited people,
when any great n.ilonll calamity is manifestly
owing to the ill conduct of their rulers. Mary
ani. her miniters, formerly odious, were now
contemptible in their eyes. All the terrors of
her levcre and arbitrary admninitration could not
restrain them fiom uttering execrations and threats
~gainft those, who having wantonly involved the
nation in a quarrel wherein it was nowile interest-
ed, had by their negligence or incapacity, brought
irreparable dilgrace on their country, and loft the
molt valuable polfenfion belonging to the English
crown.

THE French King imitated the conduct of its

former conqueror, Edward III. with regard to
Calais. He commanded all the English inhabit-
ants to quit the town, and giving their houses
to his own subjes, whom he allured to fettle
there by granting them various immunities, he
left a numerous garrison, under an experienced
governor, for their defence. After this, his vic-
torious army went into quarters of refreshment,
and the usual inacion of winter returned.

DURING there various operations, Ferdinand Feb. 4.

Charleji'

assembled the college of Ele&ors at Frankfort, in reignat,,o
order to lay before them the deed whereby otril.'
Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and crowa,

;ransferred
/

B 0 0 transferred it to him. This he had hitherto de-

XI,.
M).. layed on account of fume difficulties which had
558. occurred concerning the formalities requisite in

supplying a vacancy occafior.ed by an .event, to
which there was no parallel in the annals of the
Empire. These being at length adjusted, the
Prince of Orange executed the commifiion with
which he had been entrusted by Charles; the
EleCtors accepted of his resignation; declared
Ferdinand his lawful successor; and put him in
poflTelion of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

The Pope BUT when the new Emperor sent Gufinan his
cktO'w- chancellor, to acquaint the Pope with this rranf-
ledg "dl action, to testify his reverence towards the Holy
roepor. See, and to signify that, according to form, he

would soon dispatch an ambassador extraordinary
to treat with his Holiness concerning his coro-
nation; Paul, whom neither experience nor dil-
appointments could teach to bring down his lofty
ideas of the papal prerogative to such a moderate
standard as suited the genius of the times, refused
to admit the envoy into his presence, and de-
clared all the proceedings at Frankfort irregular
and invalid. He contended that the Pope, as
the vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the
keys both of celestial and terrefirial government;
that from him the Imperial jurifdidion was de-
rived ; that though hispredeceffors had authorized
the eletors to chufe an Emperor whom the Holy
See confirmed, this privilege was confined to

thclt'

those cafes when a vacancy was occasioned by B o ° K
death; that the inlirument of Charles's refigna- ..-
tion had been prefiented in an improper court, as s
it belonged to the Pope alone to rejet or to ac-
cept of it, and to nominate a prfon to fill the
Imperial throne; that, setting aside all these b-
jeatons, Ferdinand's ele&ion laboured under
two defects which alone were sufficient to render
it void, for the Protestant Eletors had been ad-
mitted to vote, though by their apoftacy from
the catholick faith, they had forfeited that and
every other privilege of the electoral office; and
Ferdinand, by ratifying the concefiions of several
Diets in favour of hereticks, had rendered him-
self unworthy of the Imperial dignity, which
was instituted for the protection, not for the de-
ftruuion, of the church. But after thundering
out these extravagant maxims, he added with an
appearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand
would renounce all title to the Imperial crown,
founded on the election at Frankfort, make pro-
felfions of repentance for his pas: conduct, and
supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm
Charles's resignation, as well as his aiumption to
the Empire, he might expect every mark of fa-
vour from his paternal clemency and goodness.
Gufman, though he had foreseen considerable
difficulties in his negociation wili the Pope,
little expeted that he would have revived thol;
antiquated and wild pretensions, which aonifh.el
him so much, that he hardly knew in what tone
he ought to reply. He prudently declined enttr-

ing

B3 0 K io into any controverf concerning the nature or
C4 , extent of the papal jurildiition, and confining

'I55' himself to the political considerations, which

lhould determine the Pope to recognize an Em-
peror already in poffellion, he endeavorired to
place them in such a light, as he imagined could
scarcely fail to strike Pa.!l, if he were not alto-
gether blind to his own interest. Philip seconded
Gufinan's arguments with great earneitnefs, by
an ambalador whom he sent to Rome on purpofr,
and besought the Pope to desist from claims so
unseasonable, as might not only irritate and alarm
Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but
furnilh the enemies of the Holy See with a new
reason for representing its juridiition as incom-
patible with the rights of Princes, and iubveriive
of all civil authority. But Paul, who deemed it
a crime to attend to any consideration suggested
by human prudence or policy, when he thought
himself called upon to assert the prerogatives of
the Papal See, remained inflexible and, during
his pontificate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged
as Emperor by the court of Rome'.

Henry en. WHILE Henry was intent upon his prepara-
eSieth tions for the approaching campaign, he received
otin.gd'int accounts of the iflue of his negociations in Scot-

land. Long experience having at laR taught the
Scots the imprudence of involving their country
in every quarrel between France and England,

· Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. I:nl";r.
39.. alav. lib. xiii. 139. Ribier, ii. 74.6. 759.

neither

neither the solicitations of his ambaflador, nor B 00 o
the address and authority of the Queen-regent, - - .
could prevail on them to take arms againR a king- "ss'.
dom with which they were at peace. On this
occasion the ardour of a martial nobility and of a
turbulent people was refrained by regard for the
publick interest and tranquillity, which, in former
deliberations of this kind had been seldom attend-
ed to by a nation always prone to rush into every
new war. But though the Scots adhered with
steadiness to their pacifick fyltem, they were ex-
tremely ready to gratify the French King in an-
other particular, which he had given in charge to
his ambassador.

THE young Queen of Scots had been affianced Marriage es

0 ^sti.e 'atbin

to the Dauphin in the year one thousand five with the
hundred and forty-eight, and having been edu- Scots.
cared since that time in the court of France, he
had grown up to be the most amiable, and one
of the most accomplished Princesses of that age.
Henry demanded the consent of her fubjeEts to
the celebration of the marriage, and a parliament
which was held for that purpose, appointed eight
commifloners to represent the whole body of the
nation at that solemnity, with power to sign such
deeds as might be requisite before it was con-
cluded. In fettling the articles of the marriage,
the Scots took every precaution that prudence
could dicate, in order to preserve the liberty and
independence of their country; while the French
uscd every art to secure to the Dauphin the con-

a duLAe.

B 0 0 I dut of affairs during the Queen's life, and the

. . fucceflion of the crown on the event of her de.
Ap,'. mise. The marriage was celebrated with pomp

suitable to the dignity of the parties, and the
magnificence of a court at that time the mofl
splendid in Europe'. Thus Henry, in the course
of a few months, had the glory of recovering an
important poffeflion which had anciently belong-
ed to the crown of France, and of adding to it
the acquisition of a new kingdom. By this event,
too, the Duke of Guile acquired new confider.
ation and importance; the marriage of his niece
to the apparent heir of the crown, raising him so
far beyond the condition of other fubjets, as
seemed to render the credit which he had gained
by his great ations, no less permanent than it
was extensive.

The cm. WHEN the campaign opened, oon after the
d.g"pen Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was

placed at the head of the army, with the fame
unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-
ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjets, that
the troops under his command were both nu-
merous and well appointed; while Philip, ex-
haufted by the extraordinary efforts of the pre-
ceding year, had been obliged to difinifs so
many of his forces during the winter, that he
could not bring an army into the field capable of
making head against the enemy. The Duke of

* Keith's hilf.ry cf Sc tland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps.
Diplow. v.a

. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~Guili;

Guise did not lose the favourable opportunity B o o K
which his superiority afforded him. He invested
Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg, one 'I5'
of the firongeft towns on the frontier of the
Netherlands, and of great importance to France
by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-
flanding the obltinate valour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege of
three weeks ". Juae .

BUT the success of this enterprize, which it TheFrench

was expeced would lead to other conquests, was fead at
more than counterbalanced by an event that Gravdie
happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termies, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fiion, invested Dunkirk with an army of fourteen
thousand men, and took it by orm on the fifth
day of the siege. Hence he advanced towards
Nieuport, which must have oon fallen into his
hands, if the approach of the Count of Egmont
with a superior army had not made it prudent to
retreat. The French troops were so much en-
cumbered with the booty which they had got at
Dunkirk, or by ravaging the open country, that
they moved slowly; ad Egmont, who had left
his heavy baggage and artillery behind him,
marched with such rapidity, that he came up with
them near Gravelines, and attacked then with

u Thuan. lib. xx. 69.
VOL. IV. T the

B o K the utmost impetuosity. De Termes, who had

the choice of the ground, having potled his
'55» troops to advantage in the angle formed by the

mouth of the river Aa and the ea, received him
with great firmnels. Vicory remained for tome
time in fufpenle, the desperate valour of the
French, who foresaw the unavoidable defruation
that must follow upon a rout in an enemy's
country, counterbalancing the superior number
of the Flemings, when one of those accidents to
which human prudence does not extend, decided
the conreft in favour of the latter. A squadron
of Englilh ihips of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered the
river Aa, and turned its great guns against the
right wing of the French, with such effae, as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom alffilance, so unex:edted and
so seasonable, gave frefli fpirir, redoubled their
efforts, that they might not lose the advantage
which fortune had prerented them, or give the
enemy time to recover fom t!eir confernation,
and the rout of te F:":nch fuon became uni-
versal. Near two th ' "ind were killed on the
spot a greater nuinber fell by the h.!nds of rtie
peasants, who, in rvence for the cruelty with
which their country had been plundered, pursued
the fugitives and !iaflacrtl then without Inerc
the relt were taken p.ifuners, together v.ici

I De

De Termes their general, and many officers of B O K
diftinaion'. ----

*5S5.

THIS signal victory, for which the Count of The Duke

Egmont was afterwards so ill requited by Philip, pofSd "torP;
obliged the Duke of Guise to relinquish all other 'itoriouU
:chemes, and to haften towards the frontier of
Picardy, that he might oppose the progress ot
the enemy in that province. This difafler reflect-
ed new lustre on his reputation, and once more
turned the eyes of his countrymen towards him,
as the only general on whose arms vitory always
attended, and in whole conduce, as well as good
fortune, they could confide in every danger.
Henry reinforced Guile's army with so many
troops drawn from the adjacent garrisons, that it
loon amounted to forty thousand men. That of
the enemy, after the jundion of Egmont with
the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in number.
They encamped at the diffance of a few leagues
from one another; and each monarch having
joined his respeCtive army, it was xpeSced, after
the viciflltudes of good and bad fuccels durini
this and the former campaign, that a dccifive
battle would at last determine, 'which of the rivals
lould take the ascendant for the future, and give
law to Europe. But though both had it in their
power, neither of them dilcovercd any inclination
to bring the determination f such an important
p':nlt to depend upon the uncertain and for-

' Thunn. lib. . 694.

T 2 tuious

B OO K tuitous issue of a single battle. The fatal en.
*. .-.- gagements at St. Quintin and Gravelines were

558. too recent to be so loon forgoren, and the pro-

fpe: of encountering the fame troops, command-
ed by the fame generals who had twice triumphed
over his arms, inspired Henry with a degree of
caution which was not common to him. Philip,
of a genius averse to bold operations in war,
naturally leaned to cautious measures, and would
hazard nothing against a general so fortunate and
successful as the Duke of Guise. Both monarchs,
as if by agreement, flood on the defensive, and
fortifying their camps carefully, avoided every
Ikirmifh or rencounter that might bring on a g-
neral engagement.

Bo:h mo- WHILE the armies continued in this inacion,
narchs bc*n
to defib peace began to be mentioned in each camp, and
''' C both Henry and Philip discovered an inclination

to liften to any overture that tended to re-eftablih
it. The kingdoms of France and Spain had been
engaged during half a century in almost con-
tinual wars, carried on at great expence, and pro-
dutive of no considerable advantage to either.
Exhausted by extraordinary and unceasing es-
forts, which far exceeded those to which te
nations of Europe had been accustomed before
the rivalnlip between Charles V. and Francis I.
both nations longed so much for an interval of
repose, in order to recruit their strength, th:t
their fbvereigns drew from them with dilliculty
the supplies neceftiry for carrying on hollilitics.

'Tle

The private inclinations of both the Kings con- B o 0 K
curred with those of their people. Philip was *-
prompted to wish for peace by his fond desire of ,5s'
returning to Spain. Accustomed from his in-
fancy to the climate and manners of that country,
he was attached to it with such extreme predi-
leion, that he was unhappy in any other part of
his dominions. But as he could not quit the
Low Countries, either with decency or safety,
and venture on a voyage to Spain during the con-
tinuance of war, the profpet of a pacification
which would put it in his power to execute his fa-
vourite scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry
was no less desirous of being delivered from the
burden and avocations of war, that he might
have leisure to turn all his attention, and bend
the whole force of his government, towards fiup-
prefling the opinions of the Reformers, which were
spreading with such rapidity in Paris and other
great towns of France, that they began to grow
formidable to the eftablifled church.

BESIDES these publick and avowed confidera- An ntiue

tions arising from the state of the two hoflile ilr.ne
kingdoms, or from the wifles of their refpe&ive fJci:iates "it
monarchs, there was a iecret intrigue carried on
in the court of France, which contributed as
much as either of the other, to haften and to fa-
cilitate the negociation of a peace. The Con-
stable Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld
the rapid uccefs and growing favour of the Duke
of Guise with envious solicitude. Every ad-

T 3 vantage

D 0 K vantage gained by his rival he confidered as a
h--- frelh wound to his own reputation, and he knev,

s55s' with what malevolent address it would be im-

proved to diminilh his credit with the King, and
to augment that of the Duke of Guile. rThcl
arts, he was afraid, might, by degrees, work on
the easy and ductile mind of Henry, so as to
efface all remains of his ancient affeAion towards
hinfelf. But he could not discover any remedy
for this, unless ie were allowed to return home,
that he might try whether by his pretence hc
could defeat the artifices of his enemies, and re-
vive those warm and tender sentiments which hadI
long attached Henry to him, with a confidence
so entire, as resembled rather the cordiality of
private friendlllip, than the cold and felfifl con-
nexion between a monarch and one of his cour-
tiers. While Montmorency was forming fcheere
and wifnes for his return to France with much
anxiety f mind, but with little hope of success,
an unexpeEted incident prepared the way for it.
IThe Cardinal of Lorrain, who had flared witi!
his brother in the King's favour, and partici.
pated of the power which that conferred, did no:
bear prosperity with the fame discretion as the
Duke of Guise. Intoxicated with their goozd
fortune, he forgot how much they had been in-
debted for their prefcnt elevation to their con-
nexions with the Dutchess of Valentinois, and
vainly aferibcd all to the extraordinary merit of
their family. This led him not only to negleE
his benefatrefs, but to thwart her schemes, and

to

to talk with a farcaltick liberty of her charaEter B K
and person. That singular woman, who, if we -w
may believe contemporary writers, retained the '55s'
beauty and charms of youth at the age of three-
score, and on whom it is certain th.t Henry Cfill
doated with all the fondness of love, flt this injury
with sensibility, and set herself with ecrnefs to
revenge it. As there was no method of iupplant-
ing the Princes of Lorrain so elFt.iually as by a
coalition of interests with the Conflable, lie pro-
posed tle marriage of her grand-.dughter with
one of his sons, as the bond of their future union;
and LMntmorency readily gave his confnt to
the match. Having thus cemented their alli-
ance, the Dtc!1.fs employed all her influence
with the K.i:, in order to confrira his inclinations
to\airds peace, a:' ::;.ice himi to take the fleps
necessary for .;c.ining it. Se insinuated that
any overture of that klnd would come with great
propriety from the Constable, and if committed
to the conduct of his prudence, could hardly fail
of success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all affairs ri n.enr.

of importance to the Constable, and needing .,,.i o
only this encouragement to return to his an- Ic,,.
cient habits, wrote to him immediately with his
usual familiarity and afFeaion, empowering him
at the fame time to take the first oportunity of
founding Philip and his minilters wicl regard to
peace. Montmorency made his application to
Philip by the most proper channel. i-Ie opened

T 4 im

o0 0 himself to the Duke of Savoy, who, notwithftand.
->_ ing the height of preferment to which he hat
tss been raised, and the military glory which he had

acquired in the Spanifli service, was weary of re-
maining in exile, and languished to return into
his dominions. As there was no profpet of his
recovering pofleflion of them by force of arms, he
confidered a definitive treaty of peace between
France and Spain, as the only event by which he
could hope to obtain restitution. Being no
stranger to Philip's private wilhes with regard o
peace, he easily prevailed on him not only to dif-
cover a disposition on his part towards accommo-
dation, but to permit Montmorency to return, on
his parole, to France, that he might confirm his
own fvereign in his pacifick sentiments. Henry
received the Constable with the most flattering
marks of regard; absence, instead of having
abated or extinguished the Monarch's friendlii,
seemed to have given it new ardour. Montmo-
rency, from the moment of his appearance in
court, assumed, ifpoflible, a higher place than
ever in his affecion, and a more perfet& ascendant
over his mind. The Cardinal of Lorrain and
Duke of Guile prudently gave way to a tide of
favour too strong for them to oppose, and con.
fining thenfelves to their proper departments, per.
mitted, without any itruggle, the Constable and
Dutchess of Yalentinois to dired publick affairs at
their pleasure, They fbon prevailed on the King
to nominate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace.
Vpiilip did the fame, The abbey of Cercamp was

fixed

fixed on as the place of congress; and all mili- o o K
tary operations were immediately terminated by -
a suspension of arms. .s55s

WHILE there preliminary fleps were taking to- resth or

wards a treaty which restored tranquillity to Eu- ci
rope, Charles V. whose ambition had so long dif-
turbed it, ended his days in the monaiery of St.
Juftus. When Charles entered this retreat, he
formed such a plan of life for himself, as would
have suited the condition of a private gentleman
of a moderate fortune. His table was neat, but
plain; his domeflicks few; his intercourse with
them familiar; all the cumbersome and ceremo-
nious forms of attendance on his person were en-
tirely abolished, as dellrudive of that social cafe
and tranquillity which he courted, in order to
soothe the remainder of his days. As the mild-
ness of the climate, together with his deliverance
from the burdens and cares of government, pro-
cured him, at first, a conliderable remiflion from
the acute pains with which he had been long tor-
mented; he enjoyed, perhaps, more complete fa-
tisfa&ion in this humbcl solitude, than all his
grandeur had ever yielded him. The ambitious
thoughts and projcts which had to long engrof-r
ed and disquieted him, were quite effaced from
his mind : Far from taking any part in the poli-
tical tranfations of the Princes of Europe, he
restrained his curiosity even from any enquiry
concerning then; and he seemed to view the
busy scene which he had abandoned with all the

contempt

B 0 0 K contempt and indifference arising from his tho-
,_ rough experience of its vanity, as well as from
'5538 the pleasing rfle&ion of having disentangled hil-

seif from its cares.

H;, amie. OTHER amusements, and other objecs now oc.
mnts in his
te:ttat. cupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the p.nts

in is garden with his own hands; sometimes he
rode out to the neighbouring wood on a little horse,
the only one that he kept, attended by a single
servant on foot. When his infirmities confined
;i nz to his apa:tment, which often happened, and
deprived him of these more aive recreations, he
either admitted a few gentlemen who resided near
the monaletry to visit him, and entertained them
fln!ialIy at his table; or he employed himself
i:i 'il.udy!lng tnech'.nical principles and in sorning
curio.s works of mechanifin, of which he had
liways been remarkably fond, and to which his
genius was peculiarly turned. With this view he
had engaged Turriano, one of the most ingenious
ari.s of that age, to accompany him in his re-
treat. H-e laboured together with him in fram-
ing models of the molt useful machines, as well
as in making experiments with regard to their re-
fpeaive powers, and it was not seldom that the
ideas of the monarch assisted or perfected the in-
ventions of the artist. He relieved his mind, at
intervals, with flighter and more fantaltick works
of mechanifin, in fashioning puppets, which, by
the ftruture of internal springs, mimicked the
gestures and aions of men, to the no finall

altonifl-

astonishment of the ignorant monks, who behold- B o° °
ing movements which they could not compre- .--
hend, sometimes diRlrufted their own ifnfes, and 'S'
sometimes fu peted Charles and Turriano of bec ng
in compat with invisible powers. I-I was parci-
cularly curious with regardl to the conflrution of
clocks and watches; and having found, after re-
peated trials, that he could not bring any two of
them to go exa&ly alike, he refleted, it is said,
with a mixture of furprFie as well as regret, on
his own folly, in having beltowed so much time
and labour on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of entiment
concerning the intricate and mylicrious docrines
of religion.

BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed of :Hs mte

the reft of his time, he constantly reserved a con- ca..
fiderable portion of it for religious exercises. He
regularly attended divine service in the chapel of
the monastery, every morning anti evening; he
took great pleasure in reading books of devotion,
particularly the works of St. Augufline anti 3.
Bernard; and converted mruch with his confiW.;r,
and the prior of the monaltery, on piuis Iut-
jecs. Thus did Charles pas the firt year of his
retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a man per-
fe&tly disengaged from the affairs of the pre;'-nct
life, and ilanding on the confines of a sit!;e
world, either in innocent amulfements, wlili
soothed his pains, and relieved a mind worn (-il

w: il

B o o K with excessive application to bufinels; or in de-

X11'. vout occupations, which he deemed necessary in
s58. preparing for another state.

The cirei BUT about fix months before his death, the
Qs his cad/.

gout, after a longer intermifion than usual, re-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His hattered constitution had not vigour enough
remaining to withstand such a shock. It enfeebled
his mind as much as his body, and from this pe-
riod we hardly discern any traces of that found
and masculine understanding, which distinguish-
ed Charles among his contemporaries. An illi-
beral and timid superstition depressed his spirit.
He had no relish for amusements of any kind.
He endeavoured to conform, in his manner of
living, to all the rigour of monaftick austerity.
He desired no other society than that of monks,
and was almost continually employed with them
in chanting the hymns of the Missal. As an ex.
piation for his fins, he gave himself the discipline
in secret with such severity, that the whip of cords
which he employed as the instrument of his pu-
nifhment, was found after his decease tinged with
his blood. Nor was he satisfied with these as of
mortification, which, however severe, were not
unexampled. The timorous and diftruflful o-
licitude which always accompanies fuperition,
frill continued to disquiet him, and depreciating
all that he had done, prompted him to aim at
something extraordinary, at some new and fingll-

lar a of piety that would display his zeal, and B °o K
merit the favour of heaven. The a on which
he fixed was as wild and uncommon as any that 5s
superstition ever fuggefled to a weak and difor-
dered fancy. le relolved to celebrate his own
obsequies before his death. He ordered his tomb
to be ereted in the chapel of the monastery. His
domefticks marched thither in funeral proceflion,
with black tapers in their hands. He himself
followed in his shroud. He was laid in his coffin,
with much solemnity. The service for the dead
was chanted, and Charles joined in the prayers
which were offered up for the reft of his foul,
mingling his tears with those which his atten-
dants hed, as if they had been celebrating a real
funeral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling
holy water on the coffin in the usual form, and
all the afliftants retiring, the doors of the chapel
were hut. Then Charles rose out of the coffin,
and withdrew to his apartment, full of those aw-
ful sentiments which such a singular solemnity
was calculated to inspire. But either the fatiguing
length of the ceremony, or the imprefflon which
this image of death left on his mind, affetted him
To much, that next day he was seized with a fever.
His feeble frame could not long resist its violence,
and he expired on the twenty-firft of September,
after a life of fifty-eight years, fix months, and
twenty-five days7.

$ Stradade Bcllo Belg. lib. i. p. . Thuan. 7.. San-

dov. ii. 609, &c. Miniana Cntin. Mariana, vil. iv. 2z6.
Vcra y Zuniga vida de Carlos, p. i.

As

a 0 K As Charles was the first Prince of the age in

.-. rank and dignity, the part which he aced, whether
iHa~S ,. we confider the greatness, the variety, or the fuc-

cess of his undertakings, was the mol confpi-
cuous. It is from an attentive observation of his
condu&, not from the exaggerated praises of the
Spanilh historians, or the undiftinguilhing censure
of the French, that a just idea of Charles's genius
and abilities is to be colle&ed. He possesed qua-
lities fb peculiar, as strongly mark his charater,
and not only distinguish him from the Princes who
were his contemporaries, but account for that fu-
periority over them which he so long maintained.
In forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as
well as by habit, cautious and confideratc. Born
with talents which unfolded themselves slowly,
and were late in attaining maturity, he was ac-
customed to ponder every fubje& that demanded
his consideration, with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of hts mind
towards it, and dwelling upon it with a serious
application, undiverted by pleasure, and hardly
relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in
silence, in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his resolution with a de-
cifive firmness, which seldom follows finch flow,
and seemingly hesitating consultations. Of con-
lequence, Charles's measures, initead of refem-
bling the desultory and irregular sallies of Henry
VIII. or-Francis I. had the appearance of a con-
fiftent system, in which all the parts were Srran-

ged,

ged, the effe&s were foreseen, and the accidents B 0 0 K
were provided for. His promptitude in execu- _
tion was no less remarkable than his patience in I58S
deliberation. He confulred with phlegm, but he
ated with vigour; and did not discover greater
aigacity in hit choice of the measures which it
was proper to pursue, than fertility of genius in
finding out the means for rendering his pursuit
of them successful. Though he had naturally so
little of the martial turn, that, during the most
ardent and bufling period of life, he remained
in the cabinet inactivc, yet when hc chore at
length to appear at the hcad of his armies, his
mind was so formed for vigorous exertions in
every dire&ion, that he acquired such knowledge
in the art of war, and such talents for command,
as rendered him equal in reputation and lifccefs
to the most able generals of the age. But Charles
possessed, in the most eminent degree, the science
which is of greatest importance to a monarch,
that of knowing men, and of adapting their ta-
lents to the various departments which he allotted
to them. From the death of Chievres to the end
of his reign, he employed no general in the field,
no minister in the cabinet, no ambassador to a
foreign court, no governor of a province, whose
abilities were inadequate to the truit which he
reposed in them. Though deflitute of that be-
witching affability of nnners, which gained
Francis the hearts of all who approached his per-
son, he was no firanger to the vrt!ues whic'i fe-
cuce fidelity and attachment. -e placed ln-

b'uunded

A 0 0 K bounded confidence in his generals; he rewarded

-- their services with munificence; he neither envied
'ss. their fame, nor discovered any jealouly of their

power. Almost all the generals who conduced
his armies, may be placed on a level with those
illufrious personages who have attained the high-
eft eminence of military glory; and his advan-
tages over his rivals, are to be ascribed so mani-
feitly to the superior abilities of the commander;
whom he set in opposition to them, that this might
seem to detract, in ilbne degree, from his own
merit, if the talent of discovering and employ-
ing such instruments were not the most undoubt-
ed proof of a capacity for government.

THERE were, neverthclefs, defecs in his po-

litical character which mutt considerably abate
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents.
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed the
chimerical projec of eltablinfing an universal mo-
narchy in Europe, it is certain that his desire of
being diltinguifhed as a conqueror involved him
in continual wars, which not only exhausted and
oppressed his subjes, but left him little leisure
for giving attention to the interior police and im-
provement of his kingdoms, the great objects of
every Prince who makes the happiness of his
people the end of his government. Charles, at
a very early period of life, having added the I!n-
perial crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and to

2 the

the hereditary dominions of the houses of Austria 00 K

XlI.

and Burgundy, this opened to him such a vait k.-~^
field of enterprize, and engaged him in schemes 'ss58
so complicated as well as arduous, that feeling
his power to be unequal to the execution of them,
he had often recourse to low artifices, unbecoming
his superior talents, and rometimes ventured on
such deviations from integrity, as were dilho-
nourable in a great Prince. Ilis insidious and
fraudulent policy appeared more confpicous, and
was rendered more odious, by a comparison with
the open and undesigning character of his con-
remporaries Francis I. and Henry VIII. This
difference, though occasioned chiefly by the di-
verfity of their tempers, must be acribed, in
fime degree, to such an opposition in the prin-
ciples of their political condut, as affords 'ome
excuse for this defet in Charles's behaviour,
though it cannot serve as a justification of it.
Francis and Henry seldom adted but from the im-
pulse of their pailions, and rulhed headlong to-
wards the object in view. Charles's measures,
being the result of cool reflection, were difpoled
into a regular system, and carried on upon a con-
certed plan. Persons who act in the former man-
ner, naturally pursue the end in view, without
a!i:,.ning any disguise, or di'lilaying much ad-
(refs. Such as hold the latter courie, are apr, in
f;rming as well as in executing th ir designs, to
tmploy such refinements as always lead to artifice
in conduct, and often degenerate into deceit.

VOL. IV. U THu

B n O K THE circumstances tranfinitted to us, with re-

Xty.
i--, fpet to Charles's private deportment and charac-

ter, are fewer and less interesting, than might have
been expected from the great number of authors
who have undertaken to write an account of his
life. These are not the object of this history,
which aims more at representing the great tranlf
acions of the reign of Charles V. than at deii-
neating his private virtues or defeas.

c('.-,,,rce THE plenipotentiaries of France, Spain, and
Fct'. England, continued their conferences at Cer-

camp; and though each of them, with the usual
art of negociators, made at first very high de-
mands in the name of their refpe&ive courts, ye.
as they were all equally desirous of peace, they
would have consented reciprocally to such abate-
ments and reftri&ions of their claims, as muit
have removed every obstacle to an accommoda-
tion. The death of Charles V. was a new motive
with Philip to haften the conclusion of a treaty,
as it increased his impatience for returning into
Spain, where there was now no person greater or
more illustrious than himself. But, in spite of
the concurring withes of all the parties interested,
an event happened which occasioned an unavoid-
able delay in their negociations. About a month
after the opening of the conferences at Cercamp,

Nov. T7. Mary of England ended her (hort and inglorious
M,:y of reign, and Elizabeth, her lilter, was immediately
Ealli*nd. proclaimed Queen by the Englilh, with univer-

fal joy. As the powers of the Englilh plenipo-

tentiaries

tentiaries expired on the death of their mifrrefs, B o o K

XII.

they could not proceed until they received a com- .
million and inflruc'ions from their new sovereign. IS5S.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation ntnr and

Philip mnt

to the throne with equal solicitude. As during Elizabeth
Mary's jealous adminillration, under the oft or,. '
difficult circumftanccs, and in a situation extreme-
;l delicate, that rinicfs had conduitcd herself
with prudence and addryf- far excc'dilg her years,
tl;ey had conceived an high ide-a of her abilities,
:nd already formed expctlations of a reign very
!iilferent from that of her fifler. Equally iL-nfible
of the importance of gaining her favour, both
monarchs iet themselves with emulation to court
it, and employed every art in order to insinuate
themselves into her confidence. Each of them
had something meritorious, with regard to Eliza-
beth, to plead in his own behalf. Henry had of-
sered her a retreat in his dominions, if the dread
of her ifter's violence flould force her to fly for
safety out of England. Philip, by his powerful
intercefflon, had prevented Mary from proceed-
ing to the moit fatal extremities againflt her.
Each of them endeavoured now, to avail himfllf
of the circumRfances in his favour. Henry wrote
to Elizabeth soon after her accefflon, with the
warmest expreflions of regard and :iriendflip.
He represented the war which had unhappily
been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a
national quarrel, but as the effcet of Mary's blind

U a partiality

IB o K partiality to her husband and fond compliance
* -. with all his wishes. He entreated her to diftn.

'553. gage herself from an alliance which had proved

so unfortunate to England, and to consent to a
separate peace with him, without mingling her
incerefts with those of Spain, from which they
ought now to be altogether disjoined. Philip,
on the other hand, unwilling to luol his connexion
with England, the importance of which, during
a rupture with France, he had so recently expe-
rienced, not only vied with Henry in declarations
of esteem for Elizabeth, and in professions of his
resolution to cultivate the ftriacti- mity with her,
but, in order to confirm and perpetuate their
unions he offered himself to her in marriage, and
undertook to procure a dispensation from the Pope
to that effect.

r",ahbeth's ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two
delibem.
,onscn. Monarchs attentively, and with that provident
ernint her
conduft. discernment of her true interest, which was con-

fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave ome
encouragement to Henry's overture of a eparate
negociation, because it opened a channel of cr
refpondence with France, which nhe might sitd
to be of great advantage, if Philip foulld not
discover sufficient zeal and solicitude for fc. uri,!!
to her proper terms in the joint treaty. B!t fl'e
ventured on this tep with the most caurions re-
serve, that flie might not alarm Philip's fsi;iicious
temper, and lose an ally in attempting to giIl

an

an enemy . Henry himfcir, by an unpardonable B o K
ac of indiscretion, prevented her from carrying '---
'her intercourse with him to such a length as 5
might have offended or alienated Philip. At the
very time when he was courting Elizabeth's friend-
ship with the greatest aliduity, he yielded with
an inconsiderate facility to the felicitations of the
Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-
law the Queen of Scots, to affulne the title and
arms of Queen of England. This ill-timed pre-
tension, the source of many calamities to the un-
fcrtunate Queen of Scots, extinguilhed at once
all the confidence that might have grown between
Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its place distrust,
resentment, and antipathy. Elizabeth found that
she must unite her interests closely with Philip's,
and expe& peace only from negociations carried
on in conjuntion with him,.

As he had granted a commission, immediately hefmpFow.
after her accefion, to the fame plenipotentiaries 'Ih,, 5t
whom her filter had employed, fle now inflruted 'tea of
them to a& in every point in concert with the ple-
nipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no ftep until
they had previously consulted with themb. But
though The deemed it prudent to afulme this ap-
pearance of confidence in the Spanish Monarch,
bhe knew precisely how far to carry it; and dif-
covered no inclination to accept of that extraor-

' Sorbes, i. p. 4. ' Strype's Annals of the Reror'-
ation, i. iI. Carte's Hill, of England. vol. iii. p. 37;.
I Sorbes' full View, i, p. 37. 40.

U 3 dinary

B o0 K dinary proposal of marriage which Philip had

XII.
-._.- made to her. The Englifi had expresscd f1
"8' openly their detestation of her sifter's choice (,f

him, that it would have been highly imprud;-z
to have exasperated them by renewing that osuiou
alliance. She was too well acquainted with Phi-
lip's harsh imperious temper, to think of him for
a husband. Nor could fne admit a diftenfation
from the Pope to be ifulicient to authorize her
marrying him, without condemning her fdiher'
divorce from Catharine of Arragon, and acl ;o -
ledging of consequence that her mother's li.r-
riage was null, and her own birth illegitiiia:c.
But though ihe determined not to yield to l',i-
lip's addresses, the situation of her affairs rendered
it dangerous to reject them; fle returned her
answer, therefore, in terms which were evaliv',
but so tempered with refpec, that though thcy
gave him no reason to be secure of success, tlecy
did not altogether extinguih his hopes.

Wecoi. BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence with
c,e- which he concealed her sentiments and intentions
Cambtcfi. concerning religion, for ome time after her ac-

ceflion, ile so far gained upon Philip, that he
warmly espoused her interest in the conferences

»559. which were renewed at Cercamp, and after-
cbruary. wards removed to Cateau-Cambrerfs. A def-

nitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims and
pretensions of so many Princes, required the ex-
amination of such a variety of intricate points,
and led to such infinite and minute details, as

drev'

drew out the negociations to a great length. But B K
the constable Montmorency exerted himself with ..--
such indefatigable zeal and industry, repairing al- '559'
ternately to the courts of Paris and Brussels, in
order to obviate or remove every difficulty, that
all points in dispute were adjuffed at length in
iuch a manner, as to give entire satisfaction in
every particular to Henry and Philip; and the
last hand was ready to be put to the treaty between
them.

THE claims of England remained as the only Difficulivs

obfRacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the wothecaim
refitution of Calais in the mot peremptory tone, "of'"1"1d
as an ellential condition of her consenting to peace;
Henry refuted to give up that important conquest;
and both seemed to have taken their resolution
with unalterable firmness. Philip warmly sup-
ported Elizabeth's pretensions to Calais, not mere-
ly from a principle of equity towards the English
nation, that he might appear to have contributed
to their recovering what they had loft by espousing
his cause; nor solely with a view of soothing Eli-
zabeth by this manifestation of zeal for her inte-
reft; but in order to render France lcfs formidable,
by securing to her ancient enemy this easy accels
into the heart of the kingdom. The earnestness,
however, with which he leconded the arguments
of the Englilh plenipotentiaries, oon began to
relax. During the course of the negociation,
Elizabeth, who now felt herself firmly feated on
her throne, began to take such open and vigorous

U measures

B 0 K measures not only for overturning all that her siser

v--y. had done in favour of popery, but for eftablihing
s39' the protestant church on a firm foundation, as

convinced Philip that his hopes of an union with
her had been from the beginning vain, and were
now desperate. From that period, his interpo-
fitions in her favour became more cold and for-
mal, flowing merely from regard to decorum, or
from the consideration of remote political inte-
refts. Elizabeth, having reason to expect such
an alteration in his condut, quickly perceived it.
But as nothing would have been of greater detri-
ment to her people, or more inconfitent with her
schemes of domeftick adlninifiration, than the
continuance of war, fle iaw the necefity of sub-
mitting to luch conditions as the situation of her
affairs inpofed, and that fie must reckon upon
being deferred by an ally who was now united to
her by a very feeble tie, if she did not speedily
reduce her demands to what was moderate and
attainable. She accordingly gave new inftruc-
tions to her ambassadors and Philip's plenipo-
tentiaries aing as mediators between the French
and therin, an expedient was fallen upon, which,
in b1mine degree, jufRified Elizabeth's departing
from the rigour of her firls demand with regard
to Calais. All leier articles were fettled wvithoi!
much diicuflion or delay. Philip, that he nig'it
not appear to have abandoned the Engliilh, in-
fited that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth

c Sorbes, i. 59.

ihou'i.

should be concluded in form, before that between B o o K
the French monarch and him. The one was sign- a
ed on the second day of April, the other on the 'ss9'
day following.

THe treaty of peace between France and Eng- A^tile f
land contained no articles of real importance, but t-.cn

tric~ and

that which rfpeaed Calais. It was flipulated, ,l"a
That the King of France hould retain pofelon
of that town, with all its dependencies, during
eight years; That, at the expiration of that tern,
he should restore it to England; That in cafe of
nun-performance, he hould forfeit five hundred
thousand crowns, for the payment of which fim,
fcven or eight wealthy merchants, who were not
his subje&s, should grant security; rThat five
persons of diftinfion should be given as hoalages
until that security were provided; That, although
the forfeit of five hundred thou:and crowns floui l
be paid, the right of England to Cl:,is flo,:ld
till remain entire, in the ime manner as ': the
term of cight years were expired; Th. t g
and Queen of Scotland ihould be includtd .
treaty; That if they, or the French King, i
violate the peace by any hoflile ation, t. r
should be obliged instantly to restore C,
That, on the other hand, if any breach oi .
treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then Henry, l
the King and Qicen of Scots were absolved fr,,
all the engagements which they had come un.. r
by this treaty,

NOrWITH-

/
B 0 0 K NOTWITHSTANDING the fludied attention witl

XII.

i ..- . which so many precautions were taken, it is evi-
ThSs9ef dent that Henry did not intend the rcetitution of
both ^Ai` Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth expeCted
to thee it. It was hardly poflible that he could main-

tain, during the course of eight years, such per-
fee concord both with France and Scotland, as
not to afford Henry some pretext for alleging
that she had violated the treaty. But even if that
term flould clapfe without any ground for co:n-
plaint, Henry might then chufe to pay the fum
stipulated, and Elizabeth had no method of as-
serting her right but by force of arms. Howe-
ver, by throwing the articles in the treaty with
regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth satisfied
her subje&s of every denomination; i he gave men
of discernment a striking proof of her address, in
palliating what (he could not prevent; and alnu-
fed the multitude, to whom the ceflion of such
an important place would have appeared alroge-
ther infamous, with the profpet of recovering in
a short time that favourite possession.

Anaexpedi. THE expedient which Montmorency employed,
cut which
promotes in order to facilitate the conclusion of peace be-
nebe' tween France and Spain, was the negociating
hineS nd two treaties of marriage, one between Elizabeth,

Henry's eldeit daughter, and Philip, who sup-
planted his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to
whom that Princess had been promised in the for-
mer conferences at Cercamp; the other between

Margarer,

Margaret, Henry's only fitler, and the Duke of K
Savoy. For feeble as the ties of blood often are *.-
among Princes, or how little oever they may re- '5S5
gard them when pushed on to at by motives of
ambition, they aflume on other occasions the ap-
pearance of being o far inluenced by there do-
ineflick afleffions, as to employ them to jultify
measures and concteions which they find to be
necessary, but know to be impolitick or dilho-
nourable. Such was the ule Hlenry made of the
two marriages to which he gave his conlent.
Having secured an honourable ctcablilhment for
his filler and his daughter, he, in consideration
of there, granted terms both to Philip and the
Duke of Savoy, of which he would nor, on any
other account, have ventured to approve.

THE principal articles in the treaty between Theterms

of pacifica-

France and Spain were, That a sincere and per- tion.
petual amity hould be eltablifled between the
two crowns and their rel)ective allies That the
two monarchs Ihould labour in concert to procure
the convocation of a general council, in order to
check the progress of heresy, and reitore unity
and concord to the Chriflian church That all
conquests made by either party, on this fide of
the Alps, since the commencement of the war in
one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, should
be mutually reltored; That the dutchy of Sa-
voy, the principality of Piedmont, the country
of Breffe, and all the other territories formerly sub-
jef t the Dukes of Savoy, hould be restored to

3 Emanuel

B3 0 K Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the cele-

XU1.

A,-~ bration of his marriage with Margaret of France,
'isg. the towns of Turin, Qier, Plgnerol, Chivaz,

and Villanova excepted, of which Henry lhould
keep possession until his claims on that Prince, in
right of his grandmother, hould be heard and
decided in course of law, That as long as Henry
retained these places in his hands, Philip hould
ie at liberty to keep garrions in the towns of
Verccili and Alti That the French King hould
immediately evacuate all the places which he held
in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and renounce all
future pretenlions to them; that he hould re-
store the mrarquifate of Montserrat to the Duke
of Mantua; that he should receive the Genoese
into favour, and give up to them the towns which
he had conquered in the island of Corsica; that
none of the Princes or states, to whom there cef-
ions were made, ihould call their fubjets to ac-
count for any part of their conduct while under
the dominion of their enemies, but hould bury
all pas tranfations in oblivion. The Pope, the
Emperor, the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Po-
land, Portugal, the King and Qecen of Scots,
and alnoft every Prince and Rate i Chrifendom,
were comprehended in this pacification as the al-
lies either of Henry or of Philip".

wn:r, ,B. THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re-
,tanuliy cflablilhed in Europe. All the causes of discord

d P.ecueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 287.

which

which had so long embroiled the powerful moo- a o K
narchs of France and Spain, which had transmit- D
ted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles to '"9
Philip, and from Francis to Henry, seemed to be
wholly removed, or finally terminated. The'
French alone complained of the unequal condi-
tions of a treaty, into which an ambitious mini-
lter, in order to recover his liberty, and an artful
mistress, that she might gratify her refentmenrt,
had reduced their too easy monarch. They ex-
claimed lou:;iy against the folly of giving up to
the enemies of France an hundred and eighty-
nine fortified places, in the Low-Countries or in
Italy, in return for the three infinificant towns
of St. Quintin, Ham, and Catelet. They con-
fidered it as an indelible stain upon the glory of
the nation, to renounce in one day territories so
extensive, and so capable of being defended, that
the enemy could not have hoped to wrest them
out of their hands, after many years of victory
and success.

BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments Thl,. a.

of his people, or being moved by the remon- -,c,,-
ftrances of his council, ratified the treaty, and A."r
executed with great fidelity whatever he had i-
pulated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired
with a numerous retir,.i t Paris, in oder to
celebrate iis marriage va',: Henr':'s frl'er. The
duke of Aiva was sent to :: fame apitai, at the
head of splendid en'>a-:., to L.oiO!e Eli-
zabech in name of his maiLer. 'i '.: were

s reccived

B 0 0 K received with extraordinary magnificence by the

XII.

. .-~- French court. Amidst the rejoicings and fefli-

Death 9f vities on that occasion, Henry's days were cut
IsToy. short by a singular and tragical accident. HiJ
July o.

son, Francis II. a Prince under age, of a weak
constitution, and of a mind lTill more feeble, fuc-
ceeded him. Soon after, Paul ended his violent
and imperious Pontificate, at enmity with all the
world, and difguiled even with his own nephews.
They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted by the
succeeding Pope, whom they had raised by their
influence to the papal throne, were condemned
to the punishment which their crimes and ambi-
tion had merited, and their death was as infamous
as their lives had been criminal. Thus most of
the personages, who had long sustained the prin-
cipal characters on the great theatre of Europe,
disappeared about the fame time. A more known
period of history opens at this aera; other aors
enter upon the stage, with different views, as well
as different paflions; new contests arose, and new
schemes of ambition occupied and disquieted
mankind.

A teneal UPON reviewing the tranfations of any alcive
r-view of
thewhole period in the history of civilized nations, the
1tpiod. changes which are accomplifled appear wonder-

fully disproportioned to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquefs are never very exten-
five or rapid, but among nations whose progress
in improvement is extremely unequal. When
Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant

people,

people, of simple manners, and formed to war B 0°
by admirable military institutions, invaded a state *-.~_
funk in luxury, and enervated by exceflive refine-
ment; when Genchizcan and Tamerlane, with
their armies of hardy barbarians, poured in upon
nations, enfeebled by the climate in which they
lived, or by the arts and commerce which they
cultivated, these conquerors, like a torrent, swept
every thing before them, subduing kingdoms and
provinces in as short a space of time as was re-
quifite to march through them. But when na-
tions are in a state similar to each other, and keep
equal pace in their advances towards refinement,
they are not exposed to the calamity of udden
conquests. Their acquisitions of knowledge, their
progress in the art of war, their political sagacity
and address, are nearly equal. The fate of fates
in this situation, depends not on a single battle.
Their internal resources are many and various.
Nor are they themselves alone interested in their
own safety, or acive in their own defence. Other
states interpose, and balance any temporary ad-
vantage which either party may have acquired.
After the fiercest and mofl lengthened contest, all
the rival nations are exhausted, none are con-
quered. At length, a peace is concluded, which
reinstates each in pofeffion of almost the fame
power and the fame territories.

SvcH was the state of Europe during the reign The nations

of Europe in

of Charles V. No Prince was so much superior a f.,ilar
to the reR in power, as to render his efforts irre- thrixtcsn,

nftiblex ccntury*

b ox K fiftible, 'and his conquests easy. No nation had

X11.. made progress in improvement so far beyond its

neighbours, as to have acquired a very manifefc
pre-eminence. Each state derived ome advan.
tage, or was fubjeft to some inconvenience, from
its situation or its climate; each was diftinguilhed
by something peculiar in the genius of its people,
or the constitution of its government. But the
advantages possessed by one state, were counter-
balanced by circumstances favourable to others;
and this prevented any from attaining such fupe-
riority as might have been fatal to all. The na-
tions of Europe in that age, as in the present,
were like one great family; there were ome sea-
tures common to all, which fixed a resemblance;
there were certain peculiarities cnfpicuous in
each, which marked a diftinaion. But there was
not among them that wide diversity of chara&ser
and of genius which, in almost every period of
history, hath exalted the Europeans above the in-
habitants of the other quarters of the globe, and
seems to have destined the one to rule, and the
other to obey.

A fem.rlk. BUT though the near resemblance and equality
able ch..Ige i j
i ,theit.e n improvement among the different nations of
fS,'' c Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V. from
rigsof being dil'cinguilhed by such sudden and extensive
Cabarile V.

conquelts as occur in so;ne other perios of his-
tory, yet, during the con.fe of his adminiilra-
tion, all the conidcrabl. !ites in t srope fufered
a remarkable change in their political situation

and

and felt the influence of events, which have not B O O C
hitherto spent their force, but till continue to --
operate in a greater or in a less degree. It was
during his reign, and in consequence of the per-
petual efforts to which his enterprizing ambition
routed him, that the different kingdoms of Eu-
rope acquired internal vigour; that they discern-
ed the resources of which they were possessed; that
they came both to feel their own strength, and to
know how to render it formidable to others. It
was during his reign, too, that the different king-
doms of Europe, formerly tingle and disjoined,
became so thoroughly acquainted, and so intimate-
ly conneted with each other, as to form one great
political system, in which each took a ation,
wherein it has remained since that time with less
variation than could have been expe&ed after the
events of two a&ive centuries.

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of the The no-

house of Austria, were not only greater than those ofi. 0o
of any other power, but more discernible and Auslri.
conspicuous. I have already enumerated the valt
territories which descended to Charles from his
Austrian, Burgundian, and Spanilh ancellors .
To these he himself added the Imperial dignity
and, as if all this had been too little, the bounds
of the habitable globe seemed to be extended,
and a new world was fubjeced to his command.
Upon his resignation, the Burgundian provinces,

'* %V. ii. p.2.
VOL. IV. X and

B 0 0 K and the Spanilh kingdoms with their dependen-

X1I.
,--.- , cies, both in the old and new worlds, devolved to

Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions
to his son, in a condition very different from that
in which he had received them. They ere
augmented by the acceflion of new provinces;
they were habituated to obey an administration
which was no less vigorous than eady; they
were accustomed to expensive and persevering
efforts, which, though necessary in the contests
between civilized nations, had been little known
in Europe before the sixteenth century. The pro-
vinces of Friesland, Utretcht, and Overyffel,
which he acquired by purchase from their former
proprietors, and the dutchy of Gueldres, of
which he made himself master, partly by force of
arms, partly by the arts of negociation, were
additions of great value to his Burgundian do-
minions. Ferdinand and Isabella had tranfinit-
ted to him all the provinces of Spain, from the
bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portu-
gal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace with
that kingdom, amidst the various efforts of his
enterprizing ambition, he made no'acquifition of
territory in that quarter.
Pr;licauarly CHARLES had gained, however, a vast accession

n Sl of power in this part of his dominions. By his

success in the war with the commons of Cafile,
he exalted the regal prerogative upon the ruins
of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the

6 Cortes

Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it B o K
to be continued, he reduced its authority and .
jurisdiction to nothing, and modelled it in such a
manner, that it became rather a junto of the ser-
vants of the crown, than an aflembly of the re-
prefentacives of the people. One member of the
confitution being thus lopped off, it was impof-
fble but that the other must feel the stroke, and
susser by it. The fuppreflion of the popular power
rendered the ariftocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the
age, or allured by the honours which they enjoy-
ed in a court, exhauffed their fortunes in military
service, or in attending on the person of their
Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did not
observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain ditindion
of being covered in preence of their sovereign,
stripped them, by degrees, of that real power
which they possessed while they formed one body,
and aed in concert with the people. Charles's
success in abolifling the privileges of the com-
mons, and in breaking the power of the nobles
of Caltile, encouraged Philip to invade the liber-
ties of Arragon, which were fill more extensive.
The Caffilians, accustomed to fubjeaion them-
iclves, aflifted in impofihg the yoke on their more
happy and independent neighbours. The will
of the overeign became the supreme law in all
the kingdoms of Spain; and princes who were not
checked in forming their plans by the jealousy of
the people, nor controled in executing them by

X tlhe

B o o K the power of the nobles, could both aim at great
,- .-' objects, and call forth the whole strength of the

monarchy in order to attain them.

Aloo; t As Charles, by extending the royal preroga-
»f E.rorc. tive, rendered tile rronarchs of Spain masters at

home, he added new dignity and power to their
crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet possession of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud,
and held with difficulty. He united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the mort fertile and populous
Italian provinces, to the Spanilh crown; and left
his ucceflors, even without taking their other
territories into the account, the most considerable
Princes in Italy, which had been long the theatre
of contention to the great powers of Europe,
and in which they had struggled with emulation
to obtain the superiority. When the French, in
conformity to the treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis,
withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally re-
linquifled all their schemes of conquef on that
tide of the Alps, the Spanish dominions then roi
in importance, and enabled their Kings, as long
as the monarchy retained any degree of vigour,
to prefcrve the chief sivay in all the transactions
of that country. But whatever accefion either
of interior authority or of foreign dominion
Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain in Eu-
rope, it was inconlidlcrable when compared with
his acquisitions in the new world. He added
there, not provinces, but empires to his crown.

He

He conquered territories of such immense ex- B O O K
tent; he discovered such inexhaufliblc veins of .-..
wealth, and opened such boundleis prospects of
every kind, as mufl have roufled his 'lucceiibr, and
have called him forth to aion, though his am-
biion had been much less ardent than Philip's,
and muf have rendered him not only cnterprizing
but formidable.

;VLtrLE te c!ider branch of the Auffrian family P.ogr.c of

rose to llch pre-eminence in Sp.ain, the younger, 'j"' ':, '
of which Ferdinand was the head, grew to be tile l;t:e

of Aultlrh..

considerable in German". The ancient hercditary
dominions of the houie of Austria in Germany,
united to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia,
which Ferdinand had acquired by nulriag,
formed a respectable power; and when the Im-
perial dignity was added to these, Ferdinand pol-
fefed territories more extensive than had belong-
ed to any Prince, Charles V. excepted, who had
been at the head of the Empire during several
ages. Fortunately for Europe, the dilguft which
Philip conceived on account of Ferdinand's re-
fusing to relinquish the Imperial crown in his
favour, not only preventec for fonme time the
fcparate members of the house of Au:ria fro;n
ading in concert, but occalioncd a visible alien-
ation and rivalflhip. By degrees, however, re-
gard to the intcrelt of their failily extinguifled
this impolitical animosity. The confidence which
was natural retturned; te aggrandizing of the
house of Austria became the commllon object of

' 3 a.l

B 0oo T; all their schemes; they gave and received aift-
*-*-y-v ance alternately towards the execution of then;

and each derived consideration and importance
fronm t other's fiicc,.s. A family so great and
so asp:.:: , bec::me the general object ofjea'l.fy
and terror. All the power, as well as policy, of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order
to check and humble it. Nothing can give a more
'riking ilea of the ascendant which it had ac-
quired, and of the terror which it had inspired, than
that after its vigour was spent with extraordinary
exertions of its strength, after Spain was become
only the shadow of a great name, and its mo-
narchs were funk into debility and dotage, the
house of Auflria flill continued to be formidable.
The nations of Europe had so often felt its fupe-
rior power, and had been so constantly employed
in guarding against it, that the dread of it became
a kind of political habit, the influence of which
remained when the caulis, which had formed it,
ceased to exill.

Acquifit 'on WHILE the house of Austria went on with such
of the Kings
,f rFlce success in enlarging its dominions, France made
^'.ii,,ic no considerable acquisition of new territory.
Cnaris V. All its schemes of conquest in Italy had proved

abortive; it had hitherto obtained no establish-
ment of confiquence in the new world; and after
the continued and vigorous efforts of four fuc-
ceffive reigns, the confines of the kingdom were
much the fIlne as Louis XI. had left them. But
though France made not ihch large strides to-

wards

wards dominion as the house of Austria, it con- B o K

XII.

tinued to advance by steps which were more fe- --
cure, because they were gradual and less obfcrved.
The conquest of Calais put it out of the power
of the English to invade France but at their ut-
most peril, and delivered the French from the
dread of their ancient enemies, who, previous to
that event, could at any time penetrate into the
ki!ngdom by that avenue, and thereby retard or
defeat the execution of their best concerted en-
terprizes againfi any foreign power. The im-
portant acquisition of Metz, covered that part of
their frontier which formerly was most feeble,
and lay most expoled to insult. France, from
the time of its obtaining these additional fecuri-
ties against external invasion, mull be deemed
the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and is
more fortunately situatcd than any on the Conti-
nent either for conquest or defence. From the
confines of Artois to the bottom of the Pyrenees,
and from the British channel to the frontiers of
Savoy and the coast of the Mediterranean, its
territories lay compact and unmingled with those
of any other power. Several of the considerable
provinces, which had contracted a spirit of inde-
pendence by their having been long fiubjce to
the great vassals of the crown, who were often at
variance or at war with their malter, were now
accustomed to recognize and to obey one fove-
reign. As they became members of the fame
monarchy, they assumed the sentiments of that
body into which clcy were incorporated, and co-

X 4 operated

B O K operated with zeal towards promoting its interest
* _ and honour. The power and influence vreflc.t

from the nobles were seized by the crown. The
people were not admitted to {Ihare in thci: foils;
they gained no new privilege; they acquired no
additional weight in the legislature. It w;ns not
for the fake of the people, but in order to extc: n
their own prerogative, that the monarchs of
France had laboured to humble their great v::'l ;.
Satisfied with having brought them under entilr
fubjetion to the crown, they discovered no soli-
citude to free the people from their ancient dc-
pendence on the nobles of whom they held.
T: ' c A YMONARCH, at the head of a kingdom t!:.:

n,:. n united at home and secure from abroad, was en-

hi,'n arr. titled to form great designs, because he felt him-
th, -owrs self in a condition to execute them. The foreign

wars which had continued with little interruption
firom the acceflion of Charles VIII. had not only
cherihed and augmented the martial genius of
the nation, but by inuring the troops during the
course of long service to the fatigues of war, and
accustoming them to obediencc, had added the
force of discipline, to their natural ardour. A
gallant and active body of nobles, who conde. -
ed thelclvs as idle and lilefs, unless v.i;ii
thcy were in the field; who were hardly acqai:;t-
ed with any pastime or ercifi' but what v;:';
riilitar); and vwho lknew no road t') pnocr, cr
fE.me, or wealth, but wavr, would not have i:: -
,ti their tbvotcri: : to remain long in inai':;

.1S 1'1:c

The people, little acquainted with the arts of B 0l KS
peace, and always ready to take arms at the corn- .-_i
Inand of their superiors, were accuflomeed, by the
vast expence of long wars carried on in distant
countries, to bear impositions, which, however
inconsiderable they may seem if estimated by the
exorbitant rate of modern exations, appear in-
mense when compared with the fums levied in
France, or in any other country of Europe, pre-
vious to the reign of Louis XI. As all the mem-
bers of which the slate was composed wert thus
impatient for ation, and capable of great efforts,
the schemes and operations of France must have
been no less formidable to Europe than thole of
Spain. The superior advantages of its situation,
the contiguity and compa&nefs of its territories,
together with the peculiar state of its political
constitution at that jun&ure, must have rendered
its enterprizes still more alarming and more de-
cifive. The King possessed such a degree of
power as gave him the entire command of his
subje&s; the people were strangers to thoe oc-
cupations and habits of life which render men
averse to war, or unfit for it; and the nobles,
though reduced to the subordination neceiary in
a regular government, till retained the high un-
daunted spirit which was the effec of their an-
cient independence. The vigour of the Feudal
times remained, their anarchy was at an end;
and the Kings of France could avail themselves
of the martial ardour which that singular infti-
tution had kindled or kept alive, without being

exposed

B OOKX exposed to any of the dangers or inconveniencie¢

__- which are inseparable from it when in eii;

force.

C:rcmftaln A KINGDOM in such a (tate is, perhaps, cap.b;1
(es which
rlveated of greater military efforts than at any o;l!,
t:te ffefs, period in its progress. But how formidable :.-
Oi 'h r ever or fatal to the other nations of Europe :he

power of such a monarchy might have been, ti:e
civil wars which broke out in France saved thtn
at that junture from feeling its efTects. These
wars, of which religion was the pretext and am-
bition the cause, wherein great abilities were r!;i-
played by the leaders of the different fatior,s,
and little conduct or firmness were manifested by
the crown under a fucceflon of weak Princes,
kept France occupied and embroiled for half a
century. During these commotions the internal
strength of the kingdom was much wafted, and
such a spirit of anarchy was spread among te
nobles, to whom rebellion was familiar, and the
restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable in-
terval became requisite not only for recruiting the
internal vigour of the nation, but for re-eftablilh-
ing the authority of the Prince; so that it was
long before France could turn her whole attention
towards foreign tranfaffions, or act with her pro-
per force in foreign wars. It was long before file
rose to that afccndant in Europe which fle has
maintained since the administration of Cardinal
Richlieu, and which the ficuation as well as extent
of the kingdom, the nature of her government,

together

together with the charaer of her people, entitle B O o
her to maintain.

WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew Pogrefsof
into power and conequence, Enan likewise withflrpe
made considerable progress towards regular go- 'ar ,^t.
vernment and interior ftrengrh. lenry VIII.
probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any conflltent plan, of which his nature was
incapable, pursued the 'cheme of depressing the
noility, which the policy of hIis father Henry VII.
ilad begun. The pride and caprice of his tem-
per led him to employ chiefly new men in the
administration of affairs, because he found them
most obsequious, or least scrupulous; and he not
only conferred on them such plenitude of power,
but exalted them to such pre-eminence in dignity,
as mortified and degraded the ancient nobility.
By the alienation or sale of the church lands,
vwhich were dissipated with a profuion not inferior
to the rapaciousness with which they had been
leized, as well as by the privilege granted to the
ancient landholders of felling their efates, or
disposing of them by will, an immense property,
formerly locked up, was brought into circulation.
This put the spirit of industry and commerce in
notion, and gave it fomc considerable degree of
vigour. The road to power and to opulence
b1,camie open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and excessive flow of wealth from the Weft
Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain; a mo-
derate accetliun in England to the um in circu-

lation

B 0 0 lation ave life to commerce, awakened the in-
.-~ genuity of the nation, and e::cited it to useful

enterprize. In France, what the nobles loft the
crown gained. In England, the commons were
gainers as well as the King. Power and influence
accompanied of course the property which they
acquired. They rcle to consideration among their
fellow-fubjecs; they began to feel their own im-
portance and extending their influence in the
iegiflative body gradually, and often vwhen neither
they themselves nor others foresaw all the effct
of their claims and pretensions, they at las a-
tained that high authority, to which the Britiih
constitution i indebted tbr the existence, anl
must owe the preservation of its liberty. At thi
l:ame time that the English constitution advancc. d
towards perfecion, several circumstances broughL
on a change in the ancient system with refped to
toreign powcrs, and introduced another more
beneficial to the nation. As soon as Henry
dificaimed the fpremacy of the Papal See, and
broke off all connexion with the Papal court,
considerable fums were saved to the nation, of
which it had been annually drained by remit-
tances to Rome for dispensations and indulgences,
by the expence of pilgrimages into foreign coun-
tries , or by payment of annates, firit fruits,

and

' Ti: lo,- w\lil tile nation fuflaincd by most of thcfe

.:iicIcs is cbvious, nd mult have been great. Even tl:at
1':, pil'ri:nigc'. w'.! not inconiderable. In the y!cr ;A :'
licnce wa.1s obtainrd by no t wer lthan 916 persons to iii.

and a thousand other taxes which that artful and B o o0

XI.

rapacious court levied on the credulity of man-
kind. The exercise of a jurisdiction different
from the civil power, and claiminil not only to be
independent but superior to it, a wild solecism in
government, apt not only to perplex and disquiet
weakminds, but tending directly to dilturb society,
was finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more refpeclable, when no rank
or charater exempted any perlon from being
amenable to the fame courts, from being tried by
the fame judges, and fiom being acquitted or
condemned by the fame laws.

BY the loss of Calais the English were excluded w;i . e.

from the continent. All ichemes for invading a,irst'!
France became of coure as chimerical as they c'u"'""l'
had formerly been pernicious. The views of the
English were confined, firll by necefltty, and
afterwards from choice, within their own iand.
That rage for conquell which had pofefhied the
nation during many centuries, and walted its
flrength in perpetual and fruitle.s wars, ceased
at length. Those aive spirits which had known
and fllowed no profelion but war, bought for
occupation in the arts of peace, and their country
benefited as much by the one as it had suffered
by the other. The nation, exhaufled by frequent

the hrine of St. James of Composlella in S'pain. Rymer,
vol. x. p. . In l4:.. the number of pilgrims to the
fime place was 2.60o. Ibid. p. In 1.}. thley were
aico, vol. xi. p. .

expeditions

B O O K expeditions to the continent, recruited, and ac-

x.[ . quired new strength; and when roused by an?

extraordinary exigency to take part in foreign
operations, the vigour of its efforts were propor-
tionally great, because they were only occasional
and of a hort continuance.

With re. THE fame principle which had led England to
S'olnd. adopt this new system with regard to the power.

on the continent, occasioned a change in its plan
of condut with refpet to Scotland, the only
foreign fate, with which, bn account of its fitua-
tion in the fame island, the English had such a
clole connexion as demanded their perpetual at-
tention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient
scheme of conquering that kingdom, which th
nature of the country, defended by a brave and
hardy people, rendered dangerous if not im-
practicable; it appeared more eligible to endea-
vour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as
might exempt England from any danger or dif-
quiet from that quarter. The national poverty
of the Scots, together with the violence and ani-
mofity of their factions, rendered the execution of
this plan easy to a people far superior to them in
wealth. Their popular leaders were gained; the
ministers and favourites of the crown were cor-
rupted; and such absolute direction of their
councils acquired, as rendered the operations of
the one kingdom dependent, in a great measure,
on the sovereign of the other. Such perfea ex-
ternal security added to the interior advantages

which

which England now possessed, must soon have aB o K
raised it to new consideration and importance; --
the long reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous
for wisdom, for steadiness, and for vigour, ac-
celerated its progress, and carried it with greater
rapidity towards that elevated station which it
hath since held among the powers of Europe.

DURINC the period in which the political Rate Chals li
of the great kingdoms underwent such changes, f.te ofth
ievolutions of considerable importance happened pe, ia,
in that of the secondary or inferior powers. Europe.
Those in the papal court are most obvious, and of
most extensive consequence.

IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned Themo:

the rife of that spiritual jurifdi&tion which the co^fidibtl
Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have of the si-
traced the progress of that authority which they tuyin the
possess as temporal Princes*. There was no- Rome.
thing previous to the reign of Charles V. that
tended to circumscribe or to moderate their au-
thority, but science and philosophy, which began
to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of
these, however, was still inconfidcrable; they
always operate slowly; and it is long before their
influence reaches the people, or can produce any
sensible efrtct upon them. They may perhaps
gradually, and in a long course of years, under-
mine and lhake an eftablilhed fytemn of faire re-

Vol.i. p. :+9. &c.

liion,

B o o K ligion, but there is no instance of their having
AI._. overturned one. The battery is too feeble to de-

molilh those fabricks which superstition raises on
deep foundations, and can strengthen with tllh
most consummate art.

The general LUTHER had attacked the Papal fupremacv
rCvoI at
gaift , with other weapons, and with an impetuofitv
dotrines
the church more formidable. The time and manner of his
of Rome" attack concurred with a multitude of circum-
and the
powerof stances, which have been explained, in givilg

him immediate success. The charm which had
bound mankind for so many ages was broken ;:c
once. The human mind, which had continued
long as tame and pallive, as if it had been formed
to believe whatever was taught, and to bea.
whatever was imposed, roused of a sudden, ai
became inquisitive, mutinous, and disdainful o'
the yoke to which it had hitherto ubmitted.
That wonderful ferment and agitation of mind,
which, at this distance of time, appears unac-
countable, or is condemned as extravagant, was
so general, that it must have been excited by
caulfs which were natural and of powerful e-
cacy. The kingdoms of Denmark, Swedcn,
England and Scotland, and almost one half of
Germany, threw off their allegiance to the Popc,
abolilhed his jurifdi&ion within their territories,
and gave the fan&ion of law to modes of dil'i-
pline and yftems of dotrine which were not on;y
independent of his power, but hostile to it. Nor
was this spirit of innovation confined to tl.hc:

CoUIuntl i;

countries which openly revolted from the Pope; °,,j°
it spread through all Europe, and broke out in *- -
every part of it with various degrees of violence.
It penetrated early into France, and made pro-
grefs apace. In that kingdom, the number of
converts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal so enterprizing, and the abilities
of their leaders so ditinguilhed, that they oon
ventured to contend for superiority with the efta-
blilhed church, and were sometimes on the point
of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany
which continued to acknowledge the Papal fupre-
macy, as well as in the Low Countries, the Pro-
teftant dotrines were secretly taught, and had
gained so many proselytes, that they were ripe
for revolt, and were refrained merely by the
dread of their rulers from imitating the example
of their neighbours, and asserting their independ-
ence. Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of
the fame disposition to hake off the yoke appear-
ed. The pretensions of the Pope to infallible
knowledge and supreme powver were treated by
many persons of eminent learning and abilities
with such scorn, or impugned with such vehe-
mence, that the most vigilant attention of the
civil magistrate, the highest firains of pontifi-
cal authority, and all the rigour of inquisitorial
jurifdi&ion were requisite to check and extin-
guifh it.

THE defecion of so many opulent and power- Thiabtid.
ful kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal teltnf the

rVOL. V. Y blow mPonFe'
VoL. IV. Y blow mi,io.«,

B 0

o K blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged the
y-J dominions of the Popes in extent, it diminilhed

their revenues, and left them fewer rewards to
bellow on the ecclefiafticks of various denormi
nations, attached to them by vows of obedience
as well as by ties of interest, and whom they em.
ployed as instruments to establish or support their
usurpations in every part of Europe. The coun-
tries too which now disclaimed their authority,
were tholf which formerly had been molt devoted
to it. The empire of superstition differs from
every other species of dominion its power is
often greatest, and most implicitly obycci in the
provinces most remote from the feat of govern-
ment; while fltch as are ituated nearer to that,
are more apt to discern the artifices by which it is
upheld, or the impostures on which it is found-
ed. The personal frailties or vices of the Popes,
the errors as well as corruption of their admini-
ftration, the ambition, venality, and deceit which
reigned in their courts, fell immediately under
the observation of the Italians, and could not fail
of diminilhing that refpea which begets fubmif-
sion. But in Gernmany, England, and the more
remote countries, there were either altogether
unknown, or being only known by repvrt, made
a fighter impression. Their venera:ton tor ';e
Papal dignity increased with their distance tromn
Rome; and that, added to their gross ignorance,
rendered them equally credt!lous and panfivz. i
tracing the progress of the Papal domination, rr
boldett and most successful inftanccs of encro c'-

11KI11

ment are to be found 'in Germany and other B o OK
countries distant from Italy. In these its impo- -
fitions were heaviest, and its exa&ions the most
rapacious; io that in estimating the diminution of
power which the court of Rome suffered in confe-
quence of the Reformation, not only the number
but the charater of the people who revolted, not
only the great extent of territory, but the extra-
ordinary obsequiousness of the subjects which it
lolt, must be taken into the account.

NOR was it only by this defection of so many *ad oblige,

them to

kingdoms and states which the Reformation oc- change the
carloned, that it contributed to diminish the tii, go.
power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them. vernm"'.
to adopt a different system of conduct towards
the nations which still continued to recognise
their jurifdi&ion, and to govern them by new
maxims and with a milder spirit. The Reform-
ation taught them, by a fatal example, what
they seem not before to have apprehended, that
the credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and exhauaed. They became
afraid of venturing upon any such exertion of
their authority as might alarm or exasperate their
subje&s, and excite them to a new revolt. They
saw a rival church :ilablifihed in nmany countries
of Europe, the nmemiers of which were on the
watch to oblerve any errors in their adiiniltra-
tion, and eager to expose them. They were
sensible that the opinions, a tlverfe to their power
ard uirpations, were not cuilincd to their ene-

Y 2 ies

B O O mries alone, but had' pread. even among the
X ., people who still adhered to.them. Upon all these

accounts, it was no longer poilble to lead or to
govern their flock in the fame manner as in those
dark and quiet ages, when faith was implicit,
when fubmiflion was unreserved, and all tamely
followed and obeyed the voice of their hepherd.
From the era of the Reformation, the Popes have
ruled rather by address and management than
by authority. The style of their decrees is the
fame, but the effet of them is very different.
Those Bulls and Interdits which, before the Re-
formation, made the greatef Princes tremble,
have since that period been disregarded or de-
spifed by the most inconsiderable. Those bold
decisions and as of jurifdi&ion which, during
many ages, not only passed uncenfured, but were
revered as the awards of a sacred tribunal, would,
since Luther's appearance, be treated by one
part of Europe as the effte of folly or arrogance,
and be detested by the other as impious and
unjust. The Popes, in their administration, have
been obliged not only to accommodate them-
selves to the notions of their adherents, but to
pay some regard to the prejudices of their ene-
mies. They seldom venture to claim new
powers, or even to inift obstinately on their an-
cient prerogatives, left they hould irritate the
former they carefully avoid every measure that
may either excite the indignation or draw on them
the derision of the latter. The policy of the
court of Rome has become as cautious, circum-

5 fpe&,

fpe&, and timid, as it was once adventurous and B 0o

o E

violent; and though their pretensions to infalli- . --
bility, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurifdition
which they have at any time claimed or exercised,
they find it expedient to susser many of their pre-
rogatives to lie dormant, and not to expose
themselves to the rifque of losing that remainder
of power, which they still enjoy, by ill-timed at-
tempts towards reviving oboblete pretensions.
Before the sixteenth century, the Popes were
the movers and direcors in every considerable en-
terprize; they were at the head of every great
alliance; and being conEfdered as arbiters in
the affairs of Chritcendom, the court of Rome
was the centre of political negociation and in-
trigue. From that time, the greatest operations
in Europe have been carried on independent of
them ; they have funk almost to a level with the
other petty Princes of Italy; they continue to
claim, though they dare not exercise, the fame
spiritual jurifdicion, but hardly retain any fna-
dow of the temporal power which they anciently
pofTelfd.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may TheRe-

have been to the power of the Popes, it contri- contriute
buted to improve the church of Rome both in h't.hec;,
science and in morals. The desire of equalling oh In,nd
the reformers in those talents which had pro- mr',.
cured them refpet; the necesity of acquiring

Y 3 the

B o o the knowledge requisite for defending their own

_,>v tenets, or refuting the arguments of their oppo-

nents, together with the emulation natural be-
tween two rival churches, engaged the Roman
Catholick clergy to apply themfclves to the study
of useful science, which they cultivated with such
afliduity and success, that they have gradually be-
come as eminent in literature, as they were in
some periods infamous for ignorance. The fame
principle occasioned a change no ies confiderablc
in the morals of the Romilh clergy. Various
causes which have formerly been enumerated,
had concurred in introducing great irregularity,
and even dissolution of manners among the popifi
clergy. Luther and his adherents began their
attack on the church with such vehement in-
vetives against these, that, in order to remove
the scandal, and silence their declamations,
greater decency of conduct became necesSary.
The Reformers themselves were so eminent not
only for the purity but even auftcrity of their
manner, and had acquired such reputation among
the people on that account, that the Roman
Catholick Clergy mul have soon loft all credit,
if they had not endeavoured to conform in some
measure to their standard. They knew that all
their acions fell under the severe infpelion of
t!: Protef.rntF, whom enmity and emulation
prompted to obfcrve every vice, or even impro-
pricty in their conduct to censure them without
inlulgence, and to expose them without nlercy.

Ti;,

This rendered them, of course, not only cautious B 0 0 K
to avoid such enormities as might give offence, ,
but fludious to acquire the virtues which might
merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the
tyrannical jurifdi&ion of the Inquisition cruihed
the Proreftant faith as oon as it appeared, the
spirit of Popery continues invariable; science has
made fnall progress, and the chara&ter of eccle-
fiafticks has undergone little change. But in
those countries where the members of the two
churches have mingled freely with each other,
or have carried on any considerable intercourse,
either commercial or literary, an extraordinary
alteration in the ideas, as well as in the morals
of the Popih ecclefiafticks, is manifelt. In
France, the manners of the Dignitaries and fe-
cular clergy have become decent and exemplary
in an high degree. Many of them have been
diftinguilhed for all the accomplishments and vir-
tues which can adorn their profeflion; and differ
greatly from their predecessors before the Re-
formation, both in their maxims and in their
condut.

NOR has the influence of the Reforiation been The efcTal

of it cxtcnd

felt only by the inferior members of the Roman to thecha.
Catholick Church; it has extended to the See of poa ofphe
Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Vio- t'hf*cl
lations of decorum, and even trespasses against
morality, which pafled without censure in those
ages, when neither the power of the Popes, nor

Y4 the

B X0 K the veneration of the people for their charaaer,
=- had any bounds; when there was no hotile eye

to observe the errors in their condut, and no ad-
verfaries zealous to inveigh against them; would
be liable now to the severest animadverlion, and
excite general indignation or horror. nftead of
rivalling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety,
and furpafling them in licentiousness, the Popes
have studied to aume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical character.
The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted,
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that reem-n
bled Alexander VI. or several of his predeceflbrs,
who were a disgrace to religion and to human na-
ture. Throughout this long fucceflion of Popes,
-a wonderful decorum of condu&, compared with
that of preceding ages, is observable. Many of
them have been conspicuous for the virtues be-
coming their high station; and by their huma-
nity, their love of literature, and their modera-
tion, have made ome atonement to mankind for
the crimes of their predeceflors. Thus the bene-
ficial influences of the Reformation have been
more extensive than they appear on a superficial
view; and this great divilion in the Christian
Church hath contributed, in ome measure, to
increafc purity of manners, to diffuse science,
and to.infpire humanity. History recites such a
number of hocking events, occasioned by reli-
gious dissensions, that it must afford peculiar fa-
isfaion to trace any one salutary or beneficial

effe

effeit to that source, from which so many fatal B °0 K
caiamities have flowed.

THE republic of Venice, which, at the begin- Stateofthe

republic: of

ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so vnice.
formidable, that almost all the potentates of Eu-
rope united in a confederacy for its destrution,
declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendor. The Venetians not only loft a great
part of their territory in the war excited by the
league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as
vigour of the state were exhaufed by their extra-
ordinary and long continued efforts in their own
defence and that commerce by which they had
acquired their wealth and power began to decay,
without any hopes of its reviving. All the fatal
consequences to their republick, which the saga-
city of the Venetian senate foresaw on the firt dif-
covery of a passage to the Eaf-Indies by the Cape
of Good Hope, took place. Their endeavours to
prevent the Portuguese from establishing them-
lelves in the Eaft-Indies, not only by exciting the
Soldans of Egypt, and the Ottoman monarchs,
to turn their arms against such dangerous in-
truders, but by affording secret aid to the Infi-
dels in order to insure their fuccefsz, proved in-
effetual. The ativity and valour of the Por-
tuguefe surmounted every obstacle, and obtained
such firm footing in that fertile country, as fe-

* Freher. Script. Rer. Genman. vol. i. ag9.

cured
*

o o K- cured to them large poffeflions, together with in.
*- fluence fRill more extensive. Lisbon, inltead of

Venice, became the staple for the precious corn
modities of the East. The Venetians, after hav.
ing poffcffed for many years the monopoly of that
beneficial commerce, had the mortification to be
excluded from almost any hare in it. The dif-
coveries of the Spaniards in the western world,
proved no less fatal to inferior branches of their
commerce. The original defecs which were for-
merly pointed out in the conttitution of the Ve-
netian republick continued, and the disadvantages
with which it undertook any great enterprize,
increaed rather than diminished. The sources
from which it derived its extraordinary riches and
power being dried up, the interior vigour of the
fate declined, and of course, its external opera-
tions became less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased
to be one of the principal powers in Europe, and
dwindled into a secondary and subaltern state.
But as the senate had the address to conceal its
diminution of power, under the veil of modera-
tion and caution; as it made no ra(h effort that
could dilfover its impotence; as the symptoms
of political decay in fates are not oon observed,
and are seldom so apparent to their neighbours as
to occasion any fidden alteration in their condut
towards them, Venice continued long to be con-
fidered and ref'icced. She was treated not ac-
cording to her present cohdition, but according

to

to the rank which he had formerly held. Charles B 0 o0
V. as well as the monarchs of France, his rivals, I
courted her assistance with emulation and folici-
tude in all their enterprizes., Even down to the
close of the century, Venice remained not only
an object of attention, but a considerable feat of
political negociation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the first Cosmo di ofTarcu.
Medici, and Lawrence, his grandson, had ac-
quired in the republick of Florence by their
beneficence and abilities, inspired their descend-
ants with the ambition of usurping the fove-
reignty in their country, and paved their way
towards it. Charles placed Alexander di Medici
at the head of the republick, and to the natural A.D. zss
interest and power of the family added the weight
as well as credit of the Imperial protecion. Of
there, his fuccefor Cosmo, firnamed the Great,
availed himself; and eftablifhinig his filpreme
authority on the ruins of the ancient republican
constitution, he tranfinitted that, together with
the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany, to his de-
fcendants. Their dominions were compoed of
the territories which had belonged to the three
commonwealths of Florence, Pita, and Siena,
and formed one of the most refpedtable of the
Italian ates.

THE dukes f Savoy, during the former part ofthe
of the fifteenth century, poffffcd terricoris Which savoy.

were

B 0 K were not considerable either for extent or value;

XII. Av-j and the French, having seized the greater part of

them, obliged the reigning Duke to retire for
safety to the strong fortrcfs of Nice, where he shut
himfeif up for several years; while his son, the
Prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to better his
fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies
of Spain. The peace of Cateau Cambrefis re-
fored to him his paternal dominions. As theft
are environed on every hand by powerful neigh-
bours, all whose motions the dukes of Savoy must
observe with the greatest attention, in order not
only to guard againf the danger of being fur-
prifed and overpowered, but that they may chufe
their fide with discernment in those quarrels
wherein it is impolible for them to avoid taking
part, this peculiarity in their situation seems to
have had no inconsiderable influence on their
chara&er. By rousing them to perpetual atten-
tion, by keeping their ingenuity always on the
stretch, and engaging them in almof continual
action, it hath formed a race of Princes more
Sagacious in discovering their true interest, more
decisive in their resolutions, and more dexterous
in availing themselves of every occurrence which
presented itself, than any perhaps that can be
tingled out in the history of mankind. By gra-
dual acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy have added
to their territories, as well as to thei own im-
portance and aspiring at length to regal dignity,
which they obtained about half a century ago,

they

they hold no inconsiderable rank among the mo- B 0 K
narchs of Europe. ^

THE territories which now form the republick of.the

United

of the United Netherlands, were loft during the i'rovince«.
first part of the sixteenth century, among the
numerous provinces fubje& to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconsiderable, that
hardly one opportunity of mentioning them hath
occurred in all the busy period of this history.
But oon after the peace of Cateau Cambrefis,
the violent and bigoted maxims of Philip's
government, carried into execution with unre-
lenting rigour by the duke of Alva, exasperated
the free people of the Low-Countries to such a
degree, that they threw off the Spaniih yoke,
and asserted their ancient liberties and laws.
These they defended with a persevering valour,
which occupied the arms of Spain during half
a century, exhauRed the vigour, ruined the re-
putation of that monarchy, and at last constrain-
ed their ancient maRiers to recognise and to treat
with them as a free independent lfate. This
ifate, founded on liberty, and reared by industry
and economy, had grown into reputation, even
while struggling for its existence. But when
peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views,
and to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of
the most refpecable as well as enterprizing powers
in Europe.

Tns

B o o K THE tranfa&ions of the kingdoms in the North

XII. X- of Europe, have been seldom attended to in the

course of this history.
of Rurla. RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarifn and

obscurity, from which it was called about the
beginning of the present century, by the cre-
ative genius of Peter the Great, who made his
country known and formidable to the reft of
Europe.

or Den. IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of
mark and
Sweden. Charles V. great revolutions happened in their

contitutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical. In
the former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded
from the throne, and expelled the country, a
new Prince was called by the voice of the
people to assume the reins of government. In
the latter, a fierce people, roused to arms by in-
juries and opprelfion, shook off the Danish yoke,
and conferred the regal dignity on its deliverer
Gustavus Ericson, who had all the virtues of
a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhauflted
by foreign wars, or weakened by the dissensions
between the King and the nobles, became in-
capable of such efforts as were requilite in orJer
to recover the ascendant which it had long pof-
fefed in the North of Europe. Seden, as lon
as it was freed from the doninion of itrangers,
began to recruit its trength, and acq(lire-i in
a hort time lich interior vigour, that it L-_ .,,i

: h:

the first kingdom in the North. Early in the 3 ° ° I
subsequent century, it rose to such a high rank
among the powers of Europe, that it had the
chief merit in forming,. as wll as conducing,
that powerful league, which protetc.d not only
the Protestant religion, but the liberties of Gcr-
many against the bigotry and ambition of the
house of Auttria.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH VOLUMES.

I N D E X

TO THE
SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH

VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman Numerals diret to the Volume, and

the Figures to the Page.

A.

,.BSOLUTION, the form of that ued by Father
l Tetzel in Germany, I. io7.
Adrni, the fation of, assist the Imperial general

Colonna in the reduacion of Genoa, II. 197.
Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. un-
der William de Croy, lord of Chievres, II. 27. His
characer, ib. Sent by Charles with power to
afiume the regency of Castile on the death of his
grandfather, 34. His claim admitted by Cardinal
Ximenes, and executed in conjunction, ib. Autho-
rized by Charles to hold the Cortes of Valencia,
which refuses to aflemble before him, 8i. Made
viceroy of Cailile on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 86. His eletion remonstrated againf
by the Cafiilians, ib. Is chofenPope, 193. Re-
trofpea of his conduc in Spain during the absence
of Charles, 206. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
Segovians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonleca to
hefiege the city, who is repulscd by the inhabitants of
Medina del Campo, 207, 2o8. Apologizes for Son-
fca's condut to the people, 209, Rcals Fonseca,

VOL. IV. Z and

and difmifles his troops, 209. His authority dif.
claimed by the Holy Junta, 2 . Deprived of power
by them, 214. His ill reception on his arrival at
Rome on being chosen tothe Papacy, 246. Restores
the territories acquired by his predccefior, ib. La-
bouts to unite the contending powers of Europe,
247. Publilhes a bull for a three years truce among
them, 248. Accedesto theleague against the Fiench
King, ib. His death, 257. The sentiments and
behaviour of the people on that occasion, 258. A
retrofpeAdof his condut towards the Reformers, 270.
His brief to the diet at Nurembtrg, ib. Receives
a lif of grievances from the diet, 273. His condu&
to the Reformers, how esteemcd at Rome, 275.
Africa, the Spanilh troops ent by Cardinal Ximenus

againit Barbarofia, defeated there, II. 47.
igues Mortes, interview between the Emperor Charles
and Francis, there, III 53.
dix 1a Cbaple, the Emperor Charles crowned there,

II. o12. Ferdinand his brother crowned King of
the Romans there, III. 53.
Alarcon, Don Ferdinand, Francis I of France, taken

prisoner at the battle of Pavia, committed to his
custody, II. 298. Conduits Francis to Spain, 309.
Delivers up Francis in pursuance of the treaty of
Madrid, 329. Is ent ambassador to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of his treaty, 348. Pope Cle-
ment VII. taken prisoner by the Imperialists, is
committed to his custody, 372.
.dbany, John Stuart, duke of, commands the French

army ent by Francis I. to invade Naples, II. 291
Albert, of Brandenburg, grand master of the Teuto-

nic Order, becomes a convert to the do*rines or
Luther; II. 342. Obtains of Sigismund King of
Poland the invcfliture of Pruflia, ereced into a
dutchy, ib. Is put under the ban of the Empire,
ib. His family fixed in the inheritance of Prullia,
ib. C'ommands a body of troops in behalf of Mau-
riceof Saxony, but cndLavours to alirrt an independ-
ency, IV. 80. Defeats and takes the Duke
d'Auiale prilbner, and juins the Emperor at Avletz,

!0;.

1o7., Ts condemned by the Imperial Chamber for
his demands on the Bishops of Barberg and Wortl-
burg. 117. A league formed against him, 119.
Is defeated by Maurice, a12. Is again defeated by
Henry of Brunswick, 122. Is driven out of Ger-
many, and dies in exile, 123. His territo: ies restored
to his collateral heirs, ib.
,brt, elector of Metz, the publication of indulgences
in Germany, committed to him, 11. io6.
Alexander VI. Pope, remarks on the pontificate of,

II. 136.
'txander di Medici. See MFDICI.
Agiers, how it was fcized by Barbaroaia, III. 92. Is

seized by the brother of he fame name, on the death
of the former, 93. Is taken under the protection
ofthe Porte, 94. Is governed by Hafcen Aga in the
ablence of arharofl:i, 222. Is besieged by the Em-
peror Charits V. 26. Charles forced to re-imbark
by bad weather, 230.
llrafelid, nrother of Muley Hafcen King of Tunis,

solicits the protection of Barbarofa againRf him, III.
95. His treacherous treatment by hlarbarofla, 96.
Aiva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in

his dispute with the Archduke Philip concerning the
regency of Catile, II. . Forces the Dauphin to
abandon the siege of Perpignan, III. 242. Presides
at the court-martial which condemns the Elecor of
Saxony to death, 409. Detains the Landgrave
prisoner by the Emperor's order, 421. Commands
under the Emperor the army destined against France,
IV. ro5. Is appointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 1 65. Enters the eccleijflical territories and
seizes the Campagna Romana, 226. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, 227. Negociates a peace be-
tween Philip and the Pope, with Cardinal Caraffa,
256. Goes to Rome to afc pardon of the Pope for
his holiliiies, 2a7. Is sent o Paris in the name of
Philip to cfpoufe the Princess Elizabcth, 301.
dmtrfeo,/, a nobleman of Holland, associated by

Charles V. with Cardinal Ximcies, in the regency
of Cafile, II. 44.

r- .J.l,,*'/

.nabaptljs, the origin of that fct deduced, I. 7,

Their principal tenets, 73. Their ettlement at
Munffer, 74. Charater of their principal leaders,
ib. They seize the city of Munster, 75. They
eftablifi a new form of government there, ib.
Chufe Bocold King, 79. Their licentious praaices,
ib. A confederacy of the German Princes formed
againf them, 8. Are blockaded in Munster by
the bishop, 82. The city taken, and great laughter
made of them, 83. Their king put to death, 84.
CharaCter of the fct since that period, 85. Sec
Maithias and Bacald.
.Anglria, his authority cited in proof of the extortions

of the Flemilh minifiers of Charles V. 1i. 58.
Anhalt, Prince of, avows the opinions of Martin Lu-

ther, II, 269.

Annats to the court of Rome, what, II. 1t r.
Aragon, how Ferdinand became pofliefed of that king-

dom, If. 2. The Cortes of, acknowledges the
Archduke Philip's title to the crown, 3. Ancien:
enmity between this kingdom and CafRile, 8. Na-
varre added to this crown by the arts of Ferdinand,
23. Arrival of Charles V. 59. The Cortes not
alfowed to aflemble in his name, ib. The refrac-
tory behaviour of the Aragonians, 60. They refute
refitution of the kingdom of Navarre, ib. Don
John Lanuza appointed regent, on the departure of
Charles for Germany, 6. Who compotes the dif-
turbances there, 242. The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 244.
See Spain.
Alrdr), an interview there between Francis I. ad

Henry VIII. of England, II. oo.
/iOurias, Charles on of Philip and Joanna, acklnow-
ledged Prince of, by the Cortes of Castile, ii. 17.
Auglaurg, a diet called there by Charles V. II. 47.

His public entry into that city, ib. The confeiont
of faith named from this city, drawn up by Melanc-
than, ib. Resolute behaviour of the Prottilant
Princes at, 49. Its form of government violently
altercd, and rendered fubmiEive to the Enperor,

45 ,

454. The diet reassembled there, IV. . The
diet takes part with the Emperor against the city of
Magdeburg, 8. Is seized by Maurice of Saxony,
66. Another diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 73.
Cardinal Morone attends the diet as the Pope's
nuncio, 175. Morone departs on the Pope's death,
177. Rectis of the diet on the ubjei of reliion,
181. Remarks on his reccfs, 187. The diet again
assembled there, ilI. 430. Is intimidated by being
surrounded by the Empror's Spaniih troops, 431.
The Emperor re.efthlilhes the Romish worship in
the Churches of, ih. 'The diet, by the Errperors
order, petitions the P. p!: for the return of the coun-
cil to Trent, 439 A lYtRm of theology laid before
the diet by the Emperor, 4 5. The Archbishop of
Mentz declares, without authority, the diet's ac-
ceptance of it, ib.
Avila, a convention of the rialecontents in Spain hell

there, II. 21t : A confeJerary termed the Holy
Junta, formed there, ii. Which disclaims the au-
thority of Adrian, 212. The Holy Junta removed
to Tordefills, 213. See junta
dAutria, by what means the house of, became so for-

midahle in Germany, II. 375. The extraordinary
acquifirions of tile house of, in the person of the Em-
peror Charles V. IV. 305. 309.

B
Barbarlfa, Hor'ck, his rife to the kingdom of Algiers

and Tunis, II. 46. efeats the Spanihl troops Cent
againil him by Cardinal Ximenes, 47. His parent-
age, III. 9'. Commences pirate with his brother
Hayradin, ib. How he acquired pofl'lion of Al-
giers, 9 . Infests the coast of Spain, 93. Is re-
duced and kill'd by Comares the Spanith governor
of O0an, ib.
arbarojia, Hayradin, brother to the former of the
fame name, tkes pofifiion of Algiers on his bro-
ther's death, III. 94. Puts his donmii:ons under the
prot.eion of the Grand Signior, i. Obtairs the

Z 3 command

command of the Turkifi fleet, ib. His treacherous
treatment of Alrafchid, brother to the king of Tu.
nis, 96. Seizes Tunis, 97. Extends his depre-
dations by ea, ib. Prepares to rfirf the Emperor's
armament againf him, 99 Goletta and his fleet
taken, loi. is defeated b) Charles, 103. Tunis
taken, 104. Makes a defCcnt on Italy, 253. Burn:
Rbeggio, ib. Befeges Nice in conjunction with
the French, but is forced to retire, 254. Is dif-
miffed by Francis, 267.
Barhury, a fumnmary view of the revolutions of, III.

q9. Its division into independent kingdoms, ib.
Rife of the piratical fates, 9i. See Barbarojfa.
Bartctfna, the public entry of the Emperor Charles V.

into that city as its count, 111. 36. The treaties of
Charles with the Italian St! 'es, publifed there, 41.
Bayard, chevalier, his character, II. 179. H:s gal-

lant defence of Mcziers, besieged by the Imprialifls,
180. Obliges them to raire the siege, ib. His noble
behaviour at his death, 265. His efpecttul fune-
ral, 266.
Bellay, M. his erroneous account of the education of

Charles V. correted, II. 27, Note. Hib acccount
of the difafirous retrea; of the'Emperor Charles V.
from his invasion of Provence, I11. 138.
ibe, a translation of, unde taken by Martin Luther,
and its effecas i opening the eyes of te people, Il.
268.
Bicocoa, battle of, between Colcnna, and Marechal

Lautrec, Ii. 195.
Bccold or Beukles, John, a journey man-taylor, becomes

a leader of the anab.ptifs. ar Munfier, III. 74.
Succeeds Matthias in the direction of their ffairs,
78. His enthufiaflic cxtravagadtcrs, ib. Is chosen
King, 79. Marries fourteen wives, 8o. Beheads
one of them, 83. Is put to a cruel death at the
taking of MunfiQr, 4. ee d^.'abaptts.
Boehmio, the archduke Ferdinand choIen king of, II.

374. Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties of the
Bohemians, 11I. 427. The Reformation introduced
by John Huss and Jerome of Prague, 428. Raise anl

army

army to o purpore, ib. Is closely confined in the
citadel of Mechlin, IV. 22.
Bsgnuvet, admiral of France, appointed to command

the invasion of Milan, t1. 256. His charater, ib.
Enables Colonna to defend the city of Milan by his
imprudent delay, 257. Forced to abandon the
Milanese, 264, Is wounded, and his army defeated
by the Imperialifs, ib. Stimulates Francis to an
invasion of the Milanese, 285. Avises Francis to
besiege Pavia, 287. Adviles him to give battle to
Bourbon, who advanced to the reliefof Pavia, 293.
Is killed at the battle of Pavia, 296.
BoPlcgw, an interview between the Emperor Charles V.

and Pope Clement VII. there, III. 37. Another
meeting between them there, o.
Bouillon, Robert de la Ma uck, lord of, declares war

aganRt the Emperor Charles, at the infigation of
Francis? II. 177. Is ordered by Francis to disband
his troops, 178. His territories reduced by the
Emperor, 179.
Boulogne, belieged by Henry VIII. of England, III.

274. Taken, 284.
Bouarbon, Charles Duke of, his characer, II. 250.
The causes of his discontent with Francis I. ib.
His duchess dies, 251. Kejects the advances of
Louise the King's mother, 252. His estate fequeitered
by her intrigues, ib. Negociates secretly with the
Emperor, 253. Is included in a treaty between the
Emperor and Henry VIII. of England, ib. Is
taxed by the King with betraying him, which he
denies, 254 Escapes to Italy, 255. Direas the
measures of the Imperial army under Lannoy, 263.
Defeats the French on the banks of the Seffia, 265.
Infigates Charles to an iivfion of France, 280.
Advances to the relief of Pavia, 292. Defeats
Francis, and takes him prisoner, 296. Haitens to
Madrid to secure h:s own interelts in the interview
between Charles and Francis, 312. His kind re-
ception by Cnarles, 320. Obtains a grant of the
duchy of Milan, and is made general of the Impe-
fial army, 321. Obliges Sforza to surrender Milan,

i'4 352.

352. Is forced to oppress the Milanese to satisfy
his troops mutinying for pay, 3 7. Sets Morone
at liberty, and makes him his confident, 357, 358.
Appoints Leyva governor of Milan, and advances
to invade the Pope's territories, 359, 360. His dif-
appointed troops mutiny, 361. He determines to
plunder Rome, 365. Arrives at Rome, and aiaults
it, 366. Is killed, is.
Brand nburgh, Eleaor of, avows the opinions of Lu-

ther, II. 29.
- - --- Albert of. See Albrt.
BrrgS, a league concluded there between the Em-

peror and Henry VIII. of England, against France,
11. 82a.
Brtn/wck, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 269.
--- Henry, Duke of, driven from his dominions
by the Protefiant Princes of the league of Smalkalde,
Iil. 260. Rales men for Francis, but templos
thein to recover his own dominions, 298. Is taken
prisoner, 299.
Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand King of the Romans,

Ill. 218. Is treaCheroufy seized by Sultan Soly-
man, 219.
Cjtta, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Germany, ap-

pointed to examine the dorrires of Martin Luther,
II. 17. Requires Luther peremptorily to retract
his errors, a l8. Requires the eletor of Saxony to
surrender or baniih Luther, 120. His condua
justificd, 122.
Calais, an ineffeAual congress there, between the Em-

peror and Francis, under the mediation of Henry
VI II . 180. The carelers manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary Queen of Eng-
land, IV. 264. nefie:dual remonfiraices of Philip,
and Lord Wentworth the governor, concerning its
defenceless late, ib. Is invested and taken by the
Duke of Guise, 265, The English inhabitants

turned

turned out, 266. Stipulations concerning, in the
treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 2q7.
Cambray, articles of the peace concluded there, between

the Emperor Charles, and Francis of France, III.
31. Remarks on this treaty, ib
Campt, peace of, between Henry VIII. and Francis,

Ili. 334.
Cimpggio, Cardinal, made legate from Pope Clement

VII. to the second diet at Nuremberg, ii. 2;6, 277,
Publilhes articles for reforming the inferior clergy,
278. Advises Charles to rigorous measure againit
the ProteftRnts, III. 50.
Capitulation of the Germanic body, fi_n.d by Charles

V. and prescribed to all his fu, cefors, I. 77
Carffa, Cardinal, his precipitate elecion, IV. 193.

Is appointed legate to Bologn:i, ib. Reaf.ns of his
difguf with the Emperor, 4. Persuades the
Pope to solicit an alliance with France aainft the
Emperor, 195, 96, 201. His insidious comnif--
lion to the court of France, 219. His public entry
into Pari:, 220. Exhorts Henry to break his truce
with the Emperor, 221. Ablblves Henry from his
oath, 223. Negociates a peace between the Pope
and Philip, with the Duke d'Alva, 256. The fate
of him and his brother on the death of Pope Paul,
302.
Carloiadits, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,

at Wittemberg, II. 130. His intempera!e zeal,
267. Awed by the reprcufs of Luther, 268.
Carignan,befieged by the Count d'Enguin and defended

by the Marquis de Guafto, Ill. 267. Guafo de.
feated in a pitched battle, 270. Thetown taken, 272.

Calaldo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno.
Ca/lile, how Isabella became poeflled of that king-

dom, II. 2. The Archduke Philip's title acknow-
ledged by the Cortes of that kingdom, 3. Isabella
dies, and leaves her huband Ferdinand of Aragon,
regent, 7. Ferdinand rfigns the crown of, 8.
Ferdinand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, ib.
Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon, ib.

The

The particular dillike of the Cafilians to Ferdinand
8. The regency of, jointly vested in Ferdinand,
Philip and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, 14.
Declares against Ferdinand, 5. The regency of,
resigned by Philip to Ferdinand, 16 Philip and
Joanna acknowledged King and Queen by the
Cortes, 17. Death us Philip, ib. The perplexity
of the Cafilians on Joanna's incapacity for govern-
ment, 19. Ferdinand gains the regency end the good
will of the Castilians by his prudent administration,
22. Oran and other places in Barbary annexed to
this kingdom by Ximenes, 23. Ximcnes appointed
regent by Ferdinand's will, until the arrval of
Charles V. 31. Charles assumes the regal title, 35.
Ximcnes procures its acknowledgment, 37. The
nobility deprefled by Ximenes, 38, 39. The grandees
mutiny againf: Ximenes, 40. 'he mutiny sup-
pressed, ib. Ximenes resumes the grants made by
Ferdinand to the nobles, 41. The bold reply of
Ximenes to the discontented nobles, 43. Other
affcciates in the regency appointed with Ximenesat
the infiigation of the Flemish courtiers,44. Ximenes
dies, 55. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in favour
of his mother Joanna, 56. The Caltilians receive
unfavourable impreflions of him, ib. Difgufied by
his partiality to his Flemish minifiers, 57. Sauvagc
made chancellor, 58. William de Croy, appointed
archbifbop of '1oledo, ib. The principal cities
confederate, and conplain of their grievances, 6.
'The clergy of, refuse to evy the tenth of be;nefices
granted by the Pope to Charles V. 81. nterdictcd,
but the interdit taken oW, by Charles's application,
ib. An infurredion these, 84. Increase the difaf-
feation, 85. Cardinal Adrian appointed regent, on
the departure of Charles for Germany, 86. The
views and pretensions of the commons, in their in-
ifrrceions, 209. The confederacy called the foly
Junta formed, 21 . The proceedings of which are
carried on in the name of Queen Joanna, 213.
Rcceives circulatory letters from Charles for the in-

(urent;

furgents to lay down their arms, with promises of
pardon, 215 The n.:bles undertake to fuppref;
the infurge ts, 221. Raiie an army againf ti:em
under tc Ctnde de Haro, 224. Haro gets pof-
feTi., of Joanna, 225. Ex,edients by which they
raii- money for their troops, 227. Unwilling to
proceed to extremities with :he Junta, 223. The
a my of the Junta routed and Pa..1id texecuted 232,
233. Dissolution of the Jnta 25 i'le moule-
ration of Charles toward th,' ilu gcnts on his ar-
rival in Spain, 24. He aquies the love of the
Caflihans, 245. See Spain.
Catherine of Ara'gon, is divorced from Henry VIII. of

England, Ii. eg. Dies, 160.
Catherine Boria, a nun, flies from her cloister, and

marries ivlartin Luther, II. 3o0.

Catherine di Medici. See MEDICI.
Cavi peace concluded there between Pope Paul IV.

and Philip II. of Si;ain, IV. 256.
Ccrcamp, negociations for peace entered into there be-

tween Philip II. of Spain, and He,iry II. of France,
IV. 281. 290. The neociations removed to Cha-
teau Cambrefis, 294. See Cateau Cambrefis.
Characrs of men, rules for forming a proper estimate

of them, III. 313. Applied to the cafe of Luther,
ib.
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, his observations on

the manners of the clergy, in his letter to the arch-
bifihp of Metz, II. 139, Note.
ChariesV. Emperor, his descent and birth, 1I. . flow

he came to inherit such extensive dominions, 2.
Acknowledged Prince of Asturias by the Cortes of
CafRile, 17. His father Philip dies, ib. Jealoufv
and hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand towards him,
23. Left heir to his dominions, 26. Death of
Ferdinand, ib. His education committed to Wil-
liam de Crov, Lord of Chiev'es, ib. Adridn of
Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor, 27. The
first opening of his character, 29. Allumes the
government of Slanders, and attends to business, ib.
bends Cardinal Adrian to be regent ol Callile, who

executes
8

executes it jointly with Ximenes, 34. Aflumesthe
regal title, 35. His title admitted with difficulty
by the Castilian nobility, 37. Persuaded to add
fiociate regents to Ximenes, 44. His Flemish
court corrupted by the avarice of Chievres, 47.
Persuaded by Ximenes to visit Spain, but how that
journey is retarded, 48, 49. The present state of his
affairs, 49. Concludes a peace at Noyen with Fran-
cis I. of France, and the conditions of the treaty,
ib. Arrives in Spain, 52. His ungrateful treat-
ment of Ximenes, 54. His public entry into Val-
ladolid. 55. Is acknowledged King by the Cortes,
who vote him a free gift, 56. The Caflilians re-
ceive unfavourable imprefflons of him, ib. Difgufls
them by hit partiality to his Flemifll ministers, 57.
Sets out for Aragon, 59. Sends his brother Ferdi-
nand to visit their grandfather Maximilian, ib.
Cannot aTmble the Cortes of Aragon i his own
name, ib. The opposition made by that aflimbly
to his deires, il. Refuses the application of Francis
I. for refitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 60.
Negleats the remonfirances of the C4tilians, 61.
Death of the Emperor Maximilian, 62. View of
the present slate of Europe, 68. How Maximilian
was obfirualed in securing the Empire to him, 63.
Francis I. apires to the Imperial crown, 64. Cir-
cumftances favourable to the pretensions ps Charles,
ib. 68. The Swils Cantons epoufe his caule, 69.
Apprchenfions and conduct of Pope Leo X. on the
occaion, 70, 71. AflembJing of the diet at Fran;-
fort, 72. Frederic duke of Saxony refules the offer
of the empire, and votes for him, 3, 7. nAd re-
fuses the presents offered by his ambafladors, 75.
Concurring circumniances which favoured his elec-
tion, 76. His election, 77. Signs and confirms
the capitulation of the Germanic body, 7, 78.
The election notified to him, 78. Aumes the title
of Majefy, 79. Accepts the Imperial dignity of-
sered by the count Palatine amlalFador from the
Ele!ors, 80. The clergy of Callile refute the
tenth of benefices granted him by the Popg, ib.

Procures

Procures the interdia the kingdom is laid under for
refusal, to be taken off, 8. Empowers Cardinal
Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia, 82. The
nobles refuse to aflemble without his presence, 82,
83. Authorises the infirgents there to continue in
aons, 83. Summons the Cortes of Castile to meet
in Galicia, ib. Narrowly escapes with his Flemilt
ministers from an iofurreiion on that account, 84.
Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 86. Prepares
to leave Spain, and appoints regents, ib. Embarks,
87. Motives of this journey, 89. Rife of the ri-
valihip between him and Francis 1. 9o. Courts the
favour of Henry VIII. of England and his minifier
Cardinal Wolfey, 96. Visits Henry at Dover, 99.
Promises Wolfey his interelt for the papacy, oo.
Has a second interview with Henry at Graelines,
1ot. Offers to submit his differences with Fiancis
to Henry's arbitration, ib. His magnificent coro-
nation at Aix-la-Chapelle, 102. Calls a diet at
Worms, to check the reformers, 103. Cule5
which hindered his efpouing the party of Martin
Luther, 161. Grants Luther a fafecondut to the
diet of Worms, 162. An edia published againt
him, 164. His embarrairnmcnt at this time, 68.
Concludes an alliance with the Pope, 172. The
conditions of the treaty, 172, 173. Death of his
minifier Chieves, and its advantages to him, 173,
174. Invasion of Navarre by Francis, 175. The
French driven out, and their general L'Pfparre ta-
ken prisoner, 177. War declared againfi him by
Robert de la Marck, lord of Bouillon, who ravages
Luxemburg, 177, 178. Reduces Bouiil(n, and
invades France, 179. His demands at the cogrefs
at Calais, 181. Has an interview with Cardinal
Wolfey at Bruges, and concludes a lcague with
Henry VIII. againit France, 182. Pope Leo de-
clares for him againftFrance, 186, 187. 'l'hc'ircnch
driven out of \ilan, 190, 95. Vilits England in
his passage to Spain, 198. Cultivates the good-will
of Cardinal Wolley, and creates the Earl of Surcy
his high admiral, 199. Grants the illand of M;tlta

to,

to the Knights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes by
Solyman the Magnificent, 202. Arrives in Spain,
203. A retrufpea of his proceedings in relati n to
the infurreaions in Spain, 215. Iliues circulaiory
letters for the insurgents to lay down their arms,
with promises of pardon. ib. His prudent mode-
ration towards the insurgents, on his arr:val in Spiin,
244. Acquires the love t<f the Calhfians, 245.
Enters into a league witn Charles Duke of Bourb. n,
253' Why h did not endeavour to get Wolfey
eleated Pnpc, 259. In.ades Guienne and Burgundy
but without uccelf, 262. His troops in Milan
mutiiy tor want of pay, but are pacified by Morone,
264. Undertakes an invasion of Provence, 28o.
Orders Pcfcara to besiege Marfeil!es, 281. PIf...ra
obliged to retire, 282. Disconcerted by the French
over-running the Milanese again, 286. 1 he reve-
nues of Naples mortgaged to raile money, 27,
His troops defeat Francis, and take hin prlfoner at
the itttle ot Pavia, 296. His afftecd moderation
a: receiving the news, 298, 299. Avails himfelfof
a treaty concluded between Lannoy and Pope Cle-
ment, but refuses to ratify it, 305. His army in Pa-
via mutiny, and are obliged to be disbanded, 305,
306. His deliberations on the proper improvement
of his disadvantages, 306, 307. His propositions
to Francis, 308. After many delays grants S'orza
the inveftitue of Milan, 311. Mor,'ne's inrrigues
betrdyed to him by Pescara, 316. Orders Pekara
to continue his negocitions with Moron, ib. His
ri. orous treatment of Francis, 31 8. Visits Francis,
3 9. His kind reception of the Duke of Bourbon,
32c. Grants Bourbon the dutchy of Milan, and
appoin:s him general in chief of the Imperial army
there, 321. Fruitless negociations for the delivery
of rancis, 322. Treaty of Madrid, with Francis,
324. Delivers up Francis, 329. Marries Isabella
of Portugal, 330. An alliance formed againtt him
at C'gnac, 345. Sends ambaifadors to Francis o
require the fulfilment of the treaty of Madrid, 48.
Prepares for war anainit rancis, 350. he Pope
reduced to an accommodation with him, 3S5. The

exhausted

exihaufed fate of his finances, 356. His troops uri-
der Bourbon distressed and mutinous for want of pay,
357. Bourbon affauhs Rome, and is flin but the
city taken, 368. The Prince of Orange general
on Bourbon's death, takes the castle of St. Angelo,
and the Pope prisoner, 371. The Emperor's con-
dul on that occasion, i. His dissensions with
the Pope, how far favourable to the reformation,
375. His infiruions to the diet at Spires, ib.
His manifesto against the Pope, and letter to the
Cardinals, 376 France and England league against
him, III. 3. Is refuted supplies by the Cortes of
Castile, 9. Delivers the Pope for a ransom,
ib. His overtures to enry and Francis, il.
Their declaration of war aainft him, 13. Is chal-
lenged by Francis to fingie combat, 14. Andrew
Doria revolts from Francis to him, 21. His forces
defeat the French in Italy, 23, 25. H-!is motivc
for desiring an acconmmodation, 27. Concludes a
separate treaty with the Pope, 29. Terms of the
peace of Cambray concluded with Francis by the
midiation of Margaret of AufRria and Lcuils cf
France, 30. Remarks on the advantages gained by
him in this treaty, and on hiscondu of the war, 3t.
Visits Italy, 36. His policy on his public entry into
Barcelona, 37. Has an interview with the Pcpe at
Bologna, ib. Motives for his mroderation in Italy,
38. His treaties with the fates of, 39. Is crowned
Kin, of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 41.
Summons a diet at Spires to confider th.-: ate of
religion, 43. His deliberations with the Pope, re-
fpeeting the expediency of calling a general council,
45. Appoints a diet at Augfourg, 47. Makes a
publick entry into that city, ib. His endea;cours to
check the reformation, ib. Reflute behaviour of
the Proteflait Princes toward him, 49. His cverc
decree again{t the Protestants, ib. Propcfes his
brother Ferdinand to be eleed Kingof the PRomans,
51. Is opposed by the Proteltants, 53. Obtains
his election, ib. Is dcfirous of an acc(cm odition
with the Protfltants, 57. Concludes a trecty with

tlibci

them at Nuremburg, ib. Raises an army to oppoc
the Turks under Solyman, and oblliges him to retire,
59. Has another interview with the Pope, and
prefles him to call a general council, 60. Pro tires
a league of the Italian States to secure the peace of
italy, 63. Arrives at Barcelona, ib. His endea-
vours to prevent the negociations and meeting be-
tween the Pope and Francis, 67. Undertakes to
expel Barbarossa from Tunis, and restore Mu!ey
Hafcen, 98. Linds in Africa, and besieges Go-
letta, 1oo. Takes Goletta, and seizes BariLarofa's
fleet, 102, 103. Defeats Barbarolla, and takes
Ttni'., 103, 104. Restores Muley Hafcen, and
the treaty between them, o05. The glory acquired
by this enterprize, and the delivery of the Chrifliai
captives, lob. Seizes the dutchy of Milan on the
death of F'rJncis Sf,,rza, 122. His policy with
recard to it, ib. Prepares for war with rancis,
123. His invective against Francis at Rome before
the Pope in council, 124. RemarKs on this tranf-
act.on, i27. Invades France, 130. Enters Pro-
vence and finds it desolated, 135. Besieges Mar-
feilles and Aries, 136. His milerable retreat from
Provence, 138. His invasion of Picardy defeated,
139. Is accured of poifoni.g the Dauphin, 141.
Improbability of its truth, 142. Conjefture concern-
ing the Dauphin's death, ib. Slanders invaded by
Francis, 144.. A fulfpeiion of arms in Slanders,
)low nrgociated, 45. A truce in Piedmont, 146.
viotive to thtfe truces, ib. Negociation tur peace
w iih Francis, 149. Concludes a truce f,,r ten years at
Nice, 51r. Remarks on the war, 152. His inter-
view with Franci,, ib. Courts the friendlhip of
Henry VIII. of England, 16o. Indulges the Pro-
teflaors ri; ces, 161. Quiets their dppreientions of
the Catholick league, o6. His tr(ops mutiny,
169. Afiembiles the Cortes of Caltile, i. De-
itroys the ancitnt conflitution of the (.oltet, 171.
Instance of the haughty Ipirit of the Spanilh grandees,
;2. Desires permillion of Francis to pass through
Ffance to the Netherlands, jtI. His reception in

Frances

France, 182. His rigorous treatment of Ghent,
186. Refuses to fulfil his engagements to Francis,
188. Appoints a friendly conference between a
deputation ,f Catholick and Protefiant divines before
the diet at Ratisbon, 211. Result of this confer-
ence, 213. Grants a private exemption from op-
preflions to the ProteRants, 214. Undertakes to
reduce Algiers, 222. Is near being cafl away by a
violent storm, 225. Lands near Algiers, ib. His
soldiers exposed to a violent tempest and rain, 227.
His fleet Ihattered, 228. His fortitude under these
difaters, 230. Leaves his enterprize and em-
barks again, 231. Is difreffed with another form
at sea, ib. Takes advantage of the French invaion
of Spain to obtain subsidies from the Cones, 242.
His treaty wih Portugal, 243. Concludes a league
with Henry VIII. 244. Particulars of the treaty,
247. Over-runs Cleves, and his barbarous treat-
ment of the town of Duren, 250. His behaviour
to the Duke of Cleves, 25i, Besieges Landrecy,
ib. Is joined by an Englilh detachment, ib. Is
forced to retire, 252. Courts the favour of the
Protestants, 259. His negociations with the Pro-
tefants, at the diet of Spires, 261. Procures the
concurrence of the diet in a war againit Francis,
265. Negociates a separate peace with the King of
Denmark, 266, Invades Champagne, and invefls St.
Difiere, 273. Want of concert between his opera.
tions and those of Henlry, who now invades France,
274. Obtains St. Dfiere by artifice, 275. His
diftrefes and happy movements, 277. Concludes
a separate peace with Francis, 279. His motives
to this peace, 280. His advantages by this treaty,
283. Obliges himself by a private ar ile to exter-
minate the Proteflant erefy, ib. I cruelly as-
fliaed with the gout, 286. Diet at Worms, 88.
Arrives at Worms and alters his conldua toward the
Protefiants, 291. His condua on the death of the
Duke of Orleans, 295. His diflimulatiun to the
Landgrave of HelFe, 3 5. Concludes a truce with
Solyman, 320. Holdsa diet at Ratibun, 321.

Vol. IV. Aa His

His declaration to the ProteRant'deputies, 326. His
treaty with the Pope, concluded by the Cardinal of
Trent, ib. His circular letter to the Protestant
members of the Germanick body, 327. The Pro-
tenants levy an army against him, 336. Is unpre.
pared against them, 337. Puts them under the ban
of the Empire, 339. The Protestants declare war
against him, 341. Marches tojoin the troops sent
by the Pope, 344. Farnese, the Pope's legate,
returns in disgust, 345. His prudent declension of
an afion with the Protestants, 348. Is joined by
his Flemih troops, 349. Proposals of peace made by
the Proteffants, 360. Their army disperse, 361.
His rigorous treatment of the ProteRant Princes,
364. Difmifies part of his army, 367. The Pope
recals his troops, 68. His refleaion on Fiefco's
infurreaion at Genoa, 385. Is alarmed at the hof.
tile preparations of Francis, 391. Death of Francis,
393. A parallel drawn between him and Francis,
i. Consequences of Francis's death to him, 397.
Marches agairift the eletor of Saxony, 398. Pafles
the Elbe, 399. Defeats the Saxon army, 404.
Takes the Eletor prifdner, 405. His harsh recep-
tion of him, 406. Invests Wittemberg 407. Con-
demns the Eletor to death, by a court-martial,
409. The Elector by treaty surrenders the elcao-
rate, 4 1. The harlh terms imposed by him'on the
Landgrave of Hesse, 46. His haughty reception
of the Landgrave, 419. Detains him prisoner, 421.
Seizes the warlike stores of the league, 426. His
cruel exaaions, 417. Aflembles a diet at Augsburg,
430. Intimidates the diet by his Spanifi troops, ib.
Re-tftabliihes the Romih worihipin the churches of
Augsburg, 431. Seizes Placentia, 436. Orders
the diet to petiticn the Pope for the return 'of the
council to Trent, 439. Protests a'gainfi the council
of Bologna, 441. Causes a system of faith t be
prepared for Germany, 443. Lays'it before the
diet, 445. The Irhtri' opposed, 451. And re-
jected by the Imperial cities, 452. Reduces the city
of Augsburg to submission, 453. Repeats the fame

'1 ~~~~~~:~ violence

violenceat Ulm, 44 Carlies the Eleaor and Land-
grave with him into the Low countries, 456. Pro-
cures his son Philip to be recognized ',y the States
of the Netherlands, 457. ELtbliilhes the Interim
there, 459. Reaflembles the diet at Auiefurr,
under the influence of his Spanish truops, IV. 9.
The city of Magdeburg rcfufes to admit the Interim,
and prepares for resistance, 8. Appoints Maurice
Ele.tor of Saxony to reduce it, 19. Pomies to
prote& the Proteflants at the council f Trent, 2 1.
Arbitrarily releases Maurice and the Ector of
Brandenburg, from their egagements to the Land-
grave for the recovery of his liberty, 22. Ed a-
vours to secure the Empire for his ona Philip, 24.
His brother Ferdinand refuses to resign his preten-
sions, 25. Besieges Parma, but is repulsed, 32.
Proceeds rigorously againfi the Protelants, 34.
Endeavours to upport the council of Trent, 35-
Puts Magdeburg under the ban of the Empire, 36.
Absolves the city, 42. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Protetlant deputies, con-
cerning their safe condut, 44. Begins t fu;se
Maurice of Saxony, 59. Circumrftnces which
contributed to deceive him with regard to Maurice,
61. Maurice takes the field against him, 63.
Maurice seconded by Henry II. of France, 6. His
difiefs and consternation, 66. An ineffcaual nego-
ciation with Maurice, 67. Flies from Infpruck,
72. Releales the Elefor of Saxony, 73.. Is soli-
cited to satisfy the demands of Maurice, 81. His
present difficulties, 83. Refures any ditc& compli-
ance with the demands of MauI ice, 88. Is difpoled
to yield by the progress of Maurice's operations, i.
Makes a peace with Maurice at Paftla, 9t. Re.
fledtions on this treaty, 92. Turns his arms
against France, co1. Lays siege to Metz, lo5.
Is joined by Albet of Brandenburg, o16. His army
diltreffed by the vigilance of the Duke of Guise
o18. Raises the iege and retires in a hattcrec
condition lro. Cofmio di Medici aflerts his inde-
pendency againf him, i12. Siena revolts againfi

A a him?

him, 112. Isdejeded at his bad fIccefs, 1 6. Takes
Terrouane, and demolishes it, 125. Takes Hefden,
ib. Proposes his son Philip as a husband to Mary
Queen of England, 139. The articles of the mar-
riage, 142. Marches to oppose the French opera-
tion>, 151. Is defeated by Henry, 52. Invades
Picardy, 153. Grants Siena, ubdued by Cosmo di
Medici, to his son Philip, 164. A diet at Augsburg
opened by Ferdinand, 173. Leaves the interior
administration of Germany to Ferdinand, 177.
Applies again to Ferdinand to resign his pretensions
of fuccelion to Fhilip, but is refuled, 178. Recess
of the diet of Augsburg on the subject of religion,
i81. A treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV.
and Henry II. of France against him, 202. Resigns
his hereditary dominions to his son Philip, ib. His
motives for retirement, 203. Had long meditated
this resignation, 206. The ceremony of this deed,
208. His speech on this occasion, 209. Resigns
aito the dominions of Spain, 213. His intended
retirement into Spain retarded, 215. A truce for
five years concluded with France, 26. Endeavours
in vain to secure the Imperial crown for Philip, 230.
Resigns the Imperial crown to Ferdinand, 231.
Sets out for Spain, ib. His rrival and reception
in Spain, 232. Is diflrefled by his son's ungrateful
neglect in paying his pension, 233. Fixes his retreat
in the monaflery of St.Juftus in Plazencia, 234. The
situation of this nonatry, and his apartments,
described, ib. Cntraft between the condu of
Charles and the Pope, 235. His manner of life in
his retreat. 280. His death precipitated by his
monallick reverities, 284. Celebrates his own fune-
r;l, 285. Dies, ib. His character, 286. A re-
view of the slate of Europe during his reign 304.
His acquisitions to the crown of Spain, 308.
,Chateau Camrriis, the conferences for peace between

Philip 1. of Spain, and Henry 11. of France, re-
moved thither from Cercamp, IV. 29. The peace
retarded by the demand of Elizabeth of England for
refitution'of Calis, 295. Particulars of the treaty

ig!l'ed

signed there between England and France, 29'.
Terms of the pacification between Philip and Heal-
ry, 299.
Chrtgato, nuncio from the Pope to the diet at Nurem-

burgh, his intrudions, 11. 270. Opposes the as-
fembling a general council, 272.
Cbivrs, William de Croy, lord of, appointed by

Maximilian to uperintend the education of his
grandson Charles, II. 26. Adrian of Utrecht made
preceptor under him, 27. His direction of the
studies of Charles, 29. His avarice corrupts the
Flemish court of Charles, 47. Negociates a peace
with France, 49, 50. Endeavours to prevent an in-
terview between Charles and Ximenes, 5 r. Attends
Charles to Spain, 52. His ascendency over Charles,
56. His extortions, 58. His death and the sup.
posed causes of it, 173.
Chrifiians, primitive, why averse to the principles of

toleration, IV. 183.
Clkmnt VII. Pope, he. eleaion, II. 258. His cha-

ra&er, ib. ('ants Cardinal Wolfey a legatine
commifiop s England for life, 259. Refutes to
accede '-the league againf Francis, 26 . Labours
to .ccomodate the differences between the con-
nding parties, ib. His proceedings with regard to

the reformers, 176. Concludes a treaty of neu-
trality with Francis, 19o. Enters into a separate
treaty with Charles after the battle of Pavia, and
the consequences of it, 305. Joins in an alliance
with Francis Sforza, and the Venetians, against the
Emperor, 345. Absolves Francis from his oath to
obrerve the treaty of Madrid, 346. Cardinal Co-
lonna seizes Rome, and invests him in the cafle of
St. Angelo, 354, 355. Is forced to an accommoda-
tion with the Imperialiis, 355. His revenge againit
the Colonna family, 359. Invades Naples, ib. His
territories invaded by Bourbon, and his perplextv
on the occasion, 362. Concludes a treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, ib. His conflernation
on Bourbon's motions towards Rome, 366. Rome
taken, and himself besieged in the castle of St. An-
gelo, 369. Surrenders himlelf pifoncr, 372. The

A a 3 lorentincs

Florentines revolt against him, II. 4. Pays
Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other ftipula.
tion,, to. Makes his ecape from confinement,

x. Writes a letter of thanks to Laurrec, ib. Is
jealous of the intentions of Francis, and negociates
with Charles, 18. His motives and fleps towards
an accommodation, 27. Concludes a separate
treaty with Charles, 29. His interview with the
Emperor at Bologna, 37. Crowns Charles King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 41.
His representations to the Emperor against calling a
general council, 45. Has another interview with
Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties raised by
him to the calling a general council, 60. Agrees
to a league of the Italian States for the peace of
Italy, 62. His interview and treaty with Franc,
67. Marries Catharine di Medici to the Duke of
Orleans, ib. His protraction of the affair of the
divorce solicited by Henvy VIII. 68. Reverses
Cranmer's sentence of divorc.. under penalty of
excommunication, 69. Henry r..ounces his fu-
premacy, ib. His death, 70. ReftQions on his
Pontificate, 71.
Clergy, Romifi, remarks on the immoral lives u. and

how they contributed to the progress of the Refo6..,
ation, II. 137. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, 139. Their usurpations in Ger-
many, during the disputes concerning inveltitures,
14.1. Their other opportunities of aggrandizing
themselves there, 142. Their personal immunities
143. Their encroachments on the laity, 44.
The dreadful efft&s of piritual censures, 145.
Their devices to secure their usurpations, 146. The
united effet of all these circumstances, 151. Op-
pose the advancement of learning in Germany, 156.
Clives, invaded and over-run by the Emperor Charles

V. III. 250. Cruel treatment of Duren, ib. Hu-
miliating fubmiflion of the Duke, 21.
Cnipptrdeling, a leader of the Anabaptilts at Munfler,

an account of, III. 75, 76. Sec dna aptis.

a Cognac

Ca-ar, an alliance formed there against Charles V.

by the Pope, the Venetians, the Duke of Milan,
and Francis I. II. 345.
Celigi, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends St.

Quintin againfi the Spanih general Emmanuel
Phillibert Duke of Savoy, IV. 245. His brother
D'Andelot defeated in an endeavour tojoin the gar-
rifon, 246. But D'Andelot enters the town, 247.
His character, 252. The town taken by af'ault,
and himself taken prisoner, ib.
Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia,

brother to the Emperor Charles V. elefied King of
the Romans by the college of Elecors there, III. 53.
-- Herman, Count de Wied, archbishop and

eletor of, inclines to the Reformation, and is op-
posed by his canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III. 293. Is deprived and excommuni-
cated, 318. Resigns, 365.
Colonna, Cardinal Pompeo, his character, and rival-

lhip with Pope Clement VII. 11. 353. Seizes
Rome, and invefis the Pope in the cattle of St.
Angelo, 354,355. Is degraded, and the reft of the fa.
mily excommunicated by the Pope, 359. Is pre-
vailed on by the Pope when prisoner with the Im-
perialifts to solicit his delivery, III. 9.
- Prosper, the Italian general, his character,
II. 187. Appointed to command the troops in the
invasion of Milan, ib. Drives the French out of
Milan, 19o. His army how weakened at the death
of Pope Leo X. 191. Defeats Marechal de Lau-
trec, at Bicocca, 195. Reduces Genoa, 197.
The bad state of his troops when the French invade
Milan, 256. Is enabled to defend the city by the
ill-conduct of Bonnevet the French commander,
258. Dies, and is succeeded by Lannoy, 263.
Cenchilios, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Ser-

dinand of Aragon, to obtain Joanna's consent
his regency of Caflile, II. xi. Thrown into a
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, i/,.
Conft/ion of Augsburg, drawn up by Mlc!anAhon, III.

48.

A a 4 CoI/ntce,

Caot/awn, the privileges of that city taken away by the

Emperor Charles V. for disobedience to the Interim,
III. 459.
Corsairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of, III. 9 1.

See Algiers, Barbaro.a.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, II. 3. Not allowed to afTemble
in the name of Charles V. 59. Their oppofirion
to his desires, 60. Is prevailed on by the Emperor
to recognize his on Philip as fuccefror to that king-
dom, III. 243. See Spain.
Cortes of Cafllile, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, II. 3. Is prevailed on to
acknowledge Ferdinand regent, according to Isabel.
la's will, 8. Acknowledges Philip and Joanna King
and Queen of Castile, and their son Charles, Prince
of Aflurias, 17. Declares Charles King, and votes
him a free gift, 56. Summoned by Charles to meet
at Compofiella in Galicia, 84. Tumultuary pro-
ceedings thereupon, ib. A donative voted, 86.
Loses all its influence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 238, 239. Its backwardness to grant sup-
plies for the Emperor's wars in Italy, 356. Refuses
his prefling solicitations for a (upply, II. 9. Aflem-
bled at Toledo to grant supplies to the Emperor,
169. The remonfirances of, 170. The ancient
constitution of, subverted by Charles 71. See Spain.
.-- of Valencia, prevailed on by the Emperor

Charles V. to acknowledge his son Philip fucceflor
to that kingdom, III. 243. See Spain.
Certono, Cardinal di, governor of Florence for the

Pope, expelled by the Florentines, on the Pope's
captivity, III. 4.

Cefmo di Medici. See Medici.
Cramtar, archbifsop of Canterbury, annuls the mar-

riageof Henry V111. with Catharine of Aragon,
which was refused to Henry by the Pope III. 68.
His sentence reverted by the Pope, 69.
Cruqy, peace of, between the Emperor and Francis,

11. 279.

Croy,

Crel, Willian de, nephew to Chievres, made arch-

bilhop of Toledo, by Charles V. II. 58. Dies,
237.

D
D'Albert, John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre

by Ferdinand of Aragon, II. 23. Invades Navarre,
but is defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 45.
D'Al/mbert, M. his obfervition on the order ofJe-

suits, 1II. 203. 3ste.
D'/Andtlat, brother to Coligni, is defeated by the

Duke of Saxonv in an endeavour to succour St.
Quintin, IV. 246. But enters the town with the
fugitives, 247. The town taken by laault, 252.
Dauphin of France, eldest son of Francis 1. is delivered

up with the Duke of Orleans, to the Emperor
Charles V. in exchange for his father, as hoitges
for the performance of the treaty of Madrid, II.
329. His death imputed to poison, 111. 14z. The
mofr probable cause of it, 142.
- late Duke of Orleans, second son of Francis I.
commands an army, and invades Spain, II. 240.
Is forced to abandon the siege of Perpignan, 24.. Is
difatisfied at the peace of Crerpy, 285. Makes a
secret protestation against it, ib.

*- of France, Con of Henry II. contraced to
Mary the young Queen of Scotland, III. 438.
Is married to her, IV. 271.
Denmark, a fommary view of the revolutions in,

during the sixteenth century, IV. 334.
·-- .-- King of, joins the Proceltant league at

Smalkalde, 111. 165.
Do Ritz, Cardinal, writes a history of Fiefco's con-

fpiracy while a youth, 111. 384, Nots.
Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of France,

aflifis the Guises in persuading Henry to an alliance
with Pope Paul IV. against the Emperor, IV. 198.
Induces Henry to break the treaty of Vaucelles, 223.
Marries her &rand-daughter toone of Montmorency's

ions,

tons, 279. Joins Montmorency againf the
Guises, ib.
Doria, Andrew, afifts Lautrec in subduing Genoa,

III. 7. Conquers and kills Moncada in a sea-en-
gagement before the harbour of Naples, 17. His
charaAer, 19. Is disgusted with the behaviour of
the French, 20. Revolts to the Emperor, 21.
Opens to Naples a communication by sea, 22.
Rescues Genoa from the French, 23. ReRtores
the government of, to the citizens, 25. The
refpea paid to his memory, 26. Attends the Em-
peror Charles in his difairous expedition against
Algiers, 2X5. His partial fondness for his kinsman
Giannetino, 371. His narrow escape in Lavagno's
infurreAion, 381. Returns on Lavagno's death,
and the dispersion of his party, 384. See Genoa
and Lavagn.

Giannetino, his character, III. 37r. Is

murdered by Lavagno's conspirators, 38r.
Denr, an interview there between Henry VIII. and

the Emperor Charles V. II. 99.
Dragut, a corsair, commands the Turkilh fleet which

ravages the coast of Naples, IV. 6.
Du Prat, chancellor of France, his charater, II. 252.

Commences a law-suit againf Charles Duke of
Bourbon, for his estate, at the infligation of Louise
the King's mother, ib.
Duelling, the custom of, how rendered general, III.

iS. Its influence on manners, ib.
Dur in Clever, taken by the Emperor Charles V.

the inhabitants put to the sword, and the town
burnt, II1. 250.

E
Ectuin, an adversary of Luther's, holds a publick dif-

putation with him at Leipfic, on the validity of the
papal authority, II. 25.
EclfJiaflical censures of the Romish church, the dread-

ful effets of, II. 145.

Fcthvfia/sihal

Eclefia/ltcal Reservation, in the recess of the diet of

Augsburg, remarks on. III. 58.
Edinburgh, plundered and burnt by the Earl of Hert-

ford, Il. 274.

Edward VI. of England, hs character, IV. 1g9.
Egmoit, count of, commands the cavalry at the battle

of St. Quintin, and puts Montmorency's troops to
light, IV. 248, 249. Engages Marlhal de Termes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival of an Enlifh
squadron, 274.
Egypt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman Em.

pire, II. 6;.
Ehreberhg, the caflle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony,

IV. 70.
Eignatz, a faaion in Geneva To termed, an account of,

II. i 18.
Elizabeth, filler of Mary, her acceflion to the crown of

England, IV. 290. Her character, 291. Is adlrcft-
e6 by Philip of Spain, and Henry of France, for
marriage, ib. Her prudent conduct between them,
292. How determined against Henry, 293. Her
motives for rejecing Philip, 294. Returns Piilip
an evasive nfwer, ib. Demands restitution of
Calais at the conferences at Chateau Cambrefis,
295. Elablifhts the Protestant religion in Eng-
land, 296. Treaty between her and Henry signed
at Chateau Cambreh4, 297.

Emmanuel Phillibert, Due of Savoy. See Savay.
England, by what means at kingdom was freed from

the Papal supremacy, and received the dodlrlnes of
the Reformation, lI. 69. Mary, Queen of, mar-
ried to Prince Philip, son of the Emperor Charles V.
:ntrary to the fenie of the nation, IV. 141. The
cna-ee ratified by parliament, 145. Is *'luaantly
Rgaint FraPn' il- now King of Spain, in t,,e war
prerogative, to carry Mary levic mlly by her
by t -he ui of uic the war, ib. Calais taken
by the DuK o Guifle B Hams,

' -uites ani laes

taken, ib. Death of Mary and accetion of Eliza-
beth, 29o. 'Ihe Protetlant religion eabliled by
Elizabeth, 296. Treaty with rance signed at

Chate u

Chateau Cambrefis, 297. Its interior Rrength how
increased by the conduct of Henry VIII. 35. Its
power no longer fruitlessly wafted on the continent,
317. Alteration of its conduA towards Scotland,
318.
Enguin, the count de, besieges Carignan, III. 267.

Desires of Francis permission to engage Guafto,
268. Defeats Guafto in a pitched battle, 270.
Erard de la Mark, ambaf'ador of Charles V. to the

diet of Frankfort, his private motives for thwarting
the pretensions of Francis I. of France to the Im-
perial crown, II. 76. Signs the capitulation of the
(ijrrinick body on behalf of Charles, 77.
Erasmus, some account of, II. 57. Preceded Luther

in his censures against the Romish church, ib. Con-
curs with him in his intentions of reformation, xI8.
Motives which checked him in this, ib.
EsCurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in memory of

the battle of St. Quintin, IV. 254.
Eurp, a hort view of the fate of, at the death of the

Emperor Maximilian, II. 62. The contemporary
monarchs of all, illustrious at the tiwe of Charles
V. 102, 103. The method of crrying on war
in, how improved beyond the padtice of earlier
ages, 226. The sentiments of, on Charles's treat-
ment of the Pope, III. . A review of the fiate of,
during the reign of the mperor Charles V. IV.
303. The remarkable change in, at this period,
304. How asseted by the revolt of Luther against
the church of Rome, 320.
Eutrmi, King of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in his

service, and is murdered by him, II. 9o, 91.

Excammu#iomian in the Romifb church, the or-"'
* jnAlituion of, and the use made of it, II. ·'

F

Farn, Alexander. nanimous elelion to the

Papacy, III. 70. e Paul IxI.
'...._ {ardigal, accompanies the troops sent by the
Pope to the Emperor, againf the army of the Pro-

tctar,

teftant league, III. 345. Returns dilgufted, ib.
Leads the troops home again by the Pope's order,
368. Contributes to the elecion of Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, IV. 6.
Farn,f, Otavio, grandson of Pope Paul II. endea-

vours to surprise Parma, and enters into treaty'with
the Emperor IV. 3. Is confirmed in Parma, by
Julius, 29. Procures an alliance with France, 31.
Is attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully pro-
teaed by the French, 32. Placentia reRored to
him by Philip II. of Spain, II. 257.
*- - Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope Paul III.

obtains of his father the dutchies of Parma and
Placentia, II. 296. His character, 434. Is aflaf-
finated, 435.
Frdind King of Aragon, how he acquired his king-

doms, II. a. Invites his daughter Joanna, and her
hulband, Philip Archduke of Austria, to Spain, 3.
Becomes jealous of Philip, 4. Carries on his war
with France vigorously, notwithfRanding Philip's
treaty with Lewis, 6. His Queen Isabella dies,
and leaves him regent of CaRlile, under reftriaions,
7. Resigns the kingdom of Castile, and is acknow-
ledged Regent by the Cortes, 8. His charater,
ib. His maxims of government odious to the Caf-
tilians, q. Required by Philip to resign his regency,
so. Joanna's letter of content procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself confined, . Is
deserted by the Castilian nobility, ib. Determines
to exclude his daughter from the fucceflion by mar-
rying, 12. Marries Germaine de Foix, niece to
Lewis XII. of France, 13. A treaty between him
and Philip at Salamanca, by which the regency of
Castile is jointly veited in them, and Joanna, 14.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to detain Philip
for three months, when driven on that coast, x5.
The Castilians declare againit him, ib. Resigns the
regency of Castile, by treaty, 16. Interview between
him and Philip, ib. Is abfenr, at Naples, when
Philip died, 21. Returns and gains, with the re.
gency of Castile, the good will of the natives by his

prudent

prudent adminiflration, 22. Acquires by diflo.
nourale means the kingdom of Navarre, 23. How
he detroyed his conflitution, 24. Endeavours to
diminish his grandson Charles's power, by a will in
favour of Ferdinand, 24, 25. Alters his will in fa-
vour of Charles, 26. Dies, ib. Review of his ad-
miniftrati;)n, 31. Ximenes appointed by his will,
regent of Caltile, until the arrival of Charles, V.
ib.
Ferdinandl, second fun of Philip Archduke of Aufiria,

born, II. 5. Left regent of Aragon, by his grand.
father Ferdinanld, 25. This revoked by a fubfc-
auent will, by which he obtains only a pension, 26.
Discontented with his dirappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of Cardinal Ximenes, 3;.
Sent by Charles V. to visit their grandfather Maxi-
milian, 59. Is e!eaed King of Hungary and Bo-
hemia, 374. Signs a deed called the Rverfe, ib.
The Etmperor endeavours to get him eleaed king of
tie Romans, III. 52. He is opposed by the Pro.
tenants, 53. Is crowned King of the Romans, 54.
Forms aco, federacy against the Anabaptists at Mun-
ficr, 8:. Opposes the refloration of Ulric Duke of
Wurtemberg, 85. Recognizes his title, and con-
cludes a reacy with him, 87. His kingdom of
Hungairy wreTed from him by John Zapol Scaepius,
215. Besieges the young King Stephen and his
mother in Buda, but is defeated by the Turks, 218.
His mean offers of fubmillion to the Porte, i.
Which are rejeaed, 220. Courts the favour of the
Proteflants, 60. Opens the diet at Worms, 28g.
Requires it to submit to the decisions of the council
of Trent, 389. Agrees to pay a tribute to Soly-
snan for Hungary, 32o. Encroaches on the liberties
of Bohemia, 427. His rigorous treatmentofPrague,
429. Disarms the Bohemians, 430. Obtains the
ouvereignty of the city of Conflance, 459. Invades
T'ranylvania by invitation of Martinuzzi, IV. 47.
Obtains the resignation of Transylvania from Queen
l{abella, 48. Orders Martinuzzi to be aflaflinated,
j . Enters into negociation withMaurice on behalf

of

of the emperor, 8r. His motives for promoting
the Emperor's agreeing with Maurice, 86. Isabella
and her son Stephen recover poffefion of Tranfyl-
vania, 28. Opens a diet at Augiburg, and excites
suspicions in the Protestants, 173. The Emperor
leaves the internal administration of German affairs
to him, 177. Is again applied to by the Emperor
to resign his pretensions of fuccefilon to Philip, but
refuses, 178. Endeavours therefore to gain the
friendihip of the diet, 18o. Again refuses the Em-
peror's solicitations, 230. Charles resigns the Im-
perial crown to him, 231. Aflembles the college
of EleAors at Frankfort, which acknowledges him
Emperor of Germany, 267. The Pope refuses to
acknowledge him, 268.
Feudal government, a view of, as it exified in Spain,

II. 209.

Fiefco, Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna.
-- Jerome, engages in his brother's conspiracy,

and fails in ecuring Andrew Doria, III. 380. is
imprudent vanity on his brother's death, 382. Shuts
himself up in a fort on his estate, 385. Is reduced
and put to death, 393.

Slanders. See Nethtrlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt againf Pope Cle-

ment VII. on the news of his captivity, and recover
their liberty, III, 4. Are reduced to fiubjec.it;l to
Alexander di Medici, by the Emperor, 41. Ax-
ander di Medici, Duke of, aftafluiatel by his hi!s-
man Lorenzo, 155. Co(mo di Med ici av:,lceid o
the fovereigncy, 156. Cosmo, supportet by ;e li£ni-
peror, defeats the partizansofLoreu;zo, 157. t/<-rio
aflerts his independency on the Empeior, V. 1 i ..
Fonl/oa, Antonio de, commander in chief of the ..r. Is

in Spain, ordered by Cardinal Adrian to befieg ie
insurgents in Segovia, II. 207. Is dieni d I:! :t of
taking military lores, by the inhabitantb of M .dina
del Campo, ib. Attacks and almofi burns : e
'whole town, 208. Is repuifed, ib. His house at
Valadolid burnt, ib.

Firanct.

Fafrnc, the aquifitions of that kingdom, during the

reign of the Emperor Charles V. IV. 310. The
ch.ractcr of the people of, 312. The good confe-
quences of the civil wars in that kingdom to the
reft of Europe, 314.
Francis I. King of France, concludes a peace with

Charles V. and the conditions of the treaty, II. 49,
o0. Sends a fruitless embafly to Charles for the re-
ititution of Navarre to the young king,6o. Apires
to the Imperial crown at the death of Maximilian,
64. Rcafons by which hefupported his pretensions,
65. Remarks on the equipages of his ambafladors
to the German States, 68. His pretensions adopted
by the Venetians, 69. Lores the eleaion, 77.
Rife of the rivallhip between him and Charles, 90.
Courts the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 9 Pro.
mits Wolfey his intercft for the Papacy, 99. Has
an interview with Henry VIII. of England, oo.
Wrefiles with Henry, and throws him, lot, Note.
His advantages ever Charles, at the commencement
of hofil!ities between them, 168. Concludes an
alliance with the Pope, 171. Invades and reduces
Navarre, in the name of Henry D'Albert, (on of
John, the former King, 175. The French driven
out by the imprudence of I.'Eparre their general,
who is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, 176, 177.
Retakes Mouf;n from the Imperialifls, 180. Invaies
the Low Countries, but loses the opportunities of
fucces by imprudence, ib. Rejeas the demands of
Charles at the Congress at Calais, 181. A league
concluded between Charles and Henry VIII. againt
him, 182. His imprudent appointment of the
Ln a rchal de Foix to the government of Milan, 185.
De Foix attacks Reggio, but is repulsed by the go-
svrnror Guicciardini the historian, 186. The Pope
dclarcs againd him, ib. His embarraflments on the
invafiun or Milan, 187. His mother seizes the mo-
rery appointed for payment of the Milanee troops,
1S. Mlan taken, and the French driven out,
19o. Levies a body of Swiss, 194. Who infilt

01O

on giving a precipitate battle to the Imperialists,
which is lotl, 196. War declared against him by
Henry VIII. 197. His expedients to supply his
treasury, 19S. The plan pursued by him to resist
the incursions of the Englifb, 200. Picardy invaded
by Henry, ib. bhe Venetians league with the Empe-
ror against him, 248. To which Pope Adrian accedes,
ib. His expeditious movement against the Milanese,
249. Disconcerted by the Duke of Bourbon's con-
fpiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraiing his cause,
which Bourbon denies, 254. B urLb'. escapes to
Italy, and Francis.returns, ib. Appoints the admiral
Bonnivet to command againfi the Milanese, 255.
Picardy invaded by the duke of Suffolk, who is driven
back, 261. Repulses the invasion of Giienne .nd
Burgundy by Cnarles, 262. His successful close of
the campa.ign, ib. His prudent care to disappoint.
the Imperialifs in their invasion of Provence,. 282.
Alembles an army, which causes the Imperialists to
retire from Marfcilles, ib. Dtermines to invade
the Milanese, 284. Appoints hs mother Louise
regent during his absence, 285. Enters Milan, and
takes pofefflion of the city, 285, 286. Advised by
Bonnivet to besiege Pavia, 288. His vigorous at-
tacks on Pavia, ib. Concludes a treaty of neutrality
with Pope Clement, 290. His imprudent invasion
of Naples, 291. Resolves, by Bonnivet's advice, to
attack Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief of
Pavia, 294. Is routed at the battle of Pavia, ib.
Is taken prisoner, 295. Is ent to the cl1le of
Pizzitchitone under tne custody of Don Ferdinand
Alarcon, 297, 2:;8. Rcfufes the propositions made to
him by Charles, 308. Is carried to Spain on his
deiire of a perlonal interview with Charles, 309.
Is rigorously treated in Spain, x18. Falls danger-
oufly ill, ih. Is vifired by Charle, 39. Re-
solves to resin his k ngdorn, 323. Is delivered
from his captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 325.
His secret proteflations against the validity of this
treaty, 327. Mrries the Queen of Portugal, ib.
Recovers his liberty, and the Dauphin and the Duke
VOL. IV. B b of

of Orleans delivered up hostages to Charles for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 329. Writes
a letter of acknowledgment to Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, 343. His reply to the Imperial ambafladors,
ib. Enters into league with the Pope, the Ve-
netians, and Sforza, again Charles, 345. Is ab-
solved from his oath to oblerve the treatyof MadriJ,
346. H;s behaviour to ihe Emperor's second cm.
baiy, 349. Is difpiited by his former ill ifccefs,
350. nters ito a treaty with Henrj VIIl.of
England against he Empe.or, III. 3. Succefles of
his general Lautrec in Italy, 7. Hs reply to the
Emperor's overtures, 12. Declares war aga;nf
him, and challenges him to fingie combat, 13, 14.
Treats Andrew Doria ill, who revolts from him to
the Emperor, a1. His army, under Saluces, driven
out of Italy, 23. His troop, in Mlsan routed, 26.
His endeavours toward an accommodation, 27.
Terms of the peace of Cambray, concluded by the
mediation of his mother Louise and Margaret of
Auftiia, 30. Remarks on the sacrifices made by
him in this treaty, and on his condut of the war,
31. Leagues secretly with the Proteftint Princes,
55. His measures to elude the treaty of Cambray,
64. His negotiations with the Pope, 65. His
interview and treaty with the Pope, 66. Gives the
Duke of Orleans in marriage toCatherine di Medici,
67. Negociates a treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke
of Milan, so9. His envoy Merveille executed at
Milan for murder, iro. Is disappointed in his
endeavours to negociate alliances against the Em-
peror, ib. Invites Melahthon to Paris, il .
Evidences his zeal for the Romish religion, 12a.
Caures ot his quarrel with the Duke of Savoy, 115.
Seizes the Duke's territories, II6. His pretensions
to the dutchy of Milan, on the death of Francis
Sforza, 1 22. The Emperor's invecive against him
before the Pope in council, 124. Is invaded by
Charles, 129. His prudent plan of defence, 133S
Joins the army under Montmorency, 138. Death
of the Dauphis, 141. Obtains a decree of the pr-

liarnnt

liament of Paris, against the Emperor, 143. Invades
the Low Countries, i44. A suspension of arms in
Slanders, and how negociated, ib. A truce in
Piedmont, 145. Motives to there truces, 147.
Concludes an alliance with Solyman the Magnifi-
cent, ib. Negociations for a peace with the Em-
peror, 149. Concludes a truce for ten years at
Nice, 151. Reflections on the war, ib. His inter-
view with Charles, Sa2. Marries Mary of Guise
to James V. of Scotland, 59. Refuses the offers
of the deputies of Ghent, 179. Informs Charles of
the offer made by them, ib. Grants the Emperor
leave to pals through France to the Netherlands,
181. His reception of the Emperor, 183. Is
deceived by the Emperor in respect to Milan, 187.
His ambassador to the Porte, Rincon, murdered by
the Imperial governor of the Milanese, 236. Pre-
pares to relent the injury, 237. Attacks the Em.
peror with five armies, 239. His first attempts
rendered abortive, by the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleans, 241. Renews his negociations with
Sultan Solyman, 248. Invades the Low Countries,
250. Forces the Emperor to raise the siege of
Landrecy, 252. Difmifes Barbarossa, 267. Gives
the count d'Enguein permilion to engage Guaflo,
269. Relieves Paris, in danger of being surprised
by the Emperor, 278. Agrees to a separate peace
with Charles, 279. Henry's haughty return to his
overtures of peace, 284. Death of the Duke of
Orleans, 295. Peace of Campe, 334. Perceives
a neceflity of checking the Emperor's ambitious
designs, 388. Forms a general league againrt him,
ib. Dies, 393. His life and characer summarily
compared with those of Charles, ib. Consequences
of his death, 397.
Francs II. his acceflon to the crown of France, and

charaier, IV. 302.
Fraifoert, the diet of, afiembled for the choice of

an Emperor at the death of Maximilian, II. 72.
Names and views of the Elc6tors, 72, 73. The Em-
pire offered to Frederick of Saxony, 73. Who reject8

B b it

it, with his reasons, 74. Choofes Charles V. Em.
peror, 77. His confirmation of the Germanick pri-
vileges required and agreed to, 78. City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, 270. The college of
Elecors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is ac-
knowledged Emperor of Germany, IV. 267.
Frederick Duke of Saxony, aembles with the other

Elecors at the diet of Francfort, to choose an Em-
peror, II. 7i. The Empire offered to him, 73.
Rejets it, and votes for Charles V. 74. Refu{.s
the prieents of the Spanini ambafiadors, 75. This
disinterested behaviour confirmed by the testimony
of historians, ib. Aete. Choofes 1Matin Luther phi-
Lfophical p ofeffor at his university of Wittemberg,
io. Encourages Luther in his opposition to indul-
gences, 1 3. Protets him against Cajetan, 120.
CaufCs Luiher to be seized at his return from the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wartburg,
164. Dies, 341.
Frtgoo, the French ambafrador to Venice, murdered

by the Marquis del Guafto, the Imperial governor
of the Milanese, III. 236.
.Frnfperg, George, a German nobleman, some ac-

count of, he joins the army of Charles V. 1I. 356.

G
Genrral of the Jeruits, an enquiry into his office and

despotic authority, III. 193.
Geneva, an account of its revolt againfi the Duke of

Savoy, Ii. 117.
Genea, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, III. 7.

T* he French endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour
of Savona, 20. Is rescued from the French by An-
drew Doria, 24. The government of, fettled by
the difintereflednes of Doria, ib. The honour paid
to Doria's memory, 26. Is visited by the Emperor,
37. A scheme formed to overturn the constitution
of, by Fiefco, count of Lavagno, 373. He as.
fembles his adherents, 376. The conspirators
sally forth from Lavagno's palace, 380. Deputies
set to know Lavagno's terms, 381. Lavagno

..
. *drowned,

drowned, 382. The infurredion ruined by the im-
prudence of his brother Jerome Fiefco, ib. The
conspirators disperse, 383. Jerome reduced and
put to death, 393.
Germanada, an aifociation in Valenria, o termed, on

what occasion formed, II. 239. Refuse to lay
down their arms, ib. Their.refentment levelled at
the nobility, who raise an army against them, 24o.
Defeat the nobles in several aions, 241. But are
routed and dispersed by them, ib.
Germany, fiate of, at the death of the Emperor Maxi-

milian, II. 62, 63. Charles V. of Spain, and Fran-
cis I. of France, form pretenlions to the Imperial
crown, 6.. Their refpedtive realons offered in favour
of their clai:ns, 65, 66. Views and interests of the
other European States in relation to the competitors,
68. Henry VIII. of England advances a claim, 69.
But is discouraged from'profecutin it, 70. How
the Papacy was likely to be affeced in the choice of
an Emperor, ib. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
German Princes, 71. Opening of the diet at Franc-
fort, 72. In whom the eleAion of an Emperor is
vested, ib. Views of the Electors, 73. The Em-
pire offered to Frederick of Saxony, ib. Who re-
jeds it, and his reasons, ib. Charles V. chosen, 77.
The capitulation of the Germanic privileges con-
firmed by him, 78. Charles sets out for, 87. Charles
crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle, 102. Commence-
ment of the Reformation there, by Martin Luther,
104. Treatment of the bull of excommunication
published against Luther, 128. The usurpations
of the clergy there, during the disputes concerning
investitures, 141. The clergy of, mostly foreigners,
147. The benefices of, nominated by the Pope, 148.
The expedient of the Emperors for rftraining this
power of the Pope, ineffetual, 149. The great
progress of Luther's dotrines in, 269. Grievances
ofthe peasants, 331. Infurrcaion in Suabia, 332,
333. The memorial of their grievances, ib. The
iniurredion quelled, 334. Another infurreaion in
'Thuriiiia, ib. How the houfc of Aultria became lo

B b 3 formidable

formidable in, 375. Proceedings relating to the Re-
formation there, ib. Great progress of the Re.
formation there, II1. 42. Ferdinand King of Hun-
gary and Bohemia, brother to. Charles V. eleted
King of the Romans, 53. The Protestant religion
eftabli&ed in Saxony, 167. The Protestant religion
eftabliied in the Palatinate, 29. The league of
Smalkalde raise an army againt the Emperor, 335.
Are put under the ban of the Empire, 339. The
Protestant army dispersed, 361. The Interim en-
forced by the Emperor, 454. Maurice of Saxony
raises an army, and declares in favour of the Pro-
teftants, IV. 64. Maurice favoured even by the
Catholic princes, and why, 83. Treaty of Pas-
fau, between the Emperor and Maurice of Saxony,
91. Truce between the Emperor and Henry of
France, 217. Charles resigns the Imperial crown
to his brother Ferdinand, 231.
Ghmnt, an infurredion there, I1. 173. The preten-

sions of the citizens, 174. Form a confederacy
against the Queen-dowager of Hungary, their gu-
vernefs, 175. Their deputies to the Emperor, how
treated by him, i. Offer to submit to France, 176.
Is reduced by Charles, s85.

Ghiblint faaion in Italy, a view of, II. 353.
Girm, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of

the army of the Holy Junta, II. 223. Resigns his
commiillon, and Padilla replaced, 226.
Goltta in Africa, taken by the Emperor Charles V.

III. 99.
GmiZge, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures

Cardinal Farnese to be afiaffinated, and takes pol'es-
sion of Placentia for the Emperor, III. 436. Pre-
pares to seize Parma, IV. 29. Is repulsed by the
French, 32.
Goaufr, sent by Francis I. King of France, to nego-

ciate a peace with Charles V. II. 49.
Grmvwllt, Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the count

de Sancerre to surrender St. Difiere to the Emperor,
III. 275. Endeavours to lull the Protestants into fc-
curity with regard to the Emperor's conduct to-
ward them, 3c8. Is commiflioned by Philip to ad-

9 drcfr

dress the afiembly at the Emperor's resignation of hit
hereditary dominions, IV. 212.
Gra'veints, an interview there between the Emperor

Charles V. and Henry VIII. of England, II. oi.
Grapprr, canon of Cologne, is appointed a manager of

the Proteliant and Catholic conferences before the
diet at Ratisbon, II1. 21 . Writes a treatire to
compose the differences between them, b. The
sentiments of both parties on this work, 212.
Granada, archbishop of, president of the council of

Caltile, his imprudent advice to Cardinal Adrian,
relating to the infurrefion in Segovia, II. 2o6.
Gaofle, the Marquis del, appointed governor of Milan,

by the Emperor, III. r4.; Procures Rincon the
French ambassador to the Porte, to be murdered on
hisjourney thither, 236. Defends Carignan against
the French, 268. Defeated by d'Enguien in a
pitched battle, 27 .
Guicciardini, his account of the publication of Indul.

gences contradicted, II 114, aote. Defends Reggio
againf the French, 85. Repulses an attack upon
Parma, by the French, x92. His sentiments of the
Pope's treaty with LJnnoy viceroy of Naples, 363.
Ga/t, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is made governor

of Meta by Henry 1I. of Frances IV. 103. His
character, ib. Prepares to defend it against the Em-
peror, ib. His brother d'Aumale taken prisoner by
the Imperialists, 107. The Emperor raises the siege,
xio. His humane treatment of the difireffed and
sick Germans left behind, . Persuades Henry
to an alliance with Pope Paul IV. 198. Marches
with troops into Italy, 236. Is unable to effet any
thing, 237. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat
of St. Quintin 255. His reception in France, 26x.
Takes the field againt Philip, 262. Invests
and takes Calais from the English, 266. Takes
also Guifnes and Hames, ib. Takes Thionville in
Luxembourg, 273..
Gu#if, Mary of, married to James V. of Scotland, IIT.

z59. Frufrates the intended marriage between her
daughter Mary and prince Edward of England, 266.

B b 4. GrA,

GurS, Cardinal de, why he favoured the election ot

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, 11. 76. Signs
the capitulation of the Germanic body on behalf of
Chawles, 78.
GuCman, chancellor to the Emperor Ferdinand, is Cent

to Pope Paul IV. to notify the eletion, who refufcs
to fee him, IV. 268.

H
Hambturgb, city of, embraces the reformed religion,

II. 269.
Hara, te conde de, appointed to command the army

of the Caflilian nobles against the Holy Junta, I1.
225. Attacks Tord.fillas, and gets poffefion of
Queen Joanna, i. Routs the army of the Junta,
and takes Padiila prisoner, who is executed, 233.
Hoafien Iga, deputy governor of Algiers, his piracies

againit the Christian flates, III. 222. Is bfieged
in Algiers by the EmperorCharles V. 225. Makes
a successful sally, 227. The Emperor forced by
bad weather to return'back again, 230.
.Hayradin, a potter's Con of Lesbos, commences pirate,

111. 9t. See Barbarga.
H-eathtns, ancient, why the principles of mutual tolera-

tion were generally admitted among them, IV. 183.
Helds, vice-chancellor to Charles V. attends the Pope's

nuncio to Smalkalde, IlI. 162. Forms a Catholic
league in opposition to the Protefiant one, 165.
Henry II. King of France, his motives for declining

an alliance with Pope Paul III. against the Emperor,
III. 438. Procures for Scotland a peace with Eng-
land, IV. 31. The young Queen Mary contraded
to the Dauphin, and sent to France for education,
ib. Enters into an alliance with Osavio Farnefc
Duke of Parma, ib. Protefis againit the council
of Trent, 33. Makes alliance with Maurice Elec-
tor of Saxony, 54. Seconds the operations of Mal-
rice, 65. His army marches and fcizes Metz, 68.
Attempts to surprise Strafburgh, 77. Is strongly
lslicited to spare it, 78. Returns, 79. The Em-

peror

peror prepares for war againf him, lot. Infiigates
the Turks to invade Naples, i i5. Terouanne taken
and demolished by Charles, 125. Hefdin taken, ib.
Leads an army into the Low Countries against
Charles, 126; Endeavours to obfirut the marriage
of Mary of England with Philip of Spain, i4.
The progress of his arms against the Emperor, 150.
Engages Charles, 152. Retires, ib. Cofrno di
Medici, Duke of Florence, makes war against him,
155. Appoints Peter Strozzi commander of his
army in Italy, 156. Strozzi defeated, 159. Sieia
taken, 161. Pope Paul IV. makes overtures to an
alliance with him against the Emperor, 196. Mont-
morency's arguments against this alliance, 197. Is
persuaded by the Guifcs to accept it, 198. Sends
the Cardinal of Lorrain with powers to conclude it,
ib. The Pope signs the treaty, 201. A truce for
five years concluded with the Emperor, 216. Is
exhorted by Cardinal Caraffa to break the truce,
220. Is absolved from his oath, and concludes a
new treaty with the Pope, 223. Sends the Duke of
Guise into Italy, 239. The Conitable Montmo-
rency defeated and taken prisoner at St. Quintin, 248.
Henry prepares for the defence of Paris, 250. St.
Qintin taken by affaulr, 252. ColleAs his troops
and negociates for aflitance, 253. His kind reception
of the Duke of Guise, 261. Calais taken by
Guise, 266. Impowers Montmorency to negociate
a peace with Philip, 279. Honours him highly on
his return to France, 280. Writes to Qieen Eli-
zabeth with proposals of marriage, 291. How he
failed in his suit, 293. His daughter nrarried to
Philip, and his sifter to the Duke of Savoy, 298.
Terms of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 29.
The marriage of his siser and daughter celebrated
with great pomp, 301. His death, 302.
Henry VII. ot England, detains the archduke Philip

and his duches when driven on his coast, three
months, at the infligation of Ferdinand, II. 15.
Henry VIII. of England, fends an arnbalJ'a.or to Ger-

many to propofi his claims to the Imperial cown,

lit

1. 69. I discouraged from his pretnfions, and
takes no part with the other competitors, 70. His
personal charater and political influence in urope,
94 Entirely guided oy Cardinal Wolfey, 95. Re-
ceives a vific from the Emperor Charles V. 99.
Goes over to France to visit Francis, too. Wrestles
with Francis, and is thrown by him, ot, Nett. Has
another interview with Charles at Gravelines, ib.
Charles offers to submit his differences with Francis
to his arbitration, ib. Publilhes a treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, againit Martin Luther, 166.
Obtains of the Pope the title of Dfyt tr of th Faith,
167. Takes part with Charles againit Francis,
169. Sends Wolfey to negociate an accommodation
between the Emperor and Francis, 80. Concludes
a league with Charles against Francis, 182. His
avowed reasons for this treaty, ib. His private mo-
tives, 183. Declares war aaint Francis, J97. Is
visited by Charles, 198. Makes descents upon the
coast of France, 199. Advances with an army into
Picardy, ib. Obliged to retire by the Duke de
Vendome, 200. Enters into a treaty with the Em-
peror and Charles Duke of Bourboun, 252, 253.
How he railed supplies for his wars beyond the grants
of his parliament, 261. Sends the Duke of Suffolk
to invade Picardy, who penetrates almost to Paris,
but is driven back, ib. Engages to afift Charles in
an invasion of Provence, 280. Causes of his not
supporting the Imperialists, 282, 283. Effects of
the battle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis, on him,
301. Particulars of his embafy to Charles, 303.
Concludes a defensive alliance with France, 310.
Is declared Protedor of the league of Cognac against
the Emperor, 345. His motives for affiing the
Pope against the Emperor, III. 2. Enters into a
league with Francis, and renounces the English
claim to the crown of France, 4. Declares war
against the Emperor, 13. Concludes a truce with
the governess of the Low Countries, 9. Projeets
his divorce from Catharine of Aragon, 34. Motives
which withheld the Pope from granting it, 35. Ac-

quicfcca

quiefces in the peace of Cambray, 36. Sends sup-
ply of money to the Protestant league in Germany,
55. Procures bis marriage to be annulled by Cran-
mer archbishop of Canterbury, 68. The divorce
reversed by the Pope under penalty of excommuni.
cation, 69. Renounces the Papal supremacy, 70.
Refuses to acknowledge any council called by tli
Pope, 88. Opposes James V. of Scotland mar-
rying Mary of Guise, 159. His difguls with
Francis and intercourse with the Emperor, 60o. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, 245. Makes war
with Scotland, 246. Particulars of his treaty with
Charles, ib. Invades France, and invefis Bou-
logne, 274. RefuCes the Emperor's plan of ope-
rations, 279. Is deserted by the Emperor, 284.
Takes Boulogne, ib. His haughty proposals to Fran-
cis, ib. Peace of Campe, 334. Is succeeded by
his Ion Edward VI. 390. A review of his policy,
IV. 315.
Hertford, earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, IITI

274. Joins Henry after, in his invaions of France,
ib.
Hffe, the Landgrave of, procures the restoration

of his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, III. 85.
His views compared with those of the Eletor of
Saxony, 305. The Emperor's deceitful professions
to him, 315. Quiets the apprehensions of the Pro-
tefiant league with regard to the Emperor, ib. Is
appointed joint commander of the army of the league
with the Elecfor of Saxony, 343. Their charac-
ters compared, ib. Urges an attack of the Empe-
ror, but is opposed by the Elector, 348. His letter
to Maurice Duke of Saxony, 357. The army of
the league disperse, 361. Is reduced to accept harsh
terms from Charles, 416. His humiliating reception
by the Emperor, 419. Is detained in confinement,
421. His offers of ifubmifion lighted by the Em-
peror, 452. Is carried by the Emperor with him
into the Netherlands, 456. Renews his endeavours
for liberty, IV. 22. Charles releales arbitrarily the
Ele6or of Brandenburgh, and Maurice, from their

engagemenite

engagement to him, 23. Obtains his libert by
the treaty of Palfau, 91. Is arrested by the Qucen
of Hungary, but freed by the Emperor, 98. The
effess of his confinement on him, 99.
lAutrrus, his account of Lewis XII. hewn to contra.

dit the relations given by Bellay and other French
hifioriansof the education of Charles V. II. 7, Note.

HIaly J7ta. See Jinta.
Holy Loagt, againit the Emperor Charles V. formed

at Cognac, under the proteation of Henry VIII. of
England, 11. 345, 346.
Heruc, a potter's son of Lesbos, commences pirate,

with his brother Hayraydin, III. 91. See Barbarej.

Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnificent, and
. its King Lewis II. killed, II. 373. His fuccefies,

and the number ofprifoners carried away, ib. The
archduke Ferdinand elected King of, together with
Bohemia, 374. John Zapol Scaepius wrests it from
Ferdinand, 11. 215. Stephen succeeds on the death
of his father John, 216. Is treacherously seized by
Solyman, 219. See Ijabila and Mariruzzi.
James V. of Scotland, levies troops to afliR Francis in

Provence, but his intention frustrated, III. 158.
His negociations for marriage with Francis's daugh-
ter, 159. Marries Mary of Guise, ib. Dies, and
leaves Mary his infant-daughter to succeed him,
246. See Mary.
Jtfuits, the order of, by whom founded, II. 176.

Characer of that order, ib. Charaater of gnatiu
Loyola their founder, III. 190. The order con-
firmed by the Pope, ib. An examination into the
conflitution of the order, g19. Office and power of
their general, 193. The rapid progress of the or-
der, 197. Engage in trade, and eftabliih an empire
in South America, 199. Bad tendency of the order,
201. Are responsible for most of the pernicious cf-
seas of Popery since their institution, 202. Advan-
tages resulting from their inltiution, ib. Civilize

the

the natives of Paraguay, 203. Their precautions
For the independency of their empire there, 265
How the particulars of their government and indii-
tution came to be disclosed, 208. Summary of their
character, 209.
Indulgences, in the Romifi church, the doctrine of,

explained, II. o15. By whom first invented, o6.
Martin Luther preaches against them, i . Writes
againRf them to Albert Eletor of Mentz, ib. A
bull ilfued in favour of, 123. The sale of, opposed
in Switzerland by Zuinglius, z 2.
Infanteda, Duke of, his haughty rcfntment of a carual

blow on his horse, II. 179. Is protected by the
Conflable of Cadile, ib.
Innocen;, a ytung domestic of Cardinal di Monte, ob-

tains his Cardinal's hat, on his eleelion to the Pa-
pacy, IV. 7.
Interim, a system of theology so called, prepared by

order of the emperor Charles V. for the use of
Germany, III. 445 Is disapproved of, both by
Proteffants and PapifRs, 447.
Jnv:ituzrc:, usurpations of the Romifil clergy in Ger-

many, during the disputes between the Emperors
and Popes, concerning, II. 141.
fsanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother of Charles

V. visits Spain with her husband Philip Archduke of
Austria, II. 3. Is lighted by her hulband, 4. Her
character, ib. Is abruptly left in Spain by her hut-
band, 5. Sinks into melancholy on the occasion,
and is delivered of her second Con Ferdinand, ib. Her
letter of consent to her father's regency of Castile
intercepted, and herself confined, it. Made joint
regent of Caflile with Ferdinand and Philip, by the
treaty of Salamanca, 14. Sets out for Spain with
Philip, are driven on the coast of England, and de.
tained three months by Henry VII. 15. Acknow-
ledged Queen b~ the Cortes, 17. Her tenderness to
her hulband in his sickness, and extraordinary at-
tachment to his body when dead, 8. Is incapable
of government, g19 Her son Charles allumes the
c:own, 36. The Crtes acknowledge her on

King,

King, with a reservation in her favour, 6. Her
reception of Padilla the chief of the Spanlh male-
contents, 212. The holy Junta removed to Tor-
defilas, the place of her residence, 213. Relapses
into her former melancholy, ib. The proceedings
of the Holy Junta carried on in her name, 214. Is
seized by the Conde de Hro, 225. Dies, after
near fifty years confinement, IV. 207.
7ohA Zapol S.aepius, by the afliftance of Sultan Soly-

man, efRablifhes himself in the kingdom of Hungary,
III. 215. Leaves the kingdom to his son Stephen,
216. See Hungary, Isabella, and Martinwzzi.
afabella, daughter of John 11. of CafRile, and wife of
Ferdinand Kin- of Aragon, her hiflory, II. 2.
HIer concern at the archduke's Philip's treatment of
her daughter J .anna, 4. Her death and charater, 7.
Appoints Ferdinand regent of Caflile, under rcftric.
tions, ib.
. daughter to Sigismund King of Poland, mar-
ried to John King of Hungary, Il. 216. Hercha-
raater, 217. Is treacherously carried, with her in-
sant Ton, into Transylvania by Sultan Solyman, 219.
The government of this province and the education
of her son committed to herjointly with Martinuzzi,
IV. 46. Isjealous of Mattinuzzi's influence, and
courts the Turks, ib. Is prevailed on to resign
Transylvania to Ferdinand, 48. Retires to Silesia,
49. Recovers poaieflon of rranfylvania, 128.
_- of Portugal, married to the Emperor Charles

V. 11. 30.
Italy, consequences of the league between Pope Leo X.

and the Emperor Charles V. to, II. 184. The cha-
raters of the Italians, Spaniards, and French, con-
trailed, ib. State of, at the accelion of Clement
VII. to the Papacy, 263. Views of the Italian
States with refpet to the Emperor and Francis on
the expulsion of the French from Genoaand the Mi-
lancfe, 279. Their apprehensions on the battle of
Pavia and captivity of Francis, 304. The principal
States join in the Holy league againf the Emperor,
345. Are difgufied at the tardiness of Francis, 352.

A view

A view of the Ghibeline fation, 353. Sentiments
of the States of, on the peace of Cambray, III. 33.
Is visited by the Emperor Charles, 36. The mo-
tives of his moderation toward the.States of, 38. A
league among the S'ates of, formed by Charles, 63.
Placentia granted to Oftavio Farnese by Philip II.
of Spain, V. 257. The inveytiture of Siena given
by Philip to Coimo di Medici, 360. The confe-
quence of these grants, 361.
7Jnta, Holy, a view of the confederacy in Spain, so

termed, 11. tn 1. The authority of Adrian ditclaimed
by, 212. Removed to Tordefilas, where Qieen
Joanna resided, 213. Their proceedings carried on
in the name of Joanna, ib. Receives letters
rom Charles to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises of pardon, 215. Remonfirance of grievances
drawn up by, 216. The particulars of this re-
monitrance, 217. Remarks on the spirit of it,
·21. Are intimidatedfrom presenting it to Charles,
222. Propose to deprive Charles of his royalty
during the life of Joanna, ib. Take the field,
223. Characer of their army, ib. The Queen
seized by the Conde de Haro, 225. How they
obtained money to support their army, 227. Lose
time in negociating with the nobles, 228. Propose
to make their peace with Charles at the expence of
the nobles, 230. Their irresolute conduct, 231.
Their army defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken
prisoner, 232. Padilla executed, 233. His letters
to his wife, and the city of Toledo, 231, Not.
The ruin of the confederacy, 235.
uliu 11. Pope, obtervations on the pontificate *f, II.
x36
- III. Pope, his chara&r, IV. 6. Bestows his
Cardinal's hat infamously, 7. Is averse to the call-
ing a council, 8. Summonsone at Trent, 9. A-
ferts his supreme. authority peremptorily in the
bull for it, 20. Repents confirming Otavio Far-
nefe in Parma, 29. Requires Octavio to relin-
quith his alliance with France, 31. The manner
of h death, 176.

.,- * LaHe~

L
La Chau, a Flemish gentleman, associated by Charles

V. with Cardinal Ximenes in the regency of Caflile,
II. 44.
Landrrtq, siege of, by the Emperor Charles V. III.

251. Is abandoned by him, 252.
Lanoy, mottgages the revenues of Naples, to supply

the exigencies of the Emperor, II. 287. Francis
surrenders himself prisoner to him at the battle of
Pavia, 296. His cautious disposal of him, 297.
Delivers him up in pursuance of the treaty of Mla-
<iid, and receives the Duke of Orleans and the Dau-
phin, as hostages in exchange, 330. Is lent am-
baffador to Francis to require his fulfilment o the
treaty of, 348. Concludes a treaty with the Pope,
362. Marches to join the Imperialists at Rome,
where the troops refuse to obey.him, III. S.
Laruza, Don John de, made viceroy of Aragon, oil

the departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 86.
Compoes the diflurbances there, 242.
iavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his charaAer,

IlI. 372. Meditates ubverting the government of
Genoa, 373. His preparations 374. His artful
method of altembling his adherents, 376. His ex-
bortation to them, 377. His interview with his
wife, 378. Sallies forth, 380. . Andrew Doria
escapes, 381. Deputies sent to know his terms, ib.
Is drowned, 382. His brother's vanity ruins their
design, ib. See Ficia,.
Latrec, Odet de Foix, marechal de, the French go-

vernor of Milan, his character, 11. 185. Alienates
the affe(aions of the Milanese from the French, ib.
Invests Reggin, but is repulsed by Guicciardini the
hifiorian, then governor, 186. Is excommunicated
by the Pope, ib. The money for paying his
troops seized by Louise of Savoy, 188. Is left by
his Swiss troops, 89. Is driven out of the Mila-
inefc territories, 191. A new body of Swiss under
jim infiXt on giving battle to the Imperialifls, who
defeat him, 195. The Swiss leave hinm', ib.

Retires

Retires into France with the residue of his troops,
196. Delivers up the Dauphin and Duke of Or-
leans, in exchange for Francis I. as hotages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 329. Is ap-
pointed gcneraliflimo of the league againrl the Em-
peror, 111. 6. His fuccelfls in Italy, 7. Motives
which withheld him from subduing the Milanese, 8a
Obliges the Prince of (Jrn_;e to retire to Naples, 6.
Blockades Naples, 7. His army wafted, and him-
secs killed by the pestilence, 23.
Learning, the revival of, favourable to the reformation

of religion, II. 154.
Lipfic, a public di(putation held there by Martin Lu-

ther, a;ii Eccius, on the va;iJiy of the Ppal au-
thority, II. 125.
Leo X. Pope of Rome, his characer, II, 70. His

apprehensions on the eletion of an Emperor of
Germany, at the death of Maximilian, 71. His
counsel to the German Princes, b. Grants
Charles V. a tenth of all ecclelialical benefices in
Cafile, 80. Lays Castile uder an interdit,
but takes it off at the initance of Charles, 8-
His conduE on the profprec of war between Charles
and Francis, 92. Situation of the Papacy at his
acceflion, and his views of Policy, oS. His in-
attention to Martin Luther's controversy with the
Dominicans, concerning indulgences, z6. Is in-
fiigated againt him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Desires the Elector of Saxony not to protect him,
ib. Is prevailed on to permit Luther's dotrines to
be examined in Germany, 1 7. Cardinal Cajetan
appointed to try him, ib. Issues a bull in favour
of Indulgences, 123. A fulpenfion of proceedings
againf Luther, and why, 124. Publishes a bull of
excommunication against him, 127. The political
views of his condult between Charles and Francis,
170. Concludes a treaty with Francis, 171. Con-
cludes a treaty also with Charles, 172. The con-
ditions of the treaty with Charles, 173. Its confe-
quences to Italy, 184. Is disappointed in a scheme
formed by Morone, chancellor of Milan, for attack-

VoL. IV. C c ing

ing that dutchy, 185. Excommunicates Marechal
de Foix for his attack of Reggio, and declares
againtt France, 186. Takes a body of Swiss into
pay, ib. The French driven out of the Milanese,
191. He dies, i. The spirit of the confederacy
broken by his death, ib.
L'E/parre, Foix de, commands the French troops in

Navarre for Henry D'Albert, II. 175. Reduces
that kingdom, ib. His imprudent progress into
Castile, 176. Is taken prisoner by the Spaniards,
and the French driven out of Navarre, 177.
Leonard, father, forms-a scheme of betraying Metz

to the Imperialists, IV. 167. Introduces soldiers
clad like friars, 168. Is deteced, 170. Is murder-
ed by his monks, 17r.
Ltiqu, Don, his account of the motives which in-

duced the Emperor Charles V. to resign his heredi-
tary dominions, IV. 205, Nott.
Lnwis II. King of Hungary and Bohemia, his charac-

ter, 11. 373. Is invaded and killed by Solyman the
Magnificent, ib.
-- XII. King of France, receives homage of the
Archduke Philip, for the earldom of Slanders, II. 3.
Concludes a treaty with him, while at war with
Ferdinand of Aragon, 6. Befiows his niece, Ger-
main de Foix, on Ferdinand, and concludes a
peace with him, 13. Loses the confidence of Phi-
lip on that occasion, 27, MNte. Beltows his eldest
daughter, already betrothed to Charles V. on the
count of Angouleme, ib.
Lova, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the Emperor

againf Francis, 11. 288. His vigorous defence, 289.
Sallies out at the battle of Pavia, and contributes
to the defeat of Francis, 295. Is left governor ot
Milan by the Duke of Bourbon, 359. Defeats the
forces there, III. 26. Is appointed generaliflimof
the Italian league, 63. Direds the operations of the
invasion of France, under the Emperor, 129. Dies,
138. Litrattr, its obligations to the order of Jesuits, III.

202.

Lort#.~

Ziarnzs di Midici. See Mediti.
.ouife of Savoy, mother of Francis T. of France, her
character, II. 7, 88. Her motives for seizing the
money appointed for payment of Marechal Lautrec's
troops, 88. Cause of her aversion to the house of
Bourbon, 250. Her advances toward a marriage
with Charles Duke of Bourbon, rejeled by him,
251, 252. Determines to ruin him, 252. Instigates
a law-suit against him for his estates, ib. Goes to
dissuade Francis from his intended invasion of the
Milanese, who will not wait for her, 284. Is ap-
pointed ti gent during his absence, 285. Her prudent
condua on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of her
son Francis, 300. Concludes a defensive alliance
with Henry VIII. 310. Ratifies the treaty of Ma-
drid for the recovery of her son's liberty, 328. Un-
dertakes with Margaret of Savoy, to accomodate
the differences between the Emperor and Francis,
III. 28. Articles of the peace of Cambray, 30.
$oya/a, Ignatio, commands the cafle of Pampeluna in
Navarre, and is wounded in its defence, II. 175.
His enthusiastic turn of mind, 176. The founder of
the society of Jesuits, ib. Prevails on the Pope to
eftablifl the order, III. o90. An examination into
ihe constitution of the order, 9ig. Office and power

f the general, 93. The rapid progress of the or-
der, 197. See Jfuits.
orrin, Cardinal of, persuades Henry I. of France,
to accept the offered alliance with Pope Paul IV.
and is sent to Rome to negociate it, IV. 99. His
imprudent behaviour towards the duchess of Va.
lentinois, 278.
Luntawrgh, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 270.
Luthtr, Martin, the happy consequences of the opi-

nions propagated by him, II. 104. Attacks In.
dulgences, to9. His birth and education, ib.
Chosen philosophical professor at the university of
Wittemberg, o. Inveighs against the publilhers
of Indulgences, ll. Writes to Albert Elector of
Mentz against them, ib. Composes thees aainft

C c 2 Indulgences,

Indulgences, 12. Is Supported by the Auguftinans,
and encouraged by Frederick Eletor of Saxony,
113. Is summoned to Rome by Pope Leo, 116.
Obtains of the Pope leave to have his doctrines ex-
amined in Germany, 117. Appears before Cardinal
Cajetan at Augsburg, s 18. His resolute reply to the
peremptory order of Cajetan, to retrat his prin-
ciples, 119. Withdraws from Augsburg, and ap-
peals from the Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed, concerning him, 120. Appeals to
a general council, 122. The death of Maximilian,
how of service to him, 123. Quelions the Papal
authority in a public disputation, 125. His opi-
nions condemned by the universities of Cologne and
Louvain, 126. A bull of excommunication pub-
liflled against him, 127. Pronounces the Pope to
be Antichrist, and burns the bull, 128. Reflec-
tions on the condua of the court of Rome toward
him, 130. Reflecions on his conduB, 132.
Causes which contributed to favour his oppofirion to
the church of Rome, 134. Particularly the art of
printing, 153. And the revival of learning, 154.
He is summoned to appear at the diet of Worms,
162. A safe condut granted him thither, ib. His
reception there, 163. Refuses toretraa his opinions,
ib. Departs, 164. An edit published againit him,
ib. He is eized and concealed at Wartburg, ib.
Progress of his doctrines, 65. The university of
Paris publifies a decree against him, 166. Wrote
againt by Henry VIII. of England ib. Answers
both, 167. Withdraws from his retreat to check
the inconsiderate zeal of Carloftadius, 267, 268.
Undertakes a tranfiation of the Bible, 268. His
dotrines avowed by several of the German Princes,
269. His moderate and prudent condut, 340.
Marries Catharine a Boria, a nun, ib. The great
progress of his doctrines among the Germanic
States, 1. 42. Encourages the Proteflants difpi-
rited by the Emperor's decree against him, So. His
concern at the pracices of the Anabaptists at Mun-
fter, 8. Is invited to Leipfick, by Henry Duke

of

of Saxony, I17. His opinion of Gropper's trea-
tife to unite the Proteflants and Catholics, 212.
Dies, 3o9. Summary of his charaaer, 310.
Extrat from his aft Will, 314, iNte. See Prot5it-
ants. A view of the extraordinary eff&ts of his re-
volt from the church of Rome, on that court, and
on Europe in general, IV. 320.
Luxemburg, invaded by Robert de la Marck, lord of

Bouillon, II. 178. Invaded and over-run by the
Duke of Orleans, 11I. 20. Is again invaded by
Franci3, 250.

M.
A'ladrid, treaty of, between the Emperor Charles V.

and his prisoner Francis I. King of France, II. 324,
325. Sentiments of the public with regard to this
treaty, 326.
.lagdebug, the city of, rfufcs to admit the Interim

enforced by Charles V. and prepares for defence,
IV. 18. Maurice Elecor of Saxony appointed to
reduce it, 19. Is put under the ban of the Empire,
36. The territories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. The inhabitants defeated in a
sally, 37. Maurice of Saxony arrives and besieges
the city, 38. Surrenders, 39. The senate elects
Maurice their burgrave, 40o.

Mahbind, King of Tunis, history of his funs, III. 94.
Majorca, an infurretinn there, II. 242. Which is

quelled with difficulty, ib. The moderation of
Charles towards the insurgents, on his arrival in
Spain, 243.
Majef)y, the appellation of, assumed by Charles V. on

his elecion to the Imperial crown, and taken by all
the other monarchs of Europe, 11. 79.

Malines, council of, an account of, 111. 176.
Alala, the ifand of, granted by the Emperor Charles

V. to the knights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes
by the Turks, II. 202.
,Mamalaucs, extirpated by Sultan Sclim IT. TI. 65.

C c 3 ' . nlkj

M^mmlk;, a faaion in Geneva, so termed, ome

account of, Il. z8.
.Manl, Don John, Ferdinand's ambaOador at the
'Imperial court, pays his court to the archduke Phi-
lip on Queen Isabella's death, II. Jo. Intercept,
Joanna's letter of conent to Ferdinand's regency of
Castile, iI. Negociates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, 14. Declares for Maximilian's
regency on Philip's death, 20. Is made Imperial
ambaflador at Rome, and concludes an alliance be-
tween Charles V. and Leo X. 172. The condi-
tions of the treaty, 73. Procures Adrian of Utrecht
to be eleaed Pope, 193.
AMarctlu II. Pope, his character, IV. 188. Dies,

189. ZMarciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi, and the

marquis de Marignano, IV. 58.
A'argaret of Austria, and Dowager of Savoy, aunt to

Charles V. undertakes with Louise, mother of Fran-
cis I. of France, to accommodate the differences
between those two monarchs, III. 28. Articles of
the peace of Cambray, 30.
tarignan, marquis of, appointed commander of the
Florentine amy, atidg againfi the French, IV.
156. Defeats the French army under Peter Strozzi,
59. Lays'fiege to Siena, i&. Converts the siege
into a blockade, 16i. Siena surrenders ib. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, 164. His troops ordered into
Piedmont by the Emperor, ib.
.MarcA, Robert de la, Lord of Bouillon, declares war

againf the Emperor Charles V. II. 177. Ravages
Luxemburg with French troops, 178. Is com-
mande'd to dilband his troops by Francis, ib. His
territories reduced by the Emperor, 179.
Mar/ii/sn, besieged by the Imperialists, IL 28. Re-

fcued by Francis, 282. Interview and treaty there
between the Pope and Francis, II. 67.

Martinazzi, bilhop'of Waradin, is appointed guardian
'to Stephen,' King of Hungary, I. '216. His
character, 217. Solicits the aliltance of Sultan
Solyman'agpinft Fcrdinand, 218. Solyman seizes

.. . .. .. . . ' th e

the kingdom, 2 9. Is appointed to the government
of Transylvania and the education of the young
King, jointly with the Queen, 1V. 46. Negotiates
with Ferdinand, 47. Prevails on the QCeen to re-
sign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 48. Is appointed
governor of Transylvania, and made a Cardinal, 49.
Is aafalinated by Ferdinand's order, 51.
gartyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the ex-

tortions of the Flemih ministers of Charles V.
II. 58.
Mary of Burgundy, contrated to Lewis XII. of

France, but married to the Emperor Maximilian,
II. 2.
Mary of England, her accession, IV. 139. Receives

proposals from the Emperor Charles V. of marrying
his son Philip, 140. The English averse to this
union, ib. The house of commons remonstrates
against the match, 141. The articles of marriage,
142. The marriage ratified by parliament, and
completed, 145. Re-eflablifhes the Romilh reli-
gion, 146. Persecutes the reformers, ib. In-
vites Charles to England on his resignation nd
palTage to Spain, which he declines, 232. Is en-
gaged by Philip to aift him in his war againl
France, 243. Levies money by her prerogative to
carry on the war, ib. Her neglce in the security
of Calais, 264. Calais invested and taken by the
Duke of Gui'e, 265. Dies, 290.
Jl'Iry, daughter of James V. of Scotland, succeeds to

the crown an infant, III. 245. Is contracted to the
Dauphin of France, 440. Is educated at the court
of France, IV. 31. 271. The marri.:ge com-
pleted, ib. AfTun.es the title and arms of England
on the death of Mary, 293.
Mattkias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the

Anabptitts, at Munffer, III. 74. S,:izes the city,
and eftablife;s anew form of givern.ent there, 75.
Repulies the bishop of Munfler, 78. Is killed, it.
Se Bo:old and Analibtils.
Afauria, duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceditng

to the Proteltant league of SmalalIde, iil. 255.

C g 4 Ma:chte

Marches to the affifiance of Ferdinand in Hungary,
256. His dift:rence with liiscoufinthe Elea;tr, 25.7.
lis condut at the diet of Worms, 292.. Join- the
Emperor against the Proteflants, 337. His motives,
353. His insidious condut toward the .eclor,
354. Seizes the eletl rate of Saxony, 35I. Saxony
recovered by the Eletor 36b. His iitffe&tual en-
deavours to reduce Wirtemberg, fur the Emperor,
408. Obtains poloiion of the elec'orate, 4:4. is
formally inveiled at the diet of Augsburg, 447. Be-
comes dillatiffied with the Emperor, IV. o1. His
motives to discontent explained, it. His address
and caution in his conduCt, 13. Enforces the In-
terim in his territories, 14. Makes, ncverthelefs,
profeflcns of his attachn:ent to the Rcformatiun, I5.
Undertakes to reduce !iigdeburg to submit to the
Interim, 16. Proteifs agsinft the council of Trent,
17. 1, comm!lroned by the Emperor to reduce
Mragdcurg, 19. Joins George of Mecklenburg
before Mazgdeburg, 36. The city capitulates, 39.
Begins to intrigue with Count Mansfeldr, ib. Is
eleaed Burgrave of Magdeburg, 40. Dismisses his
troops, 42. His address in amusing the Emperor,
43. Makes an alliance with Henry II. of France,
to make waron the Emperor, 53. Makes a formal
requisition of the Landgrave's liberty, 56. Joins
his troops, and publishes a manifeflo, 63. Takes
poffefion of Augiburg and other cities, 66. An
ineffeftual negociation with Charles, 67. Defeats
a body of the Emperor's troops, 70. Takes the
caflle of Ehrenburg, ib. Is retarded by a mutiny in
his troops, 71. Enters Infpruck, and narrowly
miffes taking Charles, 72. A negociation between
him and Ferdinand, 82. Besieges Francfort on the
Maine, 89. His inducements to an accommodation,
91. Signs a treaty with the Emperor at Paatu, ib.
Refletions on his condu&6 in this war, 92.
Marches into Hungary to oppose the Turks, 97.
Is placed at the head of the league against Albert of
Brandenburg, lg. Defeats Alberr, but is klled

in the battle, 120. H s character, 121. Is fuc.
ceeded by his brother Auztirlus, 123.
A.aximiian, Empercr of G;ermany, cla.ms the regency

of Calile onhis son tPhilip's deatn, 11. 19. Is sup-
ported in his claim by Don John Manuel, 20.
Loses it, 22. Obtains the government of the Low-
Countries by the death of Philip, 25. Apoints
William d Croy, lord of Chievres, to fupeiil.teil
the education of his.grandfon Chirlcs, 27. Con-
cludes a peace with France and Venice, 50. Dies,
6. Stce of Europe at this period, ib. His en-
deavnurs to secure the Imperial crown to his grand-
son Charles, 63. How obitru.ictd, ib.
,4AAc':.!e:/t:ir, George of, invades the territories of

M.gdebcrg so r the i.imperor, IV. 36. Defcats the
Magd'jburghers who iliv out onl him, 37. Is
joined u/ :'.auric o Saxony, wio aiui.:s the u-
preme cmm.ind, ib.

lIedc.inc, John J.arnm'. See ..!'argn'.
i,'dici, Alexander, rt:tored to the i,;mil.ions of Flo-
rence, y the Emperor Charles, III. 41. is alafli-
nated, 54.
/Medici, Cardinal de, eleed Pope, and assumes the
title of Clement VII. II. 258. See C;lement VII.
ledii, Catherine di, is married to the Duke of Or-
leans, Ill. 6;. Is conjecured. by the Emperor
Charles V. to have poisoncd the Dauphin, 142.
Medici, Cosmo de, made Duke of Florence, Ill. 156.

Is supported by the Emperor, and detaits the parti-
zans of Lorenzo, 157. Afirts his independency
againit the Emperor, IV. 112. Offers to rcduce
Siena for the Emperor, 154. Enters into a war
with France, 155. See .r',gnaAo. His addrces in
procuring the inveltiture of Siena from Philip 11. ,f
Spain, 258. It is granted to him, 260.
Mtd.ci, Loienzo de, affifinates his k.niian Alcxan-

der, III. 155. Flies, ib. Attempts to oppdif
Cosmo, but is defeated, 156.
^iJcdina del Campo, the inhabitants of, refuse to let

Fonleca take the military stores there, for the siege
ps the insurgents in Sgovia, 11. 207. 'ihe town

almnlt

almoR burnt by Fonseca, 208. The inhabitants re-
pulse him, ib. Surrenders after the battle of Villa-
lar, and dissolution of the Holy Junta, 235.
Pletan'*on, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,
1I. 130. Is employed to draw up a confitffon of
faith by the Proteflant Princes at the diet of Augf.
burg, III. 48. Is dejecaed by the Emperor's decree
against the Proteflants, but comforted by Luther,
51. Is invited to Paris by Francis, il . His
conference with Eckius, 210. Is prevailed on to
favour the Interim enforced by the Emperor, IV.
14.
AMdlito, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia, on the

departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 86. Ap-
pointed to command the troops of the nobles again ft
the Germanada, 24r. Defeated by them in feverai
acions, ib. Defiroys the abciation, i.
Martz, archbishop of, artfully declares before the

Emperor, the diet of Augsburg's acceptance of the
Inteirn, without being authoriied by it, III. 445.
M'er'tvi , a Milanele gentleman, employed as envoy

from Francis I. to Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan,
his fate, III. icq.
Afttz, seized by Mnntmoreney the French general!

IV. C8. The Duke of Guise made governor of,
103. Is besieged by the Emperor, o15. The
Emperor desists, and retires in a distressed condition,
log. A cheme formed by father Leonard to betray
the city to the Imperialils, 167. he conspiracy
detecttd by the governor, 169. Leonard murdered
by his monks, and his alrociates executed, 171.
J'eitrts, in France, besieged hy the Imperialists, II.

179. Gallant defence of, by the chevalier Bayard,
18o. The siege raied, ib.
Mi/an, marechal de Foix appointed to be the French

governor of, II. 185. His character, il. The
Milanese alienated from the French by his oppref-
filn, ib. Invaded by the eccltfiatfical troops under
Prosper Colorna, 187. The French driven out,

'g. Opprefl'd by the Imperial troops, 248. In-
vaded by the French, 256. Who are driven out by

Colonta,
t7

Colonn, 257. The Imperial troops there mutiny
for pay, but are appeased by Morone, 264. Aban-
doned by the French, ib. Over-run again by
Francis, who seises the city, 286. The French
retire on news of the bttle of Pavia, 297. The
investiture o.f, granted to Sforza, 31 . Taken
from him and granted to the Duke of Bourbon, 32 .
Difordcrs committed by the Imperial troops there,
"45. Oppreflive meafurcs of Bourbon to supply his
mutinous troops, 357. The French forces there
defeated by Antonio de Leyva, II. 27. Is again
graloted by the Emperor to Sforza, 40. Death of
jborza, 121. The pre;enfions of Francis to that
dutchy, ib. Is reized by the i.mperor, 122. The
marquis del Guafo appointed governor, ,.o.
2hwbacz, battle of, between Solywman the Magnificent

and the H.Tunarians, II. 373.
£fgIa/tic ord rs, enquiry into the fundamertal princi-

ples of, I1!. 191. Peculiar conllitution of the or-
der of eits, 93.
Zt;ncado, Do Hugo di, the Imperial AmbaflLdor 4t

Rome, his intrigues with Cardinal Colonna, againit
Pope Clement, IL. 354. Reduces the Pope to an
accommodation, 355. Is defeated and killed by
Andrew )oria in a naval engagement before the har-
hour of Naples, IlI. 17.
./ltluc, is sent by the count d'Enguien to Francis fr

permiflion to give battle to the marquis del Guaflo,
III. 2b8. Obtains his suit by his pirited argu-
ments, 269. Commands in Sienna, when besieged
by the marquis de Marignano, IV. 16o. His vi-
gorous defence, ib. Is reduced by famine, and
capitulates, s 1.
Monte Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena retire

thither after the reduction of that city by the Flo-
centincs, and celablilh a free government there, 1V.
162.
Aoantecuculi, Count of, accued and tortured for poi-

foiiig the Dauphin, charges the Emperor with in-
figating it, ll. 141.

Mntmronsrmny,

MJnfmormcy, marechal, his character, IIl. 133.

Francis adopts his plan for refifling the Emperor,
and commits the execution to him, 134. His pre-
cautions, ib. His troops despise his conduct, 137.
Observations on his operations, 139. Is disgraced,
239. Conduts the army of Henry II. to join
Maurice of Saxony, and fcizes Metz, IV. 68. Dif-
fuades Henry from accepting the offered alliance
with Pope Paul IV. IV. 197. Commands theFrench
army againt the Duke of Savoy, 246. Detaches
D'Andelot to relieve St. Quintin, ib. Exposes him-
self imprudently to an ation, and is defeated, 247.
Is taken prisoner, 248. Negociates a peace between
Philip and Henry, 279. Returns to France, and is
highiy honoured by Henry, 280. His aliiduity in
forwarding the negociations, 294. His expedient
for promoting the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,
398.
.lMontpelier, a fruitless conference held there for the

restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, II. 60.
Moron?, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his charater,

11. 185. Retires from the French exafaions in
Milan to Francis Sforza, ib. His intrigues, how
rendered abortive, 186. Quiets the mutiny of the
Imperial troops in Milan, 264. Is difgufied with
the behaviour of Charles, 311. Intrigues against
the Emperor with Pescara, 313. Is betrayed to the
Emperor by Pescara, 315. Is arrested at his visit
to Pescara, 317. Is set at liberty by the Duke of
Bourbon, and becomes his confident, 357.
Moufan in France, taken by the Imperialists, II. 179.

Retaken by Francis, 18o.
Mulhatufit, battle of, between the Emperor Charles V.

and the Elector of Saxony, III. 404.
Mulcy Haften, King of Tunis, his inhuman treat-

ment of his father and brothers, llI. 95. Is ex-
pceled by Barbarofli, 96. Engages the Emperor
Charles V. to restore him, 98. Is efiablifhed again
by the surrender of Tunis, o05. His treaty with
Charles, ib. 5

Mun..cc,

3unrcr, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, oppores him

with fanatical notions, II. 336. Heads the infur-
reAion of the peasants in Thuringia, 337. His
extravagant schemes, ib. Is defeated and put to
death, 339.
Mutnfl/r, the firfi settlement of the Anabaptifis in that

city, II. 74. The city seized by them, 75. They
establish a new form of government there, ib. is
called Mount Sion, 76. The bishop of, repulsed
by them, 77. Is blockaded by the bishop, 82. The
city taken, 83. See niabapris.
Murder, the prices of compofiion for, by the Romish

clergy, II. 140.
Mu/tapba, the declared heir to Sultan Solvman the

Magnificent, is inveited with the aminiliration of
Diarbequir, IV. 132. His father renJLrcd je,:lous
of his popularity, by the arts of Roxalda), 137.
Is firangled by his father's order, 137. His only
ion murdered, 138.

N
Naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to

supply the Emperor in his exigencies, 11. 287. In-
vaded by the French under the Duke of Alb;:nv,
291. Invaded by PopeClement VII. 39 Tiea'y
between the Pope and Lannoy viceroy of, 362.
The prince of Orange retreats thither before Lau-
trec, III. 6. Is blockaded by Lautrec, 17. Sea
engagement in the harbour of, between Andrew
Doriaand Moncada, ib. Causes which disappointed
the French operations againit, 18. Doria revolts,
and opens the communication by ea again, 21.
Opprefled by the Spanilh viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, becomes difaffecqed to the Emperor Charles
V. IV. x11. Is harassed by a Turkish fleet, 116.
Nas^au, Count of, invades Buillon at the head of the

Imperialists, II. 179. Invades France, takes Mou-
son, and bcfieges,Meziers, but is repulled, ib.
Navarrt, the kingdom of, unjustly acquired by Ser-

dinand of Aragon, II. 23. D'Albert's invasion t,

de!iated

defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 45. Its castles dir.
mantled, except Pampefuna, which Ximenes
firengthens, 46. Invaded by Francis J. in the
name of Henry D'Albert, 175. Reduced by
L'Efparre, the French general, i. The French
driven out by the Spaniards, and L'Efparre taken
prisoner, 177.
.tthtrlands, the government of, firt affiumed by

Charles V. II. 29. The Flemings averse to Charles's
going to Spain, 51. Invaded by Francis I. King
of Fiance, 0o. A truce concluded with, by Henry
VIII. of England, III. 19. Invaded by Francis
again, 144. A suspension of arms there, ib. An
infurreftion at Ghent, 173. See Ghbt. Is once
more invaded by Francis, 250. Resigned by the
Emperor to his son Philip, IV. 2o8. A review of
the alterations in, during the sixteenth century,
333, 334.
hict, a truce for ten years concluded there between the

Emperor and Francis, II. 151. Besieged by the
French and Turks, 254.
Noye, treaty of, between Charles V. and Francis L

of France, L. 50. The terms of, neglcted by
Charles, 90.
Nuremburgh, the city of, embraces the reformed reli-

gion, 1I. 269. Diet of, particulars of Pope Adrian's
brief to, refpeAing the reformers, 270. The reply
to, 271. Proposes a general council, 272. Presents
a lift of grievances to the Pope, 273. The recess,
or edia of, 274. This diet of great advantage to
the reformers, ib. Proceedings of a second diet
there, 277. Reces of the diet, 278. An accom-
modation agreed to there, between the Emperor
Charles V. and the Protestants, III. 57.

0
Oran, and other places in Barbary annexed to the

crown of Cafile, by Ximenes, 11. 23.
Orang, Phillibert de Chalons, Prince of, general of

the Imperial army on the death of tbe' Duke of

Bourbon,

Bourbon, takes the castle of St. Angelo, and Pope
Clement VII. priobner, 11. 371. Retires to Naples
on the approach of Lautrec, Ill. 16. Takes his
successor, the marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Averfa,
23.
Orleans, Duke o, delivered up to the Emperor

Charles V. with the Dauphin, as hostaes for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 11. 329. Is
married to Catherine di Medici, 11l. 67. Becomes
Dauphin by the death of his brother, 142. See
Dauphin.
--- Duke of, brother to the former, commands

the amy appointed by rancis I. for the invasion of
Luxembourg III. 240. Is prompted by envy to
abandon his conquests, and join his brother the Dau-
phin in Rofillon, 241. Dies, 296;

P
Pacbrho, Donna Marin, wife to Don John de Padilla,

her artful scheme to raise money to supply the army
of the holy junta, II. 227. Her huiband taken
prisoner and executed, 233. His letter to her, ib.
Note. Raises forces to revenge his death, 237. Is
reduced and retires to Portugal, 238.
Padilla, Don John de, his family and character, II,

204. Heads the infurre&ion at Toledo, ib. Routs
the troops under Ronquillo, 207. Calls a conven-
tion of the malcontents at Avila, 211. Forms the
confederacy called the Holy Junta, ib. Disclaims
Adrian's authority, 212. Gets ponfeflion of Queen
Joanna, ib. Removes the Holy Junta to Torde-
illas, the plice of her residence, 213. Sent with
troops toValladolid,and deprives Adrian of all power
of government, 214. Is fuperfcded in the command
of the army of the Junta, by, Don 'Pedro de Giron,
223. Is appointed commanier at the resignation
ofGiron, 2a6. His army supplied with muney by
an expedient of his wisei 227. BeCieges Torrelo-
baton, 230. Takes and plunders it, ib. Concludes
a truce with theb obles, 231. Is wounded and taken

prisoner

prisoner in an acion with the Conde de Haro, 232,
Is put to death, 233. His letter to his wife, ib.
Note. His letter to the city of Toledo, 234, Nte.
Pa.ratinate, the Reformation eftablificd there by the

Elkclor Frederick, III. 299.
Palatine, Count, ambaffldor from the diet at Franc*

fort, brings Charles V. the offer of the Imperial
crown, which he accepts, II. 80.
Pamp.:lna, cile of, in Navarre, its fortifications

flrengtht-ned by Cardinal Ximenes, 11. 46. Taken
by L'Efparre, the French general for Henry D'AI-
bret, 177. Retaken by the French, ib.
Papacy, how liable to be afficted by the disposal of the

Imperial crown, 11. 71.
Paraguay, a sovereignty eflablinied there, by the order

of Jefutits, IIl. 204. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, ib. Precautions iufed by the Jesuits to
preserve the independency of their empire there, 205.
Paris, a decree published by the university of, againlt

Martin Luther the Reformer, II. 166. A decree
of the parliament of, published against the Emperor
Charles V. III. 143.
Parma. the dutchy of, confirmed to O&avio Farnese,

by Pope Julius II!. IV. 29. Is attacked by the
Impetialifts,and successfully protected by the French,
32.
PaJlau, a treaty concluded there between the Emperor

Charles V. and Maurice of Saxony, IV. 9r. Re-
fletions on this peace, and the condut of Maurice,
92.
Pcvia, besieged by Francis I. of France, II. 288.

Vigorously defended by Antonio de Leyva, 289.
Battle of, between Francis and the Duke of Bour-
bon, 294. The Imperial troops in that city mutiny,
305.
Padll I. Pope, elected, III. 71. His character, ib.

Proposes a general council to be held at Mantua, 88.
Negociates personally between the Emperor and
Francis, 149. Iflues a bull for a council at Mantua,
161. Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza, 163.
A partial reformation of abuses by, 164. Summons

the

the council of Trent, 258. Prorogues it, 259.
Summons it again, 287. Grants the dutchies of
Parma and Placentia to his illegitimate ion, 396.
Deprives and excommunicates the eleaoral bithop
of Cologne, 38. Prefies the Emperor to declare
againfi the Proteflants, 319. Concludes an alli-
ance with him against the Proteltants, 325. Indif.
creetly publishes this treaty, 326. His troops join
the Emperor, 345. Recalls them, 368. Removes
the council from Trent to Bologna, 433. Refuses
the Emperor's request to carry the council back to
Trent, 434. His resentment againit the Emperor
for the murder of his on Cardinal Farneif, 436.
Is petitioned by the diet of Auglburg for the return
of the council to Trent, 439. Eludes the comply-
ing with his requcft, 441. His sentiments of the
Iterim, published by Charles, 450. DismisSes the
council of Bologna, 456. Annexes Parma and Pla-
centia to the Holy See, IV. 2. Dies, 3. The
manner of his death inquired into, 4.
Paul IV. Pope, cleAed, IV. 189. His characer and

history, 19o. Founds the order of Thcatines, 19r.
Is the principal occasion of eflablifhing the inquifi-
tion in the Papal territories, 192. Lays aside his
austerity on his election, 193. His partiality to his
nephews, ib. Is alienated from the Emperor by
his nephews, 196. Makes overtures to an alliance
with France, ib. Is enraged by the recess of the
diet of Augsburg, 99. Signs a treaty with France,
202. Is included in the truce for five years, con-
cluded between the Emperor and Henry, 216. His
insidious artifices to defeat this truce, 219. Ab-
solves Henry from his oath, and concludes a new
treaty with him, 222. His violent proceedings
againf Philip, now King of Spain, 223. The
Compagna Romana seized by the Duke d'Alva,
226. Concludes a truce with Alva, 227. Con-
traft between his conduct and that of Charles, 235.
Renews his hoffilities againfR Philip, 237. Is un-
provided for military operations, 238. Is reduced
to make peace with Philip, by the recal of the Duke

VOL .V. d of

tf Guise after the defeat of St. Quintin, 256. Re-
ceives an ambassador from the Emperor Ferdinand
to notify his eletion, but refuses to fee him, or to
acknowledge the Emperor, 257. Dies, 302.
Paliin, a French officer, sent ambafiador from Fran-

cis I. to Sultan Solyman, III. 248. His success-
sus negociations at the Porte, ib.
Pembrcke, earl of, sent by Queen Mary of England with

a body of men to join the Spaniib army in the Low
Countries, IV. 243.
Perpignan, the capital of Roufillon, besieged by the

Dauphin of France, II. 240. The siege railed,
241.
Pfcara, Marquis de, takes Milan by aflault, II. Igo.

Drives Bonnivet back to France, 265. His gene-
rous care of the chevalier Bayard, 266. Commands
in the invasion of Provence, 281. Besieges Mar-
feilles, ib. His army retires toward Italy, on
the appearance of the French troops, 282. Resigns
Milan to the French, 286. Prevails on the Spanish
troops not to murmur at present for their pay, 287.
Contributes to the defeat of Francis at the battle of
Pavia, 295. Is disgusted at Francis being taken to
Spain without his concurrence, 312. His resent-
mnent inflamed by Morone, 314. Betrays Morone's
designs to the Emperor, 316. Arrests Morone,
317. Dies, 321.
Pilip, Archduke of Auflria, and father of Charles V.

vilits Spain, with his wife Joanna, II. 3. Does
homage by the way to Lewis XII. of France for the
earldom of Slanders, ib. His title to the crown ac-
knowledged by the Cortes, ib. Is disgusted with the
formality of the Spanilh court, 4. Ferdinand be-
c mes jealous of his power, ib. Slights his wife, ib.
His abrupt departure from Spain, 5. Pafles through
France, and enters into a treaty with Lewis, 6. His
sentiments on Ferdinand's obtaining the regency of
Caftilc, 9. Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resign his regency of Caflile, to. The
regency of Cafile veiled jointly in him, Ferdinand,
and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamancha, 14. Sets

out
7

Out for Spain, and is driven on the coaf of England,
where he is detained three months by Henry VII.
s5. Arrives at Corunna, ib. The Castilian nobi-
lity declare openly for him, ib. Ferdinand resigns
the regency of Castile to him, 16. Interview be-
tween them, i. Acknowledged King of Castile
by the Cortes, 17. Dies, ib. Joanna's extraordi-
nary conduct in regard to his body, 18. See
70anna.
Philip, Prince, son to the Emperor Charles V. his

right of fuccefflion recognized by the Cortes of
Aragon and Valencia, III. 243. Is acknowledged
by the States of the Netherlands, 458. His deport-
ment disgusts the Flemings, 459. His character,
IV. 26. Is married to Mary Queen of England,
142. 145. The English parliament jealous of him,
148. His father resigns his hereditary dominions to
him, 202. Is called by his fther out of England,
2o8. The ceremony of inverting him, ib. His
father's address to him, 211. Commiflions Cardinal
Granvelle to address the aflembly in his name, 212.
Mary Queen Dowager of Hungary resigns her re-
gency, 213. The dominions of Spain resigned to
him, ib. His unpolitenefs to the French ambafiador
Coligni, 217, Note. The Pope's violent proceed-
ings against him, 223. His scruples concerning
commencing hostilities againRf the Pope, 225. His
ungrateful negle& in paying his father's pension,
233. The Pope renews holtilities against him, 237.
Aflembles an army in the Low Countries againit
France, 241. Goes over to England to engage that
kingdom in the war, ib. Visits the camp at St.
Quintin, after the vi&ory, 250. Opposes the
scheme of penetrating to Paris, and orders the siege
of St. Quintin to be prosecuted, 251. St. Quintin
taken by assault, 252. The small advantages he
reaped by these fuccefles, 254. BuiJds the Escurial
in memory of the battle of St. Quintin, ib. Con-
cludes a peace with the Pope, 256. Restores Pla-
centia to Otavio Farnese, 257. Grants the invef-
titure of Siena to Cosmo di Medici, ato. Enters into

D d 2 negociations

negociations for peace with his prisoner Montmo.
rency, 279. Death of Queen Mary, 290. Ad-
drefies her fuccefibr Elizabeth for marriage, 291.
Elizabeth's motives for rejecting him, 293. Her
evasive answer to him, 294. Supplants his son Don
Carlos, and marries Henry's daughter Elizabeth,
298. Articles of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,
299.

Philliert, Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. See Svy.
.Phil'ipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats Moncada

in a ea-ell ageimeit before the harbour of Naples,
111. 17.
Piadie, marquis de, invades Tranflvania for Ferdi-

nand IV. 47. Mifieprefents Cardinal Martinuzzi
to Ferdinandl, and obtains a commission to assassinate
himn, 5 t. s forced to abandon Transylvania, 128.
Piardy, invaded by Henry ViI. 11. 199. Henry

forced by tle Duke de Vein!'me to retire, 200.
Invaded again under the Duke of Suffolk, 261.
'Vho peneIrates aimcfl to Paris, but is driven back,
361, 262. IneiTfeual invasion by the Imperialists,
1II. 140.
PLacentia, the dutchy of, granted together with that

of Parma by Pope Paul 1ll. to his natural son, Car-
dinal Farne'e, II. 296. Farnese aflaffinated there,
435. Is taken poffelion of by the Imperial troops,
436. Restored to Otavio Farnese, by Philip 11.
of Spain, IV. 257.
Pele, Cardinal, arrives in England with a legantine

commifion, IV. 146. Endeavours to mediate a
peace between the Emperor and the King of France,
without success, 172. Is recalled from the court of
England by Pope Paul IV. 37.
Printing, its effefts on the progress of the Reformation,

II. 153.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand King of

Bohemia, III. 429.
Proteiants, the derivation of the name, III. 45. Of

whom they originally consisted, ib. A severe decree
published againfi them by the Emperor, 49. They
enter into a leagues 50. See Salkald. Renew

9 their

their league, and apply to Francis King of France,
and Henry VIII. of nglanl for proie'1ion, 54.
Are fecrety encouraecd by Frarcis, 55 Receive a
supply of mony from Henry, 56. Terms of the
pacification agreed to between them and the Empe-
ror at Nuremburg, 57. Aflif the Emperor againlt
the Turks, 59. Their negociations with the Pope,
relative to a general council, 61. Renew the league
of Smalkalde for ten years, 8. The motives fuir
refusing to ailR the King of France againit the En-
peror, it3. Refuse to acknowledge the cnincil
summoned by the Pope at Mantua, 162. A con-
ference betw.en their principal divires and a depu-
tation of Catholics, at Ratisbon, 210. This con-
ference how rendered fruitless, 212. Obtain a pri-
vate grant from Charles in their favour, 214. Drive
the Duke of Brunswick from his domini;;ns, 2(0.
All rigorous edics against them fufpcndcd by a rccefs
of the diet of Spires, 264. Their remonstrances to
Ferdinand at the diet of Worms, 290. Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess ,f Spires, ii. Dif-
claim all connetion with the council of l'rent, 29 1.
Are strengthened by the acceflion of Frederick Elec-
tor Palatine, 299. Are alarmed at the proceedings
of the Emperor, 303. 324. The Emperor leagues
with the Pope against them, 326. Prepare to resist
the Emperor, 33 . Levy an army, 335. The opera-
tions of the army difirated by the joint commanders,
343. The army dispersed, 361. The Elector of
Saxony reduced, 405. The Landgrave deceived by
treaty, and confined, 420, 421. The Emperor's
cruel trcatment ol him, 426. The InIrim, a sys-
tem of thcology recommended by the Empetor to
the diet at Augsburg, 445. Are promised proteetion
by the Emperor at the council of rent, IV. .c.
The Empeor proceeds rigorously againfl them, 34.
Their depluies (,brain a iatc.conJdut from the rnm-
peror, but ae refused by the council, 44. Maurice
of Saxony riifes an army in their catife, 63. brc
.ai<;rie. 'I'reaty of Pdfau, 91. The Protefl.,i.t
Ptiincts again uniLe o tfrengthcn the Piotcttr in-

D d 3 terelt,

teret, 179. Recess of the diet of Augiburg on
the subjet of religion, 18I. Why originally averle
to the principles of toleration, 186.
Prvvinct, is laid waste by the Marefchal Montmorency

on the approach of the Emperor Charles V. III. 134.
Is entered by the Emperor, 135. The difafirous
retreat of the Emperor from, 138.
Pruria, when conquered by the Teutonic order, II.

341. Is ereced into a dutchy, and finally into a
kingdom, and enjoyed by the house of Branden-
burg, 3+2.
Rati/_on, a conference between a deputation of Pro-

teftant and Catholic divines, before the Emperor
and diet there, Ill. 2io. This conference how
rendered fruitless, 212. A diet opened there by the
Emperor, 321. The Catholic members of, alcfrt
the authority of the council of Trent, 323. The
Protestants present a memorial againfi it, ib. The
Protestant deputies retire, 325.
Refrmation in religion, the rife of, explained, II. 104.

The diet at Worms called by Charles V. to check
the progress of, ib. Account of Martin Luther, the
Reformer, 109. Beginning of in Switzerland by
Zuinglius, 125. State of, in Germany, at the ar-
rival of Charles V. 129. Refiecion on the condut
of the court of Rome toward Luther, 130. And on
Luther's conduc, 132. Inquiry into the causes
which contributed to the progress of, 134. Obfer-
vations on the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. 136. The immoral lives of the Romifl
clergy, 137. The progrers of, favoured by the in-
vention of printing, 153. And the revival of learn-
ing, 154. The great progress of, in Germany,
269. Advantages derived to, from the diet at Nu-
remburgh, 274. Its tendency in favour of civil
liberty, 335. The dissentions between the Emperor
and the Pope, favourable to, 375. The great spread
of, among the German Princes, 111. 42. lThe

confelion

confetion of Augsburg drawn up by RMe!anlhon,
48. Causes which led to that of England, 67.
The exceflis it gave rife to, 71. See Prote/faits,
Maurice, and Smalkalde. Is etablifhcd in Saxony,
167. The great alteration occasioned by, in the
court of Rome, IV. 320. Contributed to improve
both the morals and learning of the Romifl church,
325.
Rteifi, invefled by the French, who are repulfeJ by

the governor Guicciardini the historian, II. 85.
Remira:nce of grievances drawn up by the Holy Junta,

the particulars of, I. 216, 217. Remarks on, 221.
Reverse, a deed so called, igned by the archduke Ser-

dinand on being eleted King of Bohemia, II, 374.

Rheggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, 111. 253.
Rhaiers, te island of, besieged by Solyman the Mag-

nificent, II. 201. Taken by him, 202. The iand
of Malta granted to the knights of, by the Emperor
Charles V. ib.
Richlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's hiflory

of Fiefco's conspiracy, III. 384, Note.
Rincon, the French ambassador at the Porte, the mo-

tives of his return to France, III. 235. Is murdered
in his journey back to Constantinople, by order of
the Imperial governor of the Milaneie, 236.
Rome, refledions on the conduct of the court of, re-

fpeting the proceedings against Martin Luther, II.
131. The exorbitant wealth of the church of, pre-
vious to the Reformation, 141. Venality of, t5o.
How it drained other countries of their wealth, 15t.
The city keized by Cardinal Colonna, and Pope
Clement VII. besieged in the cafle of St. Angelo,
354. The city taken by the Imperialits, and Bour-
bon killed, 355. Is plundered, ib. The great re-
volution in the court of, during the sixteenth cer-
tury, Il, 328. How affected by the Revolt of Lu-
ther, 329. The spirit of its government changed
by, 332.
.Rnquillo, lent by Cardinal Adrian with troops to sup-

press the infurretion in Segovia, II. 207. Is routed
by the insurgents i.

Dd 4 R.c:t.

Revert, Francesco Maria de, restored to his dutchy of

Urbino by Pope Adrian, II. 246.
Rrxalana, a Ruffian captive, becomes the favourite

mistress of Sultan Solyman the Magnificent, IV.
129 Her only daughter married to Ruflan the
Grand Vizier, 130. Procures herself to be declared
a free woman by theSultan, 31. Is formally mar-
jied to him, ii,. Renders Solyman jealous of the
virtues of h!s son Muftapha, 1 2. Muftapha firang-
led, 37.
Ru/lan, Grand Vizier to Solyman the Magnificent, is

married to his daughter by Roxalana, IV. 130.
Enters into Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muflapha, ib. Is sent with an army to deltroy
him, 135. Draws Solyman to the army by fails
leports, ib.

S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon,

and his fon-in-law Philip, II. 14.
Salerno, Prince of, heads the dififfeed Neapolitans,

againfi the oppressions of the viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, IV. 5. Solicits aid from Henry II. of
France, who initigates the Turks to invade Na-
ples, ib.
Sa/uces, marquis de, (ucceeds Lautrec in the command

of the French army before Naples, 111. 23. Retires
to Averfa, where he is taken prisoner by the Prince
of Orange, ib. Betrays his charge in Piedmont,
132.
SapNtr;e, count de, defends St. Difiere, againfl the

Emperor Charles, 111. 273. Is deceived into a fur-
render by the Cardinal Granvellc, 275.
Sauvage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Castile by

Charles, on the death of Ximenes, 1I. 58. His ex-
tortions, ib.
Savona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by the

French, to favour its rivalfhip with Genoa, III.

T * ~~~~~~~~~Sa'Jy,

Savoy, Charles Duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal,

sifter to the Emperor Charles V. III. 115. The
cause of Francis's displeasure against him, ib. His
territories over-run by the French troops, 116.
Geneva recovers its liberty, 1 7. His situation by
the truce at Nice, between the Emperor and Fran-
cis, 152. Is besieged at Nice, by the French and
Turks, 253.
L---. Emanuel Philibert, Duke of, appointed by
Philip of Spain to command his army in the Low-
Countries, IV. 243. Invefrs St. Quintin, 244.
Defeats D'Atldelt in an endeavour to join the gar-
rifon, 246. But does not hinder him from enter-
ing the town, 247. Defeats the Conitable Mont-
morency, and talkes him prisoner, 248. Is graci-
oufly visited in the camp by Philip, 25o. Takes St.
Quintin by aaur, 252. Aflifs Montmorency in
negociating peace between Philip and Henry, 280.
Marries Henry's fifler Elizabeth, 299, 301.
Saxony, Eleaor of, appointed joint comnmjnder of the

army of the Protellant league, with the Landgrave
of Hesse, III. 343. Their charaders compared, ib.
Opposes the Landgrave's intention of giving battle
to the Empero, 318. His eletorate seized by
Maurice, 358. The army ofthe league disperse, 361.
Recovers Saxony, 366. Is amused by Maurice with
a negociation, ib. Raises an army to defend him-
self against the Emperor, 399. Is irresolute in his
ameafures, 400. Charles pes the Elbe, ib. Is
attacked by the Imperialifls, 404. Is taken prisoner
and harshly received by the Emperor, 405. Is con-
demned to death by a court martial, 409. His refo .
lution on the occasion, 41 1. Is induced by regard
to his family to surrender his electorate, 413. Re-
fuses the Emperor's desire of his approving the Int-
rim, 450. he rigour of his confinement increased,
4; i. Is carried by the Emperor with him into the
Netherlands. 456. Is released by the Emperor on
Maurice's taking arms against him, but choofes to
continue with the Emperor, IV. 73. Obtains his
liberty after the treaty of PalTau, 99.

Saxony,

Saxony, George Duke of, an enemy to the Rcforma.

tion, III. I67. His death an advantage to the Re-
formation, ib. The Protestant religion eablilhed
by Henry Duke of, ib. Henry is succeeded by
his son Maurice, 255. His motives for not acced-
ing to the league of Smalkalde, ib. Marches to
the assistance of Ferdinand in Hungary, 256. Joins
the Emperor againf the Protefiants, 336, 35i. See
ll/aurice.
Shertel, SbafRian, a commander in the army of the

Protestant league, his vigorous commencement of
hoflilities, III. 341. Is injudiciously recalled, 343.
Is expelled from Augsburg on the dispersion of tie
Proteltant arm,36s.
Sotlandl, James V. o, married to Mary of Guire,

duchels-dowager of Longueville, III. 159. Death
of James and acceflion of his infant daughter Mary,
246. Mary contrated to the Dauphin of France,
438. The marriage celebrated, iV. 271. Mary
assumes the title and arms of England on the death
of Mary of England, 293. Included in the treaty
of Chateau Cambrefis, 298. Alteration in the con-
dut of England toward, 318.

SectJ in religion, reflcAions on the the origin of, III. 71.
Segovia, an infurresion there, on account of their re-

presentative Tordefillas voting for the donative to
Charles V. II. 204. He is killed by the populace,
205. The insurgents there defeat Ronquillo, ent
to suppress them by Cardinal Adrian, 206. Sur-
renders after the battle of Villalar, 235.
Selim II, Sultan, extirpates the Mamalukes, and adds

Egypt and Syria to his Empire, II. 65. Confidered
as formidable to the European powers, ib.
Sfarza, obtains of Charles V. he investiture of Milan

I. 312. Forfeits the dutchy, by his intrigues with
Morone, 317. Joins in a league against Charles for
the recovery of Milan, 345. Is forced to surrender
Milan to the Imperialist.;, 352. Obtains again of
the Emperor the investiture of Milan, IlI. 40. En-
tcrs into a private treaty with Francis, o19. Mer-

veillc

veille, Francis's envoy executed for murder, 11o.
Dies, 121.
Siena, the inhabitants of, implore the aiftance of the

Emperor Charles V. to defend them against their
nobles, IV. 113. The Imperial troops endeavour
to enslave them, ib. Regain poffefion of their city,
114. Repulse an attack of the Germans, 127. Are
besieged by the marquis de Marignano, 15 . The
commander Monluc repulses the afl',ults vigorously,
i60. The town reduced by famine, 16x. Num-
bers of the citizens retire, and establish a free go-
vernment at Monte Alcino, 162. The remaining
citizens oppreled, 63. And flock to Monte Al-
cino, ib. Is granted by the Emperor to his son Phi-
lip, 164. The invefliture given by Philip to Cos-
mo di Medici, 260.
Sieverhatusn, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony

and Albert of Brandenburg, IV. 120.
Sion, Cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French

army in the Milanese, II. 189. Leaves the Imperial
army to attend the conclave on the death of Leo X.
191.
Smalkalde, the ProteRants enter into a leaguethere, for

their mutual support, III. 51. The league renewed
at a second meeting there, 54. The league of, re-
newed for ten years, 89. A manifesto, refusing to
acknowledge a council called by the Pope, 162.
The king of Denmaikjoins the league, 165. The
Princes of, protest against the authority of the Im-
perial chamber, and the recess of the diet at Nurem.
burg, 26r. Publish a manifesto against the pro-
ceedings of the council at Trent, 303. Are alarmed
at the proceedings of the Emperor, ib. A want of
unity among the members, 305. The views of the
Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave, explained,
ib. Appear at the diet of Ratisbon by deputies, 322.
Their deputies protest againit the council of Trent,
324. Their deputies, alarmed at the Emperor's
proceedings and declarations, leave the diet, 326.
The Emperor leagues with the Pope against them,
327. Prepare to rcfift the Emperor, 328. Are

di(appointed

ditappointed in their application to the Venetians and
Swiss, 332. As also with Henry VIII. and Francis,
334. Allemble a large army, 335. Are put under
the ban of the Empire, 339. Declare war against
the Emperor, 341. Hottilities begun by Schertel,
ib. They recal him, 342. The Elecor of Sax-
ony and Landgrave of Hefle appointed joint com-
manders of their army, 343. The charaaers of
the two commanders compared, ib. Their opera-
tions diftraded by this joint command, 344. Can-
nonade the Emperor's camp, 348. Make overtures
of peace to the Emperor, 360. Their army dif-
perse, 361. The Elecor of Saxony reduced, 405.
The Landgrave deceived and confined, 420. Their
warlike flores seized by the Emperor, 426. See
AMaurice.
S.lynan the Magnificent arcends the Ottoman throne,

II. 102. Invades Hungary and takes Blglade, 201.
Takes the island of Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hun-
garians at Mohacz, 373. His successes, and the
number of prisoners he carried away, ib. Besieges
Vienna, III. 38. Enters Hungary again with a vati
army, but is forced to retire by the Emperor Charles,
58. Takes Barbarofia the pirate under his pro-
tetion, 94. Concludes an alliance with Francis
King of France, 147. Prepares to invade Naples,
148. Protets Stephen King of Hungary, and defeats
Ferdinand, 218. Seizes Hungary for himself, 219.
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfilment of his treaty
with Francis, 252. Concludes a truce with the
Emperor, 320. Loses Transylvania, IV. 49. Ra-
vages the coasts of Italy, 86, i 16. Carries a mighty
army into Hungary, 88. Re-eRfablilhes Isabella
and her Ton in Transylvania, 128. His violent at-
tachment to his concubine Roxalana, 129. Is pre-
vailed on to declare her a free woman, 131. For-
mally marries her, i. Is rendered jealous of the
virtues of his son Muflapha, by the arts of Roxalana,
133. Orders him to be strangled, 137. Orders
the murder of Muflapha's son, 33.

Spain,

Spain, the Rate of, at the death of Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, II. 30. Charles king of, aspires to the Impe-
rial crown on the death of Maximilian. 64. Is elea-
ed Emperor, 77. Refletions of the Spaniards on
that event 79. Charles appoints viceroys, and
departs for Germany, 87. Infurretions there, 204.
A view of the feudal system in, 209. An account
of the confederacy, termed the Holy Junta, 211.
Causes which prevented an uiun of the malcontents
in the relpeaive provinces, 244. The moderation
of Charles toward them on his arrival, ib. In-
fiance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, III. 172.
Is invaded by the Dauphin, 240. The dominions
of, religned by Charles to his Ion Phlip, IV. 208.
The arrival ot Charlcs, and his reception there, 232.
The place of his retreat describcd, 234. The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles, 307. ThJ
tfrcig zcquifitnrs added to, 308. See dragn:,
Ca,iilc, Gelisa, I'aL.ncia, C:rtes, Grrmanada, and
Hol.y lunta.
Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative to the Reforma-

tion, I. 375. Another diet called there by the
Emperor, 11. 43. Another diet at, 261. Recess
of, in tavour of the Protestants, 264.
Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the dreadful

effees of, II. 145.
St. Difer, in Champagne, invefled by the Emperor,

I!. 273. Is obtained by the artifice of Cardinal
Granvellc, 275.
St. J'./us, monastery of, in P!azencia, is chosen by

the Emperor Charles V. for his retreat after his
resignation, IV. 234.. His fitation dfcribed, ib.
His apartments, 235.
St. uintin, invefled by the Spanifl troops, and de.

fended by Admiral Coligni, IV. 244. D'Andelot
defeated in an endeavour to join the garrison, 246.
But enters the town, 24-. Montmorency defeated
by the duke of Savoy, ib. The town taken by as-
fault, 248.
Strozzi, Peter, ome account of, IV. 156. Is intruf-

ed with the command of the French army in Italy,

157-

157. Is defeated by the marquis de Marignano,
159.
Suabia, an infurreAfion of the peasants againfi the nobles

there, II. 333. They publilh a memorial of their
grievances, ib. The insurgents dirperfed, 334.
The Protestant religion suppressed there by the Em-
peror Charles V. IV. 34.
SuflWk, duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates almost to

Paris, but is driven back, II. 261.
Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to the Emperor

Charles V. II. 199. Obliged to retire out of Pi-
cardy by the Duke de Vendome, 200.
Sweden, a summary view of the revolutions in, during

the sixteenth century, IV. 334.
Switzerland, the Cantons of, espouse the pretensions of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 69. Com-
mencement of the Reformation there by Zuinglius,
125. The regulation under which they hire out
their troops, 189. The precipitate battle, inliftcd
on by their troops under Lautrec, loft, 195.
Sytia, how and by whom added to the Ottoman Ems

pire, II. 65.

T
Termes, marechal de, governor of Calais, takes Dun-

kirk by storm, IV. 273. Engages the count of Eg-
mont, and is defeated by the accidental arrival of
an English squadron on the coast, ib. Is taken
prisoner, 275.
brouane, taken and demolished by the Emperor
Charles V. IV. 25.
Tctzel, a Dominican friar, his shameful conduct in the

sale of Indulgences in Germany, I. o6. His form
of absolution, and recommendation of the virtues of
Indulgences, 107, Note. His debauched course of
life, o18. Publilhes theses against Luther, 113.
f7utonic order, a charater of, I1. 341. Conquer the

province of Prussia, ib. Their grand maser Al-
bert made duke of Prussia, 342.
Theatines, the order of, by whom founded, IV. 191.

Tbinvil,e

Thn;oville, in Luxembourg, taken by the Duke of

Guise, IV. 273.
Thuringiao, an inlurre&ion of the peasants there, against

the nobility, II. 33;. The fanatical notions inspired
into them by Thomas Muncer, 337. Their difor-
derly army defeated, 339.
Toledo, infurrecion in, at the departure of Charles V.

for Germany, I. 87, 204. The cathedral ot, stripped
of its riches to support the army of the Holy Junta,
227. Padilla's letter to, at his execution. 234., 'No/e.
Is instigated to continue in arms by Padilla's wife,
236. Is reduced, 238.
Toledo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Medici,

sent by his uncle to negociate with Philip II. of
Spain, for the investiture of Siena, IV. 25.
Toledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, oppresses the

Neapolitans, IV. 1 15. And occalions the Turks to
ravage the coasts of Naples, ib.
Toleration, refle&ions on the progress of, in Germany,

IV. 182. Why mutually allowed among the ancient
Heathens, 183. How the primitive Chriflians be-
came averse to, ib.
Tomorri, Paul, a Francifcanmonk, archbifhopofGo-

locza, is made general of the Hungarian army againfi
Solyman the Magnificent, and is defeated by him,
II. 373.
Tordeiias, the residence of Queen Joanna, the confe-

deracy of malcontents called the Holy Junta, re-
moved thither, II. 213. 'I he Queen taken there by
the Conde de Haro, 225.
--- one of the repiefentatives of Segovia, killed

by the populace for voting the donative to Charles
V. at the Cortes assembled in Galicia, II. 205.
Tranjylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand King of the

Romans, by Queen Isabella, IV. 49.
Trermouille, La, drives the Englilh under the duke of

Suffolk out of Picardy, II1. 262.
Trent, the council of, fiimmoned, III. 258. Prorogued,

ib. Again summoned, 287. Is opened, 300. De-
clares the apocryphal scriptures canonical, 317. Efta-
blifhts the authority of the church- traditions,ib. The

council,

council, on rumours of an infeacion in the city, is
translated to Bologna, 433. Henry 11. of France
protcfts against the council, IV. 33. The council
breaks up on the approach of Maurice of Saxony,
74. Historical remarks on this council, 7S. Cha-
racers of its historians, 76.
Trent, Cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles V.

to conclude an alliance vwih the Pope, III. 324.
The nature of this treaty, 325.
Tunis, the means of its coming under the power of Bar-

barofi, traced, III. 94. The Emperor and other
Chrifian powers unite to expel Barbarola, and re-
store Muley.Hafcen, 98. Is taken by the Empe-
ror, 104.' Muley Hafcen restored, and his treaty
with Charles, 105.
Tuscany, a review of the slate of, during the sixteenth

century, IV. 331.

V

altncia, an infurretion in, II. 8. The people there
greatly opprefied by the nobles, ib. The nobles re-
fuse to amble the Cortes except the King is pre-
sent, 82. Charles authorises the people to continue
in arms, 83. They expel the nobles, ib. Associate
under the Gernanada, and appoint their own magi-
flrates, ib. Don Diego de Mendora, Conde de
Melito, appointed regent, on the departureof Charles
for Germany, 86. The Germanada refuse to lay
down their arms, 239. Defeat the nobles in several
actions, 241. Are at length routed by the Conde
de Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles to-
ward the insurgents on his arrival, 244.

FVlntinoij, Duchess of. See Diana of Poitiers.
Yalladolid, the first public entry of Charles V. to that

city, II. 55. The inhabitants rife, burn Fonseca's
house, and fortify the town, II. 208. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, and difiblution of the
Holy Junta, 235.
Veuccles, treaty of, between Charles V. and Henry II.

of France, IV. 216.

Vendm .

Vttdoae, duke of, his plan of operations in opposing

the progress of the invasion of Picardy by Henry
VIII. 1I. 200. Obliges him to retire, ib.
'enicej the republic of, incline in favour of the pre-

tensions of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial
crown, II. 69. Their views and apprehensions on
the approaching rupture between the Emperor
Charles V. and Francis, 92. Leagues with the
Emperor against Francis, 248. A final accommo-
dation between, and the Emperor, III. 39. Refuses
to enter into the league of the Italian tates, formed
by the Emperor, 63. A review of the slate of
that republic during the sixteenth century, IV.
329.
Verrina, the confident of the Count of Lavagno, en-

courages him in his scheme of overturning the go-
vernment of Genoa, III. 373. Is proteced by
Francis on the ruin of that conspiracy, 392.
/ielleville, the French governor of Metz, detets Father

Leonard's conspiracy to betray the city to the Impc-
perialifts, IV. 170. Executes the conspirators, 371.
yienna, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the Magnificent,

III. 38.
Villalar, battle of, between Padilla and the Conde de

Haro, II. 231.
Villna, marquis de, his (pirited reply to the request of

the Emperor to lodge Bourbon in his palace, II. 320.
U/m, the government of that city violently altered, and

its reformed ministers carried away in chains, by the
Emperor Charles V. III. 454.
United Provinces of the Netherlands, a brief view of

their revolt against the dominion of Spain, IV. 333.
Urbiao, reflored by Pope Adrian to Francesco Maria

de Rovere, 11. 246.

W
iaYllop, Sir John, joins the Emperor Charles V. at the

siege of Landrecy, with a body of Eniinlil troops,
III. 252.

VOL. IV. E * .'r,

7lar, the method of carrying on in Europe, how im-

proved a this period from the pracice of earlier
ages, II. 26p. General reflecions on the vicissitudes
of, IV. 302.
Wartburg, Martin Luther concealed there by the Elec-

tor of Saxony, II. 164.
t'entworth, Lord, governor of Calais, remonstrates in

vain with the Englilh Privy Council to provide for
its security, IV. 264. Is attacked by the Duke of
Guise, and forced to capitulate, 266.
Wittembnrg, invested by the Emperor Charles V. and

defended by Sybilla of Cleves, wife to the EleAor
of Saxony, III. 407.
Itofty, Cardinal, his rife, character, and influence

over Henry VIII. of England, II. 95. Receives
a pension from Francis I. of France, 97. And
from the Emperor Charles V. 98. Detached from
the French interest by the latter, 99. Inclines
Henry to join the Emperor against Francis, 169.
Sent by Henry to Calais, to negociate an accomnmo-
dation between the Emperor and Francis, 80o.
Has an interview with Charles at Bruges, and con-
cludes a league with him on the part of Henry,
against rance, 182. Meditates revenge against
Charles on his second disappointment of the Papacy
by the elecion of Clement VII. 259. Obtains of
Clement a egantine commiiflon in England for life,
ib. Negociates a league with Francis against the
Emperor, III. 3.
Worms, a diet called there by Charles V. to check the

progrefsof the Reformers, II. 103. Proceedings
of, 6r. Martin Luther cited before it, 62. Re-
fuses to retrat his opinions, ib. An edit pub-
lifhed against him, 64. Diet at, opened, III.
288.
IVrtdmbrg, Ulric Duke of, why expelled his domi-

nions. III. 85. Recovers his dominions by the
afliftance of Francis King of France, and receives
the Ptotecant religion, 86.

Wyt

Vyant, Sir Thomas, raises an infirreion in Kent

against Queen Mary of England, on account of the
Spanilf match, IV. 144. Is subdued and puniihed,
145.

X
.Ximens, archbishop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinand

of Aragon, in his dispute with the archduke Philip
concerning the regency of CafRile, 11. . Epoues
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Castile on Phi-
lip's death, 2a. Conquers Oran, and other places
in Barbary, for the crown of Castile, 23. Ap-
pointed regent of Castile, by Ferdinand's will, until
the arrival of Charles V. in Spain, 31. His rife
and charaAer, 32. Admits the claim to the regency
of Cardinal Adrian, lent with that commillion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with him, 34.
Takes the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under
his own eye, 35. Procures Charles, who aflumed
the regal title, to be acknowledged by the ChriRian
nobiliiy, 37. Schemes to extend the regal preroga-
tive, ib. Deprelles the nobility, 38. Frees the
King from the feudal limitations, and effablilhes a
regal army to check the Barons, 39. upprefes a
mutiny headed by the grandees, 40. Resumes the
grants of Ferdinind to his nobles, 41. His prudent
application of the revenue, 42. His bold aflertion
of his authority to the discontented nobles, 43.
Other associates in the regency appointed at the
infligation of the Flemilh courtiers, 44. Retains
the superior management, 4;. Defeats John
D'Albert's invasion of Navarre, ib. Dismantles all
the castles there, except Pampeluna, which the
firengthens, 46. The troops sent by him against
Barbarofa defeated, and his equanimity on that
occasion, 47. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemifli court, he persuades Charles to visit Spain,
48. Falls sick on his journey to meet Charles at
his arrival, 53. His letter of council to Charles,
54. Requests an interview, ib. The ingratitude
of Charles to him, ib. His death, 5$. His cha-

rafctr,

nra&r, ib. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, i;.

Z
Zara, bishop of, raises a regiment of priests to defend

Tordefilas, for the Holy Junta, which is forced by
the Conde de Haro, I. 225.
Z~iigus, atacks the sale of Indulgences at Zurich in

Switzerland, II. 12.

t I N I &

-IN K &
/^
