~~~~1 ~ I

A. ~~ '· 1~~l

Te .I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

ii~ ~

~ ~ ~
I

~~~~~~~~~;r' N .
~~~~~~~-~~~~~~~~~u.

OF THE

REIGN
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCJPAL of the University of EDINBUGCH, and HISTO-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

V O L. III.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the

Strand; and J. B A L F O U R, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXIV.

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V,
T H E account of the cruel manner in Boo V.

which the pope had been treated, filled 1527
all Europe with astonishment or horror. ceneral i-

dignation
To fee a Christian Emperor, who, by possesing excited a.

gaint the

that dignity, ought to have been the protector Emperot.
and advocate of the holy fee, lay violent hands
on him who represented Christ on earth, and
detain his sacrcd person in a rigorous captivity,
was confidered as an impiety that merited the
severest vengeance, and which called for the
immediate intcrpofition of every dutiful ion of
the church. Francis and Henryt alarmed at the
progress of the Imperial arms in Italy, had,
even before the taking of Rome, entered into a

VOL. III. B closer

BooK V. closer alliance; and, in order to give some

1z 7. check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed

to make a vigorous diversion in the Low-
Countries. The force of every motive which
had influenced them at that time, was now in-
creased; and to there were added, the desire of
rescuing the Pope out of the Emperor's hands,
a measure no less political, than it appeared to
be pious. This, however, rendered it necessary
to abandon their designs on the Low-Countries,
and to make Italy the feat of war, as it was by
vigorous operations in that country, they might
promise most certainly upon delivering Rome,
and setting Clement at liberty. Francis being
now sensible, that, in his system with regard to
the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an excess of
rcmiffnes, he had allowed Charles to attain ad-
vantages which he might easily have prevented,
was eager to make reparation for an error of
which he was not often guilty, by an aivity
more suitable to his temper. Henry thought
his interposition necessary, in order to hinder
,the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of
power, as would enable him, for the future, to
dicate without controul to the other princes of
Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had taken
care to secure by flattery and presents, the cer-
tain methods of gaining his favour, negleAed

nothing

nothing that could incense his matier against the BooK V.
Emperor. Besides all these publick confidera- 1,7.
tions, Henry was influenced by one of a more
private nature; having begun about this time
to form his great scheme of divorcing Catherine
of Aragon, towards the execution of which he
knew that the fanEion of Papal authority would
be necessary, he was desirous to acquire as much
merit as poflible with Clement, by appearing to
be the chief initrument of his deliverance.

THE negociation, between princes thus dif- Confeidem

. ~ .0~~~~~~ againfthim.

posed, was not tedious. Wolfey himself con- JulJyi.
duted it, on the part of his sovereign, with
unbounded powers. Francis treated with him
in person at Amiens, where the Cardinal ap-
peared, and was received with royal magnifi-
cence. A marriage between the duke of Or-
leans and the princess Mary was agreed to as
the basis of the confederacy; it was resolved
that Italy hould be the theatre of war; he
strength of the army which flould take the field,
as well as the contingent of troops or of money
Which each prince hould furnish, were fettled;
and if the Emperor did not accept of the pro-
pofals they were jointly to make him, they
bound themfeives immediately to declare war,
and to begin hostilities. Henry, who took every Aug. .
resolution with impetuosity, entered so eagerly
into this new alliance, that in order to give

B 2 Franci;

BOOK V. Francis the strongest proof of his friendship and
5 '" refpet, he formally renounced the ancient claim

of the English Monarchs to the crown of
France, which had long been the pride and ruin
cf the nation; as a full compensation for which,
he accepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns,
to be paid annually to himself and his fuccef-
fors a

TheFloren- THE Pope, being unable to fulfil the con-
tines recu-
ver their ditions of his capitulation, still remained a
fleedom.

prisoner under the severe custody of Alarcon.
The Florentines no sooner heard of what had
happened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a
tumultuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di
Cortona, who governed their city in the Pope's
name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke
in pieces the statues of Leo and Clement; and
declaring themselves a free state, re.eftablilhed
their ancient popular government. The Vene-
tians, taking advantage of the calamity of their
ally the Pope, seized Ravenna, and other places
belonging to the church, under pretext of keep-
ing them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino
and Ferrara laid hold likewise on part of the
spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
confidered as irretrievably ruined b.

* Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Fed. 14, 203.
b Guic. . 18. 4 3.

LANNOYi

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to de- BooK V;

rive ome solid benefit from that unforeseen .
event, which gave such splendour and superiority T'.l In.e-
to his master's arms. For this purpof e

he il.ltvc.

marched to Rome, together with Moncada, and
the marquis del Guafto, at the head of all the
troops which they could assemble in the king-
dom of Naples. The arrival of this reinforce-
ment brought new calamities on the unhappy
citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their
licence, and with the utmost rapacity gathered
the gleanings, which had escaped the avarice cf
the Spaniards and Germans. There was not
now any army in Italy capable of making head
against the Imperialists; and nothing more was
requisite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns
in the ecclesiastical tate, than to have appeared
before them. But the boldiers having been so
long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an entire
relaxation of discipline, and having tailed the
sweets of living at discretion in a great city,
almost without the controul of a superior, were
become so impatient of military subordination,
and so averse to service, that they reflued to
leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to be impofi ..e.
At the fame time, they declared, that they
would not obey any other person than the p rince
of Orange, whom the army had chofcn general.

B3 Lannoy,

Boor V. Lannoy, finding that it was no longer safe for
'jz7' him to remain among licentious troops, who

despised his dignity,. and hated his person, re-
turned to Naples; soon after the marquis del
Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to
quit Rome for the fame reason. The prince of
Orange, a general only in name, and by the
most precarious of all tenures, the good-will of
soldiers whom success and licence had rendered
capricious, was obliged to pay more attention
to their humors, than they did to his commands.
Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping any of
the advantages which he might have expeced
from the reduction of Rome, had the mortifi-
cation to fee the most formidable body of troops
that he had ever brought into the field, conti-
nue in a state of inactivity from which it was
impoflible to rouze them'.

ThFreoch THIS gave the King of France and the Vene-
arthc tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter
jatoltcay. into new engagements for delivering the Pope,

and preserving the liberties of Italy. The
newly restored republick of Florence very im-
prudently joined with them, and Lautrec, of
whose abilities the Italians entertained a much
more favourable opinion than his own master,
was, in order to gratify them, appointed gene-

* Guic I. 18. 454.

ralifim(

raliflimo of the league. It was with the utmost BOOK v.
reluctance he undertook that office, being un- 7
willing to expose himself a second time to the
difficulties and disgraces which the negligence
of the King, or the malice of his favourites
might bring upon him. The best troops in
France marched under his command, and the
King of England, though he had not yet de-
clared war against the Emperor, advanced a
considerable fum towards carrying on the expe-
dition. Lautrec's first operations were prudent, His oer"-

-r r

. lions.

vigorous, and successful. By the affiltance of
Andrew Doria, the ablest ea officer of that age,
he rendered himself master of Genoa, and re-
eftablilhed in that republick the facion of the
Fregofi, together with the dominion of France.
He obliged Alexandria to surrender after a hort
siege, and reduced all the country on that fide
of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had o
long refiftlled the arms of his sovereign, by aflault,
and plundered it with that cruelty which the
memory of the fatal disaster that had befallen
the French nation before its walls naturally in-
spired. All the Milanese, which Antonio de
Leyva defended with a small body of troops,
kept together, and supported by his own address
and industry, must have soon submitted to his
power, if he had continued to bend the force
of his arms against that country. But Lautrec
durst not complete a conquest which would

B 4 have

BOOK V. have been so honourable to himself, and of such

advantage to the league. Francis knew his
confederates to be more desirous of circumfcrib-
ing the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquir-
ing new territories for him, and was afraid that
if Sforza were once re-established in Milan, they
would second but coldly the attack which he
intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this reason he inftruated Lautrec not to push
his operations with too much vigour in Lom-
bardy; and happily the importunities of the
Pope, and the solicitations of the Florentines,
the one for relief, and the other for protection,
were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext
to march forward without yielding to the in-
treaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who insisted
on his laying siege to Milan d.

The mpe- WHILE .Lautrec advanced slowly towards
ror ets the
r'op at Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate con-
L'ibert. cerning the disposal of the Pope's person, who

still remained a prisoner in the castle of St. An-
gelo. Notwithstanding the specious veil of
religion with which he usually endeavoured to
cover his aions, Charles in many instances
appears to have been but little under the in-
fluence of religious considerations, and had fre-
quently on this occasion expressed an inclina-

d Guic... xviii. 461. Bellay 1, 07&c. Mauroc. Hit.
Venet, lib. iii. 238.

2 ion

tion to transport the Pope into Spain, that he BOOK V.
might indulge his ambition with the fpetacle of 1i27.
the two most illustrious personages in Europe
successively prisoners in his court. But the fear
of giving new offence to all Chriitendom, and
of filling his own subjects with horror, obliged
him to forego that fatisfaftion . The progress
of the confederates made it now necessary either
to set the Pope at liberty, or to remove him to
some place of confinement more secure than the
catle of St. Angelo, Many considerations in-
duced him to prefer the former, particularly his
want of the money requisite as well for recruiting
his army, as for paying off the vast arrears due
to it. In order to obtain this he had assembled
the Cortes of Castile at Valladolid about the Feb. ix.
beginning of the year, and having laid before
them the state of his affairs, and represented the
neceflity of making great preparations to resist
the enemies, whom envy at the success which
had crowned his arms would unite againit him,
he demanded a large supply in the most prefling
terms, but the Cortes, as the nation was already
exhausted by extraordinary donatives, refulfed
to load it with any new burden, and in Ipite of
all his endeavours to gain or to intimidate the
members, persisted in this resolution . No re-
source, therefore, remained but the extorting

e Guic. 1. 78. 457 Sandov. i. p. 814.

from

BOOK V. from Clement, by way of ransom, a fum sus-
1527. ficient for discharging what was due to his

troops, without which it was vain to mention
to them their leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inaaive on his part, or

his intrigues unsuccessful towards hastening such
a treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of
unbounded confidence, he disarmed the resent-
ment of cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon
his vanity, which made him desirous of shew-
ing the world, that as his power had at first
depressed the Pope, it could now raise him to
his former dignity. By favours and promises
he gained Morone, who, by one of those whin-
fical revolutions which occur so often in his life,
and which so strongly display his charater, had
now recovered his credit and authority with
the Imperialists. The address and influence of
two such men easily removed all the obstacles
which retarded an accommodation, and brought
the treaty for Clement's liberty to a conclusion,
upon conditions hard indeed, but not more In-
tolerable than a prince in his situation had reason
to expe&t. He was obliged to advance in ready
money an hundred thousand crowns for the use
of the army; to pay the fame fum at the distance
of a fortnight; and at the end of three months,
an hundred and fifty thousand more. He en-
gaged not to take part in the war against Charles,

either

either in Lombardy or in Naples; he granted BooK V.
him a cruzado, and the tenth of eccefiaftical 1z7.
revenues in Spain; and he not only gave host-
ages, but put the Emperor in possession of
several towns, as a security for the performance
of these articles . Having raised the first
moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and
benefices, and other expedients equally unca-
nonical, a day was fixed for delivering him
from imprisonment. But Clement, impatient Decem. 6.
to be free, after a tedious confinement of fix
months, as well as full of the suspicion and dif-
trust natural to the unfortunate, was so much
afraid that the Imperialiffs might still throw in
obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he dif-
guised himself the preceding night in the habit
of a merchant, and Alarcon having remitted
somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclusion
of the treaty, he made his escape undiscovered.
He arrived before next morning at Orvieto, with-
out any attendance but a single officer; and
from thence wrote a letter of thanks to Lautrec,
as the chief instrument of procuring him li-
berty h.

DURING these tranfadions, the ambassadors Overturesof

the Emperor

of France and England repaired to Spain, in to Franci
consequence of the treaty which Wolfey had and nry.

s Guic. 1. 18. 467, &c. h Guic. 1. 8. 467, &c.
Jov. Vlt. Colon. 169. Mauroc. Hill. Vcnet. lib. iii. 252.

concluded

BOOK V. concluded with the French King. The Empc-
~527' ror, unwilling to draw on himself the united

forces of the two Monarchs, discovered an in-
clination to relax somewhat the rigour of the
treaty of Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had
adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept of the
two millions of crowns which Francis had pro-
posed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy of
Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty on con-
dition that he would recal his army out of Italy,
and restore Genoa together with the other con-
quests which he had made in that country.
With regard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate
should be determined by the judges appointed
to inquire into his crimes. These propositions
being made to Henry, he transmitted them to
his ally the French King, whom it more nearly
concerned to examine, and to answer them;
and if Francis had been sincerely solicitous either
to conclude peace, or preserve consistency in his
own condu&, he ought instantly to have closed
with overtures which differed but little from the
propositions which he himself had formerly
made'. But his views were now much changed;
his alliance with Henry; Lautrec's progress in
Italy, and the superiority of his army there
above that of the Emperor, hardly left him
room to doubt of the success of his enterprize

X Recucil des Traitez, 2. 249.

againt

against Naples. Full of those sanguine hopes, BOOK V.
he was at no loss to find pretexts for rejecting 15Z7.
or evading what the Emperor had proposed.
Under the appearance of sympathy with Sforza,
for whose intereits he had not hitherto disco-
vered much solicitude, he again demanded the
full and unconditional re-establishment of that
unfortunate prince in his dominions. Under
colour of its being imprudent to rely on the
Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons
should be set at liberty before the French troops
left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The unrea-
fonablenefs of these demands, as well as the
reproachful insinuation with which they were
accompanied, irritated Charles to such a degree
that he could hardly liften to them with pa-
tience; and repenting of his moderation, which
had made so little impreflion on his enemies,
declared that he would not depart in the smallest
article from the conditions which he had now
offered. Upon this the French and English
ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn unac-
countably to concur with Francis in these
lfrange propositions, demanded and obtained
their audience of leave k

NEXT day, two heralds, who had accompa- isig.

nied the ambassadors of purpose, though they January a
had hitherto concealed their characer, having

k Rym. 14. 0oo. Herbert 8 . Guic. 1. 18. 471.

assumcd

BOOK V. assumed the ensigns of their office, appeared ir

1;28. the Emperor's court, and being admitted into

They de his presence, they, in the name of their refpe&ive
clare war
gainft the maiters, and with all the folemnities customary
Emperor.

on such occasions, denounced war against him.
Charles received both with a dignity suitable to
his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone adapt-
ed to the sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of
the Englilh Monarch with a firmness tempered
by ome degree of decency and refpe&. His
reply to the French King abounded with that
acrimony of expression, which personal rivalfhip,
exasperated by the memory of many injuries
infli&ed as well as suffered, naturally suggests.
He desired the French herald to acquaint his
sovereign, that he would henceforth confider
him not only as a base violator of publick faith,
but as a stranger to the honor and integrity be-
coming a gentleman. Francis, too high-fpirited
to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an
uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his

Prances character. He instantly sent back the herald
challenge with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the
the Emperor
to finle Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to

cobt single combat, requiring him to name the time

and place of the encounter, and the weapons
with which he chore to fight. Charles, as he
was not inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery,
readily accepted the challenge but after several

mefagcs

meflages concerning the arrangement of all the Book V.
circumstances relative to the combat, accom- ,28.
panied with mutual reproaches, bordering on
the most indecent scurrility, all thoughts of this
duel, more becoming the heroes of romance
than the two greatest Monarchs of their age,
were entirely laid aside'.

THE example of two personages o illustrious The effa

drew such general attention, and carried with it promoting
so much authority, that it had considerable in- of'duclias.
fluence in introducing an important change in
manners all over Europe. Duels, as has already
been observed, had long been permitted by the
laws of all the European nations, and forming
a part of their jurisprudence, were authorized
by the magistrate on many occasions as the molt
proper method of terminating questions with
regard to property, or of deciding in those
which refpeted crimes. But single combats
being confidered as solemn appeals to the omni-
science and justice of the Supreme Being, they
were allowed only in publick causes, according
to the prescription of law, and carried on in a
judicial form. Men accustomed to this manner
of decision in courts of justice, were naturally
led to apply it to personal and private quarrels.
Duels, which at first could be appointed by the

' Recucil des Traitcz, . Mcm. de Bllay, o;, &c.
Sandov. Hil. . 837.

civil

BooK V. civil judge alone, were fought without the in-
1528. terpofition of his authority, and in cafes to

which the laws did not extend. The tranfatiori
between Charles and Francis strongly counte-
nanced this practice. Upon every affront, or
injury which seemed to touch his honour, a gen-
tleman thought himself entitled to draw his
sword, and to call on his adversary to make re-
paration. Such an opinion introduced among
men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and of
rude manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced most
fatal consequences. Much of the belt blood in
Christendom was shed; many useful lives were
sacrificed and at ome periods, war itself hath
hardly been more deftrutive than these contests
of honour. So powerful, however, is the do-
minion of falhion, that neither the terror of
penal laws, nor reverence for religion, have been
able entirely to abolilh a practice unknown
among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reason; though at the fame time it
must be admitted, that, to this absurd custom,
we must ascribe in some degree the extraordinary
gentleness and complaisance of modern manners,
and that respectful attention of one man to an-
other, which, at present, render the social inter-
courses of life far more agreeable and decent
than among the most civilized nations of anti-
quity.

WHILE

WHILE the two Monarchs seemed so eager to BooK V

terminate their quarrel by a personal combat, .o
Lautrec continued his operations which pro- Retreatof

the Impe-
mifed to be more decisive. His army, which rialiftsfrom

Rome.

was now increased to thirty-five thousand men, February.
advanced by great marches towards Naples.
The terror of their approach, as well as the
remonstrances and the entreaties of the prince
of Orange, prevailed at last on the Imperial
troops, though with difficulty, to quit Rome,
of which they had kept poffeflion during ten
months. But of that flourifling army which
had entered the city, scarcely one half remained;
the reft, cut off by the plague, or wafted by dif-
eases, the effects of their inativity, intempe-
rance, and debauchery, fell vidtims to their own
crimes . Lautrec made the greatest efforts to
attack them in their retreat towards the Neapo-
litan territories, which would have finished the
war at one blow. But the prudence of their
leaders disappointed all his measures, and con-
du&ed them with little loss to Naples. The
people of that kingdom, extremely impatient
to shake off the Spanih yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared
to take poffeflion; and Gaeta and Naples ex-
cepted, hardly any place of importance remained
in the hands of the Imperiahlts. The prefer-

m Guic. 1. xviii. 478.
VOL. III. C vation

BOOK V. vation of the former was owing to the strength

!q;. of its fortifications, that of the latter to the
Fte ch be- presence of the Imperial army. Lautrec, how-
fioecNplc.

ever, fat down before Naples, but finding it
vain to think of reducing a city by force while
defended by so many troops, he was obliged to
employ the flower, but less dangerous method
of blockade; and having taken measures which
appeared to him effecual, he confidently affur-
ed his master, that famine would oon compel
the besieged to capitulate. These hopes were
strongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous
attempt made by the enemy in order to recover
the command of the ea. The gallies of An-
drew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour.
Moncada, who had succeeded Lannoy in the
vice-royalty, rigged out a number of gallies
superior to Doria's, manned them with a chosen
body of Spanish veterans, and going on board
himself, together with the marquis del Guafto,
attacked Philippino before the arrival of the Ve-
netian and French fleets. But he, by his fu-
perior skill in naval operations, easily triumphed
over the valour and number of the Spaniards.
The viceroy was killed, most of his fleet de-
stroyed, and Guafto, with many officers of
diftinAion, being taken prisoners, were put on
board the captive gallies, and ent by Philippino,
as trophies of his victory to his uncle ".

"Guic. 1. xix. 87. P. IH uter. lib. x. c. z. p. 231.

2 NOT.

re-eftablilhing tranquillity in the one country, Book V.
before he attempted to compose the disorders 1529.
which abounded in the other, found it necessary
to secure at least one alliance among the Italian
states, on which he might depend. That with
Clement, who courted it with unwearied impor-
tunity, seemed more proper than any other.
Charles being extremely solicitous to make some
reparation for the insults which he had offered
to the sacred charaaer of the Pope, and to re-
deem past offences by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, notwithstanding all his misfortunes, terms
more favourable than he could have expeed as-
ter a continued series of success. Among other ar-
ticles, he engaged to restore all the territories be-
longing to the ecclefiatical state; to re-eftablilh
the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander
the head of that family and to put it in the
Pope's power to decide concerning the fate of
Sforza, and the poffeflion of the Milanese. In
return for there ample concessions, Clement gave
the Emperor the investiture of Naples without
the reserve of any tribute, but the present of a
white ifeed in acknowledgment of his sovereign-
ty; absolved all who had been concerned in
assaulting and plundering Rome; and permit-
ted Charles and his brother Ferdinand to levy
the fourth of the ecclefiafical revenues through-
out their dominions a.

G;uic. 1. xix. 2z2,

Tks

BooK V. The account of this tranfadion quickened
'529. the negociations at Cambray, and brought Mar-
,eagufs5 garet and Louise to an immediate agreement.
Cambray The treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that
between
charlesana which they concluded; the latter being intended
Francis.

to mitigate the rigour of the former. The
chief articles were, That the Emperor hould
not, for the present, demand the restitution of
Burgundy, reserving, however, in full force, his
rights and pretensions to that dutchy; That
Francis hould pay two millions of crowns as
the ransom of his sons, and, before they were
set at liberty, hould restore such towns as he
still held in the Milanese; That he should resign
the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois; That
he ihould renounce ali his pretensions to Naples,
Milan, Genoa, and every other place beyond
the Alps; That he hould immediately confum-
mate the marriage concluded between him and
the Emperor's filter Eleanora b.

Advantage. THus Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
ous for the
Emperor. procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing

which had at first prompted him to take arms,
or which had induced him, by continuing hofd
tilities, during nine successive campaigns, to
protract the war to a length hardly known in
Europe before the eftablithment of anding

b p. I1puter. Rcr. Auflr. lib. . c. . p. 234. Sandov.
iflt. deli Emper. Carl. V. ii. 28.

armies,

armies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes, BOOK V.
became universal. The Emperor, bythis treaty, 1529
was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy;
he delivered his territories in the Netherlands
from an ignominious badge of fubjetion; and
after having baffled his rival in the field, he
prescribed to him the conditions of peace. The
different conduct and spirit with which the two
Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
naturally to such an issue of it. Charles, in-
clined by temper, as well as obliged by his
situation, concerted all his schemes with caution,
purlued them with perseverance, and observing
circumstances and events with attention, let
none escape that could be improved to advan-
tage. Francis, more enterprizing than sieady,
undertook great designs with warmth, but exe-
cuted them with remilfnefs; and diverted by his
pleafuires, or deceived by his favourites, he
often loft the most promising opportunities of
success. Nor had the characctr of the two rivals
themiclves greater influence on the operations
of the war, than the opposite qualities of the
generals whom they employed. Among the
Imperialifs, valour tempered with prudence;
fertility of invention aided by experience; dif-
ccrnment to penetrate the designs of their
enemies, a provident sagacity in conducting their
own mealires, in a word all the talents which
form great commanders and ensure victory, were
VOL. III. D confpi-

BOOK V. conspicuous. Among the French, these quali-

ties were either wanting, or the very reverie of
Sz9. e

them abounded; nor could they boast of one
man (unless we except Lautrec, who was always
unfortunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara,
Leyva, Guafto, the prince of Orange, and other
leaders whom Charles had to set in opposition to
them. Bourbon, Morone, Doria, who by their
abilities and conduct might have been capable
of balancing the superiority which the Imperia-
lifts had acquired, were loft through the care-
leffnefs of the King, and the malice or injuflice
of his counsellors; and the most fatal blows
given to France during the progress of the war,
proceeded from the despair and resentment of
there three persons, who were forced to aban-
doa her service.

ifhflour. THE hard conditions to which Francis was

ah't to
Ianci. obliged to submit were not the most afflicing

circumstance to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for
adjusting their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them must have been purchased
by farther conceflions on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; and without the least pro.
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with

such

such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his BOOK V.
army, to the mercy of the Emperor. They 5z9
exclaimed loudly against this base and perfidious
ation, of which Francis himself was so much
ashamed, that in order to avoid the pain of
hearing from their ambafladors the reproaches
which he justly merited, it was some time before
he would consent to allow them an audience.
Charles, on the other hand, was attentive to the
interest of every person who had adhered to him;
the rights of some of his Flemish fubjeats, who
had estates or pretensions in France, were fe-
cured; one article was inserted, obliging Fran-
cis to restore the blood and memory of the
Constable Bourbon ; aud to grant his heirs the
possession of his lands which had been forfeited;
another, by which indemnification was stipulated
for those French gentlemen who had accom-
panied Bourbon in his exile c. This condut,
laudable in itself, and placed in the most ftrik-
ing light by a comparison with that of Francis,
gained Charles as much esteem as the fucccfs
of his arms had acquired him glory.

FRANCIS did not treat the King of England Henry ac

with the fame neglect as his other allies. He i,
communicated to him all the steps of his nego-
ciation at Cambray, and luckily found that

c Guic. 1. xix. p. 525. P. I-Heuter. Rtr. Aulr. lib. x.
c. 4. p. 35.

D 2 Monarch

BOOK V. Monarch in a situation which left him no choice,
oki, but to approve implicitly of his measures, and
Hi. scheme to concur with them. Henry had been solicit-
of bring di-
vorcc.l from ing the Pope for some time, in order to obtain
his Qecn.

a divorce from Catharine of Aragon his Queen.
Several motives combined in prompting the
King to urge this suit. As he was powerfully
influenced at some seasons by religious confide-
rations, he entertained many scruples concern-
ing the legitimacy of his marriage with his bro-
ther's widow; his affections had long been
eitranged from the Queen, who was older than
himlclf, and had loft all the charms which he
poffeifed in the earlier part of her life; he was
paflionately desirous of having male issue; Wol-
ley artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged
his hopes, that he might widen the breach be-
tween him and the Emperor, Catharine's ne-
phew ; and, what was more forcible perhaps in
its operation than all there united, the King had
conceived a violent love for the celebrated Anne
*t ~ Boleyn, a young lady of great beauty, and of

greater accomplishments, whom, as he found it
impofilblc to gain her on other terms, lie de-
termined to raise to the throne. The Papal
authority had often been imterpofed to grant
divorces for reasons less specious than thole
which Henry produced. When the matter was
firt proposed to Clement, during his imprison.
ment in the catle of St. Angelo, as his hopes

of
3

of recovering liberty depended entirely on the BooK V.
King of England, and his ally of France, he 1529.
expressed the warmest inclination to gratify him.
But no sooner was he set free, than he discovered
other sentiments. Charles, who espoused the
proteLion of his aunP with zeal inflamed by
resentment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand
with threats, which made a deep imnrefflon on
his timid mind; and allured him on the other
with those promises in favour of his family,
which he afterwards accomplished. Upon the
profpet of these, Clement not only forgot all
his obligations to Henry, but ventured to en-
danger the interest of the Romish religion in
England, and to run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever from the obedience of the
Papal fee. After amusing Henry during two
years, with all the subtleties and chicane which
the court of Rome can so dexterously employ
to protract or defeat any caufc ; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and deceitful
policy, the intricacies of which the Englifih
hiflorians, to whom it properly belongs, have
found it no cafy matter to trace and unravel;
he, at last, recalled the powers of the delegates
whom he had appointed to jud:e in the point,
avocated the cause to Rome, leaving the King
no other hope of obtaining a divorce but from
the personal decision of the Pope himself. As
Clement was now in fri& alliance with the Em-

) 3 peror,

BOOK V. peror, who had purchased his friendship by such

1529. exorbitant concessions, Henry despaired of pro-

curing any fcntence from the former, but what
was dictated by the latter. His honour, how-
ever, and passions concurred in preventing him
from relinquilhing his scheme of a divorce,
which he determined to accomplish by other
means, and at any rate; and the continuance of
Francis's friendship being necessary to coun-
terbalance the Emperor's power, he, in order
to secure that, not only offered no remonstrances
against the total neglect of their allies, in the
treaty of Cambray, but made Francis the pre-
sent of a large fum, as a brotherly contribution
towards the payment of the ransom for his sons d.

Aug. MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy
The Empe.
tor iisp with a numerous train of the Spanish nobility,
tlrly. and a considerable body of troops. He left the

government of Spain during his absence to the
Empress Isabella. By his long residence in that
country, he had acquired such thorough know-
ledge of the character of the people, that he
could perfectly accommodate the maxims of his
government to their genius. He could even
afume, upon ome occasions, such popular
manners, as gained wonderfully upon the Spa-
niards. A striking instance of his disposition
to gratify them had occurred a few days before

* Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. 122.

2 he

he embarked for Italy: He was to make his BOOK V.
publick entry into the city of Barcelona; and ,5z9
some doubts having arisen among t' inhabit-
ants, whether they hould receive him as Fm-
peror, or as Count of Barcelona; Charles in-
ftantly decided in favour of the latter, declaring
that he was more proud of that ancient title,
than of his Imperial crown. Soothed with this
flattering expression of his regard, the citizens
welcomed him with acclamations of joy, and
the ates of the province swore allegiance to his
son Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona.
A imilar oath had been taken in all the king-
doms of Spain, with equal satisfaction .

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors
from all the princes and tates of that country
attended his court, waiting to receive his decision
with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where he
firit landed, he was received with the acclama-
tions due to the protector of their liberties.
Having honoured Doria with many marks of
diftinaion, and bellowed on the republick several
new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the
place fixed upon for his interview with the
Pope. He affieted to unite in his publick entry Now. 5.
into that city the itate and majety that suited
an Emperor, with the humility becoming an

Sandov. ii.l p. so. lFerer. ix. 11 6.

D 4 obedient

BOOK V. obedient son of the church; and while at the

5. head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able

to give law to all Italy, he kneeled kown to kils
the feet of that very Pope whom he had so
lately detained a prisoner. The Italians, after
suffering so much from the ferocity and licen-
tioufnefs of his armies, and after having been
long accustomed to form in their imagination a
piture of Charles which bore ome resemblance
to that of the barbarous monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly affli&ed their
country with like calamities, were furprized to
fee a prince of a graceful appearance, affable
and courteous in his deportment, of regular
manners, and of exemplary attention to all the
offices of religion '. They were still more aflo-
nilhed when he fettled all the concerns of the
prince and states which now depended on him,
with a degree of moderation and equity much
beyond what they had expected.

Hi mode- CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain,
rcitton and
tie motives far from intending to give any such extraordi-

nary proof of his felf.denial, seems to have been
reoblved to avail himself to the utmost of the
superiority which he had acquired in Italy. But
various circumstances concurred in pointing out
the neceflity of pursuing a very different course.
The progress of the Turkith Sultan, who after

Sandov. His. del Emp. Carl. V. ii. 5c, 53, &c.

over-

over-running Hungary, had penetrated into Boor V.
Austria, and laid siege to Vienna with an army ,29.
of an hundred and fifty thousand men, loudly sept 13.
called on him to colledt his whole force to op-
pose that torrent ; and though the valour of the
Germans, the prudent conduct of Ferdinand,
together with the treachery of the Vizier, soon oet. Il
obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize with
infamy and loss, the religious disorders still
growing in Germany made the Emperor's pre-
fence highly necessary there g: The Florentines,
instead of giving their consent to the re-eftabliih-
ment of the Medici, which by the treaty of
Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to
procure, were preparing to defend their liberty
by force of arms; the vait preparations for his
journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and on this, as well as many other occasions,
the multiplicity of his affairs, together with the
narrownets of his revenues, obliged him to con-
trat his vast schemes of ambition, and to forego
present and certain advantages, that he might
guard against more remote but unavoidable
dangers. Charles from all thcfe considerations,
finding it neceflary to assume an air of modera-
tion, acted his part with a good grace. He
admitted Sforza into his prefcnce, and not only
gave him a full pardon of all pail offences, but

SIcidan, 12. Guic. 1, xx. 55o.

granted

BOOK V. granted him the investiture of the dutchy, toge.
-'"^ ther with his niece the King of Denmark's

daughter in marriage. He allowed the duke of
Ferrara to keep potiffeion of all his dominions,
adjusting the points in dispute between him and
the Pope with an impartiality not very agreeable
to the latter. He came to a final accommoda-
tion with the Venetians upon the reasonable
condition of their restoring whatever they had
usurped during the late war, either in the Nea-
politan or Papal territories. In return for so
many concessions he exaaed considerable fums
from each of the powers with whom he treated,
which they paid without reluctance, and which
afforded him the means of proceeding on his
journey towards Germany with a magnificence
suitable to his dignity h.
1. To THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to

h

ftthe Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which
,h h'ntV ,f had chiefly affeced that country, were published
the Mtdscl
in Fortnce. at Bologna with great solemnity on the first

day of the year one thousand five hundred and
thirty, amidst the universal acclamations of the
people, applauding the Emperor, to whose mo-
deration and generotity they ascribed the blef-
sings of peace which they had so long desired.
The Florentines alone did not partake of this
general joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty

a Sandov. ii. 55, &c.

more

more laudable than prudent, they determined Boo V.
to oppose the restoration of the Medici. The ,-53
Imperial army had already entered their terri-
tories, and formed the siege of their capital.
But though deserted by all their allies, and left
without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obstinate va-
lour worthy of better success, and even when
they surrendered, they obtained a capitulation
which gave them hopes offecuring some remains
of their liberty. But the Emperor, from his
desire to gratify the Pope, fruflrated all their
expectations, and abolishing their ancient form
of government, raised Alexander di Medici to
the 1ame absolute dominion over that state which
his family have retained to the present times.
Philibert de Chalons prince of Orange, the Im-
perial general, was killed during this siege. His
estate and titles descended to his sifter Claude de
Chalons, who was married to Rene count of
Nassau, and fie transmitted to her potteriry of
the house of Nassau the title of Princes of Orange,
which they have rendered so illustrious i.

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bo- State of a.

fsir,' cvil
logna, and the ceremony of his coronation as aid cgli-

ore, ill Gero

King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, many.
which the Pope performed with the accustomed and X4.

1Guic. 1. xx. p. 541, &c. P. Hcuter. Rer. Aullr. lib.
X, c. 4. p. 236.

formalities,

BooK V. formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italy k;

,S30. and he began to prepare for his journey to

Germany. His presence became every day more
necessary in that country, and was solicited with
equal importunity by the catholics and by the
favourers of the new docrines. During that
long in:crval of tranquillity which the ablence
of the Emperor, the contests between him and
the Pope, and his attention to the war with
France, affo.ded them, the latter had gained
much ground. Most of the princes who had
embraced Luther's opinions, had not only efta-
blihed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely fupprefIed
the rites of the Romish church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their conduct. Almost
one half of the Germanick body had revolted
from the Papal fee, and its dominion, even in
that part which had not hitherto shaken off the
yoke, was considerably weakened by the exam-
ple of the neighbouring states, or by the secret
progress of those doctrines which had undermined
it among them. Whatever fatisfadion the Em-
peror, while he was at open enmity with the fee
of Rome, might have felt in those events that
tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope, he
could not help perceiving now, that the religious
divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove

k H. Cornel. Agrilpa de duplici Coronitione Car. V,
ap. Scard. ii, 266,

extremely

extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority. Boos V.
The weakness of former Emperors had suffered '53o
the great vassals of the Empire to make such
successful encroachments upon their power and
prerogative, that during the whole course of a
war, which had often required the exertion of
his utmost trength, Charles hardly drew any
effectual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obsolete pretensions were
almost the only advantages which he had gained
by swaying the Imperial sceptre. He now be-
came fully sensible that if he did not recover in
some degree the prerogatives which his prede-
ceffors had loft, and acquire the authority, as
well as posess the name, of head of the linpire,
his high dignity would contribute more to ob-
strut than to promote his ambitious fchcines.
Nothing, he saw, was more essential towards
attaining this, than to suppress opinions which
might form new bonds of confederacy among
the princes of the Empire, and unite them by
ties stronger and more sacred than any political
conncstion. Nothing seemed to lead more cer-
tainly to the accompliflrnent of his designs, than
to employ zeal for the stablished religion, of
which he was the natural protecfor, as the in-
ftrument of extending his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a profpec no sooner opened Proeed:na
of coming to an accommodation with the Pope, of thiI ,t

thRp, M^rch ,

Boor V. than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of
~3. the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take

into consideration the state of religion. The
decree of the diet assembled there in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft of
Christendom. The greatest delicacy of address,
however, was requisite in proceeding to any deci-
sion more rigorous. The minds of men kept
in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on during twelve years without intermiflion of
debate, or abatement of zeal, were nowinflamed
to an high degree. They were accustomed to
innovations, and saw the boldest of them fuc-
cefsful. Having not only abolished old rights,
but substituted new forms in their place, they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
system which they had embraced, as by avcrfion
to that which they had abandoned. Luthcr
himself, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obitinacy of the combat, or to be-
come remnifs upon success, continued the attack
with as much vigour as he had begun it. His
disciples, of whom many equalled him in zeal,
and some surpassed him in learning, were no less
capable than their matter to conduc the con-
troverfy i the propereft manner. Many of the
laity, lome even of the princes, trained up
amidst thefc incecfant dilputations, and in the

habit

habit of listening to the arguments of the con- BooK V.
tending parties who alternately appealed to them Ao.
as judges, came to be profoundly killed in all
the questions which were agitated, and, upon
occasion, could shew themselves not inexpert in
any of the arts with which these theological en-
counters were managed. It was obvious from
all these circumstances, that any violent decision
of the diet must have immediately precipitated
matters into confusion, and have kindled in
Germany the flames of a religious war. All,
therefore, that the Archduke, and the other
commiifloners appointed by the Emperor de-
manded of the diet, was, to enjoin those states
of the Empire which had hitherto obeyed the
decree issued againit Luther at Worms in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-four,
to persevere in the observation of it, and to pro-
hibit the other states from attempting any far-
ther innovation in religion, particularly from
abolilhing the Mass, before the meeting of a
general council. After much dispute, a decree
to that effec was approved of by a majority of
voices .

THE Elctor of Saxony, the marquis of Bran- The folow.

era of Lu-

denburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the dukes ther protef
of Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together ,g:.i
with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free Apil 9.

'Slcid. Hill. 117.

cities,

Booc V. cities m, entered a solemn protelf againit this

0 decree, as unjust and impious. On that account

they were distinguished by the name of PRO-
TESTANTS ", an appellation which hath since
become better known, and more honourable, by
its being applied indiscriminately to all the feels
of whatever denomination which have revolted
from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this
declaration of their dissent from the decree of
the diet, the Protestants sent ambassadors into
Italy to lay their grievances before the Emperor,
from whom they met with the most difcourag-

De;ier- ing reception. Charles was at that time in cloe
toof the union with the Pope, and solicitous to attach
Ipctror. him inviolably to his interest. During their long

residence at Bologna, they held many confulta-
tions concerning the most effectual means of
extirpating the herefies which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and timid
mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror even beyond what Popes, the con-
sant enemies of such assemblies, uually feel,
employed every argument to difluade the Em-
peror from consenting to that measure. He
represented general councils as facious, ungo-

m The fourteen cities were Sralburgh, Nurembergh,

Ulm, Conitance, Reutlingen, Windflieim, Minengen,
Lindaw, Kempten, Hailbron, Ifna, Weiflrmburgh, Nord-
lingen, and St. Gal.

Slid. Hillt 119. F. Paul, lift. p. 45, Scckend. ii. 127.

vernable,

vYrnable, presumptuous formidable to civil btOK V,
authority, and too flow in their operations to 1530.
remedy disorders which required an immediate
cure. Experience, he said, had now taught both
the Emperor and himself, that forbearance and
lenity exasperated the spirit of innovation, which
they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous me-
thods which such a desperate cafe required; Leo's
sentence of excommunication, together with the
decree of the diet at Worms thould be carried into
execution, and it was incumbent on the Emperor
to employ his whole power, in order to overawe
those, on whom the reverence due either to eccie-
fiaflical or civil authority had no longer any in.
fluence. Charles, whose views were very dif-
ferent from the Pope's, and who became daily
more sensible how obstinate and deep-rooted the
evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, and confidered the con-
vocation of a council as no improper expedient
for that purpose; but promised, if gentler arts
failed of fuiccefs, that then he would exert him-
self with vigour to reduce those stubborn ene
mies of the Catholic faith .

SvcHi were the sentiments with which the Em- Emperor

pcfient at
peror ft out for Germany, having already ap- the Dietof

A*glburg.

F. Paul, xlvii. Seek. 1. il. 142. Hil., de Confess. d'Aux- tM"ih it,
bourg, par D. Chytrcub, 4to. Antw. 1572, rp 6. 1530'

VOL. II. E pointed

BOOK V. pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf-

,5 30· burg. In his journey towards that city, he had

many opportunities of observing the disposition
of the Germans with regard to the points in
controversy, and found their minds every where
so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced
him that nothing tending to severity or rigour
ought to be attempted, until all other measures
proved ineffeaual. He made his publick entry
into Augsburg with extraordinary pomp; and
June 5s. found there such a full assembly of the members

of the diet as was suitable both to the import-
ance of the affairs which were to come under
their consideration, and to the honour of an
Emperor, who, after a long absence, returned
to them crowned with reputation and success.
His pretence seems to have communicated to all
parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire
of peace. The Elecor of Saxony would not
permit Luther to accompany him to the diet,
left he hould offend the Emperor by bringing
into his presence a person excommunicated by
the Pope, and the author of all those diflenfions
which it now appeared so difficult to compose.
At the Emperor's desire, all the Protestant
princes sorbad the divines who accompanied
them, to preach in publick during their residence
at Augsburg. For the fame reason they em-
ployed Melanthon, the man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the nmoftpacifick and gentle

2 spirit

spirit among the Reformers, to draw up a con- Boor V.
feflion of their faith xprefed its terms as little Io.
offenfivc to the Roman Catholics, as a regard
for truth would permit. Melandhon, who fel- fTh conS
dom suffered the rancour of controversy to en- Ausgtir:.
venom his style, even in writings purely pole-
mical, executed a talk so agreeable to his natu.
ral disposition with great moderation and success,
The Creed which he composed, known by the
name of the Confeflion of Augsburg, from the
place where it was presented, was read publickly
in the diet some Popish divines were appointed
to examine it; they brought in their animad-
versions; a dispute ensued between them and
Melanthon, seconded by some of his brethren;
but though Melandhon softened some articles,
made conceflions with regard to others, anti put
the least exceptionable sense upon all; though
the Emperor himself laboured with great earnest-
ness to reconcile the contending parties; so
many marks of diftintion were now established,
and such insuperable barriers placed between the
two churches, that all hopes of bringing about
a coalition seemed utterly desperate p.

FROM the divines, among whom his endear
yours had been so unsuccessful Charles turned

P Szckcnd. lib. ii. 9g, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annalcs Evan-

gelici ap. Herm. Von der Hard. Hinl. Liter. Refortn. Lif.,
Z717. so, . 159.

a2 to

BOOK V. to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find

them, how desirous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed
than the former to renounce their opinions. At
that time, zeal for religion took pofleffion of the
minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely be
conceived by those who live in an age when the
paflions excited by the first manifestation of
truth, and the first recovery of liberty, have in a
great measure ceased to operate. This zeal was
then of such strength as to overcome attach-
ment to their political interest, which is com-
monly the predominant motive among princes.
The Elecor of Saxony, the Landgrave of HeTe,
and other chiefs of the Protestants, though soli-
cited separately by the Emperor, and allured by
the promise or profpet of those advantages
which it was known they were most solicitous to
attain, refused, with a fortitude highly worthy
of imitation, to abandon what they deemed the
cause of God, for the fake of any earthly ac-
quifition q.

sverde EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite
ca'e.inft the Proteflant party proving abortve, nothing
the Prote-
fans. now remained for the Emperor but to take some

vigorous measures towards aferting the doc-
trines and authority of the etablifled church.

1 Sleid. 132. Scultet. Annal. 158.

These,

These, Campeggio, the papal nncio, had al- GOOK V.
ways recommended as the only proper and es- ,,
featual course of dealing with such obstinate
hereticks. In compliance with his opinions and "v' 9.
remonftr#nces, the diet issued a decree, con-
demning most of the peculiar tenets held by the
Protestants; forbidding any person to protect or
tolerate such as taught them; enjoining a
sris observance of the established rites; and
prohibiting any further innovation under severe
penalties. All orders of men were required to
aflift with their persons and fortunes in carrying
this decree into execution; and such as refuilcd
to obey it, were declared incapable of aing as
judges, or of appearing as parties in the Inmperial
chamber, the supreme court of judicature in the
Empire. To all which was subjoined a promiie,
that an application should be made to the Pope,
requiring him to call a general council within fix
months, in order to terminate all controversies
by its sovereign decifionsr.

THE severity of this decree, which they con- They ntr

fidered as a prelude to the most violent prfe- at' sn1i.
cution, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced kalJk.
them that the Emperor was resolved on their
defrution. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the

Skeid. 139.
E 3 feeble

Booc V. feeble spirit of Melan/thon; and as if the cause

.3-O had already been desperate, he gave up himself

to melancholy and lamentation. But Luther,
who during the meeting of the diet had endca-
voured to confirm and animate his arty by
several treatises which he addressed to them, was
not disconcerted or dismayed at the profpet of
this new danger. He comforted Melanthon
and his other desponding disciples, and exhorted
the princes not to abandon those truths which
they had lately asserted with such laudable bold-
ness . His exhortations made the deeper im-'
preflion upon them, as they were greatly alarmed
:t that time by the account of a combination
among the Popish princes of the Empire for the
maintenance of the established religion, to which
Charles himself had acceded'. This convinced
them that it was necefary to stand on their
guard; and that their own safety, as well as the
fpccefs of their cause, depended on union. Filled
with this dread of the adverse party, and with
these sentiments concerning the conduct proper
for themselves, they assembled at Smalkalde.
c,m. a,, There they concluded a league of mutual de-

fence against all aggressors ", by which they
formed the Protestant states of the Empire into
one regular body, and beginning already to con.
'Seck. ii. o. Sleid, 140, ' Seek. ii. 200. iii. I

lcid,. i~l. 42z,

rider

fider themselves as such, they reiolved to apply ooK V.
to the Kings of France and England, and to ,io.
implore them to patronize and assist their new
confederacy.

AN affair not connected with religion furnished The Emne.

,r>~~~~ . . r,'r ppl, s

them with a pretence for courting the aid of to tv,. i1.s
foreign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views cleitdKing
enlarged in proportion to the increase of his ofh'sl.
power and grandeur, 'had formed a fcherine of
continuing the Imperial crown in his family,
by procuring his brother Ferdinand to be elected
King of the Romans. The present junEture
was favourable for the execution of that design.
The Emperor's arms had been every where vic-
torious; he had given law to all Europe at the
late peace; no rival now remained in a condition
to balance or to controul him; and the Elec-
tors, dazzled with the splendor of his success, or
overawed by the greatness of his power, durst
scarcely dispute the will of a prince, whose soli-
citations carried with them the authority of com-
mands. Nor did he want plausible reasons to
enforce the measure. The affairs of his other
kingdoms, he said, obliged him to be often
absent from Germany; the growing disorders
occasioned by the controversies about religion,
as well as the formidable neighbourhood of the
Turks, who continually threatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the

E 4 Empire,

BocK V. Empire, required the constant presence of a

5.Q prince endowed with prudence capable of corm-

posing the former, and with power as well as
valour sufficient to repel the latter. His brq-
ther Ferdinand possessed these qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany,
he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their
constitution and manners; having been present
almost from the first rife of their religious dif-
fznfions, he knew what remedies were mofl pro-
per, what they could bear, and how to apply
them; as his own dominions lay on the Turkish
frontier, he was the natural defender of Germany
against the invasions of the Infidels, being
prompted by interest no less than he would be
bound in duty to oppose them.

The Pro, THESE arguments made little imprefflon on
vc ftit. the Protestants. Experience taught them, that

nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness in the reins of go-
vernment which there occasioned after deriving
such advantages from a state of anarchy, they
were extremely unwilling tp give themselves a
pew and a fixed matier. They perceived clearly
the extent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed
at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary in
his family, and would of course establish in the

Empire

Empire an absolute dominion, to which eletive SOOK V.
princes could not have aspired with equal faci- 3,.
lity. They determined therefore to oppose Ser-
dinand's eletion with the utmost vigour, and to
rouse their countrymen, by their example and
exhortations, to withstand this encroachment on
their liberties. The Eletor of Saxony, accord-
ingly, not only refused to be present in the elec- I53'.
toral college, which the Emperor summoned to a
meet at Cologne, but inftruaed his eldest son to
appear there, and to protest against the election
as informal, illegal, contrary to the articles of
the golden bull, and subversive of the liberties
of the Empire. But the other Elecors, whom cI;chofen.
*Charles had been at great pains to gain, without
regarding either his absence or protest, chose
Ferdinand King of the Romans; who a few days
after was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle x.

WHEN the Protestants, who were aTfembled a Negoca-

tions ot he

second time at Smalkalde, received an account Protef.nt
of this tranfation, and heard, at the fame time,
that prosecutions were commenced, in the Im-
perial chamber, against some of their number,
on account of their religious principles, they
thought it necessary, not only to renew their
former confederacy, but immediately to dispatch
their armbffadors into France and England.

x Sleid. 42. Seck. iii. . P. Heater. Rer. Auftr lib.
x. c. 6. p. 240,

Francis

BOOK V. Francis had observed, with all the jealousy of
lglt. a rival, the reputation which the Emperor had
Feb.9. acquired by his eeming disinterestedness and

moderation in fettling the affairs of Italy; and
beheld with great concern, the successful ftep
which he had taken towards perpetuating and
extending his authority in Germany by the elec-
tion of a King of the Romans. Nothing, how-
ever, would have been more impolitick than to
precipitate his kingdom into a new war when ex-
haufted by extraordinary efforts, and discouraged
by ill success, before it had got time to recruit
its strength, or to forget past misfortunes. As
no provocation had been given, and hardly a
pretext had been afforded him, he could not
violate a treaty of peace which he himself had so
lately solicited, without forfeiting the esteem of
all Europe, and being detested as a prince void
of probity and honour. He observed, with
great joy, powerful faftions beginning to form
in the Empire; he listened with the utmost eager-
ness to the complaints of the Protestant princes;
and without eeming to countenance their reli-
gious opinions, determined secretly to cerilh
those sparks of political discord which might be
afterwards kindled into a flame. For this pur-
pose, he ent William de Bellay, one of the
ablest negociators in France, into Germany,
who visiting the courts of the malecontent
princes, and heightening their ill-humour by va-

rious

rious arts, concluded an alliance between them BooK V.
and his masterY, which though concealed at that '3.'
time, and producive of no immediate effects,
laid the foundation of an union fatal on many
occasions to Charles's ambitious projets; and
shewed the discontented princes of Germany,
where, for the future, they might find a pro.
te&or no less able than willing to undertake
their defence against the encroachments of the
Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against With E.~

Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope land.
had long retarded, and now openly opposed his
divorce, was no less disposed than Francis to
strengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite
projec of the divorce led him into such a laby-
rinth of schemes and negociations, and he was,
at the fame time, so intent on abolishing the
papal jurifdiclion in England, that lie had no
leisure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to
reft satisfied with giving general promises, toge-
ther with a small supply in money to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde z.

MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced charles
Charles that this was not a juncture when the Pruotl^eait,,

Y Bellay, 1zg, a. 130. b. Sec. iii. .
* Herbert, 152, $54,

extirpation

BoOK V. extirpation of heresy was to be attempted by
U.S. violence and rigour; that, in compliance with

the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into
one united and vigorous body, than to divide
and enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants,
already considerable as well by their numbers
as by their zeal, had acquired additional weight
and importance by their joining in that confe-
deracy into which the raih steps taken at Augfl
burg had forced them. Having now discovered
their own strength, they despised the decisions
of the Imperial chamber; and being secure of
foreign protection, were ready to set the head of
the Empire at defiance. At the fame time the
peace with France was precarious, the friendihip
of an irresolute and interested pontiff was not
to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to re-
pair the infamy and loss which his arms had sus-
tained in the former campaign, was preparing to
enter Austria with more numerous forces. On all
theie accounts, especially the last, a speedy accom-
modation with the malecontent princes, became
necessary, not only for the accomplishment of
his future schemes, but for ascertaining his present
safety. Negociations were, accordingly, carried
on by his direction with the Elector of Saxony
and his afbfciates; after many delays occasioned
by their jealousy of the Emperor, and of each

other,

other, after innumerable difficulties arising from BOOK V.
the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which 53z
cannot admit of being altered, modified, or re- Grants

0 ' ' them fa-

linquithed in the fame manner as points of poli- vourable
tical interest, terms of pacification were agreed July23.
upon at Nuremberg, and ratified solemnly in Auft 3.
the Diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty it was fti-
pulated, That universal peace be established in
Germany, until the meeting of a general council,
the convocation of which within fix months the
Emperor hall endeavour to procure; That no
person be molested on account of religion; That
a flop be put to all processes begun by the Im-
perial chamber against Protestants, and the fen-
tences already passed to their detriment be de-
clared void. On their part, the Protestants
engaged to assist the Emperor with all their
forces in resisting the invasion of the Turks'.
Thus by their firmness in adhering to their prin-
ciples, by the unanimity with which they urged
all their claims, and by their dexterity in avail-
ing themselves of the Emperor's situation, the
Protestants obtained terms which amounted al-
most to a toleration of their religion; all the
conceflions were made by Charles, none by
them; even the favourite point of their approv-
ing his brother's eletion was not mentioned;
and the Protestants of Germany, who had'hi-
2 Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87. 89.

therto

Boo K V. therto been viewed only as a religious set, came

1532. henceforth to be confidered as a political body

of no small consequence b.

campaign TH intelligence which Charles received of
iiunay. ySolyman's having entered Hungary at the head

of three hundred thousand men, cut short the de-
liberations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin-
gent both of troops and money, which each
prince was to furnish towards the defence of the
Empire, having been already fettled. The Pro-
teftants, as a testimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary
zeal, and brought into the field forces which ex-
ceeded in number the quota imposed on them;
the Catholicks imitating their example, one of
the greatest and best appointed armies that had
ever been levied in Germany, assembled near
Vienna. Being joined by a body of Spanifl and
Italian veterans under the marquis del Guafto;
by some heavy-armed cavalry from the Low-
Countries; and by the troops which Ferdinand
had raised in Bohemia, Austria, and his other
territories, it amounted in all to ninety thousand
disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, be.
fides a prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this
vast army, worthy the first prince in Christen.
dom, the Emperor took the command in per-
son; and mankind waited in furpence the issue

Sleid. 49, &c. Seck. iii. 19.

of a decisive battle between the two greatelt BOOK V.
Monarchs in the world. But each of them 1532
dreading the other's power and good fortune,
they both conduced their operations with such
exceflive caution, that a campaign, for which
such immense preparations had been made, ended
without any memorable event. Solyman, find- Septmber
ing it impossible to gain ground upon an enemy
always attentive and on his guard, marched
back to ConRfantinople towards the end of au-
tumn '. It is remarkable, that in such a martial
age, when every gentleman was a soldier, and
every prince a general, this was the first time
that Charles, who had already carried on such
extensive wars, and gained so many victories,
appeared at the head of his troops. In this first
essay of his arms, to have opposed such a leader
as Solyman, was no small honour; to have
obliged him to retreat, merited very confider-
able praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Aug. 6.

Eletor of Saxony died, and was succeeded by his
son John Frederick. The Reformation rather
gained than loft by that event; the new Elector,
no less attached than his predecessors to the opi-
nions of Luther, occupied the station which they
had held at the head of the Protestant party,

C Jov:i Hid. l;b. xxx. p. 1oo, &c. Balre HIfl. de l'Em-
pir, i. 8. 347.

and

BOOK V. acd defended, with the boldness and zeal 6f
-23.v Jyouth, that cause which they had softered and

reared with the caution of old age.

The Empe- IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks,
ror's inter-
view with Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out on
hl .,>ato" his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
Spai". desirous of an interview with the Pope, they

met a second time at Bologna, with the fame
external demonstrations of refpe& and friend-
ship, but with little of that confidence which
had subsisted between them during their late ne-
gociations there. Clement was much dissatisfied
with the Emperor's proceedings at Augsburg;
his concefions with regard to the speedy convo-
cation of a council, having more than cancelled
all the merit of the evere decree against the
docrines of the Reformers. The toleration
granted to the Proteltants at Ratisbon, and the
more explicit promise concerning a council, with
which it was accompanied, had irritated him
still farther. Charles, however, partly from con-
viction that the meeting of a council would be at-
tended with salutary effects, and partly from his

tr.nscon. desire to please the Germans, having solicited
ern," a him by his ambassadors to call that assembly
..uIcii, without delay, and now urging the fame thing

in person, Clement was greatly embarrafled what
reply he hould make to a requel}, which it was
indecent to refue, and dangerous to grant. He

endeavoured

endeavoured at first to divert Charles from the BooK V.
measure, but finding him inflexible, he had re- i~2.
course to artifices which he knew would delay,
if not entirely defeat the calling of that aflem-
bly. Under the plausible pretext of its being
previously necessary to fettle, with all parties
concerned, the place of the council's meeting
the manner of its proceedings; the right of the
persons who should be admitted to vote; and
the authority of their decisions; he dispatched
a nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from
the Emperor, to the Eletor of Saxony as head
of the Protestants. With regard to each of
these articles, inextricable difficulties and con-
tests arose. The Protestants demanded a coun-
cil to be held in Germany; the Pope insisted
that it should meet in Italy: They contended
that all points in dispute should be determined
by the words of holy scripture alone; he confi-
dered not only the decrees of the church, but
the opinions of fathers and do&ors as of equal
authority: They required a free council in which
the divines commillioned by different churches
should be allowed a voice; he aimed at model-
ling the council in such a manner as would ren-
der it entirely dependant on his pleasure. Above
all, the Protestants thought it unreasonable that
they should bind themselves to submit to the de-
crees of a council, before they knew on what
principles these decrees Were to be founded, by

VOL. III. F what

BOOK V. what persons they were to be pronounced, and
1533. what forms of proceeding they would observe.

The Pope maintained it to be altogether unne-
ceffary to call a council, if those who demanded
it did not previously declare their resolution to
acquiesce in its decrees. In order to adjust such
a variety of points, many expedients were pro-
posed, and the negociations spun out to such a
length, as effectually answered Clement's pur.
pose of putting off the meeting of a council,
without drawing on himself the whole infamy of
obftruting a measure which all Europe deemed
so essential to the good of the church d

Ird or re- TOGETHER with this negociation about call-
relving the
trnqulllity ing a council, the Emperor carried on another,

Italy. which he had still more at heart, for securing

the peace eftabliihed in Italy. As Francis had
renouncedhis pretensions in that country with
great reluctance, Charles made no doubt but
that he would lay hold on the first pretext as-
forded him, or embrace the first opportunity
which presented itself of recovering what he had
loft. It became necessary, on this account, to
take measures for assembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long
war, could not supply the fums requisite for
keeping such a body constantly on foot, he at-

. F. Paul, His'. G6. Scckend. iii. 73.

2 tempted

tempted to throw that burden on his allies, and Boolc V.
to provide for the safety of his own dominions ,32.
at their expence, by proposing that the Italian
states hould enter into a league of defence
against all invaders; that, on the first appear-
ance of danger, an army should be raised and
maintained at the common charge. and that
Antonio de Leyva hould be appointed the ge-
neraliffimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, though for a reason very different
from that which induced the Emperor to make
it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver 1533;
Italy from the German and Spanish veterans
which had so long filled all the powers in that
country with terror, and still kept them in sub-
jetion to the Imperial yoke. A league was Feb. 24.
accordingly concluded; all the Italian flates,
the Venetians excepted, acceded to it; the fum
which each of the contracting parties should
furnilh towards maintaining the army was fixed;
the Emperor agreed to withdraw the troops
which gave so much umbrage to his allies, and
which he was unable any longer to support.
Having disbanded part of them, and removed
the reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on
board Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona . April 1s.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for Dcipnnda

negociation!
fccuring the peace of Germany, and maintain- l. .le

FrenchKing
* Guic. 1. xx. Si. Ferreras, ix. 149. aarinlt the

F2 ingEmprr
F 2 ing

BOOK V. ing that system which he had eftablithed in Italy,

the Emperor became every day more and more
apprehensive that both would be soon disturbed
by the intrigues or arms of the French King,
His apprehensions were well founded, as nothing
but the dcfperate situation of his affairs could
have brought Francis to give his consent to a
treaty so dilhonourable and disadvantageous as
that of Cambray: He, at the very time of rati-
fying it, had formed a resolution to observe it
no longer than neceflity compelled him, and took
a solemn protest, though with the most profound
secrecy, against several articles in the treaty, par-
ticularly that whereby he renounced all preten-
lions to the dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injuri-
ous to his heirs, and invalid. One of the crown
lawyers, by his command, entered a protest to
the fame purpose, and with the like secrecy,
when the ratification of the treaty was registered
in the parliament of Paris . Francis seems to
have thought that, by employing an artifice un-
worthy of a King, deftru&ive of publick faith,
and of the mutual confidence on which all tranf-
aCtions between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the most sacred
engagements. From the moment he concluded
the peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for
an opportunity of violating it with safety. He
endeavoured for that reason to strengthen his

Du Mont Corps Diplon. tom. iv. part a. p. 2.

alliance

alliance with the King of England, whose LBnK V;
friendIhip he cultivated with the greatest affi- 133.
duity. He put the military force of his own
kingdom on a better and more refpe&able foot-
ing thanever. He artfully fomented the jea,-
lousy and discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis laboured to break par;cularly

the ftric confederacy which subsisted between Pope.
Charles and Clement; and he had soon the
fatisaftion to observe appearances of disgust
and alienation arising in the mind of that fufpi-
cious and interested Pontiff, which gave him
hopes that their union would not be lasting. As
the Emperor's decision in favour of the duke of
Ferrara had greatly irritated the Pope, Francis
aggravated the injustice of that proceeding, and
flattered Clement that the papal fee would find in
him a more impartial and no less powerful pro-
teEtor. As the importunity with which Charles
demanded a council was extremely offensive to
the Pope, Francis artfully created obstacles to
prevent it, and attempted to divert the German
princes, his allies, from infilting so obitinately
on that point g. As the Emperor had gained
such an ascendant over Clement by contributing
to aggrandize his' family, Francis endeavourcd
to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, pio-
posing a marriage between his second son, Henry

iBcllay, 14i , &c. Seck. iii.48. F. Paul, 63.

F 3 duke

BooK V. duke of Orleans, and Catharine, the daughter

of the Pope's cousin Laurence di Medici. On
3533.

the first overtures of this match, the Emperor
could not prfuade himself that Francis really
intended to debae the royal blood of France by
an alliance with Catharine, whole ancestors had
been so lately private citizens and merchants in
Florence, and believed that he meant only to
flatter or amuse the ambitious Pontiff. He
thought it necessary, however, to efface the im-
prefion which such a dazzling offer might have
made, by promising to break off the marriage
which had been agreed on between his own niece
the King of Denmark's daughter, and the Duke
of Milan, and to fubfitute Catharine in her
place. But the French ambassador's producing
unexpetedly full powers to conclude the mar-
riage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this ex-
pedient had no effeft. Clement was so highly
pleated with an honour which added such lustre
and dignity to the house of Medici, that he of-
sered to grant Catharine the investiture of con.
fiderable territories in Italy by way of portion;
he seemed ready to support Francis in profecut-
ing his ancient claims in that country, and con-
sented to a personal interviewwith thatMonarch h.

intetrvew CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent
between the
pope ane a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass

'Guic. i.xx. 551, 533. Bellay, 138.

but

but what would be of detriment to him; nor Bcos V.
could he bear, after he had twice condescended 15j3.
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Cle-
ment should bestow such a mark of diftintion
on his rival, as tocventure on a voyage by ea,
at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court
to Francis in the French dominions. But the
Pope's eagerness to accomplish the match over-
came all scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy,
which must have influenced him on any other
occasion. The interview, notwithstanding feve- Oaober.
ral artifices of the Emperor to prevent it, took
place at Marseilles with extraordinary pomp,
and demonitrations of confidence on both fides;
and the marriage, which the ambition and abi-
lities of Catharine rendered in the sequel as fatal
to France, as it was then thought dishonourable,
was consummated. But whatever schemes may
have been secretly concerted by the Pope and
Francis in favour of the duke of Orleans, to
whom his father proposed to make over all his
rights in Italy, so careful were they to avoid
giving any cause of offence to the Emperor, that
no treaty was concluded between them h; and
even in the marriage-articles, Catharine re-
nounced all claims and pretensions in Italy, ex-
cept to the dutchy of Urbino'.

h Guic. . xx. 5S5.
i Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. o11.

F 4 BUT

BOOK V BUT at the very time when he was carrying
1533. on these negociations, and forming this connec-
Popes con- tion with Francis, which gave so great umbrage
dua with
reard tthe to the Emperor, such was the artifice and dupli-
Englanl' city of Clement's character, that he suffered the
divorcs. latter to diret all his proceedings with regard

to the King. of England, and was no less atten-
tive to gratify him in that particular, than if the
most cordial union had ill subsisted between
them. Henry's suit for a divorce had now con-
tinued near fix years; during all which period
the pope negociated, promised, retracted, and
concluded nothing. After bearing repeated de-
lays and disappointments, longer than could
have been expected from a prince of such a cho-
lerick and impetuous temper, his patience was
at last so much exhausted, that he applied to
another tribunal for that decree which he had
solicited in vain at Rome. ,Cranmer, archbishop
of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the
authority of Universities, DoCtors, and Rabbies,
who had been consulted with. respect to the
point, annulled the King's marriage with Ca-
tharine; her daughter was declared illegitimate;
and Anne Boleyne acknowledged as Queen of
England. At the fame time Henry began not
only to neglect and to threaten the Pope whom
he had hitherto courted, but to make innova-
tions in the church, of which he had formerly
been such a zealous defender. Clement, who

had

had -already seen so many provinces and king- BOOK V.
doms revolt from the Holy See, became appre- 1'.3
henfive at last that England would imitate their
example, and partly from his solicitude to pre.
vent that fatal blow, partly in compliance with
the French King's solicitations, determined to
give Henry such fatisfacdion as might ltill retain
him within the bosom of the church. But the
violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Em-
peror, did not allow the Pope leisure for exe- $34.
cuting this prudent resolution, and hurried him, Mr,, :3.
with a precipitation fatal to the lRoman See, to
issue a bull rescinding Cranmer's sentence, con.
firming Henry's marriage with Catharine, and
declaring him excommunicated, if, within a
time specified, he did not abandon the wife he
had taken, and return to her whom he had de-
ferted. Enraged at this unexpeted decree,
Henry kept no longer any measures with the Papl al-
court of Rome; his subje&s seconded his resent- I^r,, .
ment and indignation; an a of Parliament was E)lan4
passed, abolilhing the papal power and jurifdic-
tion in England; by another, the King was
declared supreme head of the church, and all
the authority of which the Popes were deprived
was vested in him, That vast fabrick of eccle.
fiaftical dominion which had been raised with
such art, and whose foundations seemed o deep,
being no longer supported by the veneration of
the people, was overturned in a moment. Ilenry

hinlclf,

Boos V. himself, with the caprice peculiar to his charac-

ter, continued to defend the dotrines of the
Romish church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurifdiclion. He alternately persecuted the Pro-
tefants for rejecing the former, and the Catho-
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his sub-
jebs being once permitted to enter into new
paths, did not chufe to flop short at the precise
point prescribed by him. Having been encou-
raged by his example to break some of their set-
ters, they were so impatient to Ihake off what till
remained k, that in the following reign, with the
general applause of the nation, a total fepara-
tion was made from the church of Rome in arti-
cles of doctrine, as well as in matters of discipline
and jurifdi6ion.

Death of A SHORT delay might have saved the See of
ll.c' Rome from all the unhappy consequences of

Clement's rashness. Soon after his sentence
against Henry, he fell into a languilhing diftem-
per, which gradually wafting his constitution,
Spt. 5s. put an end to his Pontificate, the most unfor-

tunate, both during its continuance, and by its
effets, that the church had known for many

Elefionof ages. The very day on which the Cardinals
Paul 11 entered the conclave, they raised to the papal

throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred
college, and the eldest member of that body,

k Herbert. Burn. Hilt. of Reform.

who

who assumed the name.of Paul III. The ac- Bor V.
count of his promotion was received with extra- 1534
ordinary acclamations of joy by the people of
Rome, highlypleafed, after an interval of Wore
than an hundred years, to fee the crown of St.
Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Persons more capable of judging, formed. a fa-
vourabl :presage of. his administration, from the
experience. which. he .had acquired .under four
Pontificatep, as well as the charaeter ofprudence
and moderation which, he had uniforrily main.
tained in a station of greatemimence and during
an aive period that required. both talents and
gddrefs ' '

EUROPE, it is probable, owed ,the,.continu-

ance of its peace to the death of Clencmnt; for
although no traces remain in history of: any
league concluded between him and Franis, it is
scarcely to be doubted but that he would have
fecqnded he operations of the French arms in
Italy, that he might have gratified his ambition
by feeing one of his family ponfeffed of te fu-
preme power in Florence, and another. in. ila.
But upon the eletion of Paul III. who:had hi-
therto adhered uniformly to the Imperi4l infere',
Francis found it necessary to suspend big opera,
tions for some time, and to put off the com.

Guic. 1. xx. 556. F. Paul, 64.

mencement

Boon V. mencement f :hoRilities against the Emperor,

1534. on which he wai fully determined.

nfrurreaion WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to
of the Ana.
bapti* in renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal
Otmany. to himself and his fubje&ts, a tranfa&ion of a

very singular nature was carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and salutary effe&ts of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as must be the cafe, in all ac-
tions and events wherein men are concerned,
with ome cohfequences of an opposite nature.
When the human mind is rouzed by grand
objets, and agitated by strong paflions, its
operations acquire such force, that they are apt
to become irregular and extravagant. Upon
any great revolution in religion, such irregulari-
ties abound most, at that particular period, when
men, having thrown off the authority of their
ancient principles, do not yet fully comprehend
the nature, or feel the obligation of those new
tenets which they have embraced. The mind,
in that situation, puihing forward with the bold-
ness which prompted it to reject etablifhed opi-
nions, and not guided by a clear knowledge of
the system fubfituted in their place, disdains all
relfraint, and runs into wild notions, which often
lead to candalous or immoral condu&t. Thus,
in the first ages of the Christian church, many of
the nw converts, having renounced their an-

cient

tient Creeds, and being but imperfectly acquaint- BOOK V.
ed with the docrines and precepts of ChrifRi- '3
anity, broached the most extravagant opinions,
equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which
errors disappeared or were exploded when the
knowledge of religion increased, and came to
be more generally diffused. In like manner,
soon after Luther's appearance, the ralhnefs or
ignorance of some of his disciples led them to
publilh tenets no less absurd than pernicious,
which being proposed to men extremely illite-
rate, but fond of novelty, and at a time when
their minds were turned wholly towards religious
speculations, gained too easy credit and autho-
rity among them. To these causes must be im-
puted the extravagances of Muncer, in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as
well as the rapid progress which they made
among the peasants; but though the infurretion
excited by that Fanatic was soon suppressed, feve.
ral of his followers lurked in different places,
and edeavoured privately to propagate his opi,
nions.

In those provinces of Upper Germany, which origin and

had already been so cruelly wafted by their en- that ee.
thufiafick rage, the magistrates watched their
motions with such severe attention,, that many
of them found it necessary to retire into other
countries, some wre punished, others driven

into

BOOK V. into exile, and their errors were entirely rooted
134. out. But in the Netherlands and Wefiphalia,

where the pernicious tendency of their opinions
wtas more unknown, and guarded against with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and
spread the infetion of their principles. The most
remarkable of their religious tenets related to the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contended,
ought to be administered only to persons grown
up to years of understanding, and hould be per-
formed not by sprinkling them with water, but
by dipping them in it: For this reason they
condemned the baptism of infants, and rebap-
tizing all whom they admitted into their society,
the fee came to be distinguished by the name
of Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion con-
cerning baptism, which has the appearance of
being founded on the pracice of the church in
the apoftolick age, and contains nothing incon-
fiftent with the peace and order of human so-
ciety, they added other principles of a most en-
thufiaftick, as well as dangerous nature. They
maintained that, among Christians who had the
precepts of the gospel to dire&, and the spirit
of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecessary, but an unlawful en-
croachment on their spiritual liberty ; that the
diftintions occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal, fliould be en-

tirely

tirely abolified; that all Christians, throwing Boo. V.
their poflefiions into one common tfock, hould -53.
live together in that state of equality which be-
comes members of the fame family; that as
neither the laws of nature, nor the precepts of
the New Testament had placed any restraints
upon men with regard to the number of wives
which they might marry, they hould use that
liberty which God himself had granted to the
patriarchs.

Such opinions, propagated and maintained Settle i

with enthufiaftick zeal and boldness, were not
long of producing the violent effe&s natural to
them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias,
a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or
Beiikels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden, pof-
sessed with the rage of making proselytes, fixed
their residence at Munster, an Imperial city in
Westphalia, of the first rank, under the fove-
reignty of its bilhop, but governed by its own
senate and consuls. As neither of these Fanatics
wanted the talents requisite in desperate en-
terprizes, great resolution, the appearance of
san&ity, bold pretensions to inspiration, and a
confident and plausible manner of discoursing,
they soon gained many converts. Among there
were Rothman, who had first preached the Pro-
teftant dotrine in Muniter, and Cnipperdoling,
a citizen of good birth, and considerable emi-

nencc.

BOOK V. nence. Emboldened by the countenance of such

+.sv disciples, they openly taught their opinions;

and not satisfied with that liberty, they made
several attempts, though without success, to
seize the town, in order to get their tenets ella-

Bmcome blifhed by publick authority. At last, having
,nafters of
that city. secretly called in their associates from the neigh-

bouring country, they suddenly took possession
of the arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night-time,
and running through the streets with drawn
swords, and horrible howlings, cried out al-
ternately, " Repent, and be baptized," and
Febroary. "D pepart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca-

nons, the nobility, together with the more sober
citizens, whether Papists or .Protestants, terrified
at their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frantick
multitude, consisting chiefly of itrangers. No-
thing now remaining to overawe or controul
them, they set about modelling the government
according to their own wild ideas; and though
at first they howed so much reverence for the
ancient constitution, as to elect senators of their

:.bl:nfJ own fed, and to appoint Cnipperdoling and an-
vornmct. other proselyte consuls, this was nothing more

than form; for all their proceedings were di-
re&ed by Matthias, who, in the style, and with the
authority of a prophet, uttered his commands,
which it was instant death to dilbbey. Having
begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage

the

the churches, and deface their ornaments; he BOOK V.
enjoined them to defiroy all books except the ,'u
Bible, as useless or impious; he appointed the
estates of such as fled, to be confiscated, and fold
to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he
ordered every man to bring forth his gold, ilver,
and precious. effecs, and to lay them at his feet;
the wealth amassed by these means, he depolited
in a publick treasury, and named deacons to dif-
penfe it for the common use of all. The mem-
bers of his commonwealth being thus brought
to a perfec equality, he commanded all of them
to eat at tables prepared in publick, and even pre-
fcribed the dilhes which were to be served up
each day. Having finished his plan of reforma-
tion, his next care was to provide for the defence
of the city; and he took measures for that pur-
pose with a prudence which favoured nothing of
fanaticism. He collected vast magazines of
every kind; he repaired and extended the forti-
fications, obliging every person without diftinc-
tion to work in his turn he formed such as were
capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavoured to add the vigour of discipline to
the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He sent emif-
saries to the Anabaptists in the Low-Countries,
inviting them to assemble at Munster, which he
dignified with the name of Mount Sion, that
from thence they might set out to reduce all the
nations of the earth under their dominion. He

VOL. Ill. G himself

BOOK V. himself was unwearied in attending to every

153. thing necessary for the security or increase of the

feet; animating his disciples by his own example
to refuse no labour, as well as to repine at no
hardship; and their enthusiastic passions being
kept from subsiding by a perpetual fucceflion of
exhortations, revelations, and prophecies, they
seemed ready to undertake or to susser any thing
in maintenance of their opinions.

Th'ie bop WHILE they were thus employed, the bihop of
of Munfier
tks arms Munster having assembled a considerable army,
again s
them, advanced to besiege the town. On his approach,

Matthias sallied out at the head of some chosen
troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced
it, and after great slaughter, returned to the city
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this success, he appeared next day brandishing a
spear, and declared, that, in imitation of Gideon,
he would go forth with a handful of men and finite
,,,i, the host of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he

named, followed him without helitation in this
wild enterprize, and rushing on the enemy with
a frantick courage were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occafioaed at first great
conftcrnation among his disciples, but Boc-
cold, by the fame gifts and pretesfions which

I)nn of had gained Matthias credit, oon revived their

.irelslc ct spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he fuc-
u'hnityh ceeded lhim in the fame aboblute direction of al
Animti. nthei
AiwibpiflS. thci

iI)YL~Lp~in(· thei

their affairs. As he did not poiefs that enter- fooz V.
prizing courage which distinguished his prede- '
ceflor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
defensive war, and without attempting to annoy
the enemy by rallies, lie waited for the succours
he expeted from the Low-Countries, the arri-
val of which was often foretold and promired by
their prophets. But though less daring in ac-
tion than Matthias, he was a wilder enthufiaflt
and of more unbounded ambition. Soon after
the death of his predecessor, having, by obscure
visions and prophecies, prepared the multitude
for some extraordinary event, he stripped him-
self naked, and marching through the ftreetsi
proclaimed with a loud voice, " That the king-
dom of Sion was at hand; that whatever was
highest on earth hould be brought low, and
whatever was lowest should be exalted." Ii
order to fulfil this, he commanded the churches;
as the moit lofty buildings in the city, to be
levelled with the ground, he degraded the fe-
nators chosen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-
perdoling of the consulship, the highest office
in the commonwealth, he appointed him to exe-
cute the lowest and most infamous, that of com-
mon hangman, to which strange transition the
other agreed~ not only without murmuring, but
with the utmost joy; and fuchwas the defpotick
rigour of Boccold's administration, that he was
called almost every day to perform ome duty or

G 2 other

BooK V. other of his wretched fun&tion. In place of the

5'7. deposed senators, he named twelve jdges, ac-

cording to the number of tribes in Israel, to pre-
fide in all affairs; retaining to himself the fame
authority which Moses anciently poffefled as
legislator of that people.

Eleed NOT satisfied, however, with power or titles
King. which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he

had gained and tutored, having called the mul-
titude together, declared it to be the will of
God, that John Boccold should be King of Sion,
June :4 and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling

down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he
solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded-multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the state and pomp of
loyalty. He wore a crown of gold, and was
clad in the richest and most sumptuous garments.
A Bible was carried on his one hand, a naked
sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when he appeared in publick.
He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his household
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was
nominated governor of the city, as a reward for
his former submission.

Hislicen. HAVING now attained the height of power,
tiouS tt, Boccold began to discover pafrlons, which he

had

had hitherto restrained or indulged only in fe- BOOK V-
cret. As the excesses of enchufiai have been 1534
*observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifi-
cations, the fame constitution that is susceptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
latter, he inftru&ed the prophets and teachers
to harangue the people for several days concern-
ing the lawfulness, and even necessity of taking
more wives than one, which they asserted to be
one of the privileges granted by God to the
faints. When their ears were once accustomed
to this licentious dotrine, and their passions in-
flamed with the profpe& of such unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of
using what he called their Christian liberty, by
marrying at once three wives, among which the
widow of Matthias, a woman offingular beauty,
was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the num-
ber of his wives until they amounted to fourteen,
though the widow of Matthias was the only one
dignified with the title of Queen, or who shared
with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty.
After the example of their prophet, the multi-
tude gave themselves up to the most licentious
and uncontrouled gratification of their desires.
No man remained satisfied with a single wife.
Not to use their Christian liberty, was deemed a
crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houfcs for young women grown up to maturity,

G 3 whom

BooK V. whom they instantly compelled to marry. TQ.

534-. gether with olygamy, freedom of divorce, its

inseparable attendant, was introduced, and be-
came a new source of corruption. Every excess
was committed of which the palions of men are
capable, when restrained neither by the authority
of laws nor the sense of decencym; and by a
monstrous and almost incredible conjuntion,
voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and
dissolute riot accompanied the aufterities of fa-
natical devotion.

A confede- MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly
Ythe Ana offended at the insult offered to their dignity by
*pti*d. Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal ho-

nours ; and the profligate manners of his follow-
ers, which were a reproach to the ChriRtian

n Prophetae S concionatorum autoritate juxta et exem-

plo, tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque fminas
di(curfum eft. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum
¢utba fere ulla reperta ft supra annum decimum quar-
tum, que fluprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. H:teni. p.
303. Vulg6 viris quinas efle uxores, pluribus senas, non-
nullis feptenas & oftonas. Puellas supra duodecimum ttis
annum Ratim amare. Id. 305. Nemo una contentus suit,
neque cuiquam extra effatas & viris immaturas continenti
efle licuit. Id. 307. Tacebo hic, ut ft fou hnor auribus,
quanta barbaric et malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis non-
dum aptis matrimonio, id quod mihi neque ex vano,
peque ex vulgi fermonibus hauftum e, fed ex ea vtula,
cui cura sic vitiatarum demandata suit, auditum. Joh.
oryrinu, 3!6.

name,

name, filled men of all profeflions with horror. BOOK V.
Luther, who had testified against this fanatical 55
spirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented
its progress, and exposing th% delusion with
great strength of argument, as well as acrimony
of style, called loudly on all the states of Ger-
many to put a flop to a phrenzy no less perni-
cious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and pro-
jets, had not leisure to attend to such a distant
object. But the princes of the Empire, aflem-
bled by the King of the Romans, voted a supply
of men and m6ney to the bishop of Munster,
who being unable to keep a sufficient army on
foot, had converted the siege of the town into Betee the
a blockade. The forces raised in consequence
of this resolution, were put under the command
of an officer of experience, who approaching the
town towards the end of Spring in the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it
more closely than formerly, but found the forti-
fications so firong, and so diligently guarded,
that he durst not attempt an assault. It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptists had
established their dominion in Munster; they had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications, and perforin-
ing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent My.
attention of their King to provide for their sub- fnaticrm

of the b.
fiftence, and his frugal as well as regular ceco. Aghebd

G 4 nomy

BOOK V. nomy in their publick meals, they began to feel
1535. the approach of famine. Several small bodies

of their brethren, who were advancing to their
affiflance frorg the Low-Countries, had been
intercepted, and cut to pieces; and while all
Germany was ready to combine against them,
they had no profpet of succour. but such was
the ascendant which Boccold had acquired over
the multitude, and so powerful the fascination
of enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine
as ever, and they hearkened with implicit cre-
dulity to the visions and predictions of their pro-
phets, who assured them, that the Almighty
would speedily interpose, in order to deliver the
city. The faith, however, of some few, ihaken
by the violence and length of their sufferings,
began to fail; but being fufpeaed of an in-
clination to surrender to the enemy, they were
puniihed with immediate death, as guilty of
impiety in distrusting the power of God. Ore
of the King's wives, having uttered certain words
which implied some doubt concerning his divine
mifion, he instantly called the whole number
together, and commanding the blasphemer, as
he called her, to kneel down, cut off her head
with his own hands; and so far were the reft
from expressing any horror at this cruel deed,
that they joined him in dancing with a frantick
joy around the bleeding body of their corn-

' *
^~

BY this time, the besieged endured the utmoil BooK V.

rigor of famine; but they chose rather to susser 53
hardships, the recital of which is hocking to The city
humanity, than to liften to the terns of capitu- June .
lation offered them by the bishop. At last, a de-
ferter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either less intoxicated with the filmes of
enthusiasm, or unable any longer to bear such
distress, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a weak part in the forti-
fications which he had observed, and assuring
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger
and fatigue, kept watch there with little care,
he offered to lead a party thither in the night.
The proposal was accepted, and a chosen body
of troops appointed for the service; who, fcal-
ing the walls unperceived, seized one of the
gates, and admitted the reft of the army. The
Anabaptists, though furprized, defended them- June 4.
selves in the market-place with valour, height-
ened by despair; but being overpowered by
numbers, and surrounded on every hand, most
of them were slain, and the remainder taken
prisoners. Among the last were the King and
Cnipperdoling. The King, loaded with chains, Punilhment
was carried from city to city as a fpetacle to f the King
gratify the curiosity of the people, and was ex- ,it,:
posed to all their insults. His spirit, however,
was not broken or humbled by this fad reverse
es his condition; and he adhered with unshaken

(>6 F'firmnefs

Boot V. firmness to the ditinguilhing tenets of his fe.

srs After this he was brought back to Munfler,
*535.

the scene of his royalty and crimes, and put to
death with the most exquisite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with astonishing for-
titude. This extraordinary man, who had been
able to acquire such amazing dominion over the -
minds of his followers, and to excite commo-
tions so dangerous to society, was only twenty-
fix years of age ".

C-aaer o TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom
Chartaer
fthe feet of the Anabaptits came to an end. Their prin.
since that
perio.d ciples having taken deep root in the Low-Coun-

tries, the party ill fubfifs there, under the
name of Mennonites, but by a very singular
revolution, this feet, so mutinous and sanguinary
at its first origin, hath become altogether inno-
cent and pacifick. Holding it unlawful to wage
war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to the duties of private citi-
zens, and by their industry and charity endea-
vour to make reparation to human society for
the violence committed by their founders °. A

Sleid. 19o, &c. Tumultuum Anabaptifarum Libr

anus. Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio audore ap. Scardium, vol,
ii. p. 298, &c. De Miferabili Monaiterienfium obfidionc,
&c, libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 33. Annales
Anabaptilfici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Basilea, 1672. Cur.
Heerfbachius Hist. Anab. Edit. 1637. p. 14o.

* Bayle Dition. Art. nabaptl/te,.

a small
i

small number of this seCt which is fettled in Booc V.
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning ,53
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
rnthufiafm.

THE mutiny of the APabaptifts, though it Proceeding

drew general attention, did not so entirely en- riy of the
gross the princes of Germany, as not to allow saka;a, d
leisure for other tranfaions. The alliance be-
tween the French King and the confederates at
Smalkalde, began about this time to produce
great effects. Ulric, Duke of Wurtemberg,
having been expelled his dominions in the year
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on ac-
count of his violent and oppressive adminiftra-
tion, the house of Austria had got possession of
his dutchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his conduct, which
were the effet rather of inexperience than of a
tyrannical disposition, was become the object of
general compafnion. The Landgrave of Hesse,
in particular, his near relation, warmly espoused
his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance. But the King or
the Romans obstinately refuted to relinquilh a
valuable aquifition which his family had made
with so much cafe. The Landgrave, unable to
compel him, applied to the King of France his
new ally. Francis, eager to embrace any op-
portunity ofdiftrefing the house of Austria, and

desirous

BOOK V. desirous of wresting from it a territory, which
"'~ gave it footing and influence in a part of Ger-

many at a distance from its other dominions,
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large fum of money.
This he employed to raise troops, and marching
with great expedition towards Wurtemberg,
attacked, defeated, and dispersed a considerable
body of Austrians, entrusted with the defence
of the country. All the Duke's subje&s haft-
ened, with emulation, to receive their native
Prince, and re-invested him with that authority
which is still enjoyed by his descendants. At
the fame time the exercise of the Protestant re-
ligion was established in his dominions P.

TheKing FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this un-
mans ourts expeced blow, not daring to attack a Prince
them. whom all the Protestant powers in Germany

were ready to support, judged it expedient to
conclude a treaty with him, by which, in the
most ample form, he recognized his title to the
dutchy. The success of the Landgrave's opera.
tions in behalf of the Duke of Wurtemberg,
having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with
a league so formidable as that of Smalkalde, was
to be avoided with the utmost care, he entered
likewise into a negociation with the Elecor of

P Slid. 172. Bellay, 159, &c.

Saxony,

Saxony, the head of that union, and by some BOOK V.
concefflons in favour of the Protestant religion, 3i.
and others of advantage to the Eletor himself,
he prevailed on him, together with his confede-
rates, to acknowledge his title as King of the
Romans. At the fame time, in order to pre-
vent any such precipitate or irregular eletion in
times to come, it was agreed that no person
hould hereafter be promoted to that dignity
without the unanimous content of the Elecors;
and the Emperor soon after confirmed this ftipu-
lation q.

THESE as of indulgence towards the Pro- Paul 1.

calls a ge-
teftants, and the close union into which the neralcoun.

cil to meet

King of the Romans seemed to be entering with at Muntua.
the Princes of that party, gave great offence at
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from
a resolution of his predecessor, never to consent
to the calling of a general council, and had pro-
mifed, in the firft,confiftory held after his elec-
tion, that he would convoke that assembly so
much desired by all Christendom, was no less
enraged than Clement at the innovations in Ger-
many, and no less averse to any scheme for
reforming either the doctrines of the church, or
the abuses in the court of Rome: But having
been a witness of the univerlal censure which
Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with re-

q Sleid. 173. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. p. 2. 119.

gard

BoOK V. gard to these points, he hoped to avoid the fame

$5'7. reproach.by the seeming alacrity with which he

proposed a council flattering himself, however,
that such difficulties would arise concerning the
time and place of meeting, the persons who had
a right to be present, and the order of their pro-
ceedings, as would effec6ually defeat the inten-
tion of those who demanded that assembly, with-
out exposing himself to any imputation for
refusing to call it. With this view he dispatched
nuncios to the several courts, in order to make
known his intention, and that he had fixed on
Mantua as a proper place in which to hold the
council. Such difficulties as the Pope had fore-
seen, immediately prefenred themselves in great
number. The French King did not approve of
the place which Paul had chosen, as the Papal
and Imperial influence would neceflarily be too
great in a town situated in that part of Italy.
The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that objection, but refused,
besides, to acknowledge any council called in
the name and by the authority of the Pope. The
tDe. I. German Protestants having met together at

Smalkalde, insisted on their original demand of
a council to be held in Germany, and pleading
the Emperor's promise, as well as the agreement
at Ratilbon to that effet, declared that they
would not confider an assembly held at Mantua
as a legal or free representative of the church.

Ivy

By this diversity of sentiments and views, such BoorK V.
a field for intrigue and negociation opened, as 535
made it easy for the Pope to assume the merit
of being eager to assemble a council, while at
the fame time he could put off its meeting at
pleasure. The Protestants on the other hand
fufpefting his designs, and sensible of the import-
ance which they derived from their union, re-
newed for ten years the league of Smalkalde,
which now became stronger and more formidable
by the accession of several new members .

DURINGo these tranfacions in Germany, the TheEmpe.

Emperor undertook his famous enterprize against dton '
the piratical states in Africa. That part of the frto,4
African continent lying along the coast of the ,o"t"l.
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maffylia, together

This league was concluded December, one thousand

five hundred and thirty five, but not extended or signed it
form till September in the following year. The Princes
who acceded to it were John Eletlor of Saxony, Eneft
Duke of Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of Hefle, Ulic
Duke of Wurtemberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pome'
rania, John George, and Joachim Princes of Anhalt, Geb-
hard and Albert Cpunts of Mansfield, William Count of
Naflau. The cities, Stralburg, Nuremburg, Conflance,
Ulm, Mgdeburg, Bremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Mem-
mengen, Lindaw, Campen, Ifha, Bibrac, Windlheim,
Auburg, Francfort, Efling, Brunswick, Goflar,. Hanover,
Gottingen, Eimbeck, Hamburg, Minden.

with

Boot V. with the republick of Carthage, and which is now
· -- - known by the general name of Barbary, had

undergone many revolutions. Subdued by the
Romans, it became- a province of their empire.
Conquered afterwards by the Vandals, they
ere&ed a kingdom there. That being over.
turned by Belisarius, the country continued sub-
jeEt to the Greek Emperors, until it was over-
run towards the end of the seventh century, by
the rapid and irresistible arms of the Arabs. It
remained for some time a part of that vas empire
which the Caliphs governed with absolute autho-
rity. Its immense distance, however, from the
feat of government, encouraged the descendants
ofthofe leaders, who had subdued the country, or
the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to
throw off the yoke, and to set up for indepen-
dence. The Caliphs, who derived their autho-
rity from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for
making conquests than for preserving them, were
obliged to connive at as of rebellion which
they could not prevent; and Barbary was divided
into several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Al-
giers, and Tunis were the most considerable.
The inhabitants of these kingdoms were a mixed
race, Arabs, Negroes from the southern pro-
vinces, and Moors, either natives of Africa, or
who had been expelledout of Spain; all zealous
professors of the Mahometan religion, and in-
flamed against Christianity with a bigotted hatred

propor-

proportional to their ignorance and barbarous Boot V.
manners. 153.

AMONG thee people, no less daring, incon- Rie of the

piratical

tant, and treacherous, than the ancient inhabit- Wate%.
ants of the fame country described by the Ro-
man historians, frequent seditions broke out, and
many changes in government took place. These,
as they asseted only the internal state of a coun-
try so barbarous, are but little known, and de-
serve to be so: But about the beginning of the
sixteenth century a sudden revolution happened,
which, by rendering the states of Barbary formi-
dable to the Europeans, hath made their history
worthy of more attention. This revolution was
brought about by persons born in a rank of life add ofthe
which' entitled them to as no such illustrious Barbaroi*
part. Horuc and Hayradin, the sons of a potter
in the file of Lesbos, prompted by a reitlefs and
enterprizing spirit, forsook their father's trade,
ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates. They
soon distinguished themselves by their valour
and acivity, and becoming maiters of a small
brigantine, carried on their infamous trade with
such condu& and success, that they assembled a
fleet of twelve galleys, besides many vessels of
smaller force. Of this fleet I-oruc, the elder
brother, called Barbarossa from the red colour
of his beard, was admiral, and Hayradin second
in command, but with almost equal authority.

VOL. III. H They

oOK V. They called themselves the friends of the-fea
.535 and the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their

names oon became terrible from the Straits of
the Dardanels to those of Gibraltar. Together
with their fame and power, their ambitious views
extended, and while assing as Corsairs they
adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents of
conquerors. They often carried the prizes which
they took on the coasts of Spain and Italy into
the ports of Barbary, and enriching the inhabit-
ants by the sale of their booty, and the thought-
less prodigality of their crews, were welcome
guests in every place at which they touched.
The convenient situation of these harbours, lying
so near the greatest commercial states at that
time in Christendom, made the brothers with
for an eflablifhment in that country. An op-
portunity of accomplishing this quickly present.
ed itself, which they did not susser to pass un-
improved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having
attempted several times, without success, to take
a fort which the Spanish governors of Oran had
built not far from his capital, was so ill advised
as to apply for aid to Barbaroia, whose valour
the Africans confidered as irresistible. The
t,56. acive Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation,

and leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to
Algiers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the

town

town; and as he perceived that the Moors BooK V.
neither fufpeted him of any bad intention, nor 35
were capable' with their light-armed troops
of opposing his disciplined veterans, he secretly
ihurdered the Monarch whom he had come to Home, the
adift, arid caused himself to be proclaimed King ter, b-
of Algiers in his stead. The authority which tco,^nl.
he had thus boldly usurped, he ehdeavt)ured to sgies.
establish by arts suited to the genius of the peo-
ple whom he had to govern; by liberality with-
out bounds to those who favoured his promotion,
and by cruelty no less unbounded towards all
whom he had any reason to distrust. Not satisfied
with the throne which he had acquired, he at-
tacked the neighbouring King of Tremecen,
and having vanquished him in battle, added his
dominions to those of Algiers. At the fame
time, he continued to infest the coasts of Spain
and Italy with fleets which resembled the arma-
ments of a great Monarch, rather than the light
squadrons of a Corsair. The devastations which
there committed, obliged Charles, about the be-
ginning of his reign, to furnish the marquis de
Comares, governor of Oran, witit troops fuffi- s5«.
cient to attack him. That officer, affilted by
the dethroned King of Tremecen, executed the
commiflion with such spirit, that Barbarossa's
troops being beat in several encounters, he hinm-
self was hut up in Tremecen. After defending
it to the last extremity, he was overtaken in at-

H 2 tempting

BOOK V. tempting to make his escape, and slain while he
'L,"T fought with an obstinate valour, worthy of his

former fame and exploits.

The progre, His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the
othe ^nd name of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of Al-
brhmscr. giers with the fame ambition and abilities, but

with better fortune. His reign being undi-
flurbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European
powers, he regulated with admirable prudence
the interior police of his kingdom, carried on his
naval operations with great vigour, and extend-
ed his conquests on the continent of Africa. But,
perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted
to his government with the utmost reluctance,
and being afraid that his' continual depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the

Put hi do. Christians, he put his dominions under the pro-
minions
cader tie tetion of the Grand Seignior, and received from
h'tst.ltan° him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his

security against his domeftick as well as his foreign
enemies. At last, the fame of his exploits daily
increasing, Splyman offered him the command
of the Turkish fleet, as the only perfori whose
valour and skill in naval affairs eitled him to
command against Andrew Doria, the greatest
fea-officer of that age. Proud of this diftintion,
Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with
a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the

·~~~~~. ,W~~ ~
arts

arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair, BOOK V.
gained the entire confidence both of the Sultan
and his Vizier. To them he communicated a
scheme which he had formed of making himself
master of Tunis, the most flourishing kingdom,
at that time, on the coast of Africa; and this
being approved of by them, he obtained what-
ever he demanded for carrying it into execution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were His cheme

founded on the intestine divisions in the kingdom ing cTuls.
of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that coun.
try, having thirty-four sons by different wives,
named Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest among
them, his successor. That weak Prince, who
owed this preference not to his own merit, but
to the ascendant which his mother had acquired
over a Monarch doating with age, first poisoned
Mahmed his father in order to prevent him from
altering his destination; and then, with the bar-
barous policy which prevails wherever polygamy
is permitted, and the right of succession is not
precisely fixed, he put to death all his brothers
whom he could get into his power. Alrafchid,
one of the eldest, was so fortunate as to escape
his rage; and finding a retreat among the
wandering Arabs, made several attempts, by
the assistance of some of their chiefs, to recover
the throne, which of right belonged to him.
But these proving unsuccessful, and the Arabs,

H 3 from

oos V. from their natural levity, being ready to deliver
v him up to his merciless brother, he fled to Al-

giers, the only place of refuge remaining, and
implored the protection of Barbarossa; who, dif-
cerning at once all the advantages which might be
gained by supporting his title, received him with
every possible demonstration of friendship and
refpe&. Being ready, at that time, to set fail
for Constantinople, he easily persuaded Alraf-
chid, whose eagerness to obtain a crown disposed
him to believe or undertake any thing, to ac-
company him thither, promising him effectual
;fliftance from Solyman, whom he represented
to be the most generous, as well as most power-
ful, Monarch in the world. But no sooner were
they arrived at Conitantinople, than the false
Corsair, regardless of all his promises to him,
opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering
Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkilh empire,
by making use of thename of this exiled Prince,
an4 by means of the party ready to declare in his
favour, Solyman approved, with too much
facility, of this perfidious prop9fal, extremely
suitable to the chara&er of its author, but alto-
gether unworthy of a great Prince. A power-
ful fleet and numerous army were oon assem-
bled i at the fight of which the credulous Alraf-
:hid flattered himself, tat he would soon enter
.is capital in triumnph

BUT

BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going to BooK V.

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan, ,;. '
1hut up in the seraglio, and was never heard of It$ fuccts.
more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty veflels towards Africa. After
ravaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
that he came to aflert the right of Alrafchid,
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard the
Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta, which
commands the bay, soon fell into his hands,
partly by his own address, partly by the treachery
of its commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis,
weary of Muley-Hafcen's government, took
arms, and declared for Alrafchid with such zeal
and unanimity, as obliged the former to fly so
precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind
him. The gates were immediately set open to
Barbarossa, as the restorer of their lawful fove-
reign. But when Alrafchid himlelf did not
appear, and when instead of his name, that of
Solyman alone was heard among the acclama-
tions of the Turkish soldiers marching into the
town, the people of Tunis began to fufpet the
Corsair's treachery. Their suspicions being soon
converted into certainty, they ran to arms with
the utmost fury, and surrounded the citadel, into
which Barbarossa had led his troops. But hav-
ing forcfecn such a revolution, he was not un-

H 4 prepared

Boor V. prepared for it; he immediately turned against

.535. them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one

brisk discharge, dispersed the numerous but
undireted assailants, and forced them to ac-
knowledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to
fubmnit to himself as his viceroy.

Barbirofr's His first care was to put the kingdom, of
formidable
awcrda. which he had thus got poffefion, in a proper

posture of defence. He strengthened the citadel
which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vait expence,
made it the principal station for his fleet, and
his great arsenal for military as well as naval
stores. Being now possessed of such extehfive
territories, he carried on his depredations against
the ChriRtian States to a greater extent, and with
more deftru&ive violence than ever. Daily com-
plaints of the outrages committed by his cruizers
were brought to the Emperor by his subje&s,
both in Spain and Italy. All Christendom
seemed to expe& from himn, as its greatet and
most fortunate Prince, that he would put an end
to this new and odious species of oppreflion.

The niled At the fame time Muley-Hafcen, the exiled
King of
Tongi im- King of Tunis, finding none of the Mahometan
Ymprohs Princes in Africa willing or able to aift him in
*slsnce; recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the

3ss 3 only person who could afert his rights in oppo-

fition

fition to such a formidable usurper. The Em-n BooK V.
peror, equally desirous of delivering his domi- 153
nions from the dangerous neighbourhood of Bar-
baroffa; of appearing as the prote&or of an
unfortunate Prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age, to every expedition against
the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty
with Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for
invding Tunis. Having made trial of his own
abilities for war in the late campaign in Hun-
gary, he was now become so fond of the military
chara&er, that he determined to command on
this occasion in person. The united strength of Hisprea.

tion for he

his dominions was called out upon an enterprize expedition.
in which the Emperor was about to hazard his
glory, and which drew the attention of all Eu-
rope. A Flemihf fleet carried from the ports
of the Low-Country a body of German infan-
try'; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had diflinguifhed themselves by
so many vi&ories over the French; the Emperor
himself embarked at Barcelona with the flower
of the Spanish nobility, and was joined by a
considerable squadron from Portugal, under the
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Em-
press's brother, Andrew Doria conducted his
own gallies, the best appointed at that time in

* Ianri AnnalesBrabnt. i. 599.

Europe,

Boo0 V. Europe, and commanded by the most kilful offi-

53. cers: The Pope furnished all the affitance in his

power towards such a pious enterprize; and the
order of Malta, the perpetual enemies of the In-
fidels, equipped a squadron, which, though small,
wasformidable by the valour of the knights who
served on board it. The port of Cagliari in
Sardinia was the general place of rendezvous.
Doria was appointed High-Admiral of the fleet;
the command of the land-forces under the Em.
peror was given to the marquis de Guafto.

Ldas in ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting
Africa. of near five hundred velTels, having on board

above thirty thousand regular troops, et fail
from Cagliari, and after a prosperous naviga.
tion, landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa
having received early intelligence of the Em-
peror's immense armament, and fufpe&ing its
destination, prepared with equal prudence and
vigour for the defence of his new conquest. He
called in all his corsairs from their different fta-
tions; he drew from Algiers what forces could
be spared; he dispatched messengers to all the
African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs, and
by representing Muley-Hafcen as an infamous
apotate, prompted by ambition and revenge,
not only to become the vaflal of a Christian
Prince, but to conspire with him to extirpate the
Mahommcdap faith, he infiamcd hofc ignorant

and

and bigotted chiefs to such a degree, that they; Bo K V.
took arms as in a common cause. Twenty thou- `'-
sand horse, together with a vast body of foot,
soon assembled at Tunis; and by a proper dif-
tribution of presents among them from time to
time, Barbarossa kept the ardour which had
brought them together from subsiding. But as
he was too well acquainted with the enemy whom
he had to oppose, to think that these light troops
could resist the heavy-armed cavalry and veteran
infantry which composed the Imperial army, his
chief confidence was in the strength of the Go- Lays fege t
letta, and in his body of Turkish soldiers who ol.
were armed and disciplined after the European
fashion. Six thousand of these, under the com-
mand of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the hraveft and
most experienced of all his corsairs, he threw.
into that fort, which the Emperor immediately
invested. As Charles had the command of the
sea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not
only with the necessaries, but with all the luxu-
ries of life, that Muley-Hafcen, who had not
been accustomed to fee war carried on with such
order and magnificence, was filled with admira-
tion of the Emperor's power. His troops, ani-
mated by his presence, and confidering it as
meritorious t ihed their blood in such a pious
cause, contended with each other for the ports
of honour and danger. Three separate attacks
wyere concerted, and the Germans, Spaniards, and

Italians,

BooK V. Italians, having one of there committed to each

'-7~ of them, pushed them forward with the eager

courage which national emulation inspire. Sinan
displayed resolution and skill becoming the con-
fidence which his master had put in him; the
garrison performed the hard service on which
they were ordered with great fortitude. But
though he interrupted the besiegers by frequent I
sallies; though the Moors and Arabs alarmed
the camp with their continual incursions; the
breaches soon became so considerable towards
the land, while the fleet battered those parts of
the fortifications which it could approach, with
no less fury and success, that an aflault being

Takes it by given on all fides at once, the place was taken
Jorm. by storm. Sinan, with the remains of his

garrison, retired, after an obstinate refftance,
over a hallow part of the bay towards the city.
By the redu&ion of the Goletta, the Emperor
became master of Barbarofla's fleet, confiting
of eighty-feven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mostly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remark-
able proof of the strength of the fort, as well as
of the greatness of the corsair's power. The
Emperor marched into the Goletta through the
breach, and turning to Muley-Hafcen who at-
tended him, " Here," fays he, " is a gate open

2 t0

to you, by which you ihall return to take pof- BooK V.
fefflon of your dominions." 535.

BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight

of the blow which he had received, did nor,
however, lose courage, or abandon the defence
of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend
on the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that
the Moors and Arabs would sustain the hard-
ships of a siege, he boldly determined to advance
with his army, which amounted to fifty thou-
sand men ', towards the Imperial camp, and to
decide the fate of his kingdom by the issue of a
battle. This resolution he communicated to his
principal officers, and representing to them the
fatal consequences which might follow, if ten
thousand Christian slaves, whom he had shut up
in the citadel, hould attempt to mutiny during
the absence of the army, he proposed as a ne-
ceffary precaution for the publick security, to
massacre them without mercy before he began
his march. They all approved warmly of his
intention to fight; but inured as they were, in
their piratical depredations, to scenes of blood-
shed and cruelty, the barbarity of his proposal
concerning the slaves, filled them with horror;
and Barbarossa, rather from the dread of irritat-

Epiftrec de Princes, par Rufcelli, p. 119, &c.

ing

BooK V. ing them, than swayed by motives of humanity,
V- 3 consented to spare the lives of the slaves.
1535.

Defeats BY this time the Emperor had begun to ad.
Barbarossa's
ary. vance towards Tunis; and though his troops

suffered inconceivable hardships in their march,
over burning sands, destitute of water,. and ex-
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they
soon came up with the enemy. The Moors and
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in
number, immediately rushed on to the attack
with loud houts, but their undisciplined courage
could not long stand the hock of regular bat-
talions;. and though Barbarossa, with admirable
pretence of mind, and by exposing his own per.
son to the greatest dangers,'endeavoured to.rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. . There he found every thing
in the utmost confusion; ome of the inhabit-
ants flying with their families and effecs; others
ready to set open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the
citadel, which in such circumitances might have
afforded him tome refuge, already in the poffelf
sion of the Christian captives., These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had
laid hold on the opportunity which Barbarosfi
dreaded. As oon as his army was at ome dil.
tance from the town, they gained two of their

keeperso

eeper, by whose assistance, knocking off their BooK V.
tters, and bursting open their prisons, they 1535.
verpowered the Turkifl garrison, and turned
he artillery of the fort against their former
nafers. Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged,
xclaiming sometimes against the false compaf-
on of his officers, and ometimes condemning
is own imprudent compliance with their opi-
ion, fled precipitately to Bona.

MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy Tunis fur.
nd almost bloodless vitory which he had
ained, and advancing slowly with the precau-.
ion necessary in an enemy's country, did not
et know the whole extent of his own good for-
itune. But at last, a messenger dispatched by
the slaves acquainted him with the success of
their noble effort, for the recovery of their liber-
ty; and at the fame time deputies arrived from
the town, in order 'to present him the keys of
their gates, and to implore his prote&ion from
military violence. While he was deliberating
concerning the proper measures for this purpose,
the soldiers, fearing that they flould be deprived
of the booty which they had expected, rushed
suddenly, and without orders, into the town,
and began to kill and plunder without diftinc-
tion. It was then too late to restrain their
cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All the
outrages of which soldiers are capable in the fury
of a storm, all the excesses of which men can

be

BOOK V. be guilty when their paflions Be ]heightened
J53s; by the contempt and hatred which difference in

manners and religion inspire, were committed.
Above thirty thousand of the innocent inhabit-
ants perilhed on; that unhappy day, and ten
thousand were carried away as slaves. Muley.
Hafcen took poffelfion of a throne. surrounded
with carnage, abhorred by his fubjeas on whom
he had brought such calamities, and pitied even
by those whose ralhnefs had been the occasion of
them. The Emperor lamented the fatal acci-
dent which had stained the lustre of his victory;
and amidst such a scene of horror there was but
one fpeacle that afforded him any fatisfation.
Ten thousand Christian slaves, among whom
were several persons of diftinaion, met him as
he entered the town; and falling on their knees,
thanked and blessed him as their deliverer.

.

Rtftore the AT the fame time that Charles accomplished
td Khin his promise to the Moorish King of re-establish-
tbhrne. ing bhim in his dominions, he did not neglec

what was necessary for bridling the power of the
African corsairs, for the security of his own sub.
je&s, and for the interest of the Spanish crown:
In order to gain these ends, he concluded a
treaty with Muley-Hafcen on the following con-
ditions, that he hould hold the kingdom of
Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain, and db ho-
mJage to the Emperor as his liege lord; that
all the Christian slaves now within his domi-

nions,

!ion, of Whatever natioi fhboukl be sec ai ,liberty BOOK V'
without anfom; that no!fbjedtofthC Empe- 1
ror's hoiuld for. thefuture bcdeained in fervi;
tude that noTXurkih icoifaircibtoldbe admitted
into the ports -f his domiiosr; that free tiade
together with.hipublickrca fe of the Chriftiat
religiob lioiAud be allowed to all.the Empetods
Cubjeats; that the Emperor: fiould not only'tre
pain the Goktta, but thatraS the other sea-port
n the kingdom:which .ferm fortified ihoild be
.ut into hanids ;: tha. MilTeyHafcen.hould
ay annul:y twelve thoufarrd crowns for :the
bfiftence of the Spaniih'lgrrifon in the; Golet.
a; that he fh6uld enter into; no alliancewith
ny of thc:Emperor's enemies, and hould pre-

t- to' hit every year as an.acknowledgment

~f his. vaiddage, fix Moorish horsei, and'as many

wks ". .Having' thui:-fettled:the affairs of
frica ; chdifed the infolehce of the corsairs;
i'cured a&f,,eitreatfor the fuipsof his fubjefts
nd!a proprsta tion for hisown fleets, on that
oast from;which he was most ihfefted by pira-
ical depredatidns , Chairs- embarked again for August 7.
Europ6 , the tempeftuoL.,ieather, and fidknifl
mong his troops, not permitting.him to puirflu
darbaroffa x.

By

" Du Moaos Corps Diplotsp . , 1'i. Summolte HiI
i Napoli, iv. 89.
x Job. Etropii Diarium ]Tdition. Tunetana p.
ard. v, ii. p. 3jo, &c. Jovi ffiftor, lib. xxxiv. 153, &c.
VOL. IlI. I Sandov.

BOOK V. By this expedition, the merit of-which seems

I5 to have been estimated in that; age, rather by

Thh ,'rhy the apparent generoity of the undertaking, the
Emprror magnificence wherewith it was conducted, and
acquired.

thet. uccefs which crowned it, than by the im-
portance of the consequences that attended it,
the Emperor attained a greater height of glory
than at any other period of his reign. Twenty
thousand slaves whom he freed from bondage,
either by his arms, or by his treaty with Muley.
Hafcen , each of whom he clothed and fur.
nifled with the means of returning to their
refpetive countries, spread all over Europe the
fame of their benefactrcs- munificence: extolling
his power and abilities with te exaggeration
flowing from gratitude and admiration, In corn.
parison with.him,'the other Mouarchs of Eu.
rope made an inconsiderable figure. They
seemed to be solicitous about oching but
Fthir private and. particular interests', while
Charles, with an elevation of fetilent, which
*became the chief. Prince in Chiiltendom, ap.
,. pcared to be concerned for the honour of the

Cbaiftin name, and/attentive-to:thejublick fe.
cUrity and welfaresi, :l; i: . :.

.adov. ii. 154, &c. Vertot. Hilt. de Cheval. de Malthe,

pifires des Princes, par Ruicelli, traduites par Belleforcl,
p.!t9, Yit, 'a&c. Ambn'. Pontii COibrTctini ilt. Belli adv.
Barbar. ap. Matthel Analeta,

'rr; vSummont
H.^i ; d5e L , i 103. THE

# BOOK VI.

H g
H IS TO RY

OF THEi
R E I G N

oP TEs
MPEROR CHARLES V.

,soOK VL

* Ti. NFORTUNATELY for the reputation ioot VI.
l of Francis t among his contemporaries, '
his condiut, at this jundture, appeared a perse& Thec535.

of a new

contrast to that of his rival, as he laid hold warbetween
On the opportunity afforded him, by the tmpe- rot and
ror's having turned his whole force againt the Franch.
commoi enemy, to revive his pretensions in
.taly, and to plunge Europe into a new war.
The treaty of Cambray, as has been observed,
did not remove the causes of enmity between the
two contending Princes g it covered up, but did

IX~ 2 ~ not

BooK VI. not extinguish the flames of discord. Francis,

S535 in particular, who wited .with impatience for a

proper occasion of recovering the reputation as
well as territories which he had loft, continued
to carry on his negeciatdns in'different courts
against the Emperor, taking the utmost pains to
heighten the jealousy which many Princes en-
tertained of his powe 6r or degns,' and to inspire
the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied' to Francii Sforza, who,
though indebted to Charles for the possession of
the dutchy of Milan, had received it on such
hard conditions, as rendered him not only a
vassal of the Empire. but a tributary dependant
upon -th Erpetfor a he lionoatr- es hving
married the Emperor's niece, did not reconcile
him to this ignominious state of fubje&ion,which
became so intolerablie ein .-}o< Sforza, a weak
and poor-fpirited Prince, that he listened with
eagenffs to tlhe'rdi pr6pofals Ftarids' fMade of
reffihig him foHi e yoke. heife'pirools
wet'onhveyed-t h i' by Maravglia;"' r Mer-
vemles'(s h is htltaldb yF the Ffh historians,
a Miiiiefe'gentlitmr ie'reding a 'Ptrrs; and
soon after, in orJdf'"'cryr on iidce negociation
-with greater advaitarge' Mtrveile 'was; sent to
Mila!n, on pretence' of'viftin'g his' ielatidns, but
witl'fcrcret crederni'tls ftOi'f Francig as is envoy,
In ti'i chairaerihie iaa'rsectived bytSfora. But
notWr hftltatdding i' care to' keep that circumn

ftanct
3

itanceconcealed, Charles .fifpe&ing, or having RooR v.^^,
received information:of. 'it remonftrtacd and is
threatened in such ani 'ngh,'tone, that the Duke
and his ministers, equally intimidated, gave the
world imriediately aimoft infamous proof of
their :fervie fear of offending the Enipeor. As
Merveille had neither the prudence nor the tem-
per which the function wherein he was em-
ployed required, they artfully decoyed him in-
to a quarrel, in which.he happened to killhia an-
tagonift, one of the Duke's domefticks, And hav- Dec. x;3.
ing intantly- 'eized him, they ordered him, to be
tried for that crime, and to be beheaded, Fran-
cis, no less aftonilhed at this violation of a cha-
racter held sacred among the most unciviiZe4 na-
tions, than enraged at the insult offered o the dig-
nity of his crown, threatened Sforza with the es-
secs of his indignation, and complained to the Em-
peror, whom he confidered as the real authqr
of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with
no fatiSfasion from either, he appealed to all the
Princes of Europe, and thought himself now en-
titled to take vengeance for an injury, which
it would have been indecent and pLifillanimous
to let pass with impunity.

BEING thus furnished with a pretext for be- Frn; .'e.

ginning a war, on which he had already refolvedl, l"'i "
he multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his

1 3 nl:alurLs

BOOK VI. measures for. this purpose were disconcerted by

CIs unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the

honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle-
ment, the death of that Pontff had deprived
bim of all the advantages which he expeced to
derive from his friendship. Paul, his successor,
though attached by inclination to the Imperial
interest, seemed determined to maintain the neu-
trality suitable to his chara&er as the common
father of the contending Princes. The King of
England, occupied with domeftick cares and pro-
jets, declined, for once, engaging in the affairs
of the continent, and refused to aflift Francis,
unless he would imitate his example, in throw-

1: nea- ing off the Papal supremacy. These disappoint.
Ciations
with the ments led him to solicit, with greater earnet-
proteaant. ness, the aid of the Protestant Princes associated

by the league of Smalkalde. That he might
the more easily acquire their confidence, he en-
deavoured to accommodate himself to their pre-
dominant paflion, zeal for their religious tenets.
He affected a wonderful moderation with regard
to the points in dispute; he permitted Bellay,
his envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments
concerning ome of the mos important articles,
in terms not far different from those used by the
Protestants'; he even condescended to invite

* Freheri Script. Rer, German. iii. 354, &c. $leid
W1(1.178, 183. Sckend. lib.iii. 103.

Molanclhoni

Melane hon, whose gentle mariners and pacific IBooK vr.
ipirit diftinguilhed him among the Reformers, ;
to visit Paris, that by his afliftance he might
concert the most proper meaflres for reconciling
the contending sects, which so unhappily divided
the church b. These concefiqns must be confi-
dered rather as arts of policy, than the result of
convition; for whatever impreflion the new
opinions in religion had made on his sifters, the
Queen of Navarre and Dutchess of Ferrara, the
gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his love of
pleasure, allowed him little leisure to examine
theological controversies.

BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this Irrtates

them.

disingenuous artifice, by a flep very inconsistent
with his declarations to the German Princes.
This ftep, however, the prejudices of the age,
and the religious sentiments of his own fubjeds,
rendered it necessary for him to take. His close
union with the King of England, an excommu-
nicated heretick ; his frequent negociations with
the German'Proteftants; but above all, his giv-
ing publick audience to an envoy from Sultan
Solyman, had excited violent suspicions con-
cerning the sincerity of his attachment to reli-
gion. To have attacked the Emperor, who,
on all occasions, made high pretensions to zeal

bCamerarii Vita Ph. Melanthonis, 12i. ag. 1655.
p. IZ.

14 in

BooK VI. in defence of t4 eChoickJaih ind a;n the very

'
S.^ junture whe he was prparipg for his expe-

dition against BrbaroQfa, which ws then, on-
fidered as a pious enterprize, ould not have
failed to confirm such unfavourable sentiments
with regard to srancis, and called on him to
vindicate himself by some extraordinary deron.
tration of his reverence for the established doc-
trines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
some of his fubjets, who had imbibed the Pro.
tetant opinions, fuirnifhed him with such an
.occasion as he desired. They had affixed to the
gates of the Louvre, and other publick places,
papers containing indecent refletions on the
doctrines and rites of the Popish church. Six of
the persons concerned-in this rash action were dif-
covered and seized. The King, in order to avert
the judgments which it was supposed their blaf-
phemies might draw down upon the nation,
appointed a solemn procession. The holy sacra.
ment was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a
torch in his hand ; the princes of the blood sup.
ported the canopy over it; the nobles marched
in order behind. In the pretence of this nume.
rous assembly, the King, accustomed to exprefi
himself on every lubjet in strong and animated
language, declared that if one of his hands were
infected with heresy, he would cut it off with
the other, and would not spare even his own

children,

children, if found guly of that crime. As a BoozVI
dreadful proof of his.beininearneft, the fix un- "535
happy .persons were publickly'burnt before the
procefion was finishcd, with circumstances of
the most Mocking barbarity attendingtheir exe-
cution '.

THE.Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled They rfue

with resentment and indignation at the cruelty tojo"him"
with which their brethren were treated, could
not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he
offered to prote& in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigour in his own
dominions; so that all Bellay's art and eloquence
in vindicating his master, or apologizing for his
condut, made but little impression upon them.
They confidered likewise, that the Emperor,
who hitherto had never employed violence again t
the do6rines of the Reformers, nor even given
then. much molestation in their progress, was
now bound by the agreement at RatifoDn, not
to difurb such as had embraced the new opi-
nions; and the Protestants wifely regarded this
a a more certain and immediate security, than
the ,precarious and diRant hopes with which
Francis endeavoured to allure them. Besides,
the manner in which he had behaved to his allies
'at the peace of Cambray, was too recent to bq

c Belcwii Comment. Rcr. Gallic. 66, Sleid. Hilf.
175, &c.

forgotten,

Booi V. forgotten, sand did iot.encourage others to rely
0"V' much on his friendihip or generosity. Upon

all there accounts, the Protestant Princes refused
to assist the French King in any hostile attempt
against the Emperor. The Eletor of Saxony,
the most zealous among them, in order to avoid
giving any umbrage to Charles, would not per-
mit Melan&hon to visit the court of France,
although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by
the invitation of so great a Monarch, or hoping
that his pretence there might be of signal advan-
tage to the Protestant cause, discovered a strong
inclination to undertake the journey '.

The French BUT though none of the many Princes who
army advan.
ces oward envied or dreaded the power of Charles, would
Italy. second Francis's efforts in order to reduce and

circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded
his army to advance towards the frontiers of
Italy. As his sole pretext for taking arms was
that he might chastise the Duke of Milan for his
insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations,
it might have been expe&ed that the whole
weight of his vengeance was to have fallen on
his territories. But on a sudden, and at their
very commencement, the operations of war took
another direftion. Charles Duke of Savoy, one
of the least ative and able Princes of the line

Camoruii Via Melan. 14s, 'c. 415. Seckend. lib. iii.
107*

from

rom which he descended, had married Beatrix Booi VL
f Portugal, the Empress's sifter. By her great "
alents, she soon acquired an absolute ascendant
ver her husband; and proud of her affinity to
he Emperor, or allured by the magnificent pro.
mies with which he flattered her ambition, he
formed an union between the Duke and the Im-
perial court, extremely inconsistent with that
neutrality, which wife policy as well as the fitua.
tion of his dominions had hitherto induced him
to observe in all the quarrels between the con-
tending Monarchs. Francis was abundantly
sensible of the distress to which he might be ex-
posed, if, when he etered Italy, he should leave
behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted
so obsequiously to the Emperor, that he had sent
his eldest son to be educated in the court of
Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity.
Clement the Seventh, who had represented this
danger in a strong light during his interview
with Francis at Marseilles, suggested to him, at
the fame time, the proper method of guarding
against it, having advised him to begin his ope-
rations against the Milanese, by taking poffenion
of Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way
of securing a communication with his own do-
minions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke Takes po.
on many accounts, particularly for having sup- Chi k of
plied the Constable Bourbon with the money svoy.a"do.
that enabled him to levy the body of troops

which

- Boo vI. which ruined the French army in thF fatal battle

s.5J of Pavia, was nbt unwilling to let him now feel

both how deeply he'relented, and how severely
he could punish these injuries. Nor did he
want several pretexts which gave some colour of
equity to the violence that he intended. The
territories of France and Savoy lying contiguous
to each other, and intermingled in many places,
various disputes, unavoidable i such a situation,
subsisted concerning the limits of their repefive
property; and betides, Francis, in right of his
mother Louise of Savoy, had large claims upon
the Duke her brother, for her share in their fa-
ther's fucctfion. Being*tnwilling, however,
to begin hostilities without some cause of quarrel
more specious than these pretensions, many of
which were obsolete, and others dubious, he
demanded permillion to march through Pied-
mont in his way to. the Milanese, hoping that
the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the
Imperial interest, might refute this request, and
thus give a greater appearance of justice to all
his operations against him. But, if we may be-
lieve the historians of Savoy, who appear to be
better informed with regard to this particular
than those of France, the Duke readily, and
with a good grace, granted what it was not in
his power to deny, promising free passage to the
French troops as was desired so that Francis,
as the only method now left of justifying the

measures

measures which he determined to take, was BooK VI.
obliged to insist for full fatisfadtion with regard 1535.
to every thing that either the crown of France or
his mother Louise could demand of the house
of Savoy. Such an evasive answer, as might
have bee' expected, being made to this requi-
fition, the French army under the admiral Brion
poured' at once into the Duke's territories at
different places. The countries of Brefe and
Bugey, united at that time to Savoy, were over-
run in a moment. Most of the towns in the
dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the ap-
proach of the enemy; a few which attempted to
make reftfance were easily. forced; and before
the end of the campaign, the Duke saw himself
stripped of all his dominions, but the province
of Piedmohn, in which there were not many
places in a c6ndition to be defended.

Tocompletethe Duke's misfortunes, the city The city of

of GOneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed, covr it
and 'in fime degree polrefled, threw off his yoke, librty.
and its, revolt drewr along with it the loss of the
adjacentterritories. Geneva was, at that time,
an Imperial city ; and though under the dire&
dominion of its own bishops, and the remote
fovereigity of'the Dukes of Savoy, the form of
its internal constitution was purely republican,

Hitoir .Geneaogiqu. *de Savoye, par Guic';enon. a
toa,.-fol Lyon. 166o, i. 639, &c.

being

BOOK V. being governed by fydics and a council chosen

S535. by the citizens, From these diftin& and often

clashing jurifditions,,two opposite parties took
their rife, and had long subsisted in the state;
the one composed of the advocates for the pri-
vileges of the community, assumed the name of
Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty;
and branded the other, which supported the epif-
copal or ducal prerogatives, with the name of
Mammelukes or slaves. At length, the Protestant
opinions beginning to spread among the citizens,
,35, inpired such as embraced them with that bold

enterprizing spirit which always accompanied or
was naturally produced by them in their sirs
operations. As both the Duke and Biihop were
from interest, from prejudice, and from political
considerations, violent enemies of the Reforma-
tion, all the new converts joined with warmth
the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,
mingling with the love of liberty, added strength
to that generous paflion. The rage and animo-
fity of two factions, hut up within the fame
walls, occasioned frequent infurreftions, which
terminating mostly to the advantage of the
friends of liberty, they daily gained ground.

THE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their an-

cient contests about jurifdi&ion, had united
against their common enemies, and each attack-
ed them with his proper weapons. The Bilop

cxcom-

excommunicated the people of Geneva as guilty BooK Vt.
of a double crime; of impiety, in apostatizing 535
from the eftablithed religion; and of sacrilege,
in invading the rights of his fee. The Duke at-
tacked them as rebels against their lawful Prince,
and attelpted to render himself maftr of the
city, first by furprize, and then by open force. 'S34<
The citizens, despising the thunder of the Bi-
fhdp's censures, boldly aferted their indepen-
'dence against the Duke; and partly by their
own valour, partly by the powerful assistance
which they received from their allies, the canton
of Berne, together with some small supplies both
of men and money, secretly furnished by the
King of France, they defeated all his attempts.
Not satisfied with having repulsed him, or with
remaining always upon;the defensive themselves,
they now took advantage of the Duke's inabi-
lity to resist them, while overwhelmed by the
armies of France, and seized several catles and
places of strength which he possessed in the
neighbourhood of Geneva; thus delivering the
city from those odious monuments of its former
fubjeaion, and rendering the publick liberty
more secure for the future. At the fame time
the canton of Berne invaded and conquered the
Paijs de Vaud, to which it had some pretensions.
The canton of Friburgh, though zealously at-
tached to the Catholick religion, and having no
subjet of contest with the Duke, laid hold on

. part

3o*3 VI. prt ()th0 spoils of th;tupfotunato Pvince A

griatzv~Osl o tqpicbcq 1efts or furatons
beidi fidh ,eóiei byltIb t*o caatoiu, ad4con-
fidearbbt ydrtbtheir, Pai*h. n4 'have bebiwi& the
~iv ,t t1umCe pelt of theirwbGieriries. k' Giva,
noithsi anding many fchnyes andi. Arccpiizes
of. the-' Dukesof, Savy: toyle ft b ifeir do-
mwj~inionz~e, 1~ilkep's. :-pofliion'of'its inde-
pend~n~ensi d in conster~nee of thatbbi~fling,
has. attiaiit* a degree if Consideration' wa~lth
and elegawer, wbich t cauld not other.i! kave
reached, '

TheEme. . AmilPsTIsch a ftcceesio of difastrou evcits,
toass e the Dok& 'of' Saviy bal n. other rfó&crcebut
IsaVOk~p the Etnpei*s povedti, j#hich u, h-is re-

turn-,fiern Ttnjin he deni --ded wit;ai ihbroft
earneat' it'5rInity;' ,ad ashis, nissetunhs
were tottafldndd: chiefiy, Ihbs-attachihent to the
Imperial. ititereft,': be, had., a jitf titl toirne4
diate afftatce haled, hcevr, "i' noa in
a conditio td ftrpport hi ithlthad vigcdr and
dispatch which the xigency of his *hir.t*Ued
for. :Mft of the troosipioed irrcuhiAfri-
can, expedition,. having been· raied for hat'ser-
vice alone, were. difbandd as soon as it was

' Hid, do. It Villa do Qoppe par Spoa, a#p . Icr.

v68 g. p. 99. Hist. de la Rofropiaipn d4e SLi ply Rog-

chat, Gen. 1728. tom. iv. , 9, &c.

tow. V. ~. 2Jt) &C.
Mem. de Bcll5s, i.

Linifhed;

/nilhed; the veteran forces under Antonio de Boot VL
Leyva were hardly sufficient for the defence of 5
the Milanese; and the Emperor's treasury was
entirely drained by his vast efforts against the
Infidels,

u;t the death of Ptahcis .roria, occasioned, oG ;

according to some hitorians, by the terror of a SforzDuke
French invasion, which had twice been fatal to
his family; afforded the Empperot full leiflre to
prepare for aidn. B this unexpected event+
the nature of the war, and the Causes of discord,
were totally changed.- Francis's first pretext for
taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at
once cut off, but as that Prince died without
issue, all Francii's rights to thi dutchyof Milan,
which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
posterity, returned back to him in full force.
As the recovery of the Milanese was the fa-
vourite objeA of that..Monarch, he instantly
renewed his claim to it and if he had supported
his pretensions by ordering the powerful army
quartered in Savoy to advance without losing a
moment towards Milan, he could hardly have
failed to secure the important point of polleflion.
But Francis, who became daily less enterprizing
as he advanced in years, and who was overawed
at some times into an excess of caution by the
remembrance of his past misfortunes, endea-

VOL. III. K voured

B:,L yt. vQurcd to eLfWbdii is rightssby::tgociation,

3
. Ot by arms d fro a; timid moderation,
rianci's fatal in all greC affairs, negle dto improve
tPrnfi' the favourable opportunity which presented it.
dutchy. self. Charles was more decisive in his opera.

tions, and in quality of sovereign, took pof-
effion of he dutchy, as a vacant sis of the Em.
pire. WhileFrancis endeavoured to explain and
A-ert his title to it, by arguments and memo.
rials,or ermployed various arts in order to reconcile
the Italian powers o the oughts of his regain.
log footing in Italy, his rival was ifntly taking
ffctual teps to prevent it. T^e Emperor, how.
.ever,. wa. vry carefiu not to difcqver too early
any intpetion of this kind ; bt lfeeing, to ad-
mit the equity of Franis's claim, he appeared
solicitous oy about giing him pofffion in
fuchl, maner as might not disturb the peace of
Euroeor~ aoerturthe bance of power in Italy,
which the politician of tat ootuntry were b fond
ofprif~ving. By this artifice e deceived Francis,
and gpined so much confidence with thereft of
Europe, that almost without incurring any sus.
picion^he involvd the affair in new difficulties,
and protra&ed -the negociations at piafure.
Sometimes he propoW d to grant the investiture
of Milan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's
second son, sometimes to the Duke of Angou'
leme his third son; as the views and inclinations
of the French court varied, he transferred hi!

choice

ehoice alternately from the ~ to the other, BOOK V[.
,wih such profound and wrlliondu&cd difimu- S
lation, that neither PFrnci ,er his miniters
soem to have penetrated his real intention; and
all military operations wereehitirely suspended,
as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly
into pofllon of what they demanded.

DURItO the interval gained in this manner, 3;6.

Charles, on his return from 'Ttnisi aflemibled prepaations
the fates both, of Sicily and Naples, and as they for war
thought themselves greatly honoured by the pre-
fenceof their sovereign, and were no lets pleased
with the apparent difintereftdnefi of his expe-
dition into Africa, than dazi ed by the fuceefs
which had attended his arms, prevailed on them
to vote him such liberal subsidies s were seldom
granted in that age. This enabled him td re-
cruit his veteran toops, to levy a body of Ger-
,.mahs, and to take evry other proper precaution
ser executing or supporting the measures OR
.whih he had determined. Bellay the French
.envoy in Germany, having discovered the inten-
,tion of raising troops in ebat countryt notwith-
,tanding all the pretexts employed in order to
conceal it, first alarmed his master with this evi-
dent proof of the Emperor's insincerity s. But
Francis was so poflocd at that time with the

I Me., de Bellay, 192,

Ka rage

BOOK V[. rage of negociation» in all the artifices and re.

5 36. finements of which, his rival far surpassed him,

that instead of beginning his military operations,
and pushing them, with vigour, or seizing the
Milanese before the Imperial army was asem-
bled, he satisfied himself with making new offers
to the Emperor, in order to procure the invefti-
ture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, in-
deed, so liberal and advantageous, that if ever
Charles had intended to grant his demand, he
could not have rejeted them with decency. He
dextroufly eluded them by declaring that, un-
til he consulted the Pope in person, he could not
take his final resolution with regard to a point
which 'so nearly concerned the peace of Italy.
By this evasion he gained some farther time for
ripening the schemes which he had in view.

The Empe- THE Emperor atlat advanced towards Rome,
ror ente(.
Romc. and made his publick entry into that city with
Aptrl . extraordinary pomp; but it being found necef-

fary to remove the ruins of an ancient temple of
Peace, in order to widen one of the streets,
through which the cavalcade had to pass, all the
historians take notice of this trivial circumstance,
-which they are fond to interpret as an omen of
the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is
certain, had by this time banished all thoughts
of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with
which he had so long covered his designs from

thq

the court of France, by a declaration of his fen- BooK Vl.
timents no less singular than explicit. The -,-.
French ambassadors having in their maler's
nane demanded a definitive reply to his pro-
positions concerning the investiture of Milan,
Charles promised to give it next day in presence
of the Pope and Cardinals aflembled in full
consistory. These being accordingly met, and Hi pblc
all the foreign ambassadors invited to attend, again
the Emperor flood up, and addrefling himself
to the Pope, expatiated for some time on the
sincerity of his own withes for the peace of
Christendom, as well as his abhorrence of war,
the miseries of which he.enumerated at great
length, with studied and elaborate oratory i he
complained that all his endeavours to preserve
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de-
feated by the restless and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile inten-
tions of that Monarch; that afterwards, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Imperial
crown which belonged to him by a title no lefsjuft
than natural that he had nextinvaded his king-
dom of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he
had attacked his territories as well as those of his
allies both in Italy and the Low-Countries; that
when the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered
irresistible by the protecion of the Almighty,
bad checked his progress, ruined his armies, and

K 3 seized

BeVKW V feiued his person, he continued to pursue by de.

56.7 ceit what he had undertaken with ijuftice $ that

he had violated every article in the treaty of
Madrid to which he owed his liberty, nd as
soon as he returned to his dominions took mea.
fures for rekindling the war which that pacifi-
cation had happily extinguihed that when new
misfortunes compelled him to ue again for
peace at Cambray, he concluded and observed
it with equal insincerity that soon thereafter he
had formed dangerous connexions with the here-
tidal Princes in Germany, and incited them to
disturb the tranquillity of the Empire; that now
he had driven the Duke of Savoy, his brother-
in-law and ally, out of the greater part of his ter-
ritories; that after injuries so often repeated, and
amnidft so many sources of discord, all hope of
amity or concord became desperate; and though
he was till willing to grant the investiture of
Milan to one of the Princes of France, there was
little probability of that event's taking place, as
Francis, on the one hand, would not content to
what he judged necessary for securing the tran-
quillity of Europe, nor, on the other, could he
think it reasonable or safe to give a rival the un-
conditional possession of all that he demanded,
(gt us not, however, added he, continue wan-

chalnp, tonly to hqd the blood of our innocent fubjets
him to let us decide the quarrel man to man, with what
,i Otlcon-

l. arms he pleaes to chufe, 'n our fihfrs, on an

ifand,

illand, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a Booi V¥.
river; let the dutchy of Burgundy be put in S53b.
deposit on his part, and that of Milan on mine;
these ihall be the prize od the conqueror; and
after that, let the united forces of Germany,
Spain, and France, be employed to humble the
power of the Turk, and to extirpate heresy out
of Christendom. But if he, 'by declinig this me-
thod of terminating our differences, renders war
inevitable, nothing shall divert me from prose-
cuting it to such extremity, as hall reduce one
of us to be the poorest gentleman in his own
dominions. Nor do I fear that it will be on me
this misfortune shall fall; I enter upon aion
with the fairest profped of success; the justice
of my cause, the union of my fubjets, the num-
ber and valour of my troops, the experience and
fidelity of my generals, all combine to ensure it.
Of all these advantages, the King of France is
detitute; and were my resources no more cer-
tain, and my hopes of vitory no better founded
than his, I would instantly throw myself at his
feet, and with folded hands, and a rope about
my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered

with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greatest vehemence of expreflion and gelture.
The French ambassadors, who did not fully

Belly, 199. Sudov. Hiftor. del Rmper. l[. 226.

K 4 comprehend

BOOK VI. comprehend his meaning, as. he spake in the
1536. Spanish tongue, were totally disconcerted, and

at a loss how they hould answer such an unex-
peced invective; when one of them began to
vindicate his matter's conduc, Charles inter-
posed abruptly, and would not permit him to
proceed. The Pope, without entering into any
particular detail, satisfied himself with a hort
but pathetick recommendation of peace, together
with an offer of employing his sincere endea-
vours in order to procure that blessing to Chris-
tendom; and the aembly broke up in the
greatest astonishment at the extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited. In no part of his

' hemotves condut, indeed, did Charles ever deviate so
of this rash
meaf^c. widely from his general charater. Instead of

that prudent recollecion, that composed and re-
gular deportment so ftricly attentive to deco-
rum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his
own passions, for which he was at all other times
conspicuous, he appears on this occasion before
the most august assembly in Europe, boasting
of his own power and exploits with insolence;
inveighing against his enemy with indecency;
and challenging him to combat with an oftenta-
tious valour, more becoming a champion in
romance, than the first Monarch in Christen-
dom. But the well known and powerful opera-
tion of continued prosperity, as well as of exag-
gerated praise, even upon the firmest minds,

sufficiently

sufficiently account for this seeming inconsistency. BooK vJ.
After having compelled Solyman to retreat, 36'
and having stripped Barbarossa of a kingdom,
Charles began to confider his arms as invincible.
He had been entertained, ever since his return
from Africa, with repeated scenes of triumphs
and publick rejoicings; the orators and poets of
Italy, the most elegant at that time in Europe,
had exhausted their genius in panegyrick, to
which the astrologers added magnificent pro.
mises of a more splendid fortune till in store.
Intoxicated with all these, he forgot his usual
reserve and moderation, and was unable to re-
strain this extravagant sally of vanity, which
became the more remarkable, by being both so
uncommon and so publick,

HE himself (eems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour, and
when the French ambassadors demanded next
day a more clear explanation of what he had
said concerning the combat, he told them that
they were not to confider his proposal as a formal
challenge to their matter, but as an expedient
for preventing bloodshed; he endeavoured to
soften other expreflions in his discourse; and
spoke in terms full of refpea towards Francis.
But though this flight apology was far from
being sufficient to remove the offence which had
been given, Francis, by an unaccountable in-

fatuation,

Bool VI. fatuation, continued to negociate, as if it had

~536 still been possible to bring their differences to a

period by an amicable composition. Charles,
finding him so eager to run into the snare, fa.
voured the deception, and by seeming to liflen
to his proposals gained time to prepare for the
execution of his own designs'.

Chardle AT last, the Imperial army afembled on the
France. frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of forty

thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, while
that of France encamped near Vercelli in Pied.
mont, being greatly inferior in number, and
weakened by the departure of a body of Swiss,
whom Charles artfully persuaded the Popish
cantons to recal, that they might not serve
against the Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally.
The French general, not daring to rifque a
battle, retired as oon as the Imperialists ad-
May 6. vanced. The Emperor put himself at the head

of his forces, which the Marquis del Guafto,
the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand de Gonzaga
commandedunder him,though the supreme direc.
tion of the whole was committed to Antonio de
Leyva, whose abilities and experience justly en-
titled him to that diftinaion. Charles soon dif.
covered his intention not to confine his opera-
tions to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy,

' Mem. de Bllay, 205, &c.

but

but to push forward and invade the southern BooKVL
provinces of France. This scheme he had long -36.
meditated, and had long been taking meafores
for executing it with such vigour as might n-
fare fucces. He had remitted large fums to his
sifter, the governess of the Low-Countries, and
to his brother, the King of the Romans, inftrut-
ing them to levy all the forces in their power,
n order to form two separate bodies, the one
o enter France on the fide of Picardy, the
other on the fide of Champagne; while he, with
he main army, fell upon the opposite frontier
f the kingdom. Trusting to these vast pre-
parations, he thought it impoflible that Francis
could resist so many unexpected attacks, on such
different quarters; and begun his enterprize
with such confidence of its happy issue, that he
desired Jovius the historian, to make a large
provision of paper sufficient to record the vic-
tories which he was going to acquire.

His ministers and generals, instead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented to
him in the strongest terms the danger of leading
his troops so far from his own territories, to such
a distance from his magazines, and into pro-
vinces which did not yield sufficient subsistence
fr their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to confider the inexhaustible resources of France
in maintaining a defensive war, and the acive

zeal

BOOK VI. zeal with which a gallant nobility would erve a

1536. Prince whom they loved, in. repelling the ene-

mies of their country; they recalled to his re-
membrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon
and Pescara, when they ventured upon the fame
enterprize under circumstances which seemed as
certainly to promise success; the Marquis del i'
Guafto in particular, fell on his knees, and
conjured him to abandon the undertaking as
desperate. But many circumstances combined
in leading Charles to disregard all their remon.
ftrances. He could seldom be brought, on any
occasion, to depart from a resolution which he
had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate
and delpife the talents of his rival the King of
France, because they differed so widely from his
own; he was blinded by the presumption which
accompanies prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in
some degree on the prophecies which predicted
the increase of his own grandeur. He not only
adhered obstinately to his own plan, but deter.
mined to advance towards France without wait-
ing for the redution of any part of Piedmont,
except such towns as were absolutely necessary
for preserving his communication with the Mi-
lanefe.

,Rcovr,, THT Marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis
r;torte had entrusted the command of a small body of
Say' do. troops left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered

aloss. this

is more easy than Charles had any reason to BooK VI.
xpe&t. That nobleman, educated in the court 1'536
fFrance, distinguished by continual marks of
e King's favour, and honoured so lately with
charge of such importance, suddenly, and
ithout any provocation or pretext of difgult,
volted from his benefator. His motives to
his treacherous aion, were as childish as the
eed itself was base. Being strongly poses'ed
ith a superstitious faith in divination and aftro-
ogy, he believed with full assurance, that the
atal period of the French nation was at hand
hat on its ruins the Emperor would establish an
niverfal monarchy; that therefore he ought to
ollow the ditates of prudence, in attaching
imfelf to his rising fortune, and could incur no
lame for deserting a Prince whom heaven had
evoted to deftrutionk. His treason became
ill more odious, by his employing that very
uthority with which Francis had invested him,
n order to open the kingdom to his enemies.
Whatever was proposed or undertaken by the
officers under his command for the defence of
their conquests, he rejected or defeated. What-
ever properly belonged to himself as commander
in chief, to provide or perform for that purpose,
he totally negle&ed. In this manner, he ren-
dered towns even of the greatest consequence

Bellay, z22, a. 246, b.

untenable,

P80m vI. untenable, by leaving them- destitute either of
A6-' provisions, or ammunition, or artillery, or a

sufficient garrison; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as hort a tilte as
was necffiary to march through it, ifMontpezat,
the governor of Foffano, had not, by an extra.
ordinary effort of courage and military condut,
detained them almost a month, before that in.
considerable place.

Francite By this meritorious and seasonable service, he
plan for the
defence of gained his master sufficient time for afembling
his king.
dom,. his forces, and for concerting a system of de-

fence against a danger which he now saw to be
inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper
and effecual plan for defeating the invasion of a
powerful enemy; and his prudence in chufing
this plan, as well as his perseverance in execut.
ing it, deserve the greater praise, as it was
equally contrary to his own natural temper, and
to the genius of the French nation. He deter-
mined to remain altogether upon the defensive;
never to hazard a battle, or even a great fkir-
mifh, without certainty of success to fortify his
camps in a regular manner to throw garrisons
only into towns of great strength to deprive
the enemy of subsistence, by laying waste the
country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces.
The execution of this plan he committed en-

tirely

tire[o the marechal Montmorency, who was BooK VI.
the author of it; a man wonderfully fitted by 1536.
nature for such a trust. Haughty, severe, con- Mntmo.n
sident in his own abilities, and despising those of rncy with

the execu.

other men; incapable of .being diverted from tionofit.
any resolution by remonstrances or entreaties
and in proecuting any scheme, regardless alike
of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY made choice of a rong He encamps

camp under the walls of Avignon, at the con- a I
fluence of the Rhone and Durance, one of
which plentifully supplied his troops with all
necessaries from the inland provinces, and the
other covered his camp on that fidO where it
was most probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearid industry to render
the fortifications of this camp impregnable, and
assembled there a considerable army, though
greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at
Valence, higher up the Rhone. Marseilles and
Aries were the only towns he thought i necef-
fary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the ea; the latter as the bar-
rier of the province of Languedoc; and each of
thee he furnished with numerous garrisons of
his best troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The
inhabitants of the other towns as well as of the

open
2(

B0 't . open' countr, were:cbmpelled to'band eif

is.i houses, 'an'd -'retiddui&ted to theihitintains,

to:the campi at Avignon, or 'to the' idtind pro-
vinces. The -brtiflafio'n 'of fich plaites might
have afforded shelter or defence to the enemy,
were Thrown down. 'Corn,' forage/ ahd provi-
fi6nSif e'very kind, were carried away or de.
itr6yed; all the mills and ovens were ruined, and
the wells filled up or rendered useless. The de.
vaftation extended from the Alps to Marseilles,
add'from the sea td the confines of Dauphine;
nor does history afford any iriftance among civi-
lized nations, in whieh this cruel expedient for
the publick safety was employed with the fame
rigour. '

Charles .' -MtA HiLEt thedEmperor arrived with the
ters Pro-
wnce. vii of is army on the frontiers of Provence,

and was ffill so pofiefred with confidence of fuc
cess, that during a few days, when he was
obliged tohalt until the reft of his troops came
up, he began to divide his future conquests
amongjis officers; and as a new incitement to
serve him' th zeal, gave them liberal promises
ofi oices, lands, and honours in France . The
face of desolation, however, which presented
itielf to him, When he entered the country, be-
gan'to diml his hopes; and convinced him that

Bellay, 266, a.

[a Mo

a MQaMch, who, in order to ditrefs an enemyi, ooc Vt.
had vountarily ruined one of his richest -pro- ;
vinces, would defend the reft with obftinitt de-
(pair. NorWas it long before he became ferifible,
that Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as
it appeared to be extraordinary. His fleet ot
which Charles chiefly depended for fubfitenwc,
Was prevented for some time by contrary Wine,
and other accidents to which naval operatios
are subje&t, from approaching the French coafti
even after its arrival, it afforded at bet a pte-
carious and scanty supply to such a numerous
body of troops '; nothing was to be fouml -in
the country itself for their fapport nor could
they draw any considerable aid from the domi-
nions of the Duke of Savoy,' exhausted atdiady
by maintaining two grte armies.: The Emnp-
ror was no less etnbarraffed how to employ, than
how to fbfift his forces; for, though he was
now in poflffion of almost an entire province,
he could not be said to have the command of its
while he held only defenceless towns; and while
the French, besides their camp at Avignon,
continued masters of Marseilles and Aries. At
first he thought of attacking the camp, and of
terminating the war by one decisive blow; but
fkilfitl offcers, who were appintod to vio* it
declared the attompt to be uttery imprauioable.

" Sndov..i. . t,
Vt. IL . L He

.PpoyVL He then gave orders to invest Miarfeilles and

"y. Aries, hpirg that the French would quit their
MrIcits. advatageous post in order ,to relieve them;

bt. Montmorency adhjring firmly ,to his plan,
remained immoveable at Avignon, and the Im.
perialifts met with such a warm reception from
the garrisons of both towns, that they relin.
quied their enterprizes with loss and disgrace.
As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once
nore towards Avignon, though with an army
harassed by the perpetual incursions of finall
parties of the French light troops, weakened by
difeafes,,and dispirited by disasters, which seemed
more intolerable, because they were unexpeted.
:,T.,o-. DUR INO these operations Montmorency found

;,,de oinfr himself exposed to. greater danger from his own
lr:Man rs troops than from the enemy; and their inconil.
denrce.' derate valour went near to have precipitated the

kingdom into those calamities, which he with
fulch industry and caution had endeavoured to
avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ra.
vaging their country almost without controul;
impatient of such long inaion; unacquainted
twith thp flow and remote, but certain effects of
.Montmorency's system of defence; the French
wihed for a battle with no less ardour than the
Imperialits. !'They confidered the condut of
their general as a disgrace to their country. His
caution they imputed to timidity his circum.

fpeaio

&ion to want of spirit; nd the onflancy BooK vt.
th which he pursued hisplan; to obstinacy or s-6.
ride. These reflecions, whispered, at first,

ng the soldiers and subalterns, were adopted,
degrees, by officers of higher rank ; and a#
any of them envied Montmorency's favour
ithe King, and more were diflatisfied with
is harh disgusting manner, the discontent soon
came great in his camp, which was filled with
neral murmurings and almost open complaints
ainft his measures. Montmorency, on whom
e entiments of his own troops made as little
reffon as the nfults of the enemy, adhered
adily to his system; though, in oder to re-
ncile the army to his maxims, no less contrary
the genius of the nation, than to the ideas of
ar among undisciplined troops, he' assumed an
usual affability in his deportmeht, and often
plained with great condefcenflon the motives
'his condut, the advantages which had already
fulted from it, and the certain success with
hich it would be attended. At last Francis
ined his army at Avignon, which having re-
ived several reinforcements, he now confidered
of strength sufficient to face the enemy. A;
e had put no small constraint upon himielf, in
onfenting that his troops hould remain so
ng upon the defensive, it can hardly be doubt.
d but that his' fondness for what was dar-
g and splendid, added to the impatience both

L a

pooK Vl. of officers and soldiers, wpuld liafthay over.
T36 ruled Monprency's faIty upo".

The retreat HAPPILY the retreat f' the enemy delivered
edndtion the kingdom from the 4dnger which Fly rah
ofthe iam resolution might have ccafioed. The Epe-

ror, after spending two inglorious months in
Provence, without having performcr any thing
suitable to his vas preparations, or that could
justify the confidence with which he had boasted
of his own power, found that, betides Antonio
de Leyva, and other officers of diftintion, he
had lolt one half of his troops by diseases, or by
famine; and that the reft were in no condition
so struggle any longer with calamities, by which
so many of their companions had perished,
Necessity, therefore, extorted from him orders
to retire; and though he was some time in mo.
tion before the French fufpetled his intention, a
body of light troops, aiifted by crowds of pea.
sants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought such desolation on their country, hung
upon the rear of the Imperialitls, and by seizing
every favourable opportunity of attacking them,
threw them often into confusion. The road by
which they fled, for they pursued their march
with such disorder and precipitation, that it
scarcely deserves the name of a retreat, was
strewed with arms or baggage, which in thcil

I Mim. de Bcllay, z69, &c. 312, &c.

hurr

urry and trepidation they had abandoned anid Book v:
overed with the sick, the wounded, and the s3,
ead; insomuch that. Martin Bellay, an eye-
itnefs of their calamities, endeavours to give
is readers some idea of it, by comparing their
iferies to those which the Jews suffered from
he vitorious and deftru&ive arms of the Ro-
ans °. If Montmotency at this critical mo-
ent had advanced with all his forces, nothing
ould have saved the whole Imperial army from
tter ruin. But that general, by sanding so
ng and so obstinately on the defensive, had
become cautious to excess; his mind, tenacious
f any bent it had once taken, could not assume
contrary one as suddenly as the change of cir-
umftances required; and he still continued to
peat his favourite maxims, that it was more
rudent to allow the lion to escape, than to drive
im to delpair, and that a bridge of gold should
e hade for a retreating enemy.

THE Emperor having conduted the 1hattered
ehains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,
and appointed the marquis del Guafto to succeed
Leyva in the government of the dutchy, set
out for Genoa. As he could not bear to ex-
pof himself to the scorn of the Italians, after
such a fad'reveriof fortune; and did not choose,

o Mer. de Belliy, 316. Sandov. Hill. del Empr. ii.

23 3 under

L 3 under

BOOK VI. under his present circurltances, to revisit thof
b'"'" cities throagh which he had so lately palsed in

triumph for one conquest, and in certain expec.
ration of another; he embarked diretly for

wovember. Spain P,

ope.ati;o NOR was the progress of his arms on the op.
Pi'ary. pofite frontier of France such as to alleviate i1

any degree the lofle which he had fuftainedis
Provence. Bellay by his address and intrigues
had prevailed on so many of the German Princes
to withdraw the contingent of troops which they
had furnished to the King of the Romans, tha
he was obliged to lay aftde all thoughts of his
intended irruption into Champagne. Thougi
I powerful army levied in the Low Countrie
entered Picardy, which they found but feeb
guarded, while the strength of the kingdom w
drawn towards the south; yet the nobility tak
ing arms with their usual alacrity, supplied b!
their spirit the defects of the King's preparations
_nd defended Peronne, arid o.ther towns whid
were attacked, with such vigour, as obliged t
enemy to retire without making any conquest
importance q,

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his ow
measures, and by the union and valour of hi

p Javii Hiftor. lib. xxxv. 174, &lC
I Mcm. de Bellay, 318, &c.

fubjetl,

fubjdcs, rendered abortive those vast effi, -ith BOOK VT
which his rival had almost zxhgufted his wholeo "
force. As this humbled: ihe nspror's arrogance'
ao less than it checked his pdwer,. he was'mor-
tified more sensibly on this occasion than.on.any.
other, during the course of the long contests be-
tween him and the French Monarch. .
; ...

ONs circurmfance. alone .embitteredthe joy Dea:h 'ft:c

with which the success of the campaigninfpired
Francis, That was the. death of the Dauphin,
his eldest son, a Prince of. great hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
resemblance to his father. This happening fud-
denly, was imputed to poison, not only.by the.
vulgar, fond of ascribing the death'of illustrious
personages to extraordinary cautes, but by the
King and his ministers. The. count de Monte- Tmplted to
cuculi, an Italian nobleman, cup-bearer to the P" oCo.
Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and put to
the torture, openly charged the Imperial gene-
rals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with having. infi-
gated.him to the commifion of that crime :. he
even threw out some indirect and obscure accufa-
tions against the Emperor himself. At a time
when all France was animated with implacable
hatred againlt Charles, thiswuncertain and extorted
charge was confidered as an inconteftible proof
of guilt; while the confidence with which both
he and his officers aferted their own innocence,

L 4 together

,K-v, *wC

'ti : gsa as elt ^a horrQoy

5 whicik ]
ey rbiaa4,oQn: thsiPir bing supposed

capable of such a, .d*etftaSie a&io were little
attended to, and- fs .egarded '. It is evident,
ow.eer, that the Emperor could have no in-
ducemnot$o perpetrat¢ such a crinme, as Francis
was itill in the vigor of life himlenf and had
two sons, beside the Dauphin, grown up to a
good ago. That fingleconfideratioR, without
mentioning the Emperor's general charater,
unblemifbed by the imputation of any deed re.
fixbling this in atrocity, is more than fufg
.cient to counterbalance the weight of a dubious
veftimony uttered during the anguish of torture ',
Accor4ing to the most unprejudiced historians,
he Dauphin's death- was occasioned by, his hav.
ing drunk too freely of cold water after over-
heating himself at tennis.; and this account, as
it is the moi fimpl, is likewif.the most cre-
dible. But if his days wee cut. lhott by pifn,
it is not improbable that the Emperor con-
jetured rightly, wn he affirmed that it had
been adminiftred by the diretioof Catharine
of Medici, in order to secure the crown to.the
Duke of Orleans* her huiband, t The advan-
tages resulting to her by the Dauphin't. deathi
were obviou s o well a great; nw did her

r Mem. de Bellay, 289.
' Sandov. iRft. del Empsr. iil. : ,
t Yfra y Zunii Vida de Cylo y. p; 7. - -

boundless

btundlefi and dariilgaatbitdotev&fciipleCt BooycVt
*nailton nteceffary twardtlmtiin ig the ota "s6
jdEtswhich le had
b tt viw ' :

'Nzrr year opened with tmranftin: D,

7d .

uncommon, but f .incapable of S~aodla the parla-
efit&, thar:icald's nor derve tobe nehde;d, ParisaPint
if it were not a striking proof. of theperforial to.
animosity whith mingled itself in an the h6ftF
lities between Charles and Framis, and whiAI
often betrayed them into such indecencies to-
,itdi each other, as lessened the'dignity of
bodth Francis, accompanied by the peers and
princes f, the blood, having taken his fea'tin
the parliament of Paris with the usual folemnn
ties, theadvocate-general appeared; and aftet
caufitg Charres of Austria; (for so he' aered
w eall the Emperor)' of having violated e
tiety of Cambray, by which he was ablblved
*fjm the hftsge due tothe crown of Pran&t
kr the couintes of Artois aid Iltthders, inrfiftt
that this treaty being now void, he was' irllto
be eonfideredi as a vassal of the ciowi, ani'by

bhqfequnce, had been guilty of retellion t'
tkrtg arims agaifift his sovereign; and therefire
ie-demandtd that Charles; fhouild be fimmonele
to- appef in person, or by his cdunfel, befofe
the. parliament of Paris,. his legal judges, to an-
fwer for his crime. The requelt was granted.;
a herald repaired to the frontiers of Picardy, and
*;' summoned

Bdr YI. summoned him with.the accutornwd formalities;

%> to appear againif a day prefixed. That term

being expired, and no person appearing in his
name, the parliament gave judgment, "That
Charles of Austria had forfeited by rebellion and
contumacy those fiefs; declared Slanders and i
Artois to be re-united to the crown of France;
and ordered their decree for this purpose to be
published by found of trumpet on the frontiers
of these provinces ".

cmPiSPn? SOON after this vain display of his resentment,
the Low.- rather than of his power, Francis marched to-
Countries,
Aia, wards the Low-Countries, as if he had intended

to execute the sentence which his parliament had
pronounced, and to seize those territories which
it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hun-
gary, to whom her brother the Emperor had
committed the government of that part of his
dominions, was not prepared for so early. a cam-
paign, he at first made ome progress, and took
several towns of importance. But being obliged
soon to leave his army, in order to superintend
the other operations of war, the Flemings hav-
ing afembled a numerous army, not only re-
covered most of the places. which they had loft,
.but began to make conqueits in their turn. At

Lettres et Memoircs 4Etat, pr Ribier,' tom. Blois.
4666. tom. i. p. '

last

Eft they invested Terouennie, and the Duke of BooK VT.
Orleans, now Dauphin, by the death of his I37.
brother, and Montmorency, whom Francis had
honoured with the constable's sword, as the re-
ward of his great services during the former
campaign, determined to hazard a battle in
order to relieve it. While they were advancing A futpf
for this purpose, and within a few miles of the thaer1
enemy, they were ftopt hort by the arrival of an
herald from the Queen of Hungary, acquaint-
ing him that a suspension of arms .was now
agreed upon.

THIS unexpeced event was owing to the zeal-

ous endeavours of the two sifters, the Queens
of France and of Hungary, who had long la-
boured to reconcile the contending Monarchs.
The war in the Netherlands had laid waste the
frontier provinces of both countries, without any
real advantage to either. The French and
Flemings equally regretted the interruption of
,their commerce, which was beneficial to both.
Charles as well as Francis, who had each strained
to the utmost, in order to support the vast opera-
tions of the former campaign, found that they
could not now keep armies on foot in this quar-
ter, without weakening their operations in Pied-
wont, where both wished to puti the war with
the greatest vigour. All these circumstances fa-
cilitated the negotiations of the two Queens; a July 30.

truce

Bow VJI truc, ewas concluded, to cotihiu in force sos

" ?"' ten months, but it extended no farther than the

L37 ow-Countries'.
And IN Piedmont the war was till prosecuted with

great animofitcy and though neither Charles
to6r Francis could make the powerful efforts to
which this animosity prompted them, they con-
tinued to exert themselves like combatants,
whose rancour remains after their strength is ex-
haufted. Towns were alternately loft and re-
taken; ikirmihes were fought every day; and
much blood was fled, without any decisive ac-
tion,, that gave the superiority to either fide. At
laR the two Queens, determining not to leave
unfinilhed the good work which they had begut
prevailed, by their importunate solicitations the
one on her brother, the other on her huibadd,
to consent also to a truce in Piedmont for three
moathL. The conditions of.it were, that each
il.out.lrep poeflion of what was in his hands,
adaftCr kaving garrisons in the towns, lhouldi
withdraw his army out of the province; and that
plenipotentiaries hould be appointed to adjut
all matters in dispute by a final treaty Y.
Uot.Of THE powerful motive which inclined bth

Princes to thi; accommodation, have been aften
ientioned. he expec s of the Wir'had fat

Mceoiro, de Rilier. 56. Y Ibidi 6:.

g exceeded

qcedd te fumta which their revenues were BooK VI
ca, 1 ofsgypplying,. nor durst they venture 1537
upon any great addition to the impofilions then
eft4bliled, us fuje4s were not yet taught to
lgar.wih patince the immenfebutrdei to which
they have become accufiomed in ttodin tiniLes.
The Emperor, in panticlar, though he-had
contrated .debts which in that age appeared
pf4igious , had it not in his power to pay
thle rge arrears long due to his army. At
the fame time he had no profpe& of deriving
any aid in money or men either from the
Pope or Venetians, though he had employed
promie and threats, alernarely, in order to
procure it. But he found the former not oly
fited in his resolution of adhering steadily to the
nautrality which he had. always declared to be
fgisablq to is hara&er: but pafionately de.
Irous of bringing about a peace. He perceived
th4t the latter were ill intent on their anciint
9o.jt of holding the balance even between'd
r.l, and felicitous not to throw too grat a
weight into eithor scale.

WHAT made a deeper impreflion on Charlea of whih,

than all these, was the dread of the TurSkil inc :wi,:,
arms, which by his league with Solyman, Frian. tur:,ki
i had dawn upon him. Though. Franc .'tt

Ribier, i, 294, . .wiho;

withou

Boo V;. without the affiftnce of :a.fingle ally, had a wa

'357. to maintain against an enemy greatly superior

in.power to himfeif, yet so grat'was the horror
of Christians, in that age, at any union with
Infidels, which they confidered not only'as dif-
honourable but profane, that it was long before
he couldbe brought to avail himself of the ob-
vious advantages refultingfrom such a confede-
racy. Necessity at last surmounted his delicacy
and scruples. Towards the close of the preced-
ing years La Forest, a secret agent at. the Otto;
man Porte, had concluded a treaty with the
Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to invade
the kingdom of Naples, during the next cam-
paign, and to attack the King of the Romans
in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis
undertook to enter the Milanese at the fame
time with a proper force. Solyman had punc-
tually performed what was incumbent on him.
Barbaroffa.with a great fleet appeared on the
cdrit of Naples, filled that kingdom; from which
all the troops had been drawn towards Piedmont;
with cpnfternation, landed without refitance
near Taranto, obliged CaItro, a place of some
strength, to surrender, plundered the adjacent
country, and was taking measures for securing
and extending his conquests, when the unexpe&-
ed arrival of Doria, together with the Pope's
gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian fleet,
'nade it prudept for him to retire. In Hungary

the

th? progei of the Turks, was more foepidabl. Boo VL
Mahet, their general, after gaining several '57
small advantages, defeated the.Germans in a
great battle at Effek on the Drave . Happily
for Chriftepdom, it was not in Francis's power
to execute with equal exatnefs what he had fti-
pulated; nor could he afremble at this juncture
an army strong enough to penetrate into the Mi-
lanefe. By this he failed in recovering pofeflion
of that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved
from the calamities of a new war, but from
feeling the desolating rage of the Turkish arms,
as an addition to all that it had fufferedb. As
the Emperor knew that he could not long resist
the efforts of two such powerful confederates,
nor could expe& that the fame fortunate acci-
dents would concur a second time to deliver
Naples, and to preserve the Milanese: As he
foresaw that the Italian states would, not only
tax him loudly with insatiable ambition, but
might even turn their arms against him, if he
fmould be so regardless of their danger as obfti-
nately to protract the war, he thought it necef-
fary, both for his safety and reputation, to give
his content to a truce. Nor was Francis willing
to sustain all the blame of obftruting the re.
eftablihment of peace, or to expose himself on

* lfuanhaffi Hist. Hung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
b Jovii Hillor. lib, xxxv. p. 183.

that

io W thateccount to the danger ofeing dedrted by

,W, the Swif and other foraigntr in his service. He

even began to apprehend that his own subje&s
would serve him coldly. if by contributing to
aggrandize- the power of the Infidel, which it
was his duty, and had been the ambition of his
snceftors to depress, he continued to a& in direA
oppofitiot to all the principles which ought to
Influence a Monarch diftinguilhed by the title of
Most Christian King. He chore, for all these
reasons, rather to run the risk of difobliging
his new ally the Sultan, than by an unfeafon.
able adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit
what was of greater consequence.

eigoca; - BUT though both parties consented to a truce,
peace bes the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficul.
twen ties in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty.
Charles and
Franci. Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of

a conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other;
and neither would so far acknowledge his infe-
riority, as to sacrifice any point of honour, or to
reinquilh any matter of right; so that the pleni-
3533. potentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless

negociations, and separated after agreeing to
prolong the truce for a few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair of ac.
tonu,^'p complilhing a point in which the plenipotentiaries
f'ro had failed, and took upon himself the sole bur-

den

n of negociating a peace. To form a confe; Boor Vr.

deracycapable of defending Christendom from 1538.
the formidable inroads of the.Turkilh arms, and
to concert effectual measures for the extirpation
f the Lutheran heresy,, were two great obje&s
which Paul had much at heart, and he confidered
the union of the Emperor with the King of
rance as an eflential preliminary to both. To
the intirument of reconciling there contend-

ng Monarchs, whom his predecessors by their
nterefted and indecent intrigues had so often
mbroiled, was a circumstance which could not
ail of throwing diftinguilhed luRre on his cha-
acer and administration. Nor was he without
opes that, while he pursued this laudable end,
e might secure advantages to his own family,
he aggrandizing of which he did not neglet,
ough he aimed at it with a less audacious am.
ition than was common among the Popes of
hat century. Influenced by there confidera-
ons, he proposed an interview between the
wo Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair
ither in person, that he might at as mediator
n composing all their differences. When a
ontiff of a venerable character, and of very
dvanced age, was willing, from his zeal for
eace, to undergo the fatigues of such a distant
ourney, neither Charles nor Francis could with
ecency decline the interview. But though both
ame to the place of rendezvous, so great was
VOL. III. M the

BOOK VI. the difficulty of adjusting the ceremonial, or such

1538. the remains of distrust and rancour on each fide,

that they refused to fee one another, and every
thing was tranfafted by the intervention of the
Pope, who visited them alternately. With all
his zeal and ingenuity he could not find out a
method of removing the obfacles which pre.
vented a final accommodation, particularly thole
arising from the possession of the Milanese; nor
was all the weight of his authority sufficient to
overcome the obstinate perseverance of eitherj

A trcf or Monarch in aflerting his own claims. At last,
ten years
concluded that he might not seem to have laboured altoge
at Nice.
JU"n Is. ther without effect, he prevailed on them to sign

a truce for ten years,. upon the fame condition
with the former, that each should retain what
was now in his poffeflon, and in the mean time
ihould fend ambafladors to Rome, to difcu
their pretensions at leisure .

Tius ended a war of no long continuance

but very extensive in its operations, and in which
both parties exerted their utmost strength.
Though Francis failed in the object that he had
principally in view, the recovery of the MiLl
neie, he acquired, nevertheless, great reputa
tion by the wisdom of his measures as well as

cRecucil des Traitez, ii. 210. Rclatione del Nirfic

Tiepolo del'abocamcntu di Nizza chez. Du Mont Co'l,
Diplomat. par. ii. p. 1 74.

!'h

the success of his arms in repulsing a formidable BOOK VrI
invasion; and by securing possession of one half j38.
of the Duke of Savoy's dominions, he added no
inccnfiderable acceflion to his kingdom. 'Whereas
Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boast-
ed so arrogantly of vietory, purchased an inglo.
rious truce, by sacrificing an ally who had rashly
confided too much in his friendship and power.
The unfortunate Duke murmured, complained,
and remonstrated against a treaty so much to his
ifadvantage, but in vain; he had no means of
erefs, and was obliged to submit. Of all his
ominions, Nice, with its dependencies, was
he only corner or which he himself kept posses-
ion. lie saw the ieft divided between a power-
ul invader and the ally to whose protection he
ad trusted, while he remained a fad monument
f the imprudence of weak Princes, who by
aking part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours,
between whom they happen to be situatcd, are
rushed and overwhelmed in the fliock.
A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce, Intersiew

betwrcn

the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was Charkis a
driven by contrary winds to the iand St. Mat- ^i"'-
garet o the coafl- of lProvence. When Francis, "'"'
who happened to be not far iftant, he;:rd of
this, he confidered it as an oice of civility to
invite him to take helter in his dominions, and
ropolfd a perlbnal interview witl him at

M2 Aiguel s

Boor VI. Aigues-mortes. The Emperor, who would no

1538. be out-done by his rival in complalfance, instantly

repaired thither. As soon as he call anchor in
the road, Francis, without waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relying implicitly on
the Emperor's honour for his security, visited
him on board his galley, and was received and
entertained with the warmest demonstrations of
eteem and affeCion. Next day the Emperor
repaid the confidence which the King had placed
in him. He landed at Aigues-mortes with as
little precaution, and met with a reception
equally cordial. He remained on shore during
the night, and in both visits they vied with each
other in expressions of refpe& and friendfhipd.
After twenty years of open hostilities, or of fe.
cret enmity; after so many injuries reciprocally
inflicted or endured; after having formally given
the lie and challenged one another to single com-
bat; after the Emperor had inveighed so pub.
lickly against Francis as a Prince void of honour
or integrity; and Francis had accused him as
accessary to the murder of his eldest son, such an
interview appears altogether fngular and even
unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs
abounds with such surprising transitions. From

a Sandov. Hill. vol. ii. 238. Relation de l'entrevue de

Charl. V. & Fran. I. par M. de la Rivoire. Hill. de Lann
gued. par D. D, Do Vic & Vaifttc, tom. v. Preuves, p. 93.

implacable

implacable enmity they appeared to pass, in a BooK VI.
moment, to the most cordial reconcilement; 1538
from suspicion and distrust to perfec confidence;
and from praEtifing all the dark arts of a deceit-
ful policy, they could assume, of a sudden, the
liberal and open manners of two gallant gentle-
men.

THE Pope, betides the glory of having re-

stored peace to Europe, gained, according to
his expe&tation, a point of great consequence to
his family, by prevailing on the Emperor to be-
troth Margaret of Austria, his natural daughter,
formerly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to
his grandson Otavio Farnese, and in confidera-
tion of this marriage, to beltow several honours
and territories upon his future fon-in-law. A The lri.

nation of

very tragical event, which happened about the Alexander
beginning of the year one thousand five hundred di Mcdxci.
and thirty-feven, had deprived Margaret of her
first husband. That young prince, whom the
Emperor's partiality had raised to the supreme
power in Florence, upon the ruins of the publick
liberty, neglected entirely the cares of govern-
ment, and abandoned himself to the most diffo.
lute debauchery. Lorenzo di Medici his nearest
kinsman was not only the companion but direc-
tor of his pleasures, and employing all the
powers of a cultivated and inventive genius in
tis dishonourable ministry, added such elegance

M 3 as

BOOK VI. as well as variety to vice as gained him an ablfo

, lute acendant over the mind of Alexander. But

while Lorenzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and
affected such an appearance of indolence and
effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword,
and trembled at the fight of blood, he concealed
under that disguise, a dark, designing, audacious
spirit. Prompted either by the love of liberty,
or allured by the hope of attaining the fupremc
power, he determined to assassinate Alexander
his benefacor and friend. Though he long
revolved this design in his mind, his reserved
and suspicious temper prevented him from com-
municating it to any person whatever; and con-
tinuing to live with Alexander in their usual
familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an aignation with a lady of
high rank whom he had often solicited, drew
that unwary Prince into a secret apartment of his
house, and there stabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch expecting the arrival of the
lady whose company he had been promised. But
no sooner was the deed done, than sanding
astonished, and struck with horror at its atrocity,
he forgot, in a moment, all the motives which
had induced him to commit it. Instead of rouz-
ing the people to recover their liberty by pub-
lithing the death of the tyrant, instead of taking
any ftep towards opening his own way to the
dignity now vacant, he locked the door of the

apartmcnt,

apartment, and, like a man bereaved of reason BooK VI.
and pretence of mind, fled with the utmost pre- ,38
cipitation out of the Florentine territories. It
was late next morning before the fate of the un-
fortunate Prince was known, as his attendants,
accustomed to his irregularities, never entered his
apartment early. Immediately the chief persons
in the state assembled. Being induced partly by
the zeal of cardinal Cibo for the house of Me-
dici, to which he was nearly related, partly by
the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who re- Cos. d

- Mcl,:i'li
called to their memory and represented in frik- pl-ad tthe

held of tlc

ing colours the caprice as well as turbulence of Florentine
their ancient popular government, they agreed
to place Cofino di Medici, a youth of eighteen,
the only male heir of that illustrious house, at
the head of the government; though at the
fame time such was their love of liberty, that
they eftablilhed several regulations in order to
circumscribe and moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place il;s govrn.

of safety, made known what he had done, to ^1' y, ,=."
Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who "'' ..'""
had been driven into exile, or who had vo-
luntarily retired, when the republican form
of government was abolished, in order to make
way for the dominion of the Medici. By
them, the deed was extolled with extravagant
praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was compared

M 4 with

Rooc VL with that of the elder Brutus, who disregarded

8.- the ties of blood, or with that of the younger,

who forgot the friendihip and favours of the
tyrant, that they might preserve or recover the
liberty of their countrye. Nor did they reft
satisfied with empty panegyricks; they imme.
diately quitted their different places of retreat,
assembled forces, animated their vassals and par-
tifans to take arms, and to seize this oppor-
tunity of te-eftablifhing the publick liberty on its
ancient foundation. Being openly assisted by
the French ambassador at Rome, and secretly
encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good-
will to the house of Medici, they entered the
Florentine dominions with a considerable body
of men. But the persons who had elected Cosmo
possessed not only the means of supporting his
government, but abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner. They levied, with the
greatest expedition, a good number of troops;
they endeavoured by every art, to gain the citi-
zens of greatest anthority, and to render the
administration of the young Prince agreeable to
the people. Above all, they courted the Em-
peror's protetion, as the only firm foundation
of Cosmo's dignity and power. Charles, know-
ing the propensity of the Florentines to the
friendlhip of France, and how much all the
partisans of a republican government detested

* Lcttcre di Prindipi, tom, iii. p. 5Z.

him

him as the oppressor of their liberties, saw it to Boo Vt,
be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-efta- 1538.
bliihment of the ancient constitution in Florence.
For this reason, he not only acknowledged
Cosmo as head of the Florentine state, and con-
ferred on him all the titles of honour with which
Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to
defend him to the utmost; and as a pledge of
this, ordered the commanders of such of his
troops as were stationed on the frontiers of Tuf-
cany, to support him against all aggressors. By
their aid, Cosmo obtained an.eafy victory ovdr
the exiles, whose troops he surprised in the
night-time, and took most of the chiefs pri-
foners: an event which broke als their measures,
and fully established his own authority. But
though he was extremely desirous of the addi-
tional honour of marrying the Emperor's daugh-
ter, the widow of his predeceflor, Charles, fe-
cure already of his attachment, chose rather to
gratify the Pope by bestowing her on his ne.
phew f.

DURING the war between the Emperor and The rrend-

ship betweeq

Francis, an event had happened which abated Francs and
in rome degree the warmth and cordiality of bn,"'toL
friendship which had long subsisted between the abaLte

r Jovii Hilt. c. xcviii .

p. 8, &c. Belcarii Comment.

I. xxii. p. 696. Ilforia de fui tmpi di Giov, Bat. Adriani.
Vc- 's587. p. lo.

latter

BooK VI. latter and the King of England. James the Fifth

8'^ of Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince, hav-

ing heard of the Emperor's intention to invade
Provence, was so fond of hewing that he did
not yield to any of his ancestors in the incerity
of his attachment to the French crown, and so
eager to diftinguith himself by some military
exploit, that he levied a body of troops with
an intention of leading them in person to the
assistance of the King of France. Though some
unfortunate accidents prevented his carrying any
troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately upon
his landing, he hastened to Provence, but' had
been detained so long in his voyage that he came
too late to have any hare in the military opera-
tions, and met the King on his return after the
retreat of the Imperialists. But Francis was so
greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with
his manners and conversation, that he could not
refute him his daughter Magdalen, whom he
j,. ,i, demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-

tremely to fee a Prince of whom he was immo-
derately jealous, form an alliance, from which
he derived such an acceflion of reputation as well
as security'. He could not, however, with de-
cency, oppose Francis's bestowing his daughter
upon a Monarch descended from a race of

t Hilf. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

Princes,

Princes, the most ancient and faithful allies of BooK VI.
the French crown. Butwhen James, upon the 138.
sudden death of Magdalen, demanded as his
second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly soli-
cited Francis to deny his suit, and in order to
disappoint him, asked that lady in marriage for
himself. When Francis preferred the Scottifl
King's sincere courthip to his artful and male-
volent proposal, he discovered much diffatis-
fa&ion. The pacification agreed upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renoun-
ced his friendship for the fake of new- connec-
tions with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly The Empe-
acquainted with the temper of the Engliih King, Hinrv.
and watchful to observe all the hiftings and
caprices of his passions, thought this a favour-
able opportunity of renewing his negociations
with him, which had been long broken off. By
the death of Queen Catharine, whofi interest the
Emperor could not with decency have abandon-
ed, the chief cause of their discord was removed;
so that without touching upon the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take what
measures he thought most effetual for regaining
Henry's good-will. For this purpose; he began
with proposing fevcral marriage-treaties to the
King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the
King of Denmark, to Henry himfclf; he de.

mandcd

BooK vT. manded the princess Mary for one of the Princes
353. of Portugal, and was even willing to receive her

as the King's illegitimate daughter b. Though
none of these projeted alliances ever took place,
or perhaps were ever seriously intended, they
occasioned such frequent intercourse between the
courts, and so many reciprocal profeflions of
civility and esteem, as considerably abated the
edge of Henry's rancour against the Emperor,
and paved the way for that union between them
which afterwards proved so disadvantageous to
the French King.

tptre tef THE ambitious schemes in which the Empe-
the Rcfor.
W'uon. ror had been engaged, and the wars he had been

carrying on for some years, proved, as usual, ex-
tremely favourable to the progress of the Refor-
mation in Germany. While Charles was absent
upon his African expedition, or intent on his
vast projecs against France, his chief object in
Germany was to prevent the dissensions about
religion from disturbing the publick tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the Protestant
Princes as might induce them to concur with
his measures, or at least hinder them from tak-
ing part with his rival. For this reason, he was
careful to secure to the Protestants the poffeflion
of all the advantages which they had gained by
the articles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the

k Mem. de Ribicr, t i. 496.

year

year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two'; BOOK VL.
and except some night trouble from the pro-
ceedings of the Imperial chamber, they met with
nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their
religion, or to interrupt the successful zeal with
which they propagated their opinions. Mean- Negocia.
while the Pope continued his negociations for intrigue,
convoking a general council; and though the ith,;e
Protcftants had expressed great diffatisfation teneri
with his intention to fix upon Mantua as the
place of meeting, he adhered obstinately to his
choice, issued a bull on the second of June, one
thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing
it to afremble in that city on the twenty-third of
May the year following; he nominated three
cardinals to preside in his name; enjoined all
Chritian Princes to countenance it by their au.
thority, and invited the prelates of every nation
to attend in person. This citation of a council,
an assembly which from its nature and intention
demanded quiet times, as well as pacifick difpo-
fitions, at the very jun6ture when the Emperor
was on his march towards France, and ready to
involve a great part of Europe in the confusions
of war, appeared to every person extremely un-
seasonable. It was intimated, however, to all
the different courts by nuncios dispatched of

t Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part . p. 138.

purpcle,

BooK VI. purpofek. With an intention to gratify the

t Germans, the Emperor, during his residence

in Rome, had warmly solicited the Pope to call
a council; but being at the fame time willing
to try every art in order to persuade Paul to de-
part from the neutrality which he preserved be-
tween him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice-
chancellor into Germany, along with a nuncio
dispatched thither, inftruting him to second
all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce
them with the whole weight of the Imperial au-

teb. 2. thority. The Protestants gave them audience
s537.

at Smalkalde, where they had assembled in a
body, in order to receive them. But after
weighing all their arguments, they unanimously
refused to acknowledge a council summoned in
the name and by the authority of the Pope
alone; in which he assumed the sole right of pre-
fiding; which was to be held in a city not only
far distant from Germany, but fubje: to a
Prince, a itranger to them, and closely connet-
ed with the court of Rome ; and to which their
divines could not repair with safety, especially
after their doctrines had been stigmatized in the
very bull of convocation with the name of
hercfy. These and many other objections againit
the council, which appeared to them unanl'wer-
able? they enumerated. in a large maniclto,

i Pallavic. -lilt. Conc. Trid. 113.

wlhi.

which they published in vindication of their con- Boos vr.
du& '. 155

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed

as a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and pre-
fumption, and the Pope ill persisted in his re-
solution to hold the council at the time and in
the place appointed. But ome unexpeted dif-
ficulties being started by the Duke of Mantua;
both about the right of jurifdition over the per-
sons who resorted to the council, and the fccu-
rity of his capital amidst such a concourse of
strangers, the Pope, after fruitless endeavours
to adjust these, first prorogued the council for oaob.A
some months, and afterwards transferring the "3'
place of meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian ter-
ritories, appointed it to aflemble on the first of
May in the following year. As neither the Em.
peror nor French King, who. had not then come
to any accommodation, would permit their sub-
jets to repair thither, not a ingle prelate ap-
peared on the day prefixed, and the Pope, that
his authority might not become altogether con-
temptible by so many ineffetual intimations,
put off the meeting by an indefinite proroga-
tion m.

Sleidan, 1. xii. 123, &c. Seckend. Corn. lib. iii. p.
143, &c.

m F.Paul, 117. Pallavic. 117.

Bur

BooK I.- BUT, that he might not seem. to. ha

..A>s'v~ turned his wiole attention towards a reforna-

A fartial tion which he was not able to accompliih, while
of buf.esby he neglected that which was in his own power,

he deputed a certain number of cardinals and
bilhops, with full authority to inquire into the
abuses and corruptions of the Roman court ; and
to propose the mot effectual method of remov-
ing them. This scrutiny, undertaken with re-
luAance, was carried on floaly and with remiss-
ness. All defets were touched with a gentle
hand, afraid of probing too deep, or of discover
ing too much. But even by this partial exami-
nation, many irregularities were detected, and
many enormities exposed to light, while the re.
medies which they suggested as most proper,
were either inadequate, or were never applied.
The report and resolutions of there deputies,
though intended to be kept secret, were tranf-
mitted by some accident into Germany, and be-
ing immediately made publick, afforded ample
matter for reflection and triumph to the Pro-
teftants". On the one hand they demonstrated
the necellty of a reformation in the head as well
as the members of the church, and even pointed
out many of the corruptions against which Lu-
ther and his followers had remonstrated with the
greatest vehemence. They ihewed, on the other

"Sleidan, 233.

hand,

hand; that it was tain to expet this reffo a- Boot Vr[
tdof from ecclefiafticks themselves, wh6, as Lu-
ther floigly expressed it, piddled at curing
wafts, while they overlooked or confirmed ul-
cers .
:THB earneltnefs with which the Emiperof Ai pg,

formed in

seemed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the oppo ion
Pope's scheme of holding a council in Italy, m th'i`
alarmed the Protestant Princes so much, that
they thought it prudent to strengthen theircon.
federacy, by admitting several new members
who solicited that privilege, particularly the
King of Denmark. Heldo, who, during his re-
fidence in Germany, had observed all the ad-
vantages which they derived from that union,
endeavoured to counterbalance its effects by an
alliance among the catholick powers of the Em.
pire. This league diftinguilhed by the name of
Holy, was merely defensive; and though con-
cluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes P.

THE Proteitants soon got intelligence of this Atrirs .he

association, notwithstanding all the endeavours
of the contrating parties to conceal it; and
their zeal, always apt to fufpec and to dread,

o Seck. 1. iii. 164. Seck. 1. iii. 171. Recueil
do Trictez.

VOL. III N even

OOK VI. v en to ecxcel,. every, thing, ta: erned to

- threaten religion, nfttlanly took the alarm as if

the Emperor ha#i beenjuft readr, to enter upon
the execution of fame formidable pap for the
extirpation of their opinions. In order to difap.
point this, they held frequent consultations, they
corted the Kings of EraimeQ and England with
great assiduity, and even bega tohick of raif-
ing the refpe&ive coingents bo: in. ien and
money which they were obligedto fu&nib by the
treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not long be.
fore they were convinced that these apprehen-
sions were without foundation, and that the
Eperor, to whom repose was absolutely necef.
fary after efforts so much beyond his strength in
the war with France, had no thoughts of dif-
nurbingthe ranqillity ofGcrmaany. As aproof
of this, at an interview with the Protestant
April 9. Princes in Francfort, his ambaladors agreed that

all concerflons in their favour4 particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
fiould continue in force for fifteen months;
that during this period all proceedings of the
Imperial chamber against them lhould be sus-
pended that a conference should be held by a
few divines of each party, in order to discuss the
points in controversy, and to propose articles of
accommodation which should be laid before the
next diet. Though the Emperor, that he might
not irritate the Pope, who remonstrated againfl

:* . ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t<

the'firlt pat of this agreement 'as ifnpolitick, Boo YI.
and againt the' tter'a an impious encroach- i j9.
ment upon his prerogative, never fornally rati-
fed this c6nvetiion ! it wat observed wvith confi-
diiable etiihfs, arid gteatly strength'ened the
basis off'tat ecdleiaftical lberty, foi which the
Protefttflt'icdntended 1.

I PEW, days after the convention at Francforr, April t.

Reforms.
G¢orge uke of Saxony died, and his death was tion efa-

blifhed it

an event.of great advantage to the Reformation. ,vy p^rt
ThatPrincethe head of the Albertine,or younger of saoaya
branch of the Saxon family, possessed, as marquis
of Mifiia ad Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehendingDrefden,Leipfick,and other cities
now the most considerable in the ele&orate.
From the first dawn of the Reformatio, he had
been its enemy as avowedly as the ele&oral
Princes were its prote6ors< and had carried on
his opposition not only with all the eal lowing
from religious prejudices, but with a virulence
infpifed by pdrfonal antipathy to Luther, and
imbittsed by the doneftick anlmofly subsisting
betweei hitm: ard the other brarch of his family.
By his death without issue, his fucceflion fell to
his brother Henry, whose attachment t the
Protestant iligio furpafed, if poflible, that of
his ptedcfelfor to popery. Henry no fooier took

F. Paul, 82. Slcid. 247. Seek. I. iii. oo.

N pofFcifon

P.oo yI. even to. excesi, every- thing .tha sered to

'539. threaten religion, jitapdy tool the alarm as if

the Emperor hal been juit ready,to enter upon
the execution of. fom formidablI pa ..for the
extirpation of their opinions. In order to difap.
point this, they held frequent consultations, they
courted the Kings of Franew an4 England witb
great assiduity, and even began t;hik of raif-
ing the refpetive contingnts botb in: ten and
money which they were obligedto furnifl by the
treaty of Smalkalde, But it was not long be.
fore they were convinced that these apprehen-
ijons were without foundation, and that the
Emperor, to whom repose was absolutely necef.
fary after efforts so much beyond his firength in
the war with France, had no thoughts of dif-
turbing the tranqillity of Germanay.. Aaproof
es this, at an interview with the Protestant
April ,9. Princes in Francfors, his amballtos agreed that

all conceflions in their favourn particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
shoud continue in force for fifteen months;
that during this period all proceedings. of the
Imperial chamber against them should be sus-
pended that a confeence should be held by a
few divines of each party, in order to discuss the
points in controversy, and o propos articles of
accommodation which should be laid before the
next diet. Though the Emperor, that he might
not irritate the Pope, who remonfirated against

the

the'firft part of this agreement 'as ifnpolitick, Boo Yl.
and against the' atter'as' an impiou's er'c/ach- i5 9;
mnent upon his prerogative; hever for/naily tati
sied this conve'ition,' it waS observed with' confi-
derable ae cess, aridd gteatly ftrengthehed the
basis df'tiat ecdleiaftical berty, for which the
Proteftiaflt'icdntendd ,.

: , . .

. ... . . .
^ FZW day.s after the convention at Francfior, Apr;l,.

Reformi

G9orge puke of Saxony died, and his death was tion ela-
n eyent.f great advantage.to the Refomation. b'i^ryd r
ThatPrince,the head of the Albertine,or younrger of $*tony
branch of the Saxon family, possessed, as marquis
of Mifnia ahd Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dredien,Leipfick,and other cities
now the most considerable in the ele&orate.
From the sirs dawn of the Reformatiob, he had
'ben.its enemy as avowedly as the electoral
Princes were its protetorsr and had carried on
his opposition noxt only with all the zeal flowing
from religious prejudices, but with a virulence
infpided by pdrfonal antipathy to Luther, and
inbitted by the domeftek anlmonty subsisting
betwen hih arid the other branch of his family,
By his death without issue, his fuccefiona fell to
his brother Henry, whose attachment ta the
Proteitant eligion furpafld, if possible, that of
his predecessor to popery. Henry no sooner took

' F. Paul, 82. Sleid. 247. Seck. 1. iii. oo.

N a poffeflion

..* ->- i> . * .
, OK V. polfflion of his new dominions, than, disregard-

;,- ing a laufe in George's.will, dilated by his

bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his terri-
tories to the Emperor and King of the Romans,
if his brother hould attempt to make any inno-
vation in religion, he invited ome Protestant
divines, and among them Luther himself, to
Leipfick. By their advice and afliftance, he
overturned in a few weeks the whole system of
ancient rites, establishing the full exercise of the
reformed religion, with the univeifalapplaufe
of his fubjefs, who had long wdfled for this
change, which the authority of their Duke alone
had hitherto prevented'. This revolution de-
liveted the Protestants from the danger to which
they were exposed by- having an inveterate ene-
my situated in the middle of their territories;
and their dominions now extended in one great
and almost unbroken line from the hore of'the
Baltick to the banks of the Rhine.

A r.-tiny SoON after the conclusion of the Truce at
'tr,'op, Nice,, n event happened, which satisfied all

Europe that Charles had prosecuted the war to
the utmost extremity that the tate of his affairs
would permit. Vast arrears were due to his
troops, whom he had. long amused with vain
hopes and promises. As they now foresaw that

' Scidan, 249,

littll

little attention would be paid to their demands, BooK V.
when by the re-eftabliffment, of peace their ser- 153 .
vices became of less importance, they loft all
patience, broke out into an open mutiny, and de-
clared that they thought themselves entitled to
teize by violence what was detained from them
contrary to all jufice. Nor was this spirit of
sedition confined to one part of the Emperor's
dominions; the mutiny was almost as general as
the grievance which gave rife to it. The fol-
diers in the Milanese plundered the open coun-
try without controul, and filled the capital itself
with consternation. Those in garrison at Go-
letta threatened to give up that important fort-
refs to Barbarossa. In Sicily the troops proceeded
to ill greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they ele&ed others in their stead,
defeated a body of men whom the viceroy sent
against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conducting themselves all the while, in such a
manner, that their operations resembled rather
the regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion,
than the rashness and violence of a military mu-
tiny. But by the address and prudence of the
generals, who partly by borrowing money in'
their own name, or in that of their mailer,
partly by extorting large fums from the cities
in their refpedtive provinces, raited what was
sufficient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers,
there infurreaions were quelled. The greater

N 3 part

BooK VjI part of the troops being dilbanded, such a nun-

ber only being kept in pay as was necefary
for garrisoning the principal towns, and pro-
tetting the sea-coasts from the infuits of the
Turk'.

cr, *or

ol fd -fIT was happy for the Emperor that the abi-

Castile held a b
It Toled. lities of his generals extricated him out of these

difficulties, which it exceeded his own power to
have removed. He had depended, as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his
soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expected
from his Castilian fubjets. For this purpose,
he assembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo,
and having represented to them the great ex-
pence of his military operations, together with
the vast debts in which these had necessarily in-
volved him, he proposed to levy such supplies
as the present exigency of his affairs demanded,
by a general excite on commodities. But the

The om. Spaniards already felt themselves oppressed with
plaints and '

p

diftrtifac- a load of taxes unknown to their ancestors.
lipa ofthat
almbly They had often complained that their country

was drained not only of its wealth but of its
inhabitants, in order to. prosecute quarrels in
which it was not interested, and to fight battles
from which it could reap no bpeefit, and they
determined not to a4d'voltntary to their

Jovii HiRor. I. xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov, Ferrcra,
ix. 209.

own

own. burdens, or to furnih the Emperor with BOOK Vt.
the means of engaging in new enterprizes no less -3'

1539.

ruinous to the kingdom than most of those which
he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular, inveighed with great vehemence
against the imposition proposed, as an encroach-
ment upon the valuable and diftinguilhing pri-
vilege of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded
a conference with the representatives of the cities
concerning the state of the nation. They con-
tended that if Charles would imitate the example
of his predecessors, who had resided constantly
in Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in
a multiplicity of tranfacions foreign to the con-
cerns of his Spanish dominions, the stated reve-
nuts of the crown would be fully sufficient to
defray the necessary expences of government.
They represented to him that it would be unjust
to lay new burdens upon the people, while this
prudent and effetual method of re-establishing
public credit, and securing national opulence,
was totally negleedt. Charles, after employ-
ing arguments,. entreaties, and promises, but
without fuccets, in order to overcome their ob-
ftinacy, dinied the affcmbly with great indig- The .c;ent
nation. From that peliod:neitherthe nobles nor otnfltor,
the prelates have been called to there aflmblies, Cubvcrted.

Sandor. Hid. vol i. 69.

N on

BoOK VI. on pretence tatrfuch as paypo part of the pub

!S'K^ lick taxes, flould not clim any vote in layipg

them on. None have been admitted to the Cortex
but the procurators or representatives of eig4.
teen cities. These, to the number of thirty-fix,
being two from each community, form, an as-
fembly which bears no resemblance either in
power or dignity or independence to the ancient
Cortes, and are absolutely at the devotion of the
court in all their determinationsu. Thus the
imprudent zeal with which the Castilian nobles
Fad flipported the regal prerogative, in oppq-
fition to the claims of the commons during the
commotions in the year one thousand five hun.
dred and twenty-one, proved at last fatal to
their own body. By enabling Charles to depress
pne of the orders in the fate, .they destroyed
that balance to which the conffitution owed its
security, and put itinhis power, ori that of his
successors, to' humble the other, and to strip it
of its mot valuable privileges.

,,eSp1rnd AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees
ajilipolerd Rill possessed extraordinary power as well as pri-
set. vileges, which they exercised and defended with

an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this
the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof du-
ring the meeting of the Cottes at Toledo. As

u Sandov. ibid. La Science du Gouverpnemn, par M.

de Real tom, ii .
p. o,

he

he wa eturning one day from a'turnament ac- BooK vl.
companied by most of the nobility, one of the 159
frjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to
clear the way for the Emperor, struck the Duke
of Infantado's horse with his batton, which that l , 7
haughty grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat ,-t //
and wounded the officer. Charles, provoked ,4 1X.
at such an insolent deed in his presence, imme- . .,
diately ordered Ronquillo thejudge of the court ''L 'L
to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advanced to exe- , .
cute his charge, when the constable of Caffile .: t .
interposing, checked him, claimed the right of * ' '4
jqrifdition over a.grandee as a privilege of his ~ ,^,
office, and conducted Infantado to his own apart- si rt. ,
ment. All the nobles present were so pleased o'", t

- ' * toz., ~

with the boldness of the conitable in aflerting .^ ,7
the rights of their order, that deserting the Em- C ,
peror, they attended him to his house with in- ^^.
finite applauses, and Charles returned to the
palace without any person along with him but
the cardinal Tavera. The Emperor, however
sensible of the affront, saw the danger of irri-
tating a jealous and high spirited order of
aen, whom the flightef appearance of offence
might drive to the most unwarrantable extremes.
For that reafop, instead of straining at any ill-
timed exertion of his prerogative, he prudently
connived at the arrogance of a body too potent
for him to cohtrol, and ent next morning to
the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflict what

punifhlment

BooK, V. punishment hl pleased on -he prfon who had
%o5e affronted him. The Duke confidering this as a

full reparation to his honour, instantly forgave
the officer bestowing on him, betides, a con.
fiderable present as a compensation for his
wound. Thus the affair was entirely forgotten ;
nor would it have deserved to be mentioned, if
it were not a striking example of the haughty
and independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in
that age, as well as an instance of the Emperor's
dexterity in accommodating his conduA to the
circumstances in which he was placed,
!ntureion CHARLES was far from discovering any such

t ,condescension or lenity towards the citizens of

Ghent, who not Iong after broke out into open
rebellion against his government. An event
which happened in the year ohe thousand five
hundred and' thirty-fix,' gave occasfon to this
rash infurreion to fatal' to that flourilhing city.
At that time the Queen dowager of Hungary,
governess of the Netherlands, having received
orders from her brother to invade France with
aft the forces which he could raise, ihe aem.
bled the States of the United Provinces, and ob-
tained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins. to defray the'expence of that
undertaking. Of this fum, the county of
Slanders was obliged to pay a third part as its
s 5andov.ii. A74. Frratra ixr. zi. Midiaima 113

propor.

proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the most BooK VI.
considerable city in that country, averSe to a ,39
war with France, with which they carried on an Pt.enf.lon
extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay eat-
their quota, and contended, that in consequence
of flipulations between them and the ancestors
of their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax
could be levied upon them, unless they had
given their express consent to the imposition of
it. The governess, on the other hand, main-
tained, that as the subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand forins had been granted by the States
of Slanders, of which their representatives were
members, they were bound, of course, to con-
form to what was enacted by them, as it is the
first principle in society, on which the tranquillity
and order of government depend, that the in-
clinations of the minority must be over-ruled
by the judgment and decision of the superior
number.

THE citizens of Ghent, however, were Inot prectedint

willing to relinquish a privilege of such high ,~c,:.
importance as that which they claimed. Having
been accustomed, under the government of the
house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immuni-
ties, and to be treated with much indulgence,
they disdained to sacrifice to the delegated power
of a regent, those rights and liberties which they
had often and successfully aferted against their

gre ateft

BooK VI. greatet Princes. The Queen, though he en-

,-539 deavoured at sirs to sooth them, and to recon.
1539.

cile them to their duty by various conceflions,
was at last so much irritated by the obstinacy with
which they adhered to their claim, that he or-
dered all the citizens of Ghent, on whom she
could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands,
to be arrested. But this rash aion made an
imprefion very different from what Ihe expected,
on men, whose minds were agitated with all the
violent passions which indignation at oppression
and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affeced with
the danger of their friends and companions, than
irritated at the governess, they openly despised
her authority, and lent deputies to the other
towns of Slanders, conjuring them not to aban.
don their country at such a juncture, but to con-
cur with them in vindicating its rights againt
the encroachments of a woman, who either did
not know or did not regard their immunities.
All but a few inconsiderable towns declined en-
tering into any confederacy against the gover-
ness: they joined, however, in petitioning her
to put off the term for payment of the tax so
long, that, they might have it in their power to
fend some of their number into Spain, in order
to lay their title to exemption before their fove-
reign. This he granted with some difficuity,
But Charles received their commissioners with an
haughtiness to which they were not accustomed

from

from their ancient Princes, and enjoining them BOOK vr.
to yield the fame refpetful obedience to his ,5-.
sifter, which they owed to him in person, re-
mitted the examination of their claim to the
council of Malines. This court, which is pro-
perly a ianding committee of the parliament or
states of the county, and which possesses the
supreme jurifdition in all matters civil as well
as criminal , pronounced the claim of the citi-
zens of Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed
them forthwith to pay their proportion of the
tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they con- They ake

fidered as notoriously unjust, and rendered de- FatoTub-
fperate on feeing their rights betrayed by that itto
very court which was bound to protet them, the
people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary
manner, drove such of the nobility as resided
among them out of the city; secured several
of the Emperor's officers; put one of them
to the torture, whom they accused of having
folen or destroyed the record, that contained
the privileges of exemption from taxes which
they pleaded; chore a council to which they
committed the direcion of their affairs; gave
orders for repairing and adding to their fortifi-

Y Defcrittione di tutti paefi batfl di Lud, Guicciardini.
Aq. 57t. fol. p. 53,

cations;

BoltK V. catioas and openly ereded the fandard of re.

SYr39 bellion against their sovereign s. Sensible, how.
q139.

ever, of their inability to support what their
zeal had prompted them to undertake, and de,
firous of feuring a protetor against the for.
midable forces by which they might expect soon
to be attacked, they sent some of their misber
to Francis, offering not only to aknowledge him
as their sovereign, and to put him in immediate
pofTiflion of Ghent, btt to affit him with all
their forces in recovering ohofe provntice' in the
Netherlands, which had anciently belonged to
the crown of France, and had been so lately re-
united to it by the decree of the parliament of
Parisg ..This unexpeted proposition coming
from persons who had it in their power to have
performed instantly one part of what they under-
took, and who could contribute so efqeually
towards the execution of the whole; opened vast
as well as alluring profpe&s to Francis' ambi-
tion. The counties of Slanders and Atbis were
of greater value than the dutchy of Milan, which
he had so long laboured to acquire with pal.
fionate but fruitless desire; their situation with
refpe&t to France rendered it more easy o con-
quer or to defend them and they might be
formed into a separate principality fort the Duke

Memoires fur la revolte de Gantois en 539i par Jcea

d'Hollander, ecrit en 147. A la Hayc 1747. P. Heuter.
Rer. AuAr, lib, xi. p. 262. Sandov, Hiftor, tom. ii. p. 2zz.

of

of rla, no lefk suitable to hisdignity than BooK VI.
dat which his father aimed at obtainingf. To Ir *
this,. thq Flemings, .who were aiAt'e:. ih
the Frnch manner and goveramqnt,; would
not have.beeavr avr, nd his own i bjeeC s,
weary of heir defirutive expeditio i Italy,
woyld have turned their arms tqqards thisquar-
tgr with more goodwill, nd with gteaer yi-
gour. Several coafiderations, nevertheless pre- Flncit det

'*r» ' elac th eig

vented Francis from laying. hold of thias ppot- offe.
tnity, the:moft favourable in appearaBe which
had ever presented itfe i of extending his domi-
nions or distressing the Emperor. From the
time of their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles
had continued to court the King of France with
wonderful attention; and often flattered him
with hopes of gratifying at last his wifaes con-
cerning the Milanese, by granting the invefti-
ture of it either to him or to one of his sons. But
though these hopes and promises were thrown
out with no other intention than to detach him
from his confederacy with the grand Seignior,
or to raise suspicions in Solyman's mind by the
appearance of a cordial and familiar intercourse
fbfting between the courts of Paris and Ma-
drid, Francis was weak enough to catch at the
shadow by which he had been so often deceived,
and from eagerness to seize it, relinquished what
must have proved a more substantial acquisition.
Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to exccfs of

his
3

Boo VI. his br*her, 'iand unwilling that a Pihce who

feeried toe 'of a tefflefs and enerpazing nature
Jhodd obtain an etablifhment, which from its
situation might be confidered alnot as a do-
meftick one, madeufe of Montmorency, who, by
a singular piece of good fortune, was at the
fame time the favourite of the father and of the
son, to defeat the application of the Flemings,
and to divertthe King from espousing thei cause.
Montmorency, accordingly, represented in trong
terms, the reputation and power which Francis
would acquire by recovering that footing which
he had'formerf'in Italy, and that nothing could
be so efficacious td overcome the Emperor's aver.
sion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce,
and refuting on this occasion to countenance his
rebellious fubjets. Francis, apt of himself to
over rate the value of the Milanese, because he
estimated it from the length of time as well as
from the great efforts which he had employed
in order to re-conquer it, and fond of every
a'tion which had the appearance of generosity,
assented without difficulty to sentiments so agree-
able to his own, reje&ed the propositions of the
citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their deputies
with an harlh answer'.

·Mem. de Bellay, p, 263. P. Heutcr. Rer. Auftr. lib.
xi. 63.

NOT

Nor fathfied with this, by farther efine- Boo VI.

mnt-in generosity, he communicated to the
Emperor his whole negociation with the male- C,,mmil,'
contents, and all that he knew of their schemes iontiont

to th E.

and intentions . This convincing proof of prtot
Francis's disinterestedness relieved Charles from
the most disquieting apprehensions, and opened a
way to extricate himself out of all his difficulties.
He had already received full informatioi of all
the tranfa&ions in the Netherlands, and of the
rage with Which the people of Ghent had taken
arms against his government. He was thoroughly
acquainted with the genius and qualities of his
fubjefts in that country; with their love of li-
berty; their attachment to their ancient privi-
leges and customs ; as well as the invincible ob-
ftinacy with which their minds, flow but firm
and persevering, adhered to any measure on
which they had leisure to fix. He easily saw
what encouragement and support they might
have derived from the afliftance of Stance and
though now free from any danger on that quar-
ter, he was ill sensible that Come immediate as
well as vigorous interposition was necessary, in
order to prevent the spirit of difaffefion from
spreading in a country where the number ps
cities, the multitude of people, together with
the great wealth diffused among them by com.

tandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. s84.
Vot. III. 0 tncrcea

BooK VI. merce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and

5.9. would supply it with inexhaustible resources.

ehLk, ' No expedient, after long deliberation, appeared
hconcning to him so effeeual as his going in person to the
to tie Ne. Netherlands; and the governess his sifter being
therlands.

of the fame opinion, warmly solicited him to
undertake the journey. There were only two
different routes which he could take; one by land,
through Italy and Germany, the other entirely
by sea, from ome port in Spain to one in the
Low-Countries. But the former was more te.
dious than suited the present exigency of his
affairs ; nor could he in consistency wiih his dig.
nity or even his safety pass through Germany
without such a train both of attendants and ot
troops, as would have added greatly to the time
that he mufft have consumed in his journey; the
latter was dangerous at this season, and while
he remained uncertain with respect to the friend-
lhip of the King of England, was not to be ven-
tured upon, unless under the convoy of a power.
ful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which he
was under a neceflity of chufing, and did not
know what to chute, inspired him at last with the
singular and seemingly extravagant thought of

pfopor touh passing through France, as the moRt expeditious
France. way of reaching the Netherlands. He proposed

in his council to demand Francis's permission for
that purpose. All his. counsellors joined with
one voice in condemning the measure as no less

rash

rath than unprecedented, and which must infal- Booi VL
libly expose him to disgrace or to danger; to 3539.
disgrace, if the demand were rejected in the
manner that he had reason to expect; to danger,
if he put his person in the power of an enemy
whom he had often offended, who had ancient
injuries to revenge, as well as subjes of present
contest till remaining undecided. But Charles,
who had studied the character of his rival with
greater care, and more profound discernment
than any of his ministers, perfilted in his plan,
and flattered himself that it might be accom-
plilhed not only without danger to his own per-
son, but even without the expence of any con-
ceflion detrimental to his crown.

WITH this view he communicated the matter To which

Francis conS

to the French ambafrador at his court, and sent leans.
Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to
obtain from Francis permission to pas through
his dominions, and to promise that he would
soon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his satis-
faftion. But at the fame time he intreated that
Francis would not exact any new promise, or
even insist on former engagements, at this junc-
ture, left whatever he hould grant, under his
present circumstances, might seem rather to be
extorted by neceflity, than to flow from friend-
ship or the love of justice. Francis, instead of
attending to the snare which such a Oight artifice

0 2 scarcely

EVOK VI. scarcely concealed, was so dazzled wth the

^i39. splendour of overcoming n enemy by aCs of

gpnerofity, and so pleased with the ar of fupe-
riorirty which the retitudc and difinterftednefs
of his proceedings gave him oq this occafon,
that he at once assented to ll that was.dermand-
ed. Judging of the Emperor's heart y his own,
he imagined that the sentiments of gragtude,
arising from the remembrance of good offices
and liberal treatment, would determine. him
more forcibly to fulfil what he had so often
promised, than the most precise stipulations
that could be inserted in any treaty.

is recep- UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment

tion in that .
kingdom. was precious, let out, notwithstanding the fears

and suspicions of his Spaniih fubjeas,. with a
small but splendid train of about an hundred
persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of
France, he was received by the Dauphin and
the Duke of Orleans, attended by the constable
Montmorency. The two Princes offered to go
into Spain, and to remain there as hostages for
the Emperor's ffety but this he rejcted, de.
claring that he relied with implicit confidence
on the King's honour, ang had never demanded
nor would accept of any other pledge for his fecu-
rity. In all the towns through which he passed,
the greatest possible magnificence was displayed;
the magistrates presented him the keys of the

gates;

gates i the prison doors were set pen; and, by BooK Vl
the royal honours paid to him, he appeared 539.
mote like the sovereign of the country than
itranger. The King advanced as far as Chatel-
herault to meet him; their interview was dif-
tinguihfed by the warmest expreflions of friend-
hip and regard. They proceeded together to- ';40.
wards Paris, and presented to the inhabitants of
that city, the extraordinary fpe&acle of two rival
Monarchs, whose enmity had disturbed and laid
waste Europe during twenty years, making
their solemn entry together with all the fymp-
toms of a confidential harmony, as if they had
forgotten for ever pafi injuries, and would never
revive hostilities for the future .

CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but TheEmnpe.

ror's folici.

amidst the perpetual caresses of the French tude,
court, and the various entertainments contrived
to amuse or to do him honour, he discovered an
extreme impatience to continue his journey,
arising as much from an apprehension of danger
which constantly oppressed him, as from the
necessity of his presence in the Low-Countries.
Conscious of the difingenuity of his own inten-
tions, he trembled when he reflected that some
fatal accident might betray them to his rival, or
lead him to fufpet them and though his arti-

cThun. Hil. ib.i i. c. x4. Mem. de Bellgy, z64.

0 3 sices

BooK vr sices to conceal these fhoild be successful, he
%0~ could not help fearing that motives of interest

might at last triumph over the scruples of ho-
nour, and tempt Francis to avail himself of the
advantage now in his hands. Nor were there
wanting persons among the French ministers,
who advised the King to turn his own arts
against the Emperor, and as the retribution due
for so many instances of fraud or falsehood, to
seize and detain his person until he granted him
full fatisfadion with-regard to all thejuft claims
of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had
pledged, nor could any argument convince him
that Charles, after all the promises that he had
given, and all the favours which he had receiv-
ed, might fill be capable of deceiving him.
Full of this false confidence he accompanied him
to St. Quintin, and the two Princes, who had
met him on the borders of Spain, did not take
leave of.him until he entered his dominions in the
Low-Countries.
i *ddisie. As soon as the Emperor reached his own ter-

ritories, the French ambaifadors demanded the
January 4. accompliihment of what he had promised con-

cerning the investiture of Milan; but Charles,
under the plausible pretext that his whole atten-
tion was then engrossed by the consultations ne.
ceffary towards suppressing the rebellion in

Ghent,

Gient, put off the matter for- ome time. But BoorV[.
in order to prevent Francis from fufpeting hit 1s50.
flncerty, he still continued to talk of his refolu-
tions with refpec to that matter in the fame
strain as when he entered France, and even
wrote to the King much to the fame purpose,
though in general terms, and with equivocal ex-
pressions, which he might afterwards explainc
away or interpret at pleafurea.

MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of Redusono

Ghent, destitute of leaders capable either of
direcing their councils, or conducting their
troops; abandoned by the French King and un-
supported by their countrymen; were unable to
resist their offended sovereign, who was ready to
advance against them with one body of troops
which he had raised in the Netherlands, with
another drawn out of Germany, and a third
which had arrived from Spain by sea. The near
approach of danger made them, at last, so fen-
fible of their own folly, that they sent ambafla-
dors to the Emperor, imploring his mercy, and
offering to set open their gates at his approach.
Charles, without vouchsafing them any other an-
fwer, than that he would appear among them
as their sovereign, with the sceptre and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head

a Memoires de Ribier, i. 50.

04 of

PoOQ VI. ,ofhis troops. Though he chose to enter the
ivo. ^Vty on te twenty-fourth of February, his birth.

:day, he was touched with nothing of that ten.
dernefs or indulgence which was natural towards

,nmpun;fh- the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix of the
ment of the
Citiens. principal citizens were put to death a greater
A4pil o. number was sent into banishment; the city was

declared to have forfeited all its privileges and
immunities; the revenues belonging to it were
confiscated; its ancient form of government was
abolishe4d the nomination of its magistrates was
vested for the future in the Emperor and his fuc.
ceffors; a new system of laws and political ad-
ministration was prescribed , and in order to
bridle the seditious spirit of the citizens, orders
were given to erect a strong citadel, for defraying
the expence of which a fine of an hundred and
fifty thousand florins was imposed on the in.
habitants, together with an annual tax of fix
thousand florins for the support of a garrison ,
By these rigorous proceedings, Charles not only
punished the citizens of Ghent, but set an awful
example of severity before his other fubje6ts in
the Netherlands, whose immunities and privi-
leges, partly the effet, partly the cause of their
Cxtenfive commerce, circumnfcribed the royal

b Les coutums & loix do Comptó de Flandre, par Alex.
I\ Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i, p. 169.

' Harzi Annales Brabanltixa vol. i. 616.

prerogative

prerogative within very narrow bounds, and BooK VI.
often Stood in the way of measures which hs zTO'
wished to undertake, or fettered and retarded
him in his operations.

CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-efta- chilt'. i

fures to ful.
blifhed his authority in the Low-Countries, and fil hisn.

gagementt

being now under no necessity of continuing the to Francis.
fame scene of falsehood and dissimulation with
which he had long amused Francis, began gra-
dually to throw aside the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with refpe& to the Mi-
lanefe. At first, he elu&d the demands of the
French ambafladors, when they again reminded
him of his promises; then he proposed, by way
of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant
the Puke of Orleans the invefiture of Slanders,
clogging the offer, however, with impracicable
conditions, or such as he knew would be rejet-
ed d. At last, being driven from all his evasions
and subterfuges by their insisting for a categori-
cal answer, he peremptorily refused to give up
a territory of such value, or voluntarily to make
such a liberal addition to the strength of an ene-
my by diminishing his own power', He denied
at the fame time, that he had ever made any
promise which could bind him to an aion so
foolish, and so contrary to his own interet '.

i Mem. de Ribier, i. s09g 514. Ribicr, i. 19.
'Bellay, 65.6.

Or

BOOIK VT. OF '1ll the tranfa&ions ih the Emperor's life,

540 this, without doubt, reflects the geateft dif.

honour on his reputations. Though Charles
was not extremely scrupulous at other times
about the means which he employed for accom-
plifhing his ends, or always observant of the
ftri't precepts of veracity and honour, he had
hitherto maintained some regard for the maxims
of that less precise and rigid morality by which
Monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their conduct. But, on this occasion, the scheme
that he formed of deceiving a generous and
open-hearted Prince; the illiberal and mean
artifices by which he carried it on; the insen-
fibility with which he received all the marks of
his friendihip, as well as the ingratitude with
which he requited them; are all equally unbe-
coining the dignity of his character, and incon-
fiftent with the grandeur of his views.

THIS tranfa&tion exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After
the experience of a long reign, after so many
opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity
with which he trusted him at thisjun6ture seemed
to merit no other return than it aually met
with. Francis, however, remonstrated and ex-

s Jovii Hifl. lib. xxxix. p. 238. a..

claimed,

claimed, as if this had been the first instance in BooKVL
which the Emperor had deceived him. Feeling, ,i54
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his
understanding still more sensibly than the injury
done to his interest, he discovered such resent-
ment, as made it obvious that he would lay hold
on the first opportunity of being revenged, and
that a war, no less rancorous than that which
had so lately raged, would soon break out anew
in Europe.

THIs year is rendered memorable by the efta, The PO'p

/- « i r t r * 1 1 r authorizes
blifhment of the Order of Jesuits; a body whose the iniiit-

tion of the

influence on ecclesiastical as Well as civil affairs Order of
hath been so considerable, that an account of the Jefui.
genius of its laws and government justly merits
a place in history. When men take a view of
the rapid progress of this society towards wealth
and power; when they contemplate the admi-
rable prudence with which it has been governed;
when they attend to the persevering and fyfte-
matick spirit with which its schemes have been
carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a fingu-
lar institution to the superior wisdom of its foun-
der, and to suppose that he had formed and di.
gested his plan with profound policy. But the
Jesuits, as well as the other monaftick orders, are
indebted for the existence of their order not to
the wisdom of their founder, but to his enthu.
iafm. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have already

mcn.

BooK VI. mentioned on occasion of the wound which he

^0 receivedin defending Pampeluna", was a fnatick

diftinguilhed by extravagancies in sentiment and
condut, no es incompatible with the maxims
of fbber reaon, than repugnant to the spirit of
true religion. The wild adventures, and vi-
flonary khemes, in which his enthusiasm engaged
him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of
the Romish faints; but are unworthy of notice
in history.

Fanatc;fm PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited
t founder. by the love of power and diftin&ion, from which

such pretenders to superior fantity are not ex.
empt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order. The plan, which
he formed of its constitution and laws, was fug-
gested, as he gave out, and as his followers till
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven'.
But inotwithftanding this high pretension, his
design met at first with violent opposition. The
Pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fanc-
tion of his authority to confirm the infitution,
referred his petition to a committee of Cardinals.
They represented the eftablihment to be unne-
ceffary as well as dangerous, and Paul refused
to grant his approbation of it. At last, Loyola

b Vol. ii. Book ii. p. 9g.
I Compte Rendu des Constitutions des Jefultes, au Prle.
mat de Provence, par M. de Moocler, p. sS;.

removed

removed all his scruples by an osier which itwas BooK VI.
impoflible for any Pope to reft. He proposed 'so
that besides the three vowsof poverty, ofchaftity, The Pope',
and of monaflick obedience, which are common motives for

confirming

to all the orders of regulars, the members of his th oc".
society hould take a fourth vow of obedience
to the Pope, binding themselves to go whither-
soever he should command for the service of re-
ligion, and without requiring any thing from the
Holy See for their support. At a time when
the papal authority had received such a shock
by the revolt of so many nations from the Ro-
mifh church at a time when every part of the
popilh system was attacked with so much vio-
lence and success, the acquisition of a body of
men, thus peculiarly devoted to the See of
Rome, and whom it might set in opposition to
all i enemies, was an objec of the highest con- Sept. .
sequence. Pau instantly perceiving this, con-
irmed the institution of the Jesuits by his bull;
granted the most ample privileges to the mem.
bers of the society; and appointed Loyola to
be the first general of the order. The event
4ath fully justified Paul's discernment, in ex-
pecing such beneficial consequences to the See
of ~me from this institution. In less than half
a century, the society obtained establishments in
every country that adhered to the Roman catho-
lick church its power and wealth increased
amazingly the number of its members became

great;

BooK VI. great; their character as well as accotplih.

. ments were still greatert and the Jefiits were

celebrated by the friends, and dreaded by the
enemies of the Romiih faith, as the most able
and enterprizing order in the church.

It conftitu. THE constitution and laws of the society were
tion and ge-
nius mrit perfeted by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two
particular
attention. generals who succeeded Loyola, men far fupe-

rior to their master in abilities, and in the science
of government. They framed that system of
profound and artful policy which distinguishes
the order. The large infusion of fanaticism,
mingled with its regulations, hould be imputed
to Loyola its founder. Many circumstances
concurred in giving a peculiarity of character to
the order of Jesuits, and in forming the mem-
bers of it not only to take greater part in the
affairs of the world than any other body of
monks, but to acquire superior influence in the
condut of them.

The objea THE primary obje& of almost all the monaftick
of the order
·ngular. orders is to separate men from the world, and

from any concern in its affairs. In the solitude
and silence of the cloister, the monk is called
to work out his own salvation by extraordinary
ats of mortification and piety. He is dead to
the world, and ought not to mingle in its tranf-
aaions. He can be of no benefit to mankind,

buc

butby his example and byhis prayers. On the Booc VI.
contrary, the Jesuits are taugh; to cpnfidr them- Is
selves as formed for action. They are chosen
soldiers, bound to ?ert themfolves continually
in the service of God,.and of the Pope, his vicar
on earth. Whatever tends to initru& the igno-
rant; whatever can be of use to reclaim or to
oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their
proper obje. That they may have full leisure
for this acive service, ,they are totally exempted
from those funcions, the performance of which
is the chief business of other monks. They ap-
pear in no processions , they praaife no rigorous
aufterities; they do not, confume.one half of
their time in the repetition of tedious offices k.
But they are required to attend to all the tranf-
ations of the world, on account of the influence
which these may have. upon religion; they are
directed to study the dispositions of persons in
high rank, and to cultivate their. friendship',
and by the very constitution as well as genius
of the order, a spirit of ation and intrigue is
infused into all its members.

As the obje& of the society of Jesuits differed pcci;ari.

frocf that of the other monaftick orders, the di- t i thei
vrfity was no less in the form of its govern- Poli"y,pr-

with refpeft
k Compte Rendu, par M. de Monclar, p. xiii. 290. Sr tothepower

of the eclie
h deltrut. des Jesuites, par M. D'Alembert, p. +2. rAl.

! Compte par M. de Monclar, p. xii.

ment.

BooK VI. ment. The other orders are to be confidered as
'b"4 voluntary associations, in which whatever assets

the whole body, is regulated by the common
suffrage of all its members. The executive
power is vested in the persons placed at the head
of each convent, or of the whole society; the
legifative authority resides in the community.
Affairs of moment, relating to particular con-
vents, are determined in conventual chapters;
ich as refpet the whole order are confidered in
general congregations. But Loyola, full of the
ideas of implicit obedience; which he had de-
rived from his military profession, appointed that
the government of his order should be purely
monarchical. A general, chosen for life by
deputies from the several provinces, polfefed
,power that was supreme and independents ex-
tending to every person, and to every cafe. He,
by his sole authority, nominated provincials,
rectors, and every other officer employed in the
government of the society, and could remove
them at pkafure. In him was vested the fove-
reign administration of the revenues and funds
of the order. Every member belonging to it
was at his disposal; and by his uncontrol-
able mandate, he could impose on them any
task, or employ them in what service soever ihe
pleased. To his commands they were required
to yield not only outward obedience, but to re-
sign up to him the inclinations of their own wills,

and

and the sentiments of their own understandings. BooK Vr,
They were to liften to his injuntions, as if they 154o.
had been uttered by Christ himself. Under his
diretion, they were to be mere paillve inftru.
mcnts, like clay in the hands of the potter, or
like dead carcafiEs incapable of refifance m. Such
a singular form of policy could not fail to im-
press its charater on all the members of the
order, and to give a peculiar force to all its
operations. There is not in the annals of man-
kind any example of such a perse& despotism,
exercised not over monks shut up in the cells of
a convent, but over men dispersed among all the
nations of the earth.

As the constitutions of the order vest, in the circumfan-

General, such absolute dominion, over all its enab' him
members, they carefully provide for his being with thi
perfecly informed with refpeft to the character greate',gd.
and abilities of his fubjEts. Every novice who
offers himself as a candidate for entering into the
order, is obliged to manifest his conScience to the
superior, or to a person appointed by him; and
is required to confess not only his fins and de-
sets, but to discover the inclinations, the pas-
sions, and the bent of his foul. This manifeita-
tion must be renewed every fix months". The

" Compte Rendu an Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Cha.

lotais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar. 83. 185.
343.

" Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 121, &c.
VOL. III. P society

SOOK vI. society not satisfied with penetrating in this man.

1540. ner into the innermost recesses of the heart, di-

rets each member to observe the words and
actions of the novices; they are constituted spies
upon their condu&; and are bound to disclose
every thing of importance concerning them to
the superior. In order that this scrutiny into
their character may be as complete as poflible,
a long noviciate must expire, during which they
paTs through the several gradations of ranks in
the society, and they must have attained the full
age of thirty-three years, before they can be ad-
mitted to take the final vows, by which they
become profejsed members°. By these various
methods, the superiors, under whose immediate
infpecion the novices are placed, acquire a
thorough knowledge of their dispositions and
talents. In order that the General, who is the
foul that animates and moves the whole society,
may have under his eye every thing necessary to
inform or direct him, the provincials and heads
of the several houses are obliged to transmit to
him egular and frequent reports concerning the
members under their infpecion. In there they
descend into minute details with refpest to the
charater of each person, his abilities natural or
acquired, his temper, his experience in affairs,

° Compte par M. de Mondl. z . 241. Sur la dlr. deC
Jcf. par M. D'Alemb. p. 39.

and

ahd the particular department for which he is BOOK VI.
best fittedP. These reports, when digested and 154C;
arranged, are entered into registers, kept of pur-
pose that the General may, at one comprehen-
five view, survey the state of the society in every
corner of the earth; observe the qualifications
and talents of its members; and thus choose,
with perfect information, the instruments, which

P M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number

of there reports, which the General of the Jesuits mudi an-
nually receive according to the regulations of the ftiety.
There amount in all to 6584. If this fumr be divided by
37, the number of provinces in the order; it appears that
177 reports concerning the fiate of each province are tranf-
mitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52. Besides this,
there may be extraordinary letters, or such as are ent by
the nmonitors or spies whom the General and Provincials en-
tertain in each house. Compte par, M. de Moncl. p. 43t.
Hilt. des Jesuites, Amft. 1761. tom. iv. p. 56. The pro-
vincials and heads of houses not only report concerning the
mrembers of the society, but are bound to give the General an
account of the civil affairs of the country wherein they are
fettled, as far as the knowledge of theie may be of be.
nefit to religion. This condition may extend to every
particular, so that the General is furnished with full in-
formation concerning the tranfaaions of every Prince and
hate in the world. Compte par M. dc Moncl. 443. Hilt.
des Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When the affairs with refpe& to
which the provincials or rectors write are of importance;
they are direted to use cyphers, and each of them has a
particular cypher from the General. Compte par M. Cha--
lotais, p. 54,

P 2 his

BOOK VI. his absolute power an employ in any service for
L-,',' which he thinks melt to destine them q.

154.0.

Progref, f As it was the prffeffed intention of the order
the po er
nd infRu of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro.
ence of the
order. moting the falvatiol, of men, this engaged them,

of course, in many aive fun&tions. From their
firt institution, they confidered the education of
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at
being spiritual gides and confessors; they
preached frequently in order to inftru& the peo.
ple; they set out as missionaries to convert un.
believing nations. The novelty of the inflitu.
tion, as well as the singularity of its obje&s pro.
cured the order many admirers and patrons,
The governors of the society had the address to
avail themselves of every circumstance in its fa.
your, and in a shot time, the number as well
as influence of its members increased wonder.
fully. Before the expiration of the sixteenth
century, the Jesuits had obtained the chief direc-
tion of the education of youth in every catholick
country in Europe. They had become the con-
feffors of almost all its monarchs, a funion of
no small importance in any reign, but under a
weak Prince, superior even to that of miniflcr.
They were the spiritual guides of almost every
person eminent for rank or power. They pof-

I Compte par M. de Moncl p. 215. 439.-Compt 1'
M. de Chalotais, p. 52. 222.

fei0a

sessed the highest degree of confidence and in- BOOK VI
terest with the papal court, as the most zealous
and able champions for its authority. The ad-
vantages which an aive and enterprising body
of men might derive from all these circumstances
are obvious. They formed the minds of men
in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They pof-
sessed, at different periods, the direction of the
most considerable courts in Europe. They
mingled in all affairs. They took part in every
intrigue and revolution. The General, by
means of the extensive intelligence which he re-
ceived, could regulate the operations of the
order with the most perfect discernment, and by
means of his absolute power could carry them
on with the utrhmot vigour and effet'.

TOGETHER with the power of the order, its Progrerfr

wealth continued to increase. Various expedi- it welth
ents were devised for eluding the obligation of

' When Loyola in the year 40 petitioned the Pope to

authorize the inflitution of the order, he had only ten dif-
ciples. But in the year 160o, fixty.cight years after their
fillt inflit tion, the number of Jesuits had increased to ten
thoufand/five hundred and eighty-one. In the year 1710,
the ord~' polffed twenty-four profid houses; fifty nine
lloufes of probation three hundred and forty ridicies1
fit h ndred and twelve colleges; two hundied miflions; one
hun red and fifty seminaries and boarding-fchools; and
cofilled of 19,998 Jesuits. Hilt. desjefuites, tom. i. p. 2o.

P 3 the

BooK VI. the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample

c sAo' poffefions in every catholick country, and by

the number as well as magnificence of its pub-
lick buildings, together with the value of its pro-
perty, moveable or real, it vied with the mods
opulent of the monaftick fraternities. Beides the
sources of wealth common to all the regular
clergy, the Jesuits possessed one which was pecu-
liar to themselves. Under pretext of promoting
the success of their miflions, and of facilitating
the support of their missionaries, they obtained
a special licence from the court of Rome, to
trade with the nations which they laboured to
convert. In consequence of this, they engaged
in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in
the Ea4 and Weft Indies. They opened ware-
houses in different parts of Europe, in which
they vended their commodities. Not satisfied
with trade alone, they imitated the example of
other commercial ocieties, and aimed at obtain-
ing settlements. They acquired possession ac-
cordingly of a large and fertile province in the
southern continent of America, and reigned as
Sovereigns over some hundred thoufa d sub.
jts'.

Ptrniiaot UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast in uence
there on which the order of Jesuits acquired by all hefe
civil society. ,

Hill. ds Jef. iv. 168-196~ &c.

different

different means, has been often exerted with BOOK Vi
the most pernicious effec. Such was the ten- ,,o
dency of that discipline observed by the society
in forming its members, and such the funda-
mental maxims in its constitution, that every
Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the
order as the capital object, to which every con-
fideration was to be sacrificed. This spirit of
attachment to their order, the most ardent, per-
haps, that ever influenced any body of men ', is
the charaCeriftick principle of the Jesuits, and
serves as a key to the genius of their policy, as
well as to the peculiarities in their sentiments and
condut.

As it was for the honour and advantage of

the society, that its members should possess an
ascendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a diretion of their condut, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a system
of relaxed and pliant morality, which accommo-
dates itself to the passions of men, whichjuftifies
their vices, which tolerates their imperfeaions,
which authorizes almost every action that the
molt audacious or crafty politician would with
to perpetrate.

* Compte par M. de Moncl, p. 285,
I'P4 As

BOOK VI. As the prosperity of the order was intimately
1540 conne&ed with the preservation of the papal au-

thority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame prin-
ciple of attachment to the interests of their so-
ciety, have been the most zealous patrons of those
dotrines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical
power on the ruins of civil government. They
have attributed to the court of Rome a jurif-
diffion as extensive and absolute as was claimed
by the most presumptuous pontiffs in the dark
ages. They have contended for the entire in.
dependence of ecclefiafticks on the civil magi-
ftrate. They have published such tenets con-
cerning the duty of opposing Princes who were
enemies of the catholick faith, as countenanced
the most atrocious crimes, and tended to dif.
solve all the ties which conne& subje&s with
their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au-

thority from the zeal with which it stood forth
in defence of the Romish church against the at-
tacks of the reformers, its members, proud of
this diftinaion, have confidered it as their peC
culiar function to combat the opinions, and to
check the progress of the Protefants. They
have made use of every art, and have employed
every weapon against them. They have set
themselves in opposition to every gentle or to-
lerating measure in their favour. They have

A incf

ineefantly Rirred up against them all the rage Booc Vt.
ofecclefiftical and civil persecution. 5540.

MoNKs of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious doctrines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have ei-
ther delivered such opinions with greater reserve,
or have propagated them with less success.
Whoever recollets the events which have hap-
pened in Europe during two centuries, will find
that the Jesuits may justly be confidered as re-
fponfible for most of the pernicious effects arif-
ing from that corrupt and dangerous casuistry,
from those extravagant tenets concerning eccle-
fiatical power, and from that intolerant spirit,
which have been the disgrace of the church of
Rome throughout that period, and which have
brought so many calamities upon civil society .

BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing Someadvan.

from the institution of this order, mankind, it ing fromthe
must be acknowledged, have derived from it infitution
some considerable advantages. As the Jesuits der.
made the education of youth one of their capital
objecs, and as their first attempts to eftablilh
college for the reception of tudents were via-

Encyclopodie, Art. 7icsitti, tom. viii. 513.

lently

Boo VI. lently opposed by the universities in different

"O. 'countries, it became necessary for them, as the

most effectual method of acquiring the publick
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in.

Pariculariy duftry. This prompted them to cultivate the
to literature.

tudy of ancient literature with extraordinary ar.
dour. This put them upon various methods for
facilitating the inftru&ion of youth; and by the
improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed so much towards the progress of
polite learning, that on this account they have
merited well of society. Nor has the order of
Jesuits been successful only in teaching the ele-
ments of literature, it has produced likewise
eminent masters in many branches of science,
and can alone boast of a greater number of in-
genious authors, than all the other religious
fraternities taken together ,

Bur

z M. d'Alembert has observed that though the Jesuits

have made extraordinary progress in erudition of every
species; though they can reckon up many of their brethren
who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and
critics; though they have even formed some orators of repu-
tation; yet the order has never produced one man, whole
mind was so much enlightened with found knowledge, as
to merit the name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the
unavoidable effea of monaftick education to contra& and
fetter the human mind. The partial attachment of a monk
to the intoreft of his order; which is often incompatible
with that of other citizens; the habit of implicit obedience

to

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits BoCK Vr.

have exhibited the most wonderful display of 5 .
their abilities, and have contributed most es- Morefpe-
fetually to the benefit of the human species. thy! etto
The conquerors of that unfortunate quarter of 7ent,of the
the globe had nothing in view, but to plunder, Paraguay.
to enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants.
The Jesuits alone have made humanity the obje&
of their fettling there. About the beginning of
the last century they obtained admission into the
fertile province of Paraguay, which firetches
across the southern continent of America, from
the bottom of the mountains of Potofi, to the
confines of the Spanish and Portuguese fettle-
ments on the banks of the river de la Plata.
They found the inhabitants in a ate little dif-
ferent from that which takes place among men
when they first begin to unite together; strangers
to the arts; subsisting precariously by hunting

to the will of a fupeior, together with the frequent return
of the wearisome and frivolous duties of the cloifer, debase
his faculties, and extinguish that generosity of sentiment
and spirit, which qualifies men for thinking or feeling juflly
with refpet to what is proper in life and condudt. Father
Paul of Venice is, perhaps, the only person educated in a
cloilter, that ever was altogether fupenor to its preudices,
or who viewed the transactions of men, and reasoned con-
crning the interests of society, with the enlarged fentilnents
of a philosopher, with the discernment of a man conversant
ln affairs, and with the liberality of a gentleman.

or

BooK VI. or fishing; and hardly acquainted with the first

A54. principles of subordination and government.

The Jesuits set themselves to inftrut and to
civilize these savages. They taught them to
cultivate the ground, to rear tame animals, and
to build houses. They brought them to live
together in villages. They trained them to arts
and manufactures. They made them taste the
sweets of society; and accustomed them to the
bleflings of security and order. These people be-
came the fubjeas of their benefators; who have
governed them with a tender attention, refem-
bling that with which a father direts his chil-
dren. RefpeAed and beloved almof to adora-
tion, a few Jesuits presided over some hundred
thousand Indians. They maintained a perfec
equality among all the members of the commu-
nity. Each of them was obliged to labour not
for himself alone, but for the publick. The pro-
duce of their fields, together with the fruits of
their industry of every species, were deposited in
common florehoufes, from which each individual
received every thing necessary for the supply of
his wants. By this inRtitution, almost all the
paflions which disturb the peace of society, and
render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magistrates, chosen by the In-
dians themselves, watched over the publick tran-
quillity and secured obedience to the laws. The
sanguinary punishments frequent under other

govern-

Governments were unknown. An admonition BOOK VI.
from a Jesuit; a flight mark of infamy; or, ,54
on ome singular occasion, a few lashes with a
whip, were sufficient to maintain good order
among thee innocent and happy people Y.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Even hm

Jesuits for the good of mankind, the genius and tihen ap
spirit of their order have mingled and are dif- licy of the

order dif-

cernible. They plainly aimed at establishing in cernible.
Paraguay an independent empire, subjet to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excel-
lence of its constitution and police, could scarce.
ly have failed to extend its dominion over all the
southern continent of America. With this view,
in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in the adjacent settlements, from acquiring any
dangerous influence over the people within the
limits of the province fubjc& to the society, the
Jesuits endeavoured to inspire the Indians with
hatred and contempt of these nations. They cut
off all intercourse between their fubjets and the
Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They pro-
hibited any private trader of either nation from
entering their territories. When they were
obliged to admit any person in a publick charac-
ter from the neighbouring governments, they

Y Hilt. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlcvoix, tom. ii. 47,

&c. Voyage au Perou pr Don G. Juan & 1). Ant. de Ul.
loa, tom. i. 540, &c, Par. 4to. 175:.

did

BOOK VI. did not permit him to have any conversation with

5540 their fubjeas, and no Indian was allowed even

to enter the hufe where these strangers resided,
unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In order to
render any communication between them as dif.
ficult as possible, they induftrioufy avoided giv.
ing the Indians any knowledge of the Spanish, or
of any other European language; but encouraged
the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain diale& of the Indian tongue,
and laboured to make that the universal lan-
guage throughout their dominions. As all these
precautions, without military force, would have
been insufficient to have rendered their empire
secure and permanent, they inftruEted their ub-
jeas in the European arts of war. They formed
them into bodies of cavalry and infantry, com-
pletely armed and regularly disciplined. They
provided a great train of artillery, as well as
magazines stored with all the implements of war.
Thus they established an army so numerous and
well-appointed, as to be formidable in a coun-
try, where a few sickly and ill-difciplined batta-
lions corpofed all the military force kept on
foot by the Spaniards or Portuguese'.

Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Rccueil de!

toutes Ies Pieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jesuites er
Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

THI

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of BOOK VI.

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with 4o0.
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten- liang so
dency of the institution, and checked its pro- fullaiew
grefs'. But as the order was founded in the vcrnment

and progress

period of which I write the history, and as the of the ordert
age to which I address this work hath seen its fall,
the view which I have exhibited of the laws and
genius of this formidable body will not, I hope,
be unacceptable to my readers ; especially as
one circumstance has enabled me to enter into
this detail with particular advantage. Europe
had observed, for two centuries, the ambition
and power of the order. But while it felt many
fatal effects of there, it could not fully discern
the causes to which they were to be imputed. It
was unacquainted with many of the singular re-
gulations in the political constitution or govern-
ment of the Jesuits, which formed theenterprizing *
spirit of intrigue that distinguished its members,
and elevated the body itself to such a height
of power. It was a fundamental maxim with
the Jesuits, from their first institution, not to
pubiifh the rules of their order. These they
kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery.
They never communicated them to strangers;
nor even to the greater part of their own mem-
bers. They refused to produce them when re-

* Compte par M. dc MotxI. p. 3 z.

quired

Boot VT. quired by courts of juRice b

. and by a strange
1540. solecism in policy, the civil power in different

countries authorized or connived at the eta.
blilhment of an order of men, whose onftitution
and laws were concealed with a solicitude, which
alone was a good reason for having excluded
them. During the prosecutions lately carried
on against them in Portugal and France, the
Jesuits have been so inconsiderate as to produce
the mysterious volumes of their infitute. By
the aid of these authentick records, the principles
of their government may be delineated, and the
sources of their power investigated with a degree
of certainty and precision, which, previous to
that event, it was impoflible to attainc. But as
I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of
the constitution and spirit of the order with the
freedom becoming an historian, the candour

b Hil. des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par M. de
Chalot, p. 38.

c The greater part of my information concerning the go.

vernment and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived
from the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. 1
reft not my narrative, ho.,ever, upon the authority even of
these refpefable magiflrates, and elegant writers, but upon
innumerable pflages which they have extracted from the con-
ftitutions of the older, deposited in their hands. Hofpinian,
a Protestant Divine ot Zurich, in his ii/eria 7efIitic,
printed A. ). 619, publifled a small part of the confti-
tutions ot tilc Jc uits, ot which by some accident he had
got a copy; p. 13- 4.

and

and impartiality no less requisite in that charac- BOOK VI,
ter call on me to add one observation, That no 15,
class of regular clergy in the Romish church has
been more eminent for decency, and even purity
of manners, than the major part of the order of
Jesuits d. The maxims of an intriguing, am.
bitious, interested policy, might influence those
who governed the society, and might even cor-
rupt the heart, and pervert the conduc of some
individuals, while the greater number, engaged
in literary pursuits, or employed in the functions
of religion, was left to the guidance of those
common principles which restrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and
laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin
of this mighty body, as well as the circumfiances
and effe&s with which it has been attended in
the different countries of Europe, though ob-
je&s extremely worthy the attention of every
intelligent observer of human affairs, do not fall
within the period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-established order in A.;rrs of

the Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn Glrminy.
his attention to the affairs of Germany. The
Protestants pressed him earnestly to appoint that
conference between a felet number of the di-
vines of each party, which had been stipulared

4 Sur la deltrut. des Jef. par M. D'Ali-mbrt, p. 5;.
VOL. I. Q. in

BOOK VI. in the convention at Francfort. The Pope con-

1540. fidered such an attempt to examine or decide the

points in dispute as derogatory to his right of
being the supreme judge in controversy; and
being convinced that it would either be ineffec-
tual by determining nothing, or prove danger.
ous by determining too much, he employed

Atn.fer. every art to prevent the meeting. The Em.
twcen the peror, however, finding it more for his interest
roPftnt to sooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid
dinve'.i, little regard to his remonstrances. In a diet held

6 at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for the con-

ference. In another diet assembled at Worms,
the conference was begun, Melanahon on the
one fide and Eckius on the other, sustaining the
principal part in the dispute but after they had
made some progress, though without conclud-
ing any thing, it was suspended by the Empe-
ror's command, that it might be renewed with
greater solemnity in his own pretence in a diet
154t' summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assembly

was opened with great pomp, and with a gene-
ral expecation that its proceedings would be
vigorous and decisive. By the' consent of both
parties, the Emperor was entrusted with the
power of nominating the persons who flould
manage the conference, which it was agreed
ihould be conducted not in the form of a publick
diiputation, but as afriendly scrutiny or exani-
nation into the articles which had given rife tc

thle

the present controversies. He appointed Eckius, Booc v,
Gropper and Pflug, onthepartoftheCatholicks; '54,
Melanethon, Bucer, and Piftorius, on that of
the Protestants; all men of dilinguifhed repu-
tation among their own adherents, and, except
Eckius, all eminent for their moderation, as
well as desirous of peace. As they were about
to begin their consultations, the Emperor put
into their hands a book, composed, as he said,
by a learned divine in the Low-Countries, with
such extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as
in his opinion, might go far to unite and com-
prehend the two contending parties. Gropper,
a canon of Cologne, whom he had named among
the managers of the conference, a man of address
as well as of erudition, was afterwards fufpeed
to be the author of this hort treatise. It con-
tained positions with regard to twenty-two of the
chief articles in theology, which included moit
of the questions then agitated in the controversy
between the Lutherans and the church of Rome.
By ranging his sentiments in a natural order, and
exprefling them with great simplicity; by em-
ploying often the very words of scripture, or of
the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of
some opinions, and explaining away what was
absurd in others; by concessions, now on one
fide, and now on the other; and especially by
baniflling as much as possible fcholaftick phrases,
those words and terms of art in controversy,

2 which

BOOK VI. which serve as badges of diftintion to the dif-

151. ferent feeas, and for which theologians often con-

tend more fiercely than for opinions themselves;
he framed his work i such a manner, as pro-
mifed fairer than any thing that had hitherto
been attempted, to compose and to terminate
religious diffenfionsc.
Fruitless. BUT the. attention of the age was turned, with

fvch acute observation, towards theological con.
troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it
by any gloss, how artful or specious soever,
The length andeagernefs of the dispute had fe.
parated the contending parties so completely,
and had set their minds at such variance, that
they were not to be reconciled by partial con-
cefions. All the zealous Catholicks, particularly
the ecclefiafticks who had a feat in the diet, joined
in condemning Gropper's treatise as too favour.
able to the Lutheran opinions, the poison of
which heresy it conveyed, as they pretended,
with greater danger, because it was in some de-
gree disguised. The rigid Protestants, especially
Luther himself, and his patron the Eletor of
Saxony, were for rejecting it as an impious
compound of error and truth, craftily prepared
that it might impose on the weak, the timid, and
the unthinking. But the divines, to whom the ex

c Goldaft. Coniti. ikper. ii, p. s1z.

aminatioa

amination of it was committed, entered upon BOoK Vl.
that business with greater deliberation ahd tern- i4,.
per. As it was more easy in itself, as Well as
more confidfent with the dignity of the church
to make conceflions, and even alterations with re-
gard to speculative opinions, the difcuflion where-
of is confined chiefly to schools, and which pre-
sent nothing to the people that either strikes their
imagination or affects their senses, they came to
an accommodation about thee without much
labour, and even defined the great article con-
cerning justification to their mutual fatisfation.
But, when they proceeded to points of jurifdic-
tion, where the interest and authority of the
Roman See were concerned, or to the rites and
forms of external worship, where every change
that could be made must be publick, and draw
the observation of the people, there the Catho-
licks were altogether untratable; nor could the
church either with safety or with honour abolish
its ancient institutions. All the articles relative
to the power of the Pope, the authority ofcoun-
cils, the administration of the sacraments, the
worship of faints, and many other particulars did
not, in their nature, admit of any tempera-
ment, so that after labouring long to bring
about an accommodation with refpet to there,
the Emperor found all his endeavours ineffectual.
Being impatienti however, to close the diet, he
at last prevailed on a majority of the members

Q.3 to

1BOoK VI. to approve of the following recess; " Thar the
1541. articles concerning which the divines had agreed

Rhcetdeof in the conference, should be held as po.nts de.
Ratibon in cided, and be observed inviolably by all; that
favour of a
general the other articles about which they had differed,
Council.
July as. Ihould be referred to the determination of a ge-

neral council, or if that could not be obtained, to
a national fynod of Germany; and if it hould
prove impracticable, likewiie, to assemble a
fynod, that a general diet of the Empire fiould
be called within eighteen months, in order to
give some final judgment upon the whole con.
troverfy; that the Emperor should use all his
interest and authority with the Pope, to procure
the meeting either of a general council or fy nod;
that, in the mean time, no innovations should
be attempted, no endeavours should be em-
ployed to gain proselytes; and neither the re-
venues of the church, nor the rights of the mo-
nafteries, should be invaded ."

cives of- ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as
fence both 0
to ppifna the recess in which they terminated, gave great
and Protc offence to the Pope. The power which the
%ants.

Germans had assumed, of appointing their own
divines to examine and determine matters of
controversy, he confidered as a very dangerous
invaion on his rights; the renewing of their

f Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav, 1. iv . c. . p. 136 . Paul,

p. 86. Seckend. 1 .

iii .
5

ancient

ancient proposal concerning a national fynod, B' or v.
which had been so often rejeced by him and his 1541.
predeceflbrs, appeared extremely undutiful; but
the bare mention of allowing a diet, composed
chiefly of laymen, to pafsjudgment with refped
to articles of faith, was deemed no less criminal
and profane, than the worst of those hereies
which they seemed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the Protestants were no less diffatif-
fled with a recess, that considerably abridged the
liberty which they enjoyed at that time. As they chral,
murmured loudly againt it, Charles, unwilling Iroueliiats.
to leave any feeds of discontent in the Empire,
granted them a private declaration, in the most
ample terms, exempting them from whatever
they thought oppressive or injurious in the recess,
and ascertaining to them the full poffefion of all
the privileges which they had ever enjoyed'g.

EXTRAORDINARY as these concefions may Affairs of

appear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at ly'
this junEture made it necessary for him to grant
them. He foresaw a rupture with France to be
not only unavoidable, but near at hand, and durif
not give any such cause of disgust or fear to the
Proteitants, as might force them, in felf-defence,
to court the protection of the French King,

* Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom,
iv. p. ii . 1o.

0Qv4 fironm

BooK VI. from whom, at present, they were much alien.

ated. The rapid progress of the Turks in Hun-
gary, was a more powerful and present cause of
the moderation which Charles difeovered. A
great revolution had happened in that kingdom;
John Zapol Scapus having chosen, as has been
related, rather to possess a tributary kingdom,
than to renounce the royal dignity to which he
had been accustomed, had, by the aflltiance of
his mighty prote&tor Solyman, wrested from
Ferdinand a great part of the country, and left
him only the precarious pofefion of the reft.
But being a Prince of pacifick qualities, the fre-
quent attempts of Ferdinand, or of his partisans
among the Hungarians, to recover what they
had loft, greatly disquieted him; and the neceffi.
ty on these occasions, of calling in the Turks,
whom he confidered and felt to be his mailers
rather than auxiliaries, was hardly less mortify-
ing. In order, therefore, to avoid there diftref-
fes, as well as to secure quiet and leisure for en-
A.D. 35. joying the arts and amusements in which he de-

lighted, he secretly came to an agreement with
his competitor, on this condition; That Ferdi-
nand hould acknowledge him as King of Hun-
gary, and leave him, during life, the unmolested
poffieon of that part of the kingdom now in
his power; but that, upon his demise, the ole
right of the whole hould devolve upon Ferdi-

2 nand,

ltand . As John had never been marid, and BooK vl
wvas then far advanced in life, the terms of the IS,
contrac seemed very favourable to Ferdinand,
But, soon after, some of the Hungarian nobles
folicitow to prevent a foreigner from ascending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end
to a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the
daughter of Sigifmond, King of Poland. John Deathofthe

King of

had the satisfaction, before his death, which hap. Hunga.
pened within less than a year after his marriage,
to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom. To
him, without regarding his treaty with Ferdi-
nand, which he confidered, no doubt, as void,
upon an event not foreseen when it was conclud-
ed, he bequeathed his crown; appointing the
Queen and George Martinuzzi, bishop of Wa-
radin, guardians of his son, and regents of the
kingdom. The greater part of the Hungarians
immediately acknowledged the young Prince as
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their
monarchy, they gave the name of Stephen'.

FE DINAND, though extremely disconcerted Fcrdi,,nd's

by this unexpected event, resolved not to aban- obI' 'c
don the kingdom which he had acquired by his crown,
compact with John. He sent ambassadors to
the Queen to claim pofneflionb and to offer the

b Ifuanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xii, p. 13S.
i Javii Hist. lib. xxxix. p. z39, a. &c.

province

Boor: VI. province of Transylvania as a settlement for he?

-541. son, preparing at the fame time to assert his

right by force of arms. But John had com-
mitted the care of his son to persons, who had
too much spirit to give up the crown tamely, and
who pofl'elTd abilities sufficient to defend it.
The Queen, to all the address peculiar to her
own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition,

Cbaracer and magnanimity. Martinuzzi, who had raised
of Mati. himself from the lowest rank in life to his pre.
nuzzi. sent dignity, was one of those extraordinary

men, who, by the extent as well as variety of their
talents, are fitted to a& a superior part in bust.
ling and factious times. In discharging the
funEtions of his ecclesiastical office, he put on
the emblance of an humble and austere fantity.
In civil tranfations, he discovered induiry,
dexterity, and boldness. During war he laid
aside the cassock, and appeared on horseback
with his fcymitar and buckler, as aive, as of-
tentatious, and as gallant as any of his country-
men. Amidst all there different and contradic-
tory forms which he could assume, an insatiable
desire of dominion and authority was confpicu-
ous. From such persons it was obvious what
answer Ferdinand had to expe&t. He soon per-
ceived that he must depend on arms alone for
recovering Hungary. Having levied for this
purpose a considerable body of Germans, whom
his partisans among the Hungarians joined with

their

their vassals, he ordered them to march into that BooK vr.
part of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. ~5,.
Martinuzzi, unable to make head against such
a powerful army in the field, satisfied himself
with holding out the towns, all of which, efpe-
cially Buda, the place of greatest consequence,
he provided with every thing necessary for de-
fence; and in the mean time he sent ambassadors
to Solyman, beseeching him to extend towards canI in t
the son, the fame Imperial protection which had
so long maintained the father on his throne. The
Sultan, though Ferdinand used his utmost en-
deavours to thwart this negociation, and even
offered to accept of the Hungarian crown on
the fame ignominious condition of paying tri-
bute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had
held it, saw such prospects of advantage from
espousing the interest of the young King, that
he instantly promised him his proteCtion; and
commanding one army to advance forthwith
towards Hungary, he himself followed with an-
other. Meanwhile the Germans, hoping to ter-
minate the war by the reducion of a city in
which the King and his mother were fliut up,
had formed the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi,
having drawn thither the strength of the Hlun-
garian nobility, defended the town with such
courage and skill, as allowed the Turkish forces
time to come up to its relief. They instantly

attacked

BOOKVI. attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue;
'54. diseases, and desertion, and defeated them with

great slaughter k,

Solyman's SOLYMAN oon after joined his vitorious
Ungenerou s
condua. troops, and being weary of so many expensive

expeditions undertaken in defence of dominions
which were not his own, or being unable to resist
this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while possessed by an infant, under the guardian-
ship of a woman and a priest, he allowed in-
terested considerations to triumph with too much
facility over the principles of honour and the
Sentiments of humanity. What he planned un-
generously, he executed by fraud. Having pre-
vailed on the Queen to fend her son, whom he
pretended to be desirous of feeing, into his
camp, and having at the fame time invited the
thief of the nobility to an entertainment there,
while they, fufpe&ing no treachery, gave them-
selves up to the mirth and jollity of the feast, a
fele& band of troops by the Sultan's orders
seized one of the gates of Buda. Being thus
master of the capital, of the King's person, and
of the leading men among the nobles, he ordered
the Queen,together with her son, to be conduted
to Transylvania, which province he allotted to
them, and, appointing a Bafha to reside in Buda

k IAuarhaffii Hi,. Hung. lib. xi. p. 15o.

with

with a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary oo vI
to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and corn- V5 -
plaints of the unhappy Queen had no influence
to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi
either resist his absolute and uncontrolable comr
mand, or prevail on him to recal it'.

BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation Ferdiand's

overtrre! tG

reached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to solimr'
have dispatched new ambassadors to Solyman
with a fresh representation of his right to the
crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of his
former overture to hold the kingdom of the
Ottoman Porte, and to pay for it an annual tri-
bute. This ill-timed proposal was rejected with
scorn. The Sultan elated with success, and
thinking that he might prescribe what terms he
pleated to a Prince who'voluntarily proffered
conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, de-
clared that he would not suspend the operations
of war, unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated all
the towns whicR he frill held in Hungary, and
consented to the imposition of a tribute upon
Austria, in order to reimburse the fums which
his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had
obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence
of that kingdom .

l Ruanhaflii, lib. xiv. p. 56. Jovii 1liior, lib. xxxixi
p. 2476, &c.

ftuanhaffii hill. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 15r.

1w

BooKVr. IN this state were the affairs of Hungaryi
'L*~ As the unfortunate events there had either hap,

pened before the difoblution of the diet at Ra-
tifbon, or were dreaded at that time, Charles
law the danger of irritating and inflaming the
minds of the Germans, while a formidable
enemy was ready to break into the Empire; and
perceived that he could not expeA any vigorous
assistance either towards the recovery of Hun-
gary, or the defence of the Austrian frontier, un-
less he courted and satisfied the Protestants. By
the conceflions which have been mentioned, he
gained this point, and such liberal supplies both
of men and money were voted for carrying on the
war against the Turks, as left him under little
anxiety about the ficurity of Germany during
next campaign:.
frmetr,.r IMME DIATEILY upon the conclusion of the diet,

iiIy. the Emperor let out for Italy. As he passed

through Lucca le had a hort interview with
the Pope, but nothing could be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of composing the
religious disputes in Germany, between two
Princes, whole views and interest with regard to
that matter were at this junture so opposite.
The Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of
discord between Charles and Francis, and to

Slid. 283.

ePtinguih

extinguilh those mutual animofities which threat- BOOK VI-
ened to break out suddenly into open hostility, 15-4
were not more successful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entire- His expedi.

tion gain&:
ly, at that time, on the great enterprize which Aigiers,anA

nmotives of

he had concerted againit Algiers, that he liften- it.V'
ed with little attention to the Pope's schemes or
overtures, and hastened to join his army and
fleet °.

ALGIERS fill continued in that Rfate of de-

pendance on the Turkish empire to which Bar-
baroffa had fubjeted it. Ever since he, as cap-
tain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Ai-
giers had been governed by Hafcen-Aga, a re-
negado eunuch, who, by paing through every
station in the Corsairs service, had acquired such
experience in war, that he was well fitted for a
Rtation which required a man of tried and daring
courage. Hafcen, in order to shew how well he
deserved that dignity, carried on his piratical
depredations against the Christian States with
amazing ativity, and out-did, if possible, Bar-
baroffa himself in boldness and cruelty. The
commerce of the Mediterranean was greatly in-
terrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent
alarms given to the coafits of Spain, that there
was a neceflity of ereaing watch-towers at pro-

Sandov. hifor. tom. ii. 298.

per

'w V1. per difiances, and of keeping guards conftantty
-r' Qon foot, in order to descry the approach of his

squadrons, and to protect the inhabitants from
their descents P. Of this the Emperor's fubjeds
had long complained, representing it as an en-
terprife corresponding to his power, and becom-
ing his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which,
since the conquest of Tunis, was the common
receptacle of all the free-booters; and to exter-
minate that lawless race, the implacable ene-
mies of the Christian name. Moved partly by
their entreaties, and partly allured by the hope
of adding to the glory which he had acquired
by his last expedition into Africa, Charles, be-
fore he left Madrid, in his way to the Low-Coun-
tries, had issued orders both in Spain and Italy
to prepare a leet and army for this purpose.
No change in circumfiances, since that time,
could divert him from this resolution, or prevail
on him to turn his arms towards Hungary;
though the success of the Turks in that country
seemed more immediately to require his presence
there; though many of his most faithful adhe-
rents in Germany urged that the defence of the
Empire ought to be his firfl and peculiar care;
though such as bore him no good-will ridiculed
his preposterous conduct in flying from an ene-
my almost at hand, that he might go in queRf of

jovii hist. I xl. p. 66.

a r-

remote and more ignoble foe. But to attack BooK Vs.
the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that L
measure might appear, was an undertaking which
exceeded his power, and was not confifent with
his interest. To draw troops out of Spain or
Italy, to march them into a country so distant
as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus ne-
ceffary for transporting thither the artillery, am-
munition, and baggage of a regular army, and
to push the war in that quarter, where it could
not be brought to any issue during several cam-
paigns, were undertakings so expensive and un-
wieldy as did not correspond with the low con-
dition of the Emperor's treasury. While his
principal force was thus employed, his domi-
nions in Italy and the Low-Countries must have
lain open to the French King, who would not
have allowed such a favourable opportunity of
attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which
were already finished, and almost the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, would depend upon a
single effort, and besides the security and satis-
fation which the success of it must give his
fubjeEs, would detain him during so hort a
space, that Francis could hardly take advantage
of his abefnce, to invade his dominions in Eu-
rope.

VOL. III. R ON

BOOK VI. ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his
L.-W~ first plan, and with such determined obstinacy,
HIs prepa- that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised,
'rations.

or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not to
expose his whole armament to almost unavoid-
able deftruAtion, by venturing to approach the
dangerous coast of Algiers at such an advanced
season of the year, and when the autumnal
winds were so violent. Having embarked on
board Doria's gallies at Porto-Venere in the
Genoese territories, he soon found that this ex-
perienced sailor had not judged wrong concern-
ing the element with which he was so well ac-
quainted; for such a storm arose that it was with
the utmost difficulty and danger he reached Sar-
dinia, the place of general rendezvous. But as
his courage was undaunted, and his temper
often inflexible, neither the remonstrances of the
Pope and Doria, nor the danger to which he
had already been exposed by disregarding them,
had any other effect than to confirm him in his
fatal resolution. The force, indeed, which he
had colleced was such as might have inspired a
Prince less adventrous, and less confident in his
own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of
success. It consisted of twenty thousand foot,
and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and
Germans, mostly Veterans, together with three
thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spanish

and

and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Booc V,
Emperor by attending him in this favourite ex ,
pedition, and eager to hare in the glory which
they believed he was going to reap; to these
were added a thousand soldiers ent from Malta
by the order of St. John, led by an hundred of
its molt gallant Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the African L.ndi. i

coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard, Africa
than that which he hadjuft finished. When he
approached the land, the roll of the sea, and
vehemence of the winds, would not permit the
troops to disembark. But at last, the Emperor,
seizing a favourable opportunity, landed them
without opposition, not far from Algiers, and
immediately advanced towards the town. To
oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had only
eight hundred Turks, and five houfand Moors,
partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees
from Granada. He returned, however, a fierce
and haughty answer when summoned to furren-
der. But with such a handful of boldiers, nei-
ther his desperate courage, nor consummate skill
in war, could have long resifted forces superior to
those which had defeated Barbarossa at the
head of sixty thousand men, and which had re-
duced Tunis, in spite of all his endeavours to
save it.

R X Bur

oboK vi. BUT howsoever far the Emperor might think
t,' himself beyond the reach of any danger from the

The draf enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dread-
ters which
betcli il. ful calamity, and one against which human pru-

dence and human efforts availed nothing. On
the second day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to disperse some light
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea-
vens to appear with a fierce and threatening as-
pe. Towards evening, rain began tofall, accom.
panied with violent wind, and the rage of the tern-
pest increasing during the night, the soldiers, who
had brought nothing aflore but their arms, re-
mained exposed to all its fury, without tents, or
1helter, or cover of any kind. The ground was
soon so wet that they could not lie down on it
their camp beig in a low situation was over-
flowed with water, and they funk at every ftep
to the ankles in mud; while the wind blew with
such impetuosity, that, to prevent their falling,
they were obliged to thrust their spears into the
ground, and to support themselves by taking
hold of them. Hafcen was too vigilant an
officer to allow an enemy in such distress to re-
main unmolested. About the dawn of morning,
he allied out with soldiers, who, having been
screened from the storm under their own roofs,
were frelh and vigorous. A body of Italians
who were stationed nearest the city, dispirited

and

and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach BOOK VI.
of the Turks. The troops at the pod behind t,,.
them, discovered greater courage, but as the
rain had extinguished their matches and wet their
powder, their muskets were useless, and having
scarcely strength to handle their other arms,
they were soon thrown into confusion. Almost
the whole army, with the Emperor himself in
person, was obliged to advance, before the ene-
my could be repulsed, who, after spreading such
general consternation, and killing a considerable
number of men, retired at laif in good order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and flet.

and danger were quickly obliterated by a more
dreadful as well as affecting fpetacle. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the feaappeared agi-
tated with all the rage of which that deflrutive
element is capable ; all the lhips, on which alone
the whole army knew that their safety and sub-
iftence depended, were seen driven from their an-
chors, some dashing against each other, ome
beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced ashore,
and not a few finking in the waves. In lels than
an hour, fifteen hfips of war, and an hundred
and forty transports with eight thousand men
perilhed; and such of the unhappy crews as
escaped the fury of the sea, were murdered with-
out mercy, by the Arabs, as soon as they reached

R 3 land.

Boo VI. land. The Emperor flood in silent anguish and

51. aftonilhment beholding this fatal event, which

at once blasted all his hopes of success, and bu-
ried in the depths the vast fores which he had
provided, as well for annoying the enemy, as for
subsisting his own troops. He had it not in his
power to afford them any other assistance or re-
lief than by fending some troops to drive away
the Arabs, and thus delivering a few who were
so fortunate as to get ashore from the cruel fate
which their companions had met with. At last
the wind began to fall, and to give ome hopes
that as many ships might escape, as to save the
army from perishing by famine, and transport
them back to Europe. But these were only
hopes ; the approach of evening covered the sea
with darkness; and it being impoflible for the
officers aboarthe ihips which had outlived the
storm, to fend any intelligence to their compa-
nions who were ahore, they remained during
the night in all the anguish of suspense and un-
certainty. Next day, a boat dispatched by Doria
made shift to reach land, with information, that
having weathered out the storm, to which, du-
ring fiftygears knowledge of the sea, he had
never feen&ny equal in fierceness and horror, he
had found it neceflary to bear away with his
shattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised
the Emperor, as the face of the sky was still
lowering and tempestuous, to march with all

speed

Rpeed to that place, where the troops could re- Boox V.
embark with greater ease. ir4i.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afford- obligedto

lretrCat.

ed Charles, from being assured that part of
his fleet had escaped, was balanced by the new
cares and perplexity in which it involved him
with regard to his army. Metafuz was at least
three days march from his present camp; all
the provisions which he had brought ahore at
his first landing were now consumed; his fol-
diers, worn out with fatigue, were hardly able
for such a journey, even in a friendly country;
and being dispirited by a succession of hardships,
which victory itself would scarcely have rendered
tolerable, they were in no condition to undergo
new toils. But the situation of the army was
such, as allowed not one moment for delibera-
tion, nor left it in the least doubtful what to
choose. They were ordered instantly to march,
the wounded, the sick and the feeble being
placed in the center; such as seemed most vi-
gorous were stationed in the front and rear.
Then the fad effets of what they had suffered
began to appear more manifestly than ever, and
new calamities were added to all those which
they had already endured. Some could hardly
bear the weight of their arms; others, spent
with the toil of forcing their way through deep
and almost impassable roads, funk down and

R 4. died;

Boor VI. died; many perilhed by famine, as the whole

-^54 -army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or

the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's or-
der, and distributed among the several batta-
lions; many were drowned in brooks, which
were fwoln so much by the excessive rains, that
in passing them they waded up to the chin.; not
a few were killed by the enemy, who, during the
greatest part of their retreat, alarmed» harassed,
and annoyed them night and day. At last they
arrived at Metafuz and the weather being now
so calm as to restore their communication with
the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of pro.
visions, and cheered with the profped of safety.

Hh forti. DUR ING this dreadful series of calamities, the
tude of
ind. Emperor discovered great qualities, many of

which an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity
had hitherto afforded him no opportunity of
displaying. He appeared conspicuous for firm-
ness and conltancy of spirit, for magnanimity,
fortitude, humanity, and companion. He en-
dured as great hardships as the meanest soldier
he exposed his own person wherever danger
threatened; he encouraged the desponding;
visited the sick and wounded; and animated all
by his words and example. When the army em-
barked, he was among the last who left the
hore, although a body of Arabs hovered at no
great distance, ready to fall on the rear. By

these

these virtues, Charles atoned, in some degree, BOOK VI.
for his obstinacy and presumption in undertak-
ing an expedition so fatal to his fubjeats.

THE calamities which attended this unfor- Returns t

E urope

tunate enterprize did not end here; for no sooner
were the forces got on board, than a new storm
arising, though less furious than the former, scat-
tered the fleet, and obliged them, eparately,
to make towards such ports in Spain or Italy as
they could first reach; thus spreading the ac-
count of their disasters, with all the circum-
stances of aggravation and horror, which their
fear or fancy suggested. The Emperor himself,
after escaping great dangers, and being forced
into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he was Decemm.
obliged by contrary winds to remain several
weeks, arrived at last in Spain, in a condition
very different from that in which he had return-
ed from his former expedition against the In-
fidels .

2 Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villag-

nonem Equitem Rhodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii
Hist. 1. xl. p. 269, &c, Vera y Zuniga vida de Carloa V.
p. 83. Sandov. HitRor. ii. 299, &c.

,THE

# BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.
B K VIL
BOOK VII. ' H E calamities which the Emperor sus-

. l sered in his unfortunate enterprize

Renewal of against Algiers were great; and the account of
boftiltics by
Fra is, and there, which augmented in proportion as it
his motives
fw i. spread at a greater distance from the scene of

his' disasters, encouraged Francis to begin hof-
tilities, on which he had been for some time
resolved. But he did not think it prudent to
produce, as the motives of this resolution, either
his ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan,
or the Emperor's difingenuity in violating his
repeated promises with regard to the restitution

of

of that country. The former might have been BOOK VII.
a good reason against concluding the truce of 54-
Nice, but was none for breaking it; the latter
could not be urged without exposing his own
credulity as much as the Emperor's want of in-
tegrity. A violent and unwarrantable ation of
one of the Imperial generals, furnished him with
a reason to justify his taking arms, which was
of greater weight than either of these, and fucl
as would have routed him, if he had been as
desirous of peace as he was eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice,
without consulting Solyman, gave (as he fore-
saw) great offence to that haughty Monarch,
who confidered an alliance with him as an ho-
nour of which a Chrifian prince had cause to
be proud. The French King's friendly inter-
view with the Emperor in Provence, followed
by such extraordinary appearances of union and
confidence as accompanied Charles's reception
in France, induced the Sultan to fufped that
the two rivals had at last forgotten their ancient
enmity, in order that they might form such a
general confederacy against the Ottoman power,
as had been long wished for in Christendom and
often attempted in vain. Charles, with his
usual art, endeavoured to confirm and fftrengthen
these suspicions, by inftruting his emissaries at
Constantinople, as well as in those courts with
which Solyman held any intelligence, to repre-

flnt

BooK VII. sent the concord between him and Francis to be
^"v so entire, that their sentiments, views, and pur-

suits, would be the fame for the future It
was not without difficulty that Francis effaced
there impressions; but the address of Rincon,
the French ambassador at the Porte, together
with the manifest advantage of carrying on hof.
tilities against the house of Austria in concert
with France, prevailed at length on the Sultan
to enter into a closer conjunction with Francis
than ever. Rincon returned into France, in
order to communicate to his master a scheme of
the Sultan's, for gaining the concurrence of the
Venetians in their operations against the com-
mon enemy. Solyman having lately concluded
a peace with that republick, to which the media-
tion of Francis, and the good offices of Rincon
had greatly contributed, thought it not impof.
fible to allure the senate by such advantages, as,

The murder together with the example of the French Mo-
f hism-i narch, might overbalance any scruples arising
beffidors his a
etext so either from decency or caution that could ope-

rate on the other fide. Francis, warmly ap.
proving of this measure, dispatched Rincon
back to Constantinople, and, direcing him to go
by Venice along with Fregofo, a Genoese exile,
whom he appointed his ambassador to that re-
publick, empowered them to negociate the mat-

a Mem. de Ribicr. tom. i. p. 5oz.

ter

ter with the senate, to whom Solyman had sent BooKVII.
an envoy for the fame purpose b. The marquis s,7 .
del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, an officer
of great abilities, but capable of attempting and
executing the most atrocious ations, got intel-
ligence of the motions and destination of there
ambassadors. As he knew how much his maf-
ter wished to discover the intentions of the
French King, and of what consequence it was
to retard the execution of his measures, he em-
ployed ome soldiers belonging to the garrison
of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and Fregofo
as they failed down the Po, who murdered them
and most of their attendants, and seized their
papers. Upon receiving an account of this bar-
barous outrage, committed, during the sub-
fiflence of truce, againit persons held sacred by
the most uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for
the unhappy fate of two servants whom he loved
and truiled, his uneasiness at the interruption of
his schemes by their death, and every other pas-
sion, were swallowed up and loft in the indigna-
tion which this insult on the honour of his crown
excited. He exclaimed loudly against Guafto,
who, having drawn upon himself all the infamy
of assassination without making any discovery of
importance, as the ambassadors had left their in-

b Hit. de Vcnet. de Paruta, iv. 12;.

ftruions

BooKV1. ftru5tions and other papers of consequence be.

s$.1 hind them, now boldly denied his being accef.

fary in any wife to the crime. He sent an ambaf-
fador to the Emperor, to demand suitable repa-
ration for an indignity, which no prince, how
inconsiderable soever or pusillanimous, could
tamely endure: And when Charles, impatient
at that time to set out on his African expedi-
tion, endeavoured to put him off with an eva-
five answer, he appealed to all the courts in
Europe, setting forth the heinousness of the in-
jury, the spirit of moderation with which he had
applied for redress, and the iniquity of the Em-
peror in disregarding this just request.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidencewith which

Guafto asserted his own innocence, the accufa.
tions of the French gained greater credit than all
his protestations; and Bellay, the French com-
mander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by
his industry and address, such a minute detail
of the tranfa&ion, with the teflimony of so many
of the parties concerned, as amounted almost to
a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In confe-
quence of this opinion of the publick, confirmed
by such firong evidence, Francis's complaints
were universally allowed to be well founded,
and the steps which he took towards renewing
hostilities, were ascribed not merely to ambition

or

or resentment, but to the unavoidable neceflity BooRVIL
of vindicating the honour of his crown . 1541.

HOWEVER just Francis might esteem his

own cause, he did not trust so much to that, as
to neglect the proper precautions for gaining
other allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he
might counterbalance the Emperor's superior
power. But his negociations to this effec were
attended with very little success. Henry VIII.
eagerly bent at that time upon schemes against
Scotland, which he knew would at once dissolve
his union with France, was inclinable rather to
take part with the Emperor, than to contribute in
any degree towards favouring the operations
against him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his
ancient system of neutrality. The Venetians,
notwithstanding Solyman's solicitations, imitated
the Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied
with the religious liberty which they enjoyed,
found it more their interest to gratify than to
irritate the Emperor; so that the Kings of Den-
mark and Sweden, who on this occasion were
first drawn in to interest themselves in the quar-
rels of the more potent Monarchs of the south,
and the duke of Cleves, who had a dispute with
the Emperor about the poffefion of Gueldres,
were the only confederates whom Francis secured.

¢ Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hid. lib. xl. 268.

But

BooiKVIf. But the dominions of the two former lay at such
'L ,5' adiftance, and the power of the latter was so in-

"54".

considerable, that he gained little by their al-
liance.

rncr',in. FRANCis, however, fipplied all defers by his
dufry in own activity. Being afflited at this time with
wT war. a distemper, the effec of his irregular pleasures,

and which prevented his pursuing them with the
fame licentious indulgence, he applied to bufi-
ness with more than his usual industry. The
fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary
attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
dissatisfied with the ministers whom he had hi-
therto employed. This accidental peevishness
being harpened by reflecting on the false
steps into which he had lately been betrayed,
as well as the insults to which he had been
exposed, some of those in whom he had hitherto
placed the greatest confidence felt the effects of
this change in his temper, and were deprived
of their offices. At last he disgraced Montmo-
rency himself, who had long directed affairs as
well civil as military with all the authority of a
minister no less beloved than trusted by his maf-
ter; and Francis being fond of hewing that the
fall of such a powerful favourite did not affect
the vigour or prudence of his administration,
this was a new motive to redouble his diligence

in
2

In preparing to open the war by some splendid BooIVIr.
and extraordinary effort. -.

FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field t .

five armies. One to aft in Luxembourg under 1He brings
the duke of Orleans, accompanied by the duke into the
of Lorraine as his instructor in the art of war. si
Another commanded by the dauphin marched
towards the frontiers of Spain. A third led by
Van Roffem the marshal of Gueldres, and com-
posed chiefly of the troops of Cleves, had Bra.
bant allotted for the theatre of its operations. A
fourth, of which the duke of Vendome was ge-
neral, hovered on the borders of Slanders. The
last, consisting of the forces cantoned in Pied-
mont, was defined for the admiral Annibaut.
The .dauphin and his brother were appointed to
command where the chief exertions were intend-
ed, and the greatest honour to be reaped; the army
of the former amounted to forty thousand, that
of the latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing
appears more surprising than that Francis did
not pour with these numerous and irrefiflible
armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
the object of his wishes as well as enterprizes;
and that he hould choose rather to turn almost
his whole strength into another direction, and
towards new conquests. But the remembrance
of the disasters which he had met with in his
former expeditions into Italy, together with the

VOL. III. S difficulty

BOOK VII. difficulty of supporting a war carried on at such

a distance from his own dominions, had gra-
dually abated his violent inclination to obtain
footing in that country, and made him willing
to try the fortune of his arms in another quarter.
At the fame time he expeted to make such a
powerful impreflion on the frontier of Spain,
where there were few towns of any strength,
and no army assembled to oppose him, as might
enable him to recover possession of the county
of Roufillon, lately dismembered from the
French crown, before Charles could bring into
the field any force able to obftrut his progress.
The necessity of supporting his ally the duke of
Cleves, and the hope of drawing a considerable
body of soldiers out of Germany by his means,
determined him to at with vigour in the Low-
Countries.

J,,ne. THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened
rtions.' the campaign much about the fame time; the

former laying siege to Perpignan the capital of
Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
The duke of Orleans pushed his operations with
the greatest rapidity and success, one town fall-
ing after another, until no place in that large
dutchy remained in the Emperor's hands but
Thionville. Nor could he have failed of over-
running the adjacent provinces with the fame
cafe, if he had not voluntarily ftopt short in this

career

tareer of victory. But a report prevailing that Boo:V[Il
the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle 154.
in order to save Perpignan, on a sudden the
duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or moved,
perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, whom he
both envied and hated, abandoned his own con-
quests, and hastened towards Roufillon, in order
to divide with him the glory of the vicory.

ON his departure some of his troops were dif-

banded, others deserted their colours, and the
reft, cantoned in the towns which he had taken,
remained ina&ive. By this conduEt which
leaves a dilhonourable imputation either on his
underRlanding or his heart, or on both, he not
only renounced whatever he could have hoped
from such a promising commencement of the
campaign, but gave the enemy an opportunity
of recovering, before the end of summer, all
the conquests which he had gained. On the
Spanish frontier, the Emperor was not so incon-
fiderate as to venture on a battle, the loss of
which might have endangered his kingdom;
Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and briskly
attacked, having been largely supplied with
ammunition and provisions by the vigilance of
Doria ', was defended so long and b vigorously
by the duke of Alva, the persevering obflinacy

* Sigonii Vita A. D riTe, p. 19'.

S a of

BoK VII. of whose temper fitted him admirably for such

f,. ervice, that at last the French, after a siege of

three months, wafted by diseases, repulsed in
several assaults, and despairing of success, relin-
quilhed the undertaking, and retired into their
own country . Thus all Francis's mighty pre-
parations, either from some defec in his own
condut, or from the superior power and pru-
dence of his rival, produced no effeEts which
bore any proportion to his expence and efforts, or
fucll as gratified, in any degree, his own hopes,
or answered the expecation of Europe. The
only solid advantage of the campaign was the
acquisition of a few towns in Piedmont, which
Bellay gained rather by firatagem and address,
than by the force of his arms'.

43.: MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis,

treparjticnS
for another though both considerably exhausted by such
*lpai )n. great but indecisive efforts, discovering no abate-

ment of their mutual animosity, employed all
their attention, tried every expedient, and turned
themselves towards every quarter, in order to
acquire new allies, together with such a rein-
forcement of strength as would give them the
superiority in the ensuing campaign. Charles,
taking advantage of the terror and resentment of

c Sandov. His. tom. ii. 315.
' Sandov. His. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, &c. Ferrer. ix.
237.

the

the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of their BOOK VII.
country, prevailed on the Cortes of the several -,73
kingdoms to grant him subsidies with a more li-
beral hand than usual. At the fame time, he
borrowed a large fum from John King of Por-
tugal, and, by way of security for his repay-
ment, put him in pofleflion of the Molucca
isles in the East Indies, with the gainful com-
merce of precious spices, which that sequestered
corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied with
this, he negociated a marriage between Philip
his only son, now in his sixteenth year, and
Mary daughter of that Monarch, with whom
her father, the most opulent prince in Europe,
gave a large dower; and having likewise per-
fuaded the Cortes of Aragon and Valencia to
recognise Philip as the heir of these crowns, he
obtained from them the donative usual on such
occasions . These extraordinary supplies en-
abled him to make such additions to his forces
in Spain, that he could detach a great body into
the Low-Countries, and yet reserve as many as
were sufficient for the defence of the kingdom.
Having thus provided for the security of Spain,
and committed the government of it to his son,
he failed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But May,
how attentive soever to raise the funds for carry-
* Ferreras, ix. 238. 241. Jovii Hist. lib. xlii, 298. 6.

S 3 ing

Boo VII. ing on the war, or eager to grasp at any new

1543. expedient for that purpose, he was not so incon-

fiderate as to accept of an overture which Paul,
knowing his neceflities, artfully threw out to
him. That ambitious Pontiff, no less fagatious
to discern, than watchful to seize opportunities
of aggrandizing his family, solicited him to
grant Otavio his grandchild, whom the Empe-
ror had admitted to the honour of being his son-
in-law, the invefliture of the dutchy of Milan,
in return for which he promised such a vast fum
of money as would have gone far towards supply-
ing his present exigencies. But Charles, as well
from unwillingness to alienate a province of so
much value, as from disgust at the Pope, who
had hitherto refused to join in the war against
Francis, rejeaed the proposal. His diffatisfac-
tion with Paul at that juncture was so great, that
he even refused to approve his alienating Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter,
and fettling them on his son and grandson as
a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no
other expedient for raising money among the
Italian fatres remained, he consented to with-
draw the garrisons which he had hitherto kept
in the citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in con-
fideration for which, he received a large present
from Cofnap di Medici, who by this means fe-
cured his own independence, and got pofleflion

of

of two forts, which were justly called the fetters BooKVII.
of Tuscany. 153

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned The Emp-e
his whole attention towards raising the fums ne- iations

with Henry

ceffary for defraying the expences of the year, vmii."
had not been negligent of objects more diflant,
though no less important, and had concluded a
league offensive and defensive with Henry VIII.
from which he derived, in the end, greater ad-
vantage than from all his other preparations.
Several flight circumitances, which have already
been mentioned, had begun to alienate the as-
sections of that Monarch from Francis his pre-
sent ally, and new incidents of greater moment
had occurred.to increase his disgust and animosity.
Henry, deirous of establishing an uniformity in Henry's
religion in Great Britain, as well as fond of Fr"pt.ncreit,
making proselytes to his own opinions, had Scotland.
formed a scheme of persuading his nephew the
King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's fupre-
macy, and to adopt the fame fyftem.of reforma-
tion, which he had introduced into England.
This measure he pursued with his usual eager-
ncfs and impetuosity, making such advantage-
ous overtures to James, whom he confidered as
not over scrupulously attached to any religious

h Adriani Iftorla, i. 19g. Sleid. 312. Jovii HiR. lib,
Aliii. p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 3.

S 4 tenets,

Booc VII. tenets, that he hardly doubted of success. His

1543, propositions were accordingly received in such

a manner that he flattered himself with having
gained his point, But the Scottih ecclefiafticks,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the con.
sequence of the King's union with England; and
the partisans of France, no less convinced that
it would put an end to the influence of that
crown upon the publick councils of Scotland,
combined together, and by their insinuations de-
feated Henry's scheme at the very moment when
he expeted it to have taken effet. Too
haughty to brook such a disappointment, which
he imputed as much to the arts of the French
as to the levity of the Scottish Monarch, he
took arms against Scotland, threatetl b-
due the kingdom, since he could nWgain the
friendship of its King. At the fame time, his
resentment at Francis quickened his negociations
with the Emperor, an alliance with whom he
was now as forward to accept as the other could
be to offer it. During this war with Scotland,
and before the conclusion of his negociations
with Charles, James V. died, leaving his crownlt
Maryhis only daughter, an infant a few days;^.
Upon this event, Henry altered at once his whole
system with regard to Scotland, and abining
all thoughts of conquering it, aied a what
was more advantageous as well as tore practi-
cable, an union with that kingdom by a marriage

S1.;~ ~between

between Edward his only son and the young BooKVIL
Queen. But here, too, he apprehended a vi- s
gorous opposition from the French faction in
Scotland, which began to bestir itself in order
to thwart the measure. The necessity of crush.
ing this party among the Scots, and of prevent-
ing Francis from furnishing them any effectual
aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of breaking
with France, and pushed him on to put a finish-
ing hand to the treaty of confederacy with the
Emperor.

IN this league were contained firfi of all, ar- Feb. ,r

tides for securing their future amity and mutual Alliance
defence; then were enumerated the demands Charles an
which they were refpessively to make upon ry
Francis; and the plan of their operations was
fixed, if he ould refuse to grant them satis-
fa&ion. They agreed to require that Francis
hould not only renounce his alliance with Soly-
man, which had been the source of infinite ca-
lamities to Christendom, but also that he should
make reparation for the damages which that
unnatural union had occasioned; that he ihould
restore Burgundy to the Emperor; that he
should desist immediately from hostilities, and
leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common
enemy of the Christian faith; and that he should
immediately pay the fums due to Henry, or
put some towns in his hands as security to that

effe&t.

looKVIL effec. If, within forty days, he did not com.

C*3. ply with these demands, they then engaged to

invade France each with twenty thousand foot
and five thousand horse, and not to lay down their
arms until they had recovered Burgundy, toge-
ther with the towns on the Somme, for the Em-
peror, and Normandy and Guienne, or even the
whole realm of France, for Henry'. Their
heralds, accordingly, set out with these haughty
requisitions; but not being permitted to enter
France, could not perform their commiflion, and
the two Monarchs held themselves fully en-
titled to execute whatever was stipulated in their
treaty.

Frnc.a,' FRANCIS on his part was not les diligent in
*qgocations
with soy. preparing for the approaching campaign. Hav-

ing early observed the symptoms of Henry's dif-
gust and alienation, and finding all his endeavours
to ooth and reconcile him ineffecual, he knew
his temper too well not to expet that open hof-
tilities would quickly follow upon this cessation
of friendlhip. For this raibn he redoubled his
endeavours to obtain from Solyman fIch aid as
might counterbalance the great accession of
strength which the Emperor would receive by
his alliance with England. In order to supply
the place of the two ambassadors who had been

X Rym. xiv. 768. Hcrb, 38.

murdered

murdered by Guafto, he sent as his envoy, first BooKVlIr.
to Venice, and then to Constantinople, Paulin, 153.
a captain of foot, a man of a daring active spirit,
and on account of these qualities thought wor-
thy of this service, to which he was recommend-
ed by Bellay, who had trained him to the arts
of negotiation, and made trial of his talents and
address on several occasions. Nor did he belie
the opinion conceived of his courage and abili-
ties. Hastening to Constantinople, without re-
garding the dangers to which he was exposed,
he urged his master's demands with such bold-
ness, and availed himself of every circumtance
with such dexterity, that quickly he removed all
the Sultan's difficulties. As some of the Bashaws,
swayed either by their own opinion, or influenced
by the Emperor's emissaries, who had made
their way even into this court, had declared in
the Divan against ating in concert with France,
he found means either to convince or silence
them k. At last he obtained orders for Barba-
rosa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to regu-
late all his operations by the dire&ions of the
French King. Francis was not equally success-
ful in his attempts to gain the princes of the
Empire. The extraordinary rigour with which
he thought it necessary to punilh fuoh of his

k Sandqv. Hiflor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hifl. lib, xli. 285,
Fc. 300, c, Brantome,

fubjets

Boo&VII. subje&s as had embraced the protestant opinions,

IS, in order to give some notable evidence of his

own zeal for the Catholick faith, and to wipe off
the imputations to which he was liable from his
confederacy with the Turks, placed an infupe-
rable barrier between him and such of the Ger-
mans as interest or inclination would have
prompted most readily to join him'. His chief
advantage, however, over the Emperor, he de-
rived on this, as on other occasions, from the
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the
extent of the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and difap-
pointments unavoidable wherever popular as-
femblies provide for the expences of government
by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence his do-
meftick preparations were always carried on with
vigour and rapidity, while those of the Em-
peror, unless when quickened by some foreign
supply, or some temporary expedient, were to
the last degree flow and dilatory.

Operations LONG before any army was in readiness to
in the Low.
Countris. oppose him, Francis took the field in the Low-

Countries, against which he turned the whole
weight of the war. He made himself master of
Landrecy, which, he determined to keep as the
key to the whole province of Hainault; and or-
dered it to be fortified with great care. Turning

t Seek. lib. iii 403. m

from

from thence to the rights he entered the dutchy of BooKVIL.
Luxembourg, and found it in the fame defence- %

,

less state as in the former year. While he was thus
employed, the Emperor, having drawn together
an army, composed of all the different nations
subjec to his government, entered the territories
of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had vowed
to inflict exemplary vengeance. This prince,
whose conduct and situation were similar to that
of Robert de la Mark in the first war between
Charles and Francis, resembled him likewise in
his fate. Unable, with his feeble army, to face
the Emperor, who advanced at the head of forty-
four thousand men, he retired at his approach;
and the Imperialists being at liberty to a as
they pleased, immediately invested Duren. That The E,
town, though gallantly defended, was won by ,or be.oe
assault, all the inhabitants put to the sword, and the Dutchy

of Cleves.

the place itself reduced to ales. This dreadful Augut 24.
example offeverity firuck the people of the coun-
try with such general terror, that all the other
towns, even such as were capable of resistance,
sent their keys to the Emperor; and before a
body of French detached to his afiftance could
come up, the duke himself was obliged to make
his fubmifiion to Charles in the most abjet man-
ner. Being admitted into the Imperial pre-
fence, he kneeled, together with eight of his prin-
cipal subje&s, and implored mercy. The Em-
peror allowed him to remain in that ignominious

posture,

1543 implacable look, without deigning to answer a

single word, remitted him to his ministers. The
conditions, however, which they prescribed were
not so rigorous as he had reason to have expected
spt. 7. after such a reception. He was obliged to re-

nounce his alliance with France and Denmark;
to resign all his pretensions to the dutchyof
Gueldres; to enter into perpetual amity with
the Emperor and King of the Romans. In re-
turn for which, all his hereditary dominions were
restored, except two towns which the Emperor
kept as pledges of his fidelity during the con-
tinuance of the war, and he was re-instated in
his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after, Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of
his reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of
the daughters of his brother Ferdinand".
BegSc, - HAVING thus chastised the presumption of

the Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies
from Francis, and added to his dominions in the
Low-Countries a considerable province which
lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced to-
wards Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy.
There, as the first-fruits of his alliance with
Henry, he was joined by fix thousand Englilh

m Harzi Annal. Brabant, t. i. 6z8. Recucil des Trai-
tez, t. ii. 2a6.

under

under Sir John Wallop. The garrison, consist- BooKVI.
ing of veteran troops commanded by De la ,43
Lande and Deff, two officers of reputation,
made a vigorous resistance. Francis approached
with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles
covered the siege; both were determined to
hazard an engagement; and all Europe expect-
ed to fee this contest, which had continued so
long, decided at last by a battle between two
great armies, led by their refpetive Monarchs in
person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was such, as put the disadvantage
manifestly on his fide who should venture to at-
tack, and neither of them choe to run that
rifque. Amidst a variety of movements, in or-
der to draw the enemy into this snare, or to
avoid it themselves, Francis, with admirable
conduct, and equal good fortune, threw first a
supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of
provisions into the town, so that the Emperor,
despairing of success, withdrew into winter-quar-
ters , in order to preserve his army from being
entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

DURING this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his SoyCmbani.

engagements to the French King with great punc- vad"s H""-
tuality. He himself marched into Hungary with
a numerous army; and as the princes of the Em-

Bcleay, 40o, &c.

pire

BooKVIr. pire made no great effort to save a country which

543. Charles, by employing his whole force against

Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was
no appearance of any body of troops to oppose
his progress. He besieged, one after another,
Quinque Ecclefie, Alba, and Gran, the three
most considerable towns in the kingdom, of
which Ferdinand had kept poffeflion. The first
was taken by storm; the other two surrendered;
and the whole kingdom, a small corner excepted,
was fubjeEted to the Turkish yoke °. About

Parharoffia's
decent the fame time, Barbarossa failed with a fleet of
'taly' an hundred and ten gallies, and coasting along

the Shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheg-
gio, which he plundered and burnt; and ad-
vancing from thence to the mouth of the Tiber,
he ftopt there to water. The citizens of Rome,
ignorant of his destination, and filled with ter-
ror, began to fly with such general precipitation,
that the city would'have been left deserted, if
they had not resumed courage upon letters from
Paulin the French envoy, assuring them that no
violence or injury would be offered by the Turks
to any state in alliance with the King his maf-
ter P. FromOftia, Barbarofla failed to Marseilles,
and being joined by the French fleet with a body
of land forces on board, under the count d' En-

Iftuanhaff. Ilifior. rlung. I. xv. 167.
w Jovii His. 1. xliii. 304, &. Pallavic. 16o.

guien,

guien, a gallant yourg prince of the house of Boo VIr.
Bourbon, they direted their course towards 543.
Nice, the sole retreat of the unfortuhate duke
of Savoy. There, to the astonishment and Ican- AugsufR.
dal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France and
Crescent of Mahomet appeared 'in conjunction
against a fortress on which the Cross of Savoy
was displayed. The town, however, was bravely
defended againit their combined force by Mont-
fort a Savoyard gentleman, who stood a general
assault, and repulsed the enemy with great loss,
before he retired into the catle. That fort litu-
ated upon a rock, on which the artillery made
no impreflion, and which could not be under-
mined, he held out so long, that Doria had
time to approach with his fleet, and the marquis
del Guafto to march with a body of troops
from Milan. Upon intelligence of this, the Sep'. .
French and Turks raised the siege q; and Francis
had not even the consolation of uccefs, to render
the infamy, which he drew on himfclf by calling
in such an auxiliary, more tolerable.

FROM the finall progress of either party du- repr-i

tirns f r a

ring this campaign, it was obvious to what a new cm-
length the war might be drawn our between two P'"i"
princes, whose power was so equally balanced,

r Guichcnon Ilifoire de S.lvoye, t. i. p. 651. Eelly,
.12;, &c.

VOL. ll. T and

BooKVII. and who, by their own talents or activity, could

so vary and multiply their resources. The trial
which they had now made of each other's strength
might have taught them the imprudence of per.
sising in a war, wherein there was greater ap-
pearance of their diftrefing their own dominions
than of conquering those of their adversary, and
hould have disposed both to with for peace. If
Charles and Francis had been influenced by con-
fiderations of interest or prudence alone, this,
without doubt, must have been the manner in
which they would have reasoned. But the personal
animosity, which mingled itself in all their quar.
rels, had grown to be so violent and implacable,
that, for the pleasure of gratifying it, they dit-
regarded every thing else; and were infinitely
more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, than
how to secure what would be of advantage to
themselves. No sooner then did the season
force them to suspend hostilities, than, without
paying any attention to the Pope's repeated en.
deavours or paternal exhortations to re-eftablilh
peace, they began to provide for the operations
of the next year with new vigour, and an ativity
increasing with their hatred. Charles turned his
chief attention towards gaining the princes of
the Empire, and endeavoured to rouse the for-
midable but unwieldy strength of the G(' manick
Affroof body against Francis. In order to undertland

the propriety of the fleps which he took for that

jt purpolc,

purpose, it is necessary to review the chief tranf- BooKVI.
aftions in that country since the diet of Ratisbon
in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
one.

MUCH about the time that assembly broke up, Maurice of

Maurice succeeded his father Henry in the go- caYee hisy f
vernment of that part of Saxony which belonged ther
to the Albertine branch of the Saxon family.
This young prince, then only in his twentieth
year, had, even at that early period, begun to
discover the great talents which qualified him
for aing fuich a distinguished part in the as-
fairs of Germany. As soon as he entered upon
the adminiltration, he itruck out into fich a
new and singular path, as shewed that he aimed,
from the beginning, at something great and un-
common. Though zealously attached to the Thevie;vs'
Protestant opinions both from education and on~u
principle, he refuted to accede to the league of yp
Smalkalde, being determined, as he said, to
maintain the purity of religion which was the
original object of that confederacy, but not to
entangle himself in the political interests or com-
binations to which it had given rife. At the
fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles
and the confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiv.
ing which of them was most likely to prevail in
the contest, instead of that jealoify and distrust
which the other Protestants expressed of all the

T 2 Empe-

BooKVI. Emperor's designs, 'he affected to place in himn

an unbounded confidence; and courted his fa-
-our with the utmoit assiduity. When the other
Protestants, in the year fifteen hundred and forty-
two, either declined assisting Ferdinand in Hun-
gary, or afforded him relu&ant and feeble aid,
Maurice marched thither in person, and rendered
himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage.
From the fame motive, he had led to the Em-
peror's afliftance, during the last campaign, a
body of his own troops; and the gracefulness of
his person, his dexterity in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity, which courted and
delighted in danger, did not distinguish him
more in the field, than his great abilities and
insinuating address won upon the Emperor's
confidence and favour'. While by this con-
du&, which appeared extraordinary to those
who held the fame opinions with him concern-
ing religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court
to the Emperor, he began to discover some de-
gree of jealufy of his cousin the Elector of
Saxony. This, which proved in the sequel o
fatal to the Elc&or, had almost occasioned an
open rupture between them; and oon after
Maurice's acceflion to the government, they
both took arms with equal rage, upon account
of a dispute about the right ofjurifdiCtion over

'Sleid. 317. Seek. 1. iii. 371. 386. 428.

a paultry

a paultry town situated on the Moldaw. They B;oKVII.
were prevented, however, from proceeding to 1;.
acion by the mediation of the Landgrave of
HeTe, whose daughter Maurice had married, as
well as by the powerful and authoritative ad-
monitions of Luther'.

AMIDST there tranfadions, the Pope, though T' P,,pe
extremely irritated at the Emperor's concessions h I a gcne.

-,l (ondl

to the Protestants in the diet of Ratisbon, was so at Trnt.
warmly solicited on all hands, by such as were
most devoutly attached to the See of Rome, no
less than by those whose fidelity or designs he
fuifpeted, to summon a general council, that he
found it impossible to avoid any longer calling
that assembly. The impatience for its meeting,
and the expectations of great effects from its de-
cifions seemed to grow in proportion to the dif-
ficulty of obtaining it. He frill adhered, how-
ever, to his original resolution of holding it in
some town of Italy, where, by the number of
ecclefiafticks, retainers to his court, and de-
pending on his favour, who could repair to it
without difficulty or expence, he might influence
and even dire& all its proceedings. This pro-
position, though often reje&ed by the Germans,
he inftrufted his nuncio to the diet held at Spires,
in the year one thousand five hundred and Match .
forty.two, to renew once more; and if he found

'Sleid. 292. Seck . ii. i 403.

T 3 it

BoOKVII. it gave no greater fatisfatlion than formerly, he,

54.3. as a last concession, empowered him, to propose

for the place of meeting, Trent, a city in the
Tyrol, subjet to the King of the Romans, and
situated on the confines between Germany and
Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet, after
giving it as their opinion that the council might
have been held with greater advantage in Ratif-
bon, Cologne, or ome of the great cities in the
Empire, approved of the place which the Pope
had named. The Protestants unanimously ex-
pressed their diffatisfaaion, and protested that
they would pay no regard to a council held
without the precincs of the Empire, called by
the Pope's authority, and in which he assumed
the right of presiding'.

M'y 4i. THE Pope, without taking any notice of their
Sumnonsit objecions, published the bull of intimation,
to m"ct. named three cardinals to preside as his legates,

and appointed them to repair to Trent before
the first of November, the day he had fixed for
opening the council. But if Paul had desired
the meeting of a council as sincerely as he pre-
tended, he would not have pitched on such an
improper time for calling it. Instead of that
general union and tranquillity, without which
the deliberations of a council could neither be

' Slid, 291. Seck . . . 283,

condutctd

or t deliberate with security; and obliged him BooKVII.
to employ those forces in his own defence, which, C
with greater fatisfation to himself, as well as
iiore honour to Christendom, he would have
turned against the Infidels. That Francis, not
thinking it enough to have called him off from
opposing the Infidels, had, with unexampled
impiety, invited them into the heart of Christen-
dom, and, joining his arms to theirs, had openly
attacked the duke of Savoy a member of the
Empire. That Barbarossa's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the re-
turn of spring to carry terror and desolation to
the coast of ome Christian state. That in such
a situation it was folly to think of distant expe-
ditions againit the Turk, or of marching to op-
pose his armies in Hungary, while such a power-
ful ally received him into the center of Europe,
and gave him footing there. That prudence
dictated to oppose the nearest and molt immi-
nent danger, first of all, and by humbling the
power of France, to deprive Solyman of the
advantages, hich he derived from the unnatu-
ral confederacy formed between him and a Mo-
harch, who still arrogated the name of Most
Chrittian. That, in truth, a war against the
French King and the Sultan ought to be con-
fidered as the fame thing; and that every ad-
vantage gained over the former, was a severe
and sensible blow to the latter. That, there-

fore,

BooKVII. fore, he now demanded their aid againt Francis,

1544. not merely as an enemy of the Germanick body,

or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the
Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent

invetive of the Emperor, the King of the Ro-
mans stood up, and related the rapid conquests
of the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he
said, by the fatal necessity imposed on his bro-
ther of employing his arms againt France.
When he had finished, the ambassadors of Savoy
gave a detail of Barbarofla's operations at Nice,
and of the ravages which he had committed on
that coast. All these, added to the general in-
dignation which Francis's unprecedented union
with the Turks excited in Europe, made such
an impression on the diet as the Emperor wished,
and disposed most of the members to grant him
such effectual aid as he had demanded. The
ambassadors whom Francis had lent to explain
the motives of his conduct, were not permitted
to enter the bounds of the Empire; and the
apology which they published for their master,
vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by ex-
amples drawn from scripture, and the practice
of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced against him to
such a degree, as to be incapable of allowing

their

their proper weight to any arguments in his be- BooK VIL
half. 1544.

SucH being the favourable disposition of the Hs aft

concesior

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could i, ordrto
now obftru& his gaining all that he aimed at, ga the,
but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants,
which he determined to quiet by granting every
thing that the utmost Solicitude of these paflions
could desire for the security of their religion.
With this view, he consented to a recess, whereby
all the rigorous edits hitherto iflued against the
Protestants were suspended; a council either
general or national to be assembled in Germany
was declared neccffary, in order to re eftablifl
peace in the church; until one of these flould
be held, (which the Emperor undertook to
bring about as soon as possible) the free and
publick exercise of the Protestant religion was
authorized ; the Imperial chamber was to give
no molestation to the Protestants; and when the
term, for which the present judges in that court
were elected, should expire, persons duly qua-
lified wtre then to be admitted as members,
without any diftinion on account of religion.
In return for these extraordinary as of indul- Ad gant,,d
gence, the Protestants concurred with the other by tc dic.
members of the diet, in declaring war against
Francis in name of the Empire; in voting the
Emperor a bodyof twenty-four thousand foot,and

four

BooKVlr. four thousand horse, to be maintained at the

h55. publick expence for fix months, and to be em-

ployed against France; and at the fame time
the diet imposed a poll-tax to be levied through-
out all Germany on every person without ex-
ception, for the fpport of the war against the
Turks.

Charles's CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention
ith Den- to the minute and intricate detail of particulars
arg andd necessary towards conducting the deliberations

of a numerous and divided assembly to such a
successful period, negociated a.feparate peace
with the King of Denmark; who, though he
had hitherto performed nothing considerable in
consequence of his alliance with Francis, had it
in his power, however, to make a formidable
diversion in favour of that monarch . At the
fame time, he did not neglet proper applications
to the King of England, in order to route him
to more vigorous efforts against their common
enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting to accom-
plifh this; for such events had happened in
Scotland as inflamed Henry to the most violent
pitch of resentment against Francis. Having
concluded with the parliament of Scotland a
treaty of marriage between his son and their
young Queen, by which he reckoned himlflf

Dumont Corps Diplom. t. iv, p, ii. p. 274.

* fccure

secure of effeting the union of the two king- BooK VIs.
doms, which had been long desired, and often 4
attempted without success by his predecessors,
Mary of Guise the Queen-mother, cardinal
Beatoun, and other partisans of France, found
means not only to break off the match, but to
alienate the Scottifi nation entirely from the
friendihip of England, and to itrengthen its
ancient attachment to France. Henry, how-
ever, did not abandon an obje& of so much
importance; and as the humbling of Francis,
betides the pleasure of taking revenge upon an
enemy who had disappointed a favourite mea-
sure, appeared the moss effectual method of
bringing the Scots to accept once more of the
treaty which they had rejected, he was so eager
to accompliih this, that he was ready to second
whatever the Emperor could propose to be at-
tempted againif that monarch. The plan, ac-
cordingly, which they concerted, was such, if
it had been puncually executed, as must have
ruined France in the first place, and would have
augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's power
and territories as might in the end have proved
fatal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed
to invade France each with an army of twenty-
five thousand men, and, without losing time in
besieging the frontier towns, to advance directly

towards

BooKVII. towards the interior provinces, and to join thei'

i544. forces near Paris ,.

The French MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in oppofi.
take the
kJddinPid- tion to all the enemies whom Charles was muster-

a"'t. ing against him. Solyman had been the only

ally who did not desert him; but the assistance
which he received from hin had rendered him
so odious to all Christendom, that he resolved
rather to forego all the advantages of his friend-
lhip, than to become, on that account, the ob.
jea of general detestation. For this reason, he
dismissed Barbarossa as soon as winter was over,
who, after ravaging the coafi of Naples and Ttuf
cany, returned to Constantinople. As Francis
could not hope to equal the forces of his rival,
he endeavoured to supply that defe&t by dil-
patch, which was more in his power, and to get

invet Ca- the itart of him in taking the field. Early in
gnan' the spring the count d' Enguien invefied Carig-

nan, a town in Piedmont, which the marquis
del Guafto the Imperial general having furprilcd
the former year, confidered as of so much im-
portance, that he had fortified it at great x-
pence. The count pufled the siege with ltucI
vigour, that Guafto, fond of his own conqucit,
and feeing no other way of saving it from fall-

Herb.rt, 245. Bellay, 448.

ing into the hands of the French, resolved to BooKVII.
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began 4
his march from Milan for this purpose, and as The

The mpe.
he was at no pains to conceal his intention, it rialin,

march to

was soon known in the French camp. Enguien, relicit,
a gallant and enterprising young man, wished
passionately to try the fortune of a battle; his
troops delired it with no less ardour; but the
peremptory injuncion of the King not to ven-
ture a general engagement, flowing from a pru-
dent attention to the present situation of affairs,
as well as from the remembrance of former dif-
afters, restrained him from venturing upon it.
Unwilling, however, to abandon Carignan,
when it was just ready to yield, and eager to dif-
tinguifh his command by some memorable ac-
tion, he dispatched Monluc to court, in order to
lay before the King the advantages of fighting
the enemy, and the hopes which he had of vic-
tory. The King referred the matter to the
council; all the ministers declared, one after an-
other, against fighting, and supported their tcn.
timents by reasons extremely plaulible. While
they were delivering their opinions, Monluc,
who was permitted to be prefient, discovered
such visible and extravagant ymptoms of im-
patience to speak, as well as such diffatisfaCion
with what he heard, that Francis, diverted with
his appearance, called on him to declare what
he could offer in reply to sentiments which

VOL. II. U lecnecd

BboKVl. seemed to be as just as they were general. Upon
Asv this, Monluc, a plain but spirited soldier, and

of known courage, represented the good condi-
tion of the troops, their eagerness to meet the
enemy in the field, their confidence in their of.
ficers, together with the everlasting infamy which
the declining of a battle would bring on the
French arms and he urged his arguments with
such lively impetuosity, and such a flow of mili-
tary eloquence, as gained over to his opinion,
not only the King, naturally fond of daring ac-
tions, but several of the council. Francis, catch-
ing the fame enthusiasm which had animated his
troops suddenly started up, and having lifted
his hands to heaven, and implored the divine
protetion, he then addressed himself to Mon-
luc, " Go, fays he, return to Piedmont, and
fight in the name of God ."

Battle of No sooner was it known that the King had
Cerifolus.

given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists,
than such was the martial ardour of the gal-
lant and high-fpirited gentlemen of that age,
that the court was quite deserted, every per-
son desirous of reputation, or capable of ser-
vice, hurrying to Piedmont, in order to share,
as volunteers, in the danger and glory of
the action. Encouraged by the arrival of so

Memoires de Monluc.

man/

many brave officets, Enguien immeiately pre. Boo VII.
pared for battle, nor did Guafto decline the -=..
combat. The huimber of cavalry was almost
equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded the
French by at least ten thousand men. They Apra zI
met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which
afforded to neither any advantage of ground; and
both had full time to form their army in proper
order. The flock was such as might have been
expeted between veteran troops, violent and ob-
ftinate. TheFrench cavalryrulhing forward to the
charge with their usual vivacity, bore down every
thing that opposed them but, on the other hand,
the steady and disciplined valour of the Spanih
infantry having forced the body which they en-
countered to give way, victory remained in sus-
pence, ready to declare for whichever general
could make the best use of that critical moment.
Guafto, engaged in that part of his army which
was thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling
into the hands of the French, whose vengeance
he dreaded on account of the murder of Rincon
and Fregofo, loft his pretence of mind, and for-
got to order a large body of reserve to advance;
whereas Enguien, with admirable courage and
equal conduct, supported, at the head of his
gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to
yield; and at the fame time he ordered the
Swiss in his service, who had been victorious
wherever they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards.

U 2 Thls

BboK VII. This motion proved. decisive. All that followed
- C44 was confusion and slaughter. The marquis del

Guafto, wounded in the thigh, escaped only by
the swiftness of his horse. The victory of the
French was complete, ten thousand of the Im-
perialifts being slain, and a considerable num-
ber, with all their tents, baggage and artillery,
taken. On the part of the conquerors, their
joy was without allay, a few only being killed,
and among these no officer of diftindion b.
Efraelsofit. TaIS splendid aion, beside the reputation

with which it was attended, delivered France
from an imminent danger, as it ruined the army
with which Guafto had intended to invade the
country between the Rhone and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular
forces to oppose his progress. But it was not
in Francis's power to pursue the victory with
such vigour as to reap the advantages which it
might have yielded; for though the Milanese
remained now almost defenceless; though the
inhabitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready
to throw off the yoke though Enguien, flufled
with success, urged the King to seize this happy
opportunity of recovering a country, the ac-

b Bclla,, 429, &c. Mcmoircs de Monluc. Jovii hill
;. xliv. p. 327. 6.

quiition

quifition of which had been long his favourite BoOKVII.
object; yet, as the Emperor and King of Eng- i4
land were preparing to break in upon the oppo-
site frontier of France with superior. force, it
became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts of con-
quest to the publick safety, and to recall twelve
thousand of Enguien's best troops to be em-
ployed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
subsequent operations were, of consequence, so
languid and inconsiderable, that the reduction
of Carignan and some other towns. in Piedmont,
was all that he gained by his great viaory at
Cerifoles c.

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking OperatL'n

the field, but he appeared, towards the begin- countries.
ning of June, at the head of an army more nu-
merous, and better appointed than any which
he had hitherto led against France. It amounted
almost to fifty thousand men, and part of it hav-
ing reduced Luxembourg and some other towns
in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it,
he now marched with the whole towards the
frontiers of Champagne. Charles, according June
to his agreement with the King of England,
ought to have advanced directly towards Paris;
and the dauphin, who commanded the only
army to which Francis trusted for the security

Bellay, 438, &c.

U 3 of

.'- him. But the success with which the French

had defended Provence in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them
the molt effeeual method of diftrefing an in-
vading enemy. Champagne, a country abound-
ing more in vines than corn, was incapable of
maintaining a great army; and before the Em-
peror's approach, whatever could be of any use
to him had been, carried off or destroyed. This
rendered it necessary for him to be malter of
some places of frength, in order to secure the
convoys on which alone he now perceived that
he must depend for subsistence; and he found
the frontier towns so ill provided for defence,
that he hoped it would not be a work either of
much time or difficulty to reduce them. Ac-
cordingly Ligny and Commercy, which he first
attacked, surrendered after a hort refitance.

tor nvefia He then invested St. Difier, which, though it
At Differ.
July . commanded an important pass on the Marne,

was dcftitute of every thing neceflary for sustain-
ing a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M.
de la Lande, who had acquired such reputa-
tion by the defence of Landrecy, generoufy
threw themselves into the town, and undertook
to hold it out to the last extremity. The Em-
peror toon found how capable they were of mak-
ing good their promise, and that he could not
expect to take the town without besieging it in

form.

form. This accordingly he undertook; and as BooKrI.
it was his nature never to abandon any enterprise 5

1544.

in which he had onee engaged, he persisted In
it with an inconsiderate obftinaci.

THE King of England's preparations for the Henryvrim.

·',~~~~~~~

* *

,

, t t- 'invcfts Bo-

campaign were complete long before the Em- logne.
perot's; but as he did not choose, on'the one
hand, to encounter alone the whole power of
France, 'id was unwilling, on the other, that
his troops hould remain iaaive, he took that
opportunity of chastising the Sc6ts, by fending
his fleet, together with a considerable part of his
infantry, under the earl of Hertford, to ivade
their country. Hertford executed his commis-
sion with vigour, plundered and burnt Edin-
burgh and Leith, laid waste the adjacent coun.
try, and reimbarked his men with such dispatch,
that they joined their sovereign soon after his
landing in France. When Henry arrived in that July il.
kingdom, be found the Emperor engaged' in
the fiegy of St. Difier; an ambassador, however,
whom he sent to congratulate the Eng!ith Mo-
narch on his safe arrival on the continent, soli.
cited him to march, in terms of the treaty, di-
re&ly to Paris. But Charles had set his ally fich
an ill example of fulfilling the conditions of their
confederacy with exafnels,' that Henry, obfelrv-
ing him employ his time and forces in taking
towns for his own behoof, saw no reason why

U 4 he

BooKVII. lhe ifould not attempt the reducion of some

$44. places that lay conveniently for himself. With-

out payihg any regard to the Emperor's remon.
ftrances, he immediately invested Bologne, and
commanded the Duke of Norfolk to press the
siege of Montreuil, which had been begun be-
fore his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in con-
juntlion with some Englih troops. While
Charles and Henry hewed such attention each
to his own interest, they both neglected the
common cause. Initead of the union and con-
fidence requisite towards conducting the great
plan :that they had formed, they early dicovered
a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by de-
grees, begot distrust, and ended in open hatred d.

Oallant de. By this time, Francis had, with unwearied
fencc of St.
Daficr. industry, drawn together an army, capable, as

well from the number as from the valour of the
troops, of making head against the enemy. But
the dauphin, who itill aed as general, pru-
dently declining a battle, the loss of which
would have endangered the kingdom, satisfied
himself with harassing the Emperor with his
light troops, cutting off his convoys, and laying
waste the country around him. Though ex-
tremely distressed by there operations, Charles
still pressed the siege of St. Difier, which San-
ccrrc defended with aftonilhing fortitude and

d Herbert.

conduct&,

oiduct. He stood repeated aflaults, replfing BooKVM.
the enemy in them all; and undismayed even by ,54
the death of the brave de la Lande, who was
killed by a cannon-ball, he continued to shew
the fame bold countenance and obffinate refolu-
tion. At the end of five' weeks, he was till
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granvelle's induced him to fur-
render. That crafty 'politician, having inter-
cepted the key to the cypher which the Duke of
Guise used in communicating intelligence to San-
cerre,forged a letter in his name,authorizing Sa'n-
cerre to capitulate, as the King, though highly
satisfied with his behaviour, thought it impru-
dent to hazard a battle for his relief. This'let-
ter he conveyed, into the town in a manner which
could raise no suspicion, and the governor fell
into the snare. Even then, he obtained such
honourable conditions as' his gallant defence
merited, and among others a cessation of hofti-
lities for eight days, at the expiratioh of which
he bound himself to open the gates, if Francis,
during that time, did not attack the Imperial
army, and throw fresh troops into the town .
Thus Sancerre, by detaining the Eniperor so
long before an inconsiderable place, afforded his
fovercign full time to aflemle all his fo'rces, ahd,
what rarely falls to the lot of an officer in such

e Brantomc, tom. vi, ,49

an

BOOrV.LbI . hReriw oommand, acquired the gloryof
,15+4. :haing faved,his country.

Angut I7. ,As soon as St. Differ surrendered, the Empe.
The Empe-
- pene- ror advanced into the heart of Champagne, but
te heart of Sancerre's obstinate resistance had damped his
^IJa"' . sanguine hopes:of penetrating to Paris, and led

him feriouny to refle&. on what he might exper
before towns of greater strength, and defended
by,more numerous garrisons. At the fame time,
the procuring subsistence for his army was at-
tended with great difficulty, which increased in
proportion as he withdrew from his own frontier.
He had loft a great number of his best troops
in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell daily
in fkirmifles, which it was not in his power to
avoid, though they wafted his army insensibly,
without leading to any decisive aion. The
season advanced apace, and he had not yet the
command either of a sufficient extent of territory,
or of any such considerable town as rendered it
safe to winter in the enemy's country. Great
arrears too were due to his soldiers, who were
upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while
he knew not from what funds to satisfy them.
All there considerations induced him to liten to
the overtures of peace, which a Spanilh Domi-
nican, the conefor of his sifter the Queen of
France, had secretly made to his confessor, a
monk of the fame oder. In cnfcquence of this,

plenipo-

.plenipotentiaries were named on both fide, and BootVa
began their conferences in Chauflc, a small vil. .5
lage near Chalons. At the fame time, Charles,
'either from a'defire of making one great final
effort against France, or merely to gain a pre-
text for deserting his ally and concluding a fe-
parate peace, sent an ambassador formally to
require Henry, according to the Ripulation in
theif treaty, to advance towards Paris. While
he expeted a return from him, and waited the
issue of the conferences at Chauif, he continued
to march'forward, though in the utmost distress
from scarcity of provisions. But at last, by a
fortunate motion on his part, or through rbme
neglec or treachery on that of the French, he
surprised first Efpernay and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable maga-
zines. No sooner was it known that these towns,
the latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than
that great capital, defenceless, and susceptible
of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with consternation. The in-
habitants, as if the Emperor had been already
at'their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and
despair, many fending their wives and children
down the Seine to Roien, others to Orleans,
and the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself,
more afflicted with this than with any other
event during his reign, and fnfible as well of

the

SooK vn. the triumph that his rival would enjoy in insult.

54 ing his capital, as of the danger to which the

kingdom was exposed, could not refrain from
crying out, in the first emotion of his surprise
and sorrow, " How dear, O my God, do I pay
for this crown, which I thought thou hadst
granted me freelyf !" But recovering in a mo-
ment from this sudden rally of peevifinefs and
impatience, he devoutly added, Thy will,
however, be done ;" and proceeded to issue the
necessary orders for opposing the enemy with
his usual ativity and pretence of mind. The
dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris,
which revived the courage of the affrighted citi-
zens; he threw a strong garrison into Meaux,
and by a forced march got into Ferte, between
the Imperialists and the capital.

oblied to UPON this, the Emperor, who began again
flrt. to feel the want of provisions, perceiving that

the dauphin ill prudently declined a battle,
and not daring to attack his camp with forces so
much Ihattered and reduced by hard service,
turned suddenly to the right, and began to fall
back towards Soissons. Having about this time
received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to
abandon the sieges of Bologne and Montreuil,
of both which he expected every moment to get

' Brantome, tom. vi. 381.

poffcllion,

poffefion, he thought hinmflf absolved from ai B9oiVIL.
obligations of adhering to the treaty with him,i i.
and at full liberty to consult his own interest in
what manner soever he pleased. He consented,
therefore, to renew the conference, which the
surprise of Efpernay had broken off. To con-
clude a peace between two princes, one of whom Peace be.

tween him
greatly desired, and the other greatly needed it, and Francia

concluded

did not require a long negociation. It was signed at Ccfpy,
at Crefpy, a small town near Meaux, on the
eighteenth of September. The chief articles of
it were, That all the conqueits which either
#arty had made since the truce of Nice shall be
restored; That*the Emperor shall give in mar-
riage to the Duke of Orleans, either his own
eldest daughter, or the second daughter of his
brother Ferdinand; That if he choe to bestow
on him his own daughter, he shall fettle on her
all the provinces of the Low-Countries, to be
ereaed into an independent Rate, which shall de-
scend to the male issue of the marriage That if he
determined to give him his niece, he shall, with
her, grant him the invetiture of Milan and its
dependencies; That he hall within four months
declare which of there two Princesses he had
pitched upon, and fulfil the relpeive condi-
tions upon the consummation of the marriage,
which shall take place within a year from the date
of the treaty; That as soon as the Duke of Or-
leans is put in possession either of the Low-

a Countrics

btoiWV! Cotitries or of Milan, Ftancis flall reftre to

the Dtke of Savoy all that he now pofieffes of
his territories, except Pignerol and Montmilian
That Francis hall renounce all pretensions to the
kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois, and Charles shall ,ive up
his claim to the dutchy of Burgundy and county
of Charolois; That Francis flall give no aid to
the' exiled King of Navarre; That both Mo-
narchs hall join in making war upon the Turk,
towards which the King hall furifh, when re-
quired by the Emperor and Empire, fix hundred
men at arms, and ten thousand foot '.

Motives of BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace,
flu.e arising from the diftrefi of his army through

want of provisions; from the difficulty of re-
treating out of France; and the impoflibility of
securing. winter-quarters there; the Emperor
was influenced by other considerations, more
distant, indeed, but not less weighty. The Pope
was offended to a great degree, as well at his
concessions to the Protestants in the late diet, as
at his consenting to call a council, and to admit
ofpublick disputations in Germany,with a view of
determining the doctrines in controversy. Paul
confidering both there steps as sacrilegious en-

* Recueil des Traitez, t. i. 27. Belius de Caufis PcIs
C:cpiac. in Afis Erudit. Lip. 1 763.

croachments

roaduncnts on the jurifdicion as well priwr BOOKzV
ltgesofche Holy See had addrefid- to the Em s4'"
peror a remonstrance rather than a letteron this
subjet, written with such acrimony of languages
and in a tyle of such high authority, as disco.
vered rhore of an intention to draw on a quar-
rel than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill
humour was not a little inflamed by the Empe-
ror's league with Henry, which being contraced
with an heretick, excommunicated by the apo-
ftolick fee,. appearedto the Pope a profane alli-
ance, and was not less dreaded by him, than
(hat of Francis with Solyman. Paul's son and
grandson, highly incensed at the Emperor for
having refused to gratify them with regard
to the alienation of Parma and Placentia, con-
tributed by their suggestions to four and disgust
him 'till'more. To all which was added the
powerful operation of the flattery and promises
which Francis'inceffantly employed to gain hinm.
Though from his desire of maintaining a neutra-
lity, the Pope had hitherto suppressed his own
resentment, had eluded the artifices of his own
family, and resifted the solicitations of the
French King, it was not safe to rely much on
the feadinefs of a man whom his pafions, his
friends, and his interest combined to shake.
The union of the Pope with France, Charles
well knew, would inltantly expose his domi-
nions in Italy to be attacked. The Venetians,

he

BooVt. h~eorefaw, woQuld probably follow the xatnplc

d of a Pontif, who was .onodered as a model of,

poitical wisdom among the talians i and thus,
at a juncture when he felt himfnef hardly equal
to the burden of the present war, he would be
overwhelmed with the weight of a new confede-
racy againt himh. At the fame time, the
Turks, alnioft unresisted, made such progress
in.Hungary, reducing town afttr town, that
they approached near to the confines of the
Austrian provinces'. Above all these, the ex-
traordinary progress of the Protestant doctrines
in Germany, and the dangerous combination
into which the Princes of that profeflion had en-
tered, called for his immediate attention. Al-
most one half of Germany had revolted from the
eltablifhed church; the fidelity of the reft was
much shaken; the nobility of Austria had de-
manded of Ferdinand the free exercise of reli-
gion ; the Bohemians, among whom Ibme
feeds of the doctrines of Hufsdtill remained,
openly favoured the new opinions the arch-
bishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among eccle-
fialicks, had begun the reformation of his dio-
cefe:; nor was it poflible, unless some timely and
effe&ual check were given to the spirit of inno-
vation, to soresec where it would end. He him-

h F. Paul, oo. Pallavic. 163.

Iftuanhaffii lift. Hung. 177.
k Slcid. S85.

self

fef had been a witness, in the late diet, to the Bodr Vl.
peremptory and decisive tone which the Protest- 5.
ants had now assumed. He had seen how, from
confidence in their number, and union, they
had forgotten the humble style of their first peti-
tions, having grown to such boldness as openly
to defpiie the Pope, and-to shew no great reve-
rence tor the Imperial dignity itself; If, there-
fore, he wished to maintain either the ancient
religion or his own authority, and would not
choose to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the
Empire, some vigorous effort was requisite,
which could not be made during a war that re-
quired the greatet exertion of his trength
againit a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to
peace, he had the address to frame the treaty of
Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which he
had in view. By coming to an agreement with
Francis, he took from the Pope all profpcet of
advantage in courting the friendihip of that
Monarch in preference to his. By the proviso
with regard to a war with the Turks, he not
only deprived Solyman of a powerful ally, but
turned the arms of that ally against him. By
a private article, not inserted in the treaty that
it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he
agreed with Francis that both hould exert all
their influence and power in order to procure a

VOL. UI. X general

BbokV[t. general council, to afiert its authority, and to

,544." exterminate the Proteftnt ,heresy out of their

dominions. This cut off..all hope of assistance
which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-
pea from the French King'; and left their soli.
citations, or his jealousy of an ancient rival,
Ihould hereafter tempt Francis to forget this en-
gagement, he left him embarrassed with a war
against England, which would put it out of his
power to take any part in the affairs of Ger-
many.

War con- HENRY, poffelfed at all times with an high
tinus be. idea of his own power and importance, felt, in
Francandd the mot sensible manner, the neglect with which

the Emperor had treated him in concluding a
separate peace. But the situation of his affairs
was such as omewhat alleviated the mortifica-
tion which this occasioned. For though he was
obliged to recall the Duke of Norfolk from the
rpt. 14. siege of Montreuil, because the Flemilh troops

received orders to retire,, Bologne had furren-
dered before the negociations at Crefpy were
brought to an iue. While elated with vanity
on account of'this conquest, and inflamed with
indignation against the Emperor, the ambafla-
'dors whom Francis sent to make overtures of
peace, found him too arrogant to grant what was

Seck. . iii. 496.

moderate

moderate or equitable. His demands wete in- BooKVII.
deed extravagant, and made in the tone of a
conqueror; that Francis should renounce his.
alliance with 'Sotland, and not only pay up
the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the
money which he had expended in the present
war. Francis, though incerely desirous of
peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order
to obtain it, being now free from the prefiure
of the Imperial arms, reje&ed these ignominious
propositions with disdain ; and Henry departing
for England, hostilities continued between the
two nations ".

THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever The dau,
to the people of France, whom it delivered from "ed with

the peace of

the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into trfpy"
the heart of the kingdom, was loudly com-
plained of by the dauphin. He confidered it as
a manifest proof of the King his father's extra-
ordinary partiality towards his younger brother,
now Duke of Orleans, and complained that
from his eagerness to gain an establishment for a
favourite son, he had sacrificed the honour oi
the kingdom, and renounced the most ancient
as well as valuable rights of the crown. But as
he duflt not venture to offend the king by re-
fusing to ratify it, though extremely desirous at

Mem. de Ribir, t. i. p. 572. Herbert, 244.

X2 the

B6aoVII. the fanietime of securing to hinfelfthe privi-

Ss4. klege of reclaiming what was now alienated so

much to his detriment, he secretly protested, in
presence of some. of his adherents, against the
whole tranfation; and declared whatever he
Should be obliged to do in order to confirm it,
null;in itself, and void of all obligation. The
parliament of Thoploufe, probably by the in;
ftigation of his partisans, did the fame". But
Francis, highly pleased as well with having de-
livered his subjects from the miseries of an inva-
sion, as with the profpea of acquiring an inde-
pendent settlement for his son at no greater price
than the renouncing conquests to which he had
no just claim; titles which had hitherto proved
the source of expence or disasters to the nation;
and rights grown obsolete and of no value;
ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles,
within the time prescribed by the treaty, declared
his intention of giving Ferdinand's daughter in
marriage to the Duke of Orleans, together with
the dutchy of Milan as her dowry . Every
circumstance eemed to promise the continuance
of peace. The Emperor, cruelly afflicted with
the gout, appeared to be in no condition to un-
dertake any enterprise where great activity was
requisite, or much fatigue to be endured. e

a Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235. 238.
* Recucil de Traitez, t. ii 238.

himsel

himself felt this, or wilbed at least that it hould BooVI;
be believed and being so much disabled by this i
excruciating distemper, when a French ambaf-
fador followed him to Brufiels, in order to be
present at his ratification of the treaty of peace;
that it was with the utmost difficulty he signed
his name, he observed, that there was no great
danger of his violating there articles, as a hand
that could hardly hold a pen, was little able to
brandish a lance.

TE violence of his disease confined the Em- The Empe.

,or',

peror several months in Brussels, and was the fchees
apparent cause of putting off the execution of to G'C.
the vast schemes which he had formed in order maor.
to humble the Protestant party in Germany.
But there were other reasons for this delay. For,
however prevalent the motives were which de-
termined him to undertake this enterprise, the
nature of that great body which he was about
to attack, as well as the fiCation of his own
affairs, made it necessary to deliberate long, to
proceed with caution, nd not too suddenly to
throw aside the veil under which he had hi-
therto concealed his real sentiments and schemes.
He was sensible that the Protestants, conscious
of their own strength, but under continual ap-
prehensions of his designs, had all the boldness
of a powerful party joined to the jealousy of a

X 3 feeble

BooKVII. feeble fa&jon

o
and were no less quick-fighted

to discern the fire appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the
fame time, he coatinued involved in a Turkish
war; and though, in order to deliver himself
from this incumbrance, he had determined to
fend an envoy to the Porte with most advantage-
ous and even fubmifive overtures of peace, the
resolutions of that haughty court were o uncer-
tain, that before these were known, it would
have been highly imprudent to have kindled
the flames of civil war in his own domini-

ons.

The Pop UPOw this account, he appeared dissatisfied
summons a
general with a bull issued by the Pope immediately after
council to
meet at the peace of Crefpy, ummoning the council to
Trent.
Nov. 39. assemble at Trent early next spring, and exhort-

ing all Christian Princes to embrace the oppor-
tunity that the present happy interval of tran.
quillity afforded them, of fupprefling those he-
refies which threatened to subvert whatever was
sacred or venerable among Christians. But after
such a flight expreflion of dislike, as was necef-
fary in order to cover his designs, he determined
to countenance the council, which might be.
come no inconsiderable iftrument towards ac-
complilbing his proje&s, and therefore not only
appointed ambassadors to appear there in his

name,
S.

name, but ordered the ecclefiafticks in his domi- BOOKVr.
nions to attend at the bime prefixed P.

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the

Imperial diet, after several prorogations, was wom,.
opened at Worms. The Proteftantc, who en? Mlch 4
joyed the free exercise of their religion by a very
precarious tenure, having no other security for
it, than the recess of the last diet, which was.to
continue in force only until the meeting of a
council, wished earneltly to etablifh that im-
portant privilege upon ome firmer basis, and
to hold it by a perpetual not a temporary title.
But, instead of offering them any additional fe-
curity, Ferdinand opened the diet with obferv-
ing, that there were two points, chiefly, which
required consideration, the prosecution of the
war against the Turks, and the state oftreligion;
that the former was the most urgent, as Soly-
man, after conquering the greatest part of Hun-
gary, was now ready to fall upon the Austrian
provinces; that the Emperor, who, fromn the
beginning of his reign, had neglected no oppor-
tunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and
with the hazard of his own person had refited
his attacks, being animated still with the lame
zeal, had now consented to flop hort in the
career of his success against France, that, in

* F. Paul, 104.
X 4 conjunction

ootVllC onjunain with his ancient rival, he might

45. 'turn his rms with greater vigour against the

cQmmon dverfary of the Chrittian faith; that
it becam all the members of the Empire to f.
cond thee pious endeavours of its head; that,
therefore they ought, without delay, to vote
him fuch-ffeatual aid as not only their duty but
their inteeft called upon them to furnish; that
the conttverfies about religion were so intricate,
and of tch difficult discussion, as to give no
hope of ts being poflible to bring them at pre-

Tc:,eqd;th fent.to aly final- issue; that by perseverance and
cerm.na to repeatedfolicitations the Emperor had at length
#cknow- *
ldge the prevailec on the Pope to call a council, for
.wunci,

n"' which they had so often wished and petitioned;

that the ime appointed for its meeting was now
come, ard both parties ought to wait for its de.
crees, and submit to them as the decisions of the
univerfa church.

THE opiih members of the diet received this

declarat'on with great applause, and significd
their entire acquiescence in every particular
which it' contained. The Protestants expressed
great ftrprife at propositions, which were so
manifestly repugnant to the recess of the former
diet they insisted that the questions with regard
to religion, as sirs in dignity and importance,
ought p come first under deliberation that,
l{rming gs the progress of the Turks was to all

Germany,

'
a_

Germany, the securing the free exercise of their Boor VIT.
religion touched them fill more nearly, nor 5
could they prosecute a foreign war with spirit,
while solicitous and concerned about their do-
meftick tranquillity; that if the latter were once
rendered firm and permanent, they would con-
cur with their countrymen in puihing the for-
mer, and yield to none of them in acivity or
zeal. But if the danger from the Turkifi arms
was indeed so imminent, as not to admit offuch
a delay as would be occasioned by an immediate
examination of the controverted points in reli-
gion, they required that a diet should be in-
flantly appointed, to which the final settlement
of their religious disputes should be referred;
and that in the mean time the decree of the for-
mer diet concerning religion Ihould be explained
in a point which they deemed essential. By the
recess of Spires it was provided, that they should
enjoy unmolested the publick exercise of their re-
ligion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to submit, they
began to fufpe&t that their adversaries might
take advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of
the recess, and pretending that the event therein
mentioned had taken place,; might pronounce
them to be no longer entitled to the fame indul-
gence. In order to guard against this interpre.
tation, they renewed th;ir former remonftrancea

against

BoocV!I. agaipt a council called to I~c without the

.45 bounds.of the Empire, summoned by the Pope's

authority, and in which he afflumed the right of
presiding; and declared that, notwithstanding
the convocation of any such illegal assembly,
they fill held the recess of the late diet to be in
full force.

Emperor r. AT other jun&ures, when the Emperor
Wo'w t. thought it of advantage to sooth and gain the

Proteflants, he had devised expedients for giv-
ing them fatisfa&ion with regard to demands
seemingly more extravagant; but his views at
present being very different, Ferdinand by his
command adhered inflexibly to his first propo-
fitions, and would make no concessions which
had the most remote tendency to throw difcre-
dit on the council, or to weaken its authority.
The Protestants, on their part, were no less in-
flexible; and, after much time spent in fruitless
endeavours to convince each other, they came
to no conclusion. Nor did the prefcnce of the
Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at
iMay 15. Worms, contribute in any degree to render the

Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced
that they were maintaining the cause of God
and of truth, they flewed themselves superior
to the allurements ofintereft, or the suggestions
of fear; and in proportion as the Emperor re-
doubled his solicitations, or diicovered his der

signs,

signs, their boldness seems to have increaid. PooVIE,
At last they openly declared, that they would '5,
not even deign to vindicate their tenets in pre- The Protef-

tants dif.
fence of a council, assembled not to exmine, clirn all

connexioi,
but to condemn them; and that they would pay w,th the

c.,tnci Of

no regard to an assembly held under the influence Tent.
of a Pope, who had already precluded himself
from all title to at as a judge, by his having
stigmatized their opinions with the name of he-
refy, and denounced againit them the heaviest
censures, which, in the plenitude of his usurped
power, he could infli& 1.

WHILE the Protestants, with such union as ConduRof

well as firmness, rejeted all intercourse with the Mari' f
council, and refused their assent to the Imperial this diet.
demands in refpe& to the Turkish war, Mau-
rice of Saxony alone Ihewed an inclination to
gratify the Emperor with regard to both.
Though he professed an inviolable regard for
the Protestant religion, he assumed an appear-
ance of moderation peculiar to himself, by which
he confirmed the favourable sentiments which the
Emperor already entertained of him, and gra-
dually paved the way for executing the ambi-
tious designs which always occupied his ative
and enterprising mind'. His example, how-

q Slcid. 343, &c. Seck. iii. 543, &c. Thqan. Hillor.
lib. ii. p. 56.

Seek. iii. 571.

ever,

BooxVI. ever, had little influence upon such as agreed

s54. with him in their religious opinions; and Charles

perceived that he could not hope either to pro-
cure present aid from the Protestants against the
Turks, or to quiet their fears and jealousies on
account of their religion. But as his schemes
were not yet ripe for execution, nor his prepara-
tions so far advanced that he could force their
compliance, or punilh their obstinacy, he art-
ANft4. fully concealed his own intentions. That he

might augment their security, he appointed a
diet to be held at Ratilbon early next year, in
order to adjust what was now left undetermined;
and previous to it, he agreed that a certain num-
ber of divines of each party should meet, in
order to confer upon the points in dispute ';

The Proter. BuT how far soever this appearance of a de-
o"'frpe fire to maintain the present tranquillity might
the Emp. have imposed upon the Protestants, the Empe-

ror was incapable of such uniform and thorough
dissimulation, as to hide altogether from their
view the dangerous designs which he was medi-
tating against them. Herman count de Wied,
Archbishop and Elecor of Cologne, a prelate
conspicuous for his virtue and primitive fimpli-
city of manners, though not more diftinguihed
for learning than the other descendants of noble
families, who in that age pofcffecd molf of the

'*Slid. 351

great

great benefices in Germany, having become a BooxVI
proselyte to the docrines of the Reformers, had ,545
begun in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty three, with the afliftance of Melanthon
and Bucer, to abolish the ancient fuperfition in
his diocese, and to introduce in its place the
rites eftabliihed among the Protestants. But
the canons of his cathedral who were not pof-
sessed with the fame spirit of innovation, and
who foresaw how fatal the levelling genius of the
new fee would prove to their dignity and wealth,
opposed, from the beginning, this unprecedented
enterprize of their Archbishop with all the zeal
flowing from reverence for old inffitutions,
heightened by concern for their own interest.
This opposition, which the Archbilhop confi-
dered only as a new argument to demonstrate
the necessity of a reformation, neither shook his
resolution nor slackened his ardour in profecut-
ing his plan. The canons, perceiving all their
endeavours to check his career to be ineffe&tual,
solemnly protested against his proceedings, and
appealed for redress to the Pope and Emperor,
the former as his ecclesiastical, the latter as his
civil superior. This appeal being laid before the
Emperor, during his residence in Worms, he
took the canons of Cologne under his imme-
diate protetion enjoined them to proceed with
rigour against all who revolted from the efta-
blihed church; prohibited the Archbishop to

make

BooK vir. ake any itvatioi i Ms. diocese; and fun.

'-^^ moned him to appear at Brufels within thirty

5 days, to answer the accutions Which hould be

preferred against him '.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions

against the Protestant party, Charles added other
proofs flill more explicit. In his hereditary do.
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpeted of Lutheranifm with unre-
lenting rigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms,
he silenced the Protestant preachers in that city.
He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against
the Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel,
and to call upon him, as he regarded the favour
of God, to exterminate that pestilent heresy.
He dispatched the embassy, which has been al-
ready mentioned, to Constantinople, with over-
tures of peace, that he might be free from any
apprehensions of danger or interruption from
that quarter. Nor did any of these steps, or
their dangerous tendency, escape the jealous ob-
servation of the Protestants, or fail to alarm
their fears, and to excite their solicitude for the
safety of their fe&.

Deathofthe MEANWHILE, Charles's good fortune, which
oacin,. predominated on all occasions over that of his

'* Sid. 3 1. 340. 3 1. kend. ii 443. 553.

rival

rival Francis, extricated him out of a dilficlty, Book VII
from which, with all his sagacity and address, 1545.
he would have found it no easy matter to havt
disentangled himself. Just about the time- when Sept. 8.
the Duke of Orleans hould have received Ser-
dinand's daughter in marriage, and together
with her the pofleflion of the Milanese,' he diec!
of a pestilential fever. By this event, the Em-
peror was freed from the necessity of giving up
an important province into the hands of an enemy,
or from the indecency of violatinga recent and so-
lemn engagement, which nmuf have occasioned ar
immediate rupture with France. He asseted,
however, to express great sorrow for the un-
timely death of a young Prince, who was to
have been so nearly allied to him; but he care-
fully avoided entering into any frefb difcuflions
concerning the Milanefei and would not liften
to a proposal which came from Francis of new-
modelling the treaty of Crefpy, so as to make
him some reparation or the advantages which
he had loft by the demise of his son. In the
more aive and vigorous part of Francis's reign,
a declaration of war would have been the certain
and instantaneous consequence of such a flat re-
fufal to comply with a demand seemingly so
equitable but the declining slate of his own
health, the exhausted condition of his kingdoms,
together with the burden of the war againll
England, obliged him, at present, to dissemble

his

oocVIt. his reentment, and to put off thoughts of re.
15~ venge to some other jundture. In consequence

of this event, the unfortunate Duke of Savoy
loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of his
territories; and the rights or claims relinquiihed
by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force
to the crown of France, to serve as pretexts for
future wars .

ThePope UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of
duts thef Orleans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde
lacntd flattered themselves that the essential alterations
t hi fn. which it occasioned could hardly fail of pro-

ducing a rupture, which would prove the means
of their safety. But they were not more difap-
pointed with regard to this, than in their ex.
pe&tations from an event which seemed to be the
certain prelude of a quarrel between the Empe-
ror and the Pope. When Paul, whose paflion
for aggrandizing his family, increased as he ad.
vanced in years, and as he saw the dignity and
power which they derived immediately from him
becoming more precarious, found that he could
not bring Charles to approve of his ambitious
schemes, he ventured to grant his son Peter
Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia,
though at the risk of incurring the displeasure
of the Emperor. At a time when a great part

· Bclcarii Comment. 769. Paruta, Hist. Venet . i. p. 77.

of

of Europe inveighed openly against the corrupt BooK VI.
manners and exorbitant power of Ecclefiafticks, S
and when a council was summoned to reform the.
disorders in the church, this indecent grant of
such a principality, to'a son of whose illegitimate
birth the Pope ought to have been ashamed, and
whose licentious morals all good men detested,
gave general offence. Some Cardinals in the
Imperial interest remonstrated against such an
unbecoming alienation of the patrimony of the
church; the Spanifhl ambassador would not be
present at the solemnity of his enfeofment; and
upon pretext that these cities were part of the
Milanese state, the Emperor peremptorily re-
fused to confirm the deed of investiture, But
both the Emperor and Pope being intent upon
one common object in Germany, sacrificed their
particular paflions to that publick cause, and sup-
pressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they
might jointly pursue what each esteemed of
greater importance'.

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was Henryof

disturbed by a violent but short eruption of ki;.,llt
Henry Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, m,^ny, C
though fRill stript of his dominions, which the
Emperor held in sequestration, until his differ-

(I Paruta, Hil. Vcnct. iv. 178. Pallavii, 80.
VOL. III. Y ence

BooK VII. ences with the confederates of Smalkalde hould

5t5 be adjusted, poffefled however so much credit

in Germany, that he underotook toie so the
French king a considerable body of troops to be
employed in the war against England. The
money stipulated for this purpose was duly ad-
vanced by Francis; the troops were levied; but
Henry, instead of leading them towards France,
suddenly entered his own dominions at their
head, in hopes of recovering them before any
army could be assembled to oppose him. Th:
confederates were not more surprised at this un-
expected attack, than the King of France was
aftoniihed at a mean thievilh fraud, so unbecom-
ing the characer of a Prince. But the Land-
grave of Helfe, with incredible expedition, col,
le&ed as many men as put a stop to the progress
of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being joined
by his fon-in-law Maurice, and by rome troops
belonging to the Elector of Saxony, he gained
such advantages over Henry, who was rath and
bold in forming his schemes, but feeble ad'un-
determined in executing them, as obliged him
to disband his army, and to surrender himself, to-
gether with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion.
He was kept in close confinement, until'a new
reverss of iffairs procured him liberty .

lAkid, 32. Sck. iii. 567.

iJ

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise add- BooKicV.

ed new reputation to the arms of the Protest- 46.
ant, the Refornation of the Palatinate brought The Reso-t

a.C8,n mation of

a great acceffiq of strength to their party. '.th Pa"i.
Frederick, who succeeded his brother Lewis.in.
that' Ele&orate, had long been fufpeted of, a
secret propensity to the dorines of the Re-
formers, which, upon his accellion to the prin-
cipality, he openly manifested. ,Bu;. as he em-
peaed that something effectual towards a gne-
ral and legal eftablilhment of religion, would, be
the fruit of so many diets, conferences, and ne.
gociations, he did not, at first, attempt any pub-
lick innovation in his dominions. Finding all Jlan. 1
these issue in nothing, he thought himself called,
at length, to countenance by his authority the
system which he approved of, and to gratify'the
withes of his fubje&ts, who, by their intercourse
with the Protestant states, had universally im-
bibed their' opinions. As the warmth and im.
petuofity which Accompanied the spirit of Re-
formation in its first efforts, had somewhat abated,
this change was made with great order and re.
gularity , the ancient rites were abolished, and'
new forms introduced, without' any a& of vio-
lence, or' symptom. of' discontent. 'Though
Frederick adopted the religious system of the
Pzoteftants,'he imitated the examplc of Mau-

Y a rice,

BooKVII. 'rice, and did not accede to the league of Smal-

kalde'.

iS46.

The counil A FEW weeks before this revolution in the
afrebles at Palatinate, the general council was opened with

the accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes
of the Catholick fates were turned with much
expectation towards an assembly, which all had
confidered as a natural and adequate remedy for
the disorders of the church when they first broke
out, though many were afraid that it was now
too late to hope for great benefit from it, when
the malady, by being suffered to make progress
during twenty-eight years, had become invete-
rate, and grown to such extreme violence. The
Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had ap-
pointed the first meeting to be held in March.
But his views, and those of the Emperor, were so
different, that almost the whole year was spent
in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the
rigorous decrees of the council against the Pro-
teftants would oon drive them, in felf-defence
as well as from resentment, to ome desperate
extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until
his warlike preparations were so far advanced,
that he might be in a condition to second its de-
ciflons by the force of his arms. The Pope,

Sleid. 356, Seek. 1. ii. 6i6.

hq

who had early sent to Trent the legates who were BooKVIi
to preside in his name, knowing to what con- 546.
tempt it would expose his authority, and what
suspicions it would beget of his intentions, if the
fathers of the council Should remain in a slate of
ina&ivity, wheh the church was in such danger
as to require their immediate and vigorous inter.
position$ insisted either upon translating the coun-
cil to some city in Italy, or upon suspending alto-
gether its proceedings at that juncture, or upon
authorizing it to begin its deliberations immedi-
ately. The Emperor rejected the two former
as equally offensive to the Germans of every de-
nomination, but finding it impossible to elude
the latter, he proposed that the council ihould
begin with reforming the disorders in the church,
before it proceeded to examine or define articles
of faith. This was the very thing which the
court of Rome dreaded most, and which had
prompted it to employ so many artifices in order
to prevent the meeting of such a dangerous ju-
dicatory. Paul, though more compliant than
some of his predecefnors with regard to calling
a council, was no less jealous than they had been
of its jurifdiCion, and saw what matter of
triumph such a method of proceeding would
afford the hereticks. He apprehended confe-
quences not only humbling but fatal to the
papal fee, if the council came to confider an in-
quest into abuses as their only business; or if

Y 2 inferior

BOOK VII. inferior prelates were allowed to gratify their

'" fro Cn'efivy and peeilhiiefs, y preriing rules

to' tB6 ti w'o we'reexalted above them in dignity
and power. With6ut iftering,' tieref6re, to
this insidious propofat 6f the mpe'ror, he in-
firutled his legate 'to open the council.

Jan. ,s. THE first fefion was spent in matters of form.
proced- In a fubfequeh't one, it was agreed that the

framing a coffetlion of faith, wherein hould be
contained all the articles which the church requir-
ed'its-'members to believe, ought to be the first
and principal business of the council; but that, at
the fame time, due attention Ihould be given to
what was necessary towards the reformation of
nmariners and discipline. From this first yjmp-
to'm of the spirit with which the council was
animated, from the high tone of aufiprity' which
the'legates who resided init assumed, and from
the implicit deference with which most of the
members followed their' direcions, the Protest-
ants conjecured with ease what decisions they
niight expect. It affonifhed them, however, to
fee forty'prelates, (for no greater number were
yet aflemnbled) assume authority as reprefenta-
tives of the universal church, and proceed to de-
termine the mos iportant points of doctrine in
its hanie. Sensible of this indecency, as well as
of the ridicule with which it might be attended,
the council advanced slowly in its deliberations,

and

an'd all its proceedings were for some time lan- Bool VI.
guihing and feeble'. As soon as the' confede- L
r;t/s: of Smalkalde received information of the
opening of the council, they published a long
manifeftd, containing a renewal of their protelt
agarift its meeting, together with the reasons
which itlduced them to decline its jurifdicions b.
The Pope and Emperor, on their part, were so
little solicitous to quicken or add vigour to its
operations, as plainly discovered that some ob-
je o greater importance occupied and in-
terefied them.

THE Protestants, as they were not Inattentive, Apprehe.

or unconcerned fpe&ators of their motions, en- itctaathS
tertained every day more violent suspicions of
their intentions, and received intelligence from
different quarters of the machinations carrying
on against them. The King of England in-
forred them, that the Emperor having long
resolved to exterminate their opinions, would
not fail to employ this interval of tranquillity
which'he now enjoyed, as the most favourable
jun&ure for carrying his design into execution.
The merchants of Augsburg, which was at that
time a city of extensive trade, received advice,
by means of their correspondents in Italy, among

F. Paul, 20o, &c. Pallavic. p. 180, &c.
X Scckend. 1. iii, 602, &c.

Y 4 whom

BooKVrr. whom were ome who secretly favoured the

1546. Protefant cause , that a dangerous confederacy

againfl it was forming between the Pope and
Emperor. In confirmation of this, they heard
from the Low-Countries that Charles had issued
orders, though, with every precaution which
could keep the measure concealed, for raising
troops both there and in other parts of his do-
minions. Such a variety of information, corro-
borating all that their own jealousy or obferva-
tion led them to apprehend, left the Protestants
little reason to doubt of the Emperor's hoffile

Their dc intentions. Under this impreflion, the. depu-
libterations.

ties of the confederates of Smalkalde assembled
at Frankfort, and by communicating their intel-
ligence and sentiments to each other, recipro.
cally heightened their sense of the impending
danger. But their union was not such as their
situation required, or the preparations of their
enemies rendered necessary. Their league had
now subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom
of Germany, had created an infinite variety of
mutual rights and claims by intermarriages, al-
liances, and contracs of different kinds, sub-
je&s of jealousy and discord had unavoidably
arisen. Some of the confederates, being con-

Seek. 1. iii. 579.

ne&ed

ne&ed with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly BooLVII.
disgusted with the Landgrave, on account of the s46
rigour with which he had treated that ralh but
unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Eletor of
Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league,
with having involved the members in unne-
ceffary and exorbitant expences by their profuse-
ness or want of ceconomy. The views, like-
wife, of those two great Princes, who, by their
superior power and authority, influenced and
direted the whole body, being extremely dif-
ferent, rendered all its motions languid, at a
time when the utmost vigour and dispatch were
requisite. The Landgrave, of a violent and en-
terprifing temper, but not forgetful, amidst his
zeal for religion, of the usual maxims of human
policy, insisted that, as the danger which threat-
ened them was manifest and unavoidable, they
hould have recourse to the most effectual expe-
dient for securing their own safety, by courting
the protetion of the Kings of France and Eng-
land, or by joining in alliance with the Protest.
ant cantons of Swifferland, from whom they
might expet such powerful and present alifiance
as their situation demanded. The elector, on
the other hand, with the most upright intentions
of any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the
administration of government in any tranquil

period,

BOOK Vlt. period, w*m P9flWfl Wi flichk bptftitious ve-

64 nótnrration for all the pats of the Lutheati system,

and such bigotted aarhen t all Its tehets, as
made him averse to Mn unfil itihthofe who
differed from him in any artilel of faith4 and
rendered him very icapabl bs trinettaking its
defence in times of difficulty and danger. He
seemed to think, that the cortcerns of religion
were to be regulated by principles and maxims
totally different from those Which apply to the
common affairs of life; and being swayed too
much by the opinions of Luther, who was not
only a firanger to the rules of political condut,
but despised them; he often discovered an un.
complying spirit, that proved of the greatest de-
triment to the cause which he wilhed to support.
Influenced, on this occasion, by the severe and
rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to
enter into any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit
the friendship of Henry, because he was no lets
impious and profane than the Pope himtfelf; or
even to join in alliance with the Swiss, because
they differed from the Germans in several essential
articles of faith. This disTension, about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural es-
fe&s. Each secretly censured and reproached
the other. The Landgrave confidered the Elec-
tor as fettered by narrow prejudices, unworthy

of

of Prince called to at a chief part in a scene BooKVff.
qs flh importance. The Elecfor fufpe&ed him 546
qs loops principle and ambitious views, which
corefpopd4 ill with the sacred capfe wherein
they were engaged. Bat though ,the Eletor's
fcrupps. preve#tdL their timely application for
foreign.,aid; an4 the jealousy or discontent of
the qt;hr Pripcq .defeated a proposal for re-
newing their original confederacy, the term
during which it was to continue in force being
on the pOint of expiring; yet the sense of their
comnmon danger induced them to agree with
regard to other points,, particularly that they
would never acknowledge the affen)bly at Trent
as a lawful council, nor susser the Archbiffop
of Cologne to be oppressed on account of the
steps which he had taken towards the reforma-
tion of his diocese d,

THE Landgrave, about this time, desirous of Their neg

penetrating to. the bottom of the Emperor's in- wjth the
tentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to Emperor.
be thoroughly acquainted with all his master's
schemes, informing him of the several parti-
culars which raised the suspicions of the Pro-
tetants, and begging an explicit declaration
of. what they had to fear or to hope. Gran-
velle, in return, assured them that the intelli-

e Seck. 1. iii. 566. 570. 613. Slcid. 355.

gence

BooK VII. gence which they had received of the Empe-

1546. ror's military preparations was exaggeratedi

and all their suspicions destitute of foundation;
that, though in order to guard his frontiers
against any insult of the French or English,
he had commanded a small body of men to
be raised in the Low-countries, he was as
solicitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in
Germany .

BUT the Emperor's aions did not corre-

fpond with these profefions. For, instead of
appointing men of known moderation and a
pacifick temper to appear in defence of the Ca-
tholick doctrines at the conference which had
been agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots,
attached to their own system with a blind ob-
ftinacy, that rendered all hope of reconcile-
ment desperate. Malvenda, a Spanith divine,
who took the conduct of the debate on the part
of the Catholicks, managed it with all the subtle
dexterity of a fcholaftick metaphysician, more
ltudious to perplex his adversaries than to con-
vince them, and more intent on palliating error
than on discovering truth. The Protestants filled
with indignation, as well at his sophistry as at
some regulations which the Emperor endea-

*Slid. 356.

voured

vored to impoe on the disputants, broke off BootVIr.
the conference abruptly, being now fully con- 5~6.
vinced that, in all his late measures, the Em-
peror could have no other view than to amuse
them, and to gain time for ripening his own
schemes .

Sleid. 358. Sck;l. iii, 620.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

T H E
H I S oT 't Y

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.
Bvoo TT HILE appearances of danger daily

[-yr VV increased, and the tempest which had

D546. been so long a gathering was ready to break
Death of
Luter. forth in all its violence against the Protestant

church, Luther was saved, by a seasonable
death, from feeling or beholding its deftrufEive
rage. Having gone, though in a declining state
of health, and during a rigorous season, to his
native city of Eyfleben, in order to compose, by
his authority, a dissension among the counts of
Mansfield, he was seized with a violent inflam-
r'b. , mation in his stomach, which in a few days put

an

an end to his life, in the fixty-third year of his B oo c,
age. As he wa railed up by providence to be v.
the author of one of the greatest and most in.. is46.
teresting revolutins. recorded in history, there
is not any person perhaps whose charater has.
been drawn,with such opposite colours. In his
own age, one party, struck with horror and in-
flamed with rage, when they saw with what a
daring hand he overturned every thing which
they held to be sacred, or valued as beneficial,
imputed to him not only all the defe&s and vices
of a man, but the qualities of a dmon. The
other, warmed with the admiration and grati-
tude, which they thought he merited as the re-.
florer of light and liberty to the Christian
church, ascribed to him perfetions above the
condition of humanity, and viewed ,aU his ac-
tions with a veneration bordering on that which
should be paid only to those who are guided. :by
the immediate inspiration of Heaven. It. is his m;. ah.
own condu&, not the, uriftinguihing censure "aer,
or the exaggerated praise of his contemporaries,
that ought to regulate the opinions of theprefent
age concerning him. Zeal for what he regarded
as truth, updaunted intrepidity to maintain his
own fyflcm, abilities both natural and acquired
to defend his principles, and unwearied industry
in propagating ,them, are virtues which. hine -o
conspicuously in every part of his behaviour, that
even his enemies mull allow him to have pof-

selfed

o o sessed them in an eminent degree. To these may
VIII.
^VtIs, be added, with equal justice, such purity and
s346. even austerity of manners, as became one who

aflumed the character of a Reformer; such fanc.
tity of life as suited the docrine which he de.
livered; and such perfet dimitereftednefs as
affords no flight presumption of his sincerity.
Superior to all felfilh considerations, a stranger
to the elegancies of life, and despising its plea.
fures, he left the honours and emoluments of
the church to his disciples, remaining satisfied
himself in his original state of professor in the
university, and pastor of the town of Wittem.
berg, with the moderate appointments annexed
to these offices. His extraordinary qualities
were allayed with no inconsiderable mixture of
human frailty and human pafions. These, how-
ever, were of such a nature, that they cannot
be imputed to malevolence or corruption of
heart, but seem to have taken their rife from the
fame source with many of his virtues. His mind,
forcible and vehement in all its operations,
roused by great objects, or agitated by violent
pallions, broke out, on many occasions, with
an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler
spirits, or such as are placed in a more tranquil
situation. By carrying rome praise-worthy dif-
positions to excess, he bordered ometimes on
what was culpable, and was often betrayed into
aions which exposcd him to censure. His

confidence

cbhfidence that his own opinions were well Boo :C
founded, approached to arrogance; his courage v.~
in asserting them, to rashness; his firmness in 'S146
adhering to them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in
confuting his adversaries, to rage and fcurrilityi
Accustomed himself to confider every thing as
subordinate to truth, he expected the fame de-
ference for it from other men; and, without
making any allowances for their timidity or pre-
judices, he poured forth against such as difapa
pointed him in this particular, a torrent of in-
vective mingled with contempt. Regatdlefs of
any diftintion f rank or characer when his
doctrines were attacked, he chastised all his ad-
verfaries indifcriminatily, with the fame rough
hand; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII.
nor the eminent learning and abilities of Eras-
mus, screened them fromn the fame gross abuse
with which he treated Tetzcl or Eccius.

BUT these indecencies of which Luther was

guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
lence of his temper. They otght to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which, by putting continual restraint on the
palrions of individuals, have polished society
and rendered it agreeable, difputes'of every kind
wrere managed with heat, and itrong emotions

VOL. II, . wet

Boo were uttered in their natural language, withoru
V[' !I. reserve ordielicacy. At the fme time, the works
1546. of learned men were all composid in Latin, and

they were not only authorized, by the example
of eminent writers in that language, to use their
antagonists with the most illiberal scurrility;
but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every
kind appear less hocking than in a living lan-
guage, whose idioms and phrases seem gross,
because they are familiar.

IN passing judgment upon the chara&ers of

men, we ought to try them by the principles
and maxims of their own age, not by those of
another. For, although virtue and vice are at
all times the fame, manrers and customs vary
continually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour,
which to us appear mot culpable, gave no dif-
gust to his contemporaries. It was even by some
of those qualities, which we are now apt to
blame, that he was fitted for accomplishing the
great work which he undertook. To rouse
mankind, when funk in ignorance or superstition,
and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with power, required the utmot vehemence of
zeal, as well as a temper daring to excess. A
gentle call would neither have reached, nor have
excited those to whom it was addrefed. A
spirit more amiable, but less vigorous than Lu
ther's, would have Dhrunk back from the dan

ger

gers, which he braved and surmounted. To- BOOKc
wards the close of Luther's life, though without ""
any perceptible declension of his zeal or abilities, 1546.
the infirmities of his temper increased upon him,
so that he grew daily more peeviih, more iraf-
cible, and more impatient of contradiction.
Having lived to be witness of his own amazing
success; to fee a great part of Europe embrace
his dotrines; and to lhake the foundation of
the papal throne, before which the mightiest
Monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some
occasions, symptoms of vanity and felf-applaufe.
He must have been indeed more than man, if,
upon contemplating all that he atually accom-
plifhed, he had never felt any fcntiment of this
kind riing in his breast *.

* A remarkable inflance of this, as well as of a certain

singularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Lat
Will. Though the effeas which he had to bequeath were
very inconsiderable, he thought it neceflary to make a
Testament, but scorned to frame it with the ulual legal
formalities. Notus fum, fays he, in c¢lo, in terra, &8 inferno,
& auctoritatem ad hoc sufficientem habeo, ut mihi foil cre-
datur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et mifera-
bili peccatori, ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui
crediderit, dederitque ut in eo verax & fidelis fuerim, ita
ut multi in mundo illud per me acceperint, & me pro Doc-
tore veritatis agnoverint, fpreto banno Papc, Caris, Re-
gum, Principum facerdotum, immo omnium dlnonum
odio. Quidni, igitur, ad dispositionem hanc, in re exigua,
fufficiat, si adfit manus mea teltimonium, & dici poUlit,
hec fcripfit D. Martinus uther, Notarius Di, & tctis
Lvangclii ejus. Sec. 1. iii. p. 651.

Z 2 SoMe

B OOK SOME time before his death he felt his ftrengrh
VIII declining, his confitution being worn out by a
1546. prodigious multiplicity of business, added to

the labour of discharging his ministerial function
with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of
contant study, besides the composition of works
as voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupt-
ed leisure and retirement. His natural intrepi-
dity did not forsake him at the approach of
death; his last conversation with his friends was
concerning the happiness reserved fr good men
in a future world, of which he spoke with the
fervour and delight natural to one who expeced
and wished to enter oon upon the enjoyment of
it A. The account of his death filled the Roman
Catholick party with excessive as well as indecent
joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers;
neither party sufficiently confidering that his
doctrines were now so firmly rooted, as to be in
a condition to flourish independent of the hand
which first had planted them. His funeral was
celebrated by order of the Elector of Saxony with
extraordinary pomp. He left several children by
his wife Catharine a Boria, who survived him.
Towards the end of the last century, there were
in Saxony some of his descendants in decent and
honourable stations b

· Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &c.
i Seek. 1. iii. 65 .

THE

· THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan BoaK
of dissimulation with which he had set out, em-
ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and i46.
to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this The Empe.
purpose he contrived to have an interview with forrs dt
the Landgrave of Hefle, the most ative of all amuft ad
the confederates, and the most suspicious of his Protefn^is.
designs. To him he made such warm profef- Mrch 28.
lions of his concern for the happiness of Ger-
many, and of his aversion to all violent mea-
fures; he denied in such express terms, his hav-
ing entered into any league, or having begun
any military preparations which should give
cause of alarm to the Protestants, as seem to
have dispelled all the Landgrave's doubts and
apprehensions, and lent him away fully satisfied
of his pacifick intentions. This artifice was of
great advantage, and effetually answered the
purpose for which it was employed. The Land-
grave upon his leaving Spires, where he had
been admitted to this interview, went to Worms,
where the Smalkaldick confederates were assem-
bled, and gave them such a flattering represent-
ation of the Emperor's favourable dilpofition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from
the temper of the German nation as from the
genius of all great associations or bodies of men,
to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
deliberations, thought there was no ncellity of

Z 3 taking

BOOK taking any immediate measures againf danger,
VI) cJ which appeared to be distant or.imaginary .
1546.
Proceed SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as

Proceeding ofthecoun. staggered the credit which the Protestants had
cil gainft
thcProtcet. given to the Emperor's declarations. The

council of Trent, though still composed of a
small number of Italian and Spanish prelates,
without a single deputy from any of the king.
doms which it assumed the right of binding by
its decrees, being ahamed of its long inacti-
vity, proceeded now to fettle articles of the
greatest importance. Having begun with exa-
mining the first and chief point in controversy
between the church of Rome and the Reformers,
concerning the rule which hould be held as fu-
preme and decisive in matters of faith, the
council, by its infallible authority, determined,
April . ' That the books to which the designation of

Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from
the apoftolick age, and preserved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the doctrines
and precepts which the inspired authors have
committed to writing; that the Latin tranfa-
tion of the Scriptures, ade or revised by St.

Skiid, Hist, 367, 373.

Jerome,

Jerome, and known by the name of the ulgate Bl
translation, should be read in churches, and _
appealed to in the schools as authentick and ca- '
nonicaL Against all who disclaimed the truth
of there tenets, anathemas were denounced in
the name and by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. The decision of there points, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the Pro-
teftants what judgment they might expect when
the council should have leisure to take into con-
lideration the particular and Subordinate articles
of their creed .

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was
oon followed by a striking instance of the
Pope's resolution to punish such as embraced
them. The appeal of the canons of Cologne
against their Archbishop having been carried to
Rome, Paul eagerly seized on that opportunity,
both of displaying the extent of his own autho-
rity, and of teaching the German ecclefiafticks
the danger of revolting from the eftablifled
church. As no person appeared in behalf of
the Archbishop, he was held to be convicted of
the crime of heresy, and a Papal bull was Arl 16.
issued, depriving him of his ecclesiastical dig-

F. Paul, 141. Pallav. 206.

Z 4 nity,

Boo nity, inflicting on him the sentence of excom
VIII.
~- munication, and absolving his subje&s fron the
i546. oath of allegiance which they had taken to him

as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the
only crime imputed to him, as well as the only
reason assigned ojuftify the extraordinary rigour
of this decree. The Protestants could hardly
believe that Paul, how zealous soever to defend
the established system, or to humble those who
invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to
such extremities against a Prince and Eletor of
the Empire, without having previously secured
such powerful protection as would render his
censure something more than an impotent and
despicable sally of resentment. They were of
course deeply alarmed at this sentence against
the Archbishop, confidering it as a sure indica-
tion of the malevolent intentions not only of
the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the
whole party".

Charles UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with
commenc, such violence as is natural to men rouzed from

'int the a false security, and conscious of their having
protrtat . been deceived, Charles saw that it was now ne-

ceffary to throw aside the veil, and to declare
openly what part he determined to act. By a

Slcid. 354. F..Paul, 155. Pallavic, 24.,

long

long series of artifice and fallacy, he had gained Boo K
so much time, that his measures, though not v
altogether ripe for execution, were greatly ma- 1540.
tured. The Pope, by his proceedings against
the Elector of Cologne, as well as by the de-
cree of the council, had precipitated matters
into such a situation, as rendered a breach be-
tween the Emperor and the Proteitants almost
unavoidable. Charles had now no choice left
him but either to take part with them in over-
turning what the See of Rome had determined,
or to support the authority of the church openly
by force of arms. Nor did the Pope think. it Negociate

with thc

enough to have brought the Emperor under a Pope.
necessity of acting; he presTed him to begin his
operations, by promising to second him with
such vigour as could nor well fail of securing
his success. Transported by his zeal against
.heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious
m4axims of the Papal See, with regard to the
danger of extending the Imperial authority
beyond due bounds and in order to crush the
Lutherans, he was willing to contribute towards
raising up a master that might one day prove
formidable to himself as well as to the reft of
Ialy.

BuT, betides the certain expectation of aflift- cnclude,
ante from the Pope, Charles was now secure s"oynI.

from

Bo o from any danger of interruption to his designs

_ _, by the Turkish arms. His negotiations at the
1s46. Porte, which he had carried on with great ali-

duity since the peace of Crefpy, were on the
point of being terminated in such a manner as
he desired. Solyman, partly in compliance with
the French King, who, in order to avoid the
disagreeable obligation of joining the Emperor
against his ancient ally, laboured with great zeal
to bring about an accommodation between
them; and partly from its being necessary to
turn his arms towards the east, where the Per-
sians threatened to invade his dominions, con-
sented without difficulty to a truce for five years.
The chief article of it was, That each hould
retain pofleffion of what he now held in Hun-
gary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the pride
of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tri-
bute of fifty thousand crowns .

Gains Mu. BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of
he' d the Germans themselves that the Emperor re.
Gciany. lied with the greatest confidence. The Germa-

nick body, he knew, was of such vast strength,
as to be invincible if it were united, and that
it was only by employing its own force that he
could hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the
union of the several members in this great sys-

Iftuanhafii Hist. Hung. 180o Mm. de Ribier, tom. i.

tern

tern was so feeble, the whole frame was so Boom
Ioofely compated, and its different parts tended ,__
so violently towards separation from each other, 1546.
that it was almost impoflible for it, on any im-
portant emergence, to join in a general or vi-
gorous effort. In the present jundure, the
sources of discord were as many, and as various
as had been known on any occasion. The Ro-
man Catholicks, animated with zeal in defence
of their religion proportional to the fierceness
with which it had been attacked, were eager to
second any attempt to humble those innovators
who had overturned it in many provinces, and
endangered it in more. John and Albert of
Brandenburg, as well as several other Princes,
incensed at the haughtiness and rigour with
which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated
by the confederates of Smalkalde, were impa-
tient to rescue him, and to be revenged on them.
Charles observed, with fatisfation, the work-
ing of those passions in their minds, and count-
ing on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
should think it proper to at, he found it, in
the mean time, more necessary to moderate than
to inflame their rage.

SUCH was the situation of affairs, such the Holds a

discernment with which the Emperor foresaw ra'
and provided for every event, when the diet of
the Empire met at Ratilbon. Many of the

Roman

BooK Roman Catholick members appeared there in
VII'. person, but most of the confederates of Smal-
l56. kalde, under pretence of their being unable to

bear the expence occasioned by the late unne.
ceffary frequency of such assemblies, ent only
deputies. Their jealousy of the Emperor, to-
gether with an apprehension that violence might,
perhaps, be employed, in order to force their
approbation of what he hould propose in the
diet, was the true cause of their absence. The
speech, with which the Emperor opened the diet
was extremely artful. After professing, in com-
mon form, his regard for the prosperity of the
Germanick body, and declaring, that, in order
to bestow his whole attention upon the re-eRta-
bliihment of its order and tranquillity, he had
at present abandoned all other cares, rejected
the most pressing solicitations of his other sub-
jets to reside among them, and postponed as-
fairs of the greatest importance; he took notice,
with ome disapprobation, that his disinterested
example had not been imitated; many mem-
bers of chief consideration having negle&ed to
attend an assembly to which he had repaired with
such manifest inconvenience to himself. He
then mentioned their unhappy dissensions about
religion; lamented the ill success of his pat
endeavours to compose them; complained of
the abrupt dissolution of the late conference,
and craved their advice with regard to the belt

and

and most effectual method of restoring union to Booc

VIIt.

the churches of Germany, together with that -_i
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their 1546.
ancestors had found to be of no less advantage
to their civil interest, than becoming their Chris-
tian profefion.

BY this gracious and popular method of con-

fulting the members of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own,
besides the appearance of great moderation,
and the merit of paying much refpea to their
judgment, the Emperor dextroufly avoided dif-
covering his own sentiments, and reserved to
himself, as his only part, that of carrying into
execution what they should recommend. Nor
was he less secure of such a decision as he wished
for, by referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman Catholick members, prompted by their
own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues, joined
immediately in representing that the authority
of the council now met at Trent ought to be
final in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians hould submit to its decrees as the in-
fallible rule of their faith; and therefore they
besought him to exert the power, with which
he was invested by the Almighty, in proteting
that assembly, and in'compelling the Protestants
to acquiesce in its determinations. The Protest-
ants, on the other hand, presented a memorial,

in

B o o in which, after repeating their objeions to the

VIII.
--_ council of Trent, they proposed, as the only
3i46. effe&ual method of deciding the points in dif-

pute, that either a free general council should
be affiembled in Germany, or a national council
of the Empire hould be called, or a fele&
number of divines should be appointed out of
each party to examine and define articles of
faith. They mentioned the recesses of several
diets favourable to this proposition, and which
had afforded them the profpe& of terminating
all their differences in this amicable manner;
they now conjured the Emperor not to depart
from his former plan, and by offering violence
to their confclences, to bring calamities upon
Germany, the very thought of which must fill
every lover of his country with horror. The
Emperor receiving this paper with a contemptu-
ous smile, paid no farther regard to it. Having
already taken his final resolution, and perceiv-
ing that nothing but force could compel them
June 9. to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of

Trent to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance
with the Pope, the terms of which were already
agreed on; he commanded a body of troops,
levied on purpose in the Low-Countries, to ad-
vance towards Germany; he gave commiflions
to several officers for raising men in different
parts of the Empire; he warned John and Al-
bert of Brandenburg, that now was the proper

timle

time of exerting themselves, in order to rescue B o o

VIII.

their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from cap.- -,.
tivity f. 1546.

ALL these things could not be tranfa&ed The Pro.

without the observation and knowledge of the e.
Protefants. The secret was now in many
hands; under whatever veil the Emperor still
asseted to conceal his designs, his officers kept
no such mysterious reserve, and his allies and
subjects spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarm-
ed with reports of this kind from every quar-
ter, as well as with the preparations of war which
they saw begun, the deputies of the confede-
rates demanded audience of the Emperor, and,
in the name of their matters, required to know
whether these military preparations were car-
ried on by his command, and for what end, and
against what enemy. To a question put in such
a tone, and at a time when faas were become
too notorious to be denied, it was necefiary to
give an explicit answer, Charles owned the
orders which he had iffied, and profecfing his
purpose not to molest any on account of reli-
gion who should at as dutiful subje&s; de-
clared that he had nothing in view but to main.
tain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and, by punishing some fa6tious mem-
bers, to preserve the ancient constitution of the

f Slid. 374, Seck. iii. 68,

Empire
·2,

Boo K Empire from being impaired or dissolved by

their irregular and licentious condut. Though
1546. the Emperor did not name the persons whom he

charged with such high crimes, and defined to
be the objects of his vengeance. it was obvious
that he had the Elestor of Saxony, and Land;
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi-
dering what he had said, as a plain declaration
of his hostile intentions, immediately retired
from Ratisbon .

The Empe. THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult
tor's treaty
with th matter to treat with the Pope, who having at
(''p' length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan

which he had long recommended, assented with
July 6. eagerness to every article that he proposed. The

league was signed a few days after the Cardi-
nal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious hereies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Proteffants in rejeting the holy council
assembled at Trent, and the neceflity of main-
taining found doctrine, together with good or-
der in the church, are mentioned as the mo-
tives of this union between the contracing par-
ties. In order to check, the growth of these
evils, and to punish such as had impiously con-
tributed to spread them, the Emperor, having
long and without success made trial of gentler
remedies, engaged instantly to take the field

Sleid. 376.

with

with a sufficient army, that he might compel BOOK
*11 who disowned the council, or had apolta- VI.
tized from the religion of their forefathers, to 1546.
return into the bosom of the church, and sub-
mit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise hound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without afligning him his hare in
any conquests which fhquld be made upon them,
and that even after this period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church, or to the interest of
religion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to
deposit a large fum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain, at his own charge, during the space
of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five
hundred horse; to grant the Emperor, for one
year, half of the ecclesiastical revenues through-
out Spain; to authorize him, by a bull, to alie-
nate as much of the lands, belonging to religious
houses in that country, as would amount to the
fum of five hundred thousand crowns; and to
employ not only spiritual censures, but military
force against any Prince who hould attempt to
interrupt or defeat the execution of this treaty).

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in
which the extirpation of heresy was declared to

$ Slcid. 381. Pallav. 5s. Dumont Corps Diplom. Il.
VOL. III. Aa ba

BOOK be the objet of the war which was to follow
V-., upon this treaty, Charles till endeavoured to
5,6. persuade the Germans that he had no design to

Ende vours
ti! to con. abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed
ceal his in-
entions only at vindicating his own authority, and re-
fPotcafts, pressing the insolence of such as had encroached

upon it. With this views he wrote circular
letters, in the fame frain with his answer to the
deputies at Ratibon, to most of the free cities,
and to several of the Princes who had embraced
the Protestant doctrines. In these he complained
loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt
into which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and
of the presumptuous as well as disorderly beha-
viour of ome members of the Empire. He
declared that he now took arms, not in a reli-
gious, but in a civil quarrel; not to oppress any
who continued to behave as quiet and dutiful
subjects, but to humble the arrogance of such
as had thrown off all sense of that fubordina-
tion in which they were placed under him as
head of the Germanick body. Gross as this de-
ception was, and manifest as it might have ap-
peared to all who confidered the Emperor's
conduct with attention, it became necessary for
him to make trial of its effect; and such was
the confidence and dexterity with which he em-
ployed it, that he derived the most solid advan-
tages from this artifice. If he had avowed at
once an intention of overturning the Protestant

church,

thurch, and of reducing all Germany under its Bo K

VIII.

former slate of fubje&ion tothe Papal See, none ._,.
of the cities or Princes who had embraced the 1546.
new opihions could have remained neutral after
such a declaration, far less could they have
ventured to alift the EmperQr in such an en.
rerpriie.. Whereas by concealing, and eve't
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all
the Protestant flates, but he furnished the timid
with an excuse for continuing ina&ive, and the
designing or interested With a pretext for join-
ing him, without exposing themselves to the in-
famy of abandoning their own principles, or
having an active hand in suppressing them.
At the fame time the Emperor well knew, that
if, by their affiftahce, he were enabled to break
the power of the Eletor of Saxony and Land-
grave, he might afterwards prescribe what terms
he pleased to the feeble remains of a party
without union or leaders, who would then re-
gret, too late, their mistaken confidence in him,
and 'their inconsiderate desertion of their aflib
ciates.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen dif- The p.,pe

play of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this h,,,p,.,
plan which the Emperor had formed with so
much care and art. Proud of having been the

A a 2 author

Boo aathor of such a formidable confedercy against
s the Lutheran hcrefy, ad happy in thinking
5+,6. that the glory of ex irpai it-was reserved for

his Pontificate, he published the articles of his
league wih the Emwperor, in order to demon-
ftrate the pious intention of their confederacy,
as well as to display his own zeal, which
prompted him to make such extraordinary es-
forts for maintaining the faith in its purity.
Not satisfied with this, he soon after iued a
bull, containing most liberal promises of indul-
gence to all who Ihould engage in this holy en-
terprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,
to increase the fervour of their prayers, and the
severity of their mortifications, that they might
draw down the blessing of Heaven upon those
who undertook it'. Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so
inconsistent with the account which the Em-
peror himself gave of his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
difimulation in such a cause; at his seeming
to be aamed of owning his zeal for the
church; and at his endeavours to make that
pass for a political contest, which he ought to
have gloried in as a war which had no other ob-
jet than the defnce of religion. With as

I Do Mont. Corps Diplom.

muci

much solicitude, therefore, as the Emperar la- Bo o
boured to disguise the purpose of the confide- V

j

racy, did the Pope endeavour to publish their '5s'
real plan, in order that they might come at
once to an open rupture with the Protestants,
that all hope of reconcilement might be cut off,
and that Charles might be under fewer tempta-
tions, and have it le's in his power than at pre.
sent, to betray the interests of the church by
any accommodation beneficial to himfelfk.

TAE Emperor, though not a little offended

at the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making
this discovery, continued boldly to pursue his
own plan, and to assert his intentions to be no
other than what he had originally avowed. Se-
veral of the Protestant states, whom he had
previously gained, thought themselves justified,
in tome measure, by his declarations, for aban-
doning their associates, and even for giving
afliftance to him.

BUT these artifices did not impose on the Theprepa-

ration of the
greater and founder part of the Protestant con- iroteftints

for their

federates. They clearly perceived it to be ownde.
against the reformed religion that the Emperor rec.
had taken arms, and that not only the fuppref-
sion of it, but the extin&tion of the German

k F. Paul, 188. Thuan. Hit. i. 61.

A a 3 liberties,

B o K liberties, would be the certain consequence of
VIII.

_ . his obtaining such an entire superiority as would
5s 6, enable him to execute his schemes in their full

extent. They'determined, therefore, to prepare
for their own defence, and neither to renounce
those religious truths, to the knowledge of which
they had attained by means so wonderful, nor
to abandon those civil rights which had been
transmitted to them by their ancestors. In or,
der to give the necessary diretions tor this pur-
pose, their deputies met at Ulm, soon after their
abrupt departure from Ratisbon. Their delibe-
rations were now conduAed with such vigour and
unanimity, as the imminent danger which
threatened them required. The contingent of
troops, which each of the confedeiates was to
furniff, having been fixed by the original treaty
of union, orders were given for bringing them
immediately into the field. Being sensible, at
lgft, that through the narrow prejudices of
some of their members, and the imprudent fe-
curity of others, they had neglected too long to
strengthen themselves by foreign alliances, they
now applied with great earnestness to the Vene-
tians and Swiss.

'Try si;. To the Venetians they represented the Em-
ru the id
of th.Vc peror's intention of overturning the present sys

"'*' tern of Germany, and of raising himself to

absolute power in that country by means of

foreign

foreign force furnilhed' by the Pope they, Boo
warned them how fatal this event would prove Vi.
to the liberties of Italy,, and that by fffering Is46."-
Charles to acquire unlimited authority in the
one country, they would soon feel his dominion
to be no less defpotick.in the other; they be-
fought them, therefore, not to grant a passage
through.their territories to those troops, which
ought to be treated as common enemies, be-
cause by: subduing Germany they prepared
chains for the reft of Europe. These refletions
had not escaped the sagacity of those wife re-
publicans. They had communicated their fen-
timents to the Pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render irrefitible the power of a potentate,
whose ambition he already knew to be bound-
less. But they had found Paul so eager in the
prosecution of his own plan, that he disregard-
ed all their remonltrances'. This attempt to
alarm the Pope having proved unsuccessful,
they would do nothing more towards preventing
the dangers which they foresaw; and in return
to the application from the confederates of Smal-
kalde, they informed them, that they could not
obftruC the march of the Pope's troops through
an open country, but by levying an army strong
enough to face them in the field; and that this

l Adriani Iforia di fuoi tempi, liv. v. . 332.

A a 4 would

B oo would draw upon themRnlves the whole weight
VIII , W
.I"., of his as well as of the Emperor's indination.
is54 For the fame reaon they declined lending a

fum f money, which the Elecor of Saxony
and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them,
towards carrying on the war .
Of the THE demands of the confederates upon the

Swiss were not confined to the obftrutih of the
entrance of foreigners into Germany; they re-
quired of them, as the nearest neighbours, and
closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with
their wonted vigour for the preservation of its
liberties, and not to stand as inactive fpe'tators,
while their brethren were oppressed and enalaved.
But with Whatever zeal the reformed Cantons
might have been disposed to aft when the cause
of the Reformation was in danger, the Helve-
tick body was so divided with regard to religion,
as rendered it unsafe for the Protestants to take
any ftep without consulting their associates;
and among them the emissaries of the Pope and
Emperor had such influence, that a resolution
of maintaining an exa&t neutrality between the
contending parties, was the utmost which could
be procured ".

Sleid. 381. Paruta Ifor. Venet, tom.iv. i8o. Lam-

bernrt Hortenfius de bello Germanico, apud Scardium,
vol. ii. p. 547.

D Slid. 39z.

BzJiN

BfIt4o disappointed in both these applications, Boo

VIII.

the Protestants, not long after, had recourf to
the Kings of France and England; the ap- f F6.
proach of danger either overcoming the Elector i. and He.
of Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield 7
to the importunities of his afolciates. The situ-
ation of the two Monarchs flattered them with
hopes of success. Hostilities between them had
continued for tome time after the peace of Cref-
py. But becoming weary at last of a war, at-
tended with no glory or advantage to either,
they had lately terminated all their differences
by a peace concluded at Campe near Ardres.
Francis having with great difficulty procured
his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that concession he engaged to pay
a great fum, which Henry demanded as due to
him on several accounts, and he left Bologne in
the hands of the English, as a pledge for his
faithful performance of that article. But though
the re-establishment of peace seemed to leave
the two Monarchs at Iiberty to turn their atten-
tion towards Germany, so unfortunate were
the Protestants, that they derived no immediate
advantage from this circumstance. Henry ap-
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the supreme direc-
tor of their league; a pre-eminence which, as
the bonds of union or interet between them

were

Bo o K were but feeble, and as. he differed from them

V. so widely in his religious sentiments, they had

no inclination to admit . Francis, more power-
fully inclined by political considerations to as-
ford them assistance, found his kingdom so
much exhausted by a long war, and was so
much afraid of irritating the Pope, by entering
into close union with excommunicated Here,
ticks, that he durst not undertake the pro-
teetion of the Smalkaldick league. By this ill-
timed caution, or superstitious deference to fcru-
ples, to which at other times he was not much
addicted, he loft the most promising opportu-
nity of mortifying and distressing his rival, which
presented itself during his whole reign.

Protestants BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their
take the
field witha negociations with foreign courts, the confede-
eat army. rates found no difficulty at home, in bringing a

sufficient force into the field. Germany abound-
ed at that time in inhabitants; the feudal infti-
tutions, which subsisted in full force, enabled
the nobles to call out their numerous vassals,
and to put them in motion on the horteft warn-
ing; the martial spirit of the Germans, not
broken or enervated by the introdution of com-
merce and arts, had acquired additional vigour
during the continual wars in which they had
been employed, for half a century, either in

Rymcr, xv 93. Herbert, z8.

the

the pay of the Emperors, or Kingsof France. Boor

VIII.

Upon every opportunity of entering into ser- L-,,
rice, they were accustomed to run eagerly to 1546.
arms; and to every standard that was ere&ed,
volunteers flocked from all quarters P. Zeal
seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour.
Men on whom the doctrines of the Reforma-
tion had made that deep impression which ac-
companies truth when firit discovered, prepared
to maintain it with proportional vigour; and
among a warlike people, it appeared infamous
to remain inafive, when the defence of religion
was the motive for taking arms. Accident com-
bined with all these circumflances in facilitating
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being difiniffed by the King on the
profpe& of peace with England, joined in a
body the standard of the Protestants. By such
a concurrence of causes, they were enabled to
aflemble in a few weeks an army composed of
seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse,
provided with a train of an hundred and
twenty cannon, eight hundred ammunition
waggons, eight thousand beasts of burden, and
fix thousand pioneers', This army, one of the

P Seek. 1. iii. 16~. 6 Thuan. . i. 68.

Thuan. 1. i. 601. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Com-

mentariorum d b Germ. lib. duo, Antw. 1550. 12mo.
p. 13,a. r

most

Boo most numerous, and undoubtedly the best ap.

pointed of any which had been levied in .Europe
s46s during that century, was not railed by the united

effort of the whole Protestant body. The Ele&or
of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke
of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhalt, and the
Imperial cities of Aufbourg, Ulm, and Straf-
burg, were the only powers which contributed
towards this great armament: The Electors of
Cologne, of Brandenburg, and the Count Pa-
latine, overawed by the Emperor's threats, or
deceived by his profeflions, remained neuter.
John marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and Al-
bert of Brandenburg Anfpach, though both
early converts to Lutheranifm, entered openly
into the Emperor's service, under pretext of
having obtained his promise for the security of
the Protestant religion; and Maurice of Saxony
soon followed their example.

'The ief THR number of their troops, as well as the
the mp,; amazing rapidity wherewith they had assembled
for ' forces
* thkir, them, astonished the Emperor, and filled him

with the most disquieting apprehensions. He
was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a
mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of
ho great firength, whose inhabitants being most-
ly Lutherans, would have been more ready to
betray than to alift him, with only three thou-
sand Spanifi foot, who had frved in Hungary,

~~~~~a ~and

and about five thousand Gernans. who had Booc
joined him from different parts of the Empire, VIII
he must have been overwhelmed by the approach 1546.
of such a numerous army, which he could not
fight, nor even hope to retreat from it in safety.
The Pope's troops, though in full march to his
relief, had hardly reached the frontiers of Ger-
many ; the forces which he expected from the
Low-Countries had not yet begun to move, and
were even far from being complete *' His situ-
ation, however, called for more immediate fuc-
cour, nor did it seem practicable for him to wait
for such distant auxiliaries, with whom his junc-
tion was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for .Charles, that The ,im,

the confederates did not avail themselves of/the Pudo.ia,'
advantage which lay so full in their view. In a^d of
civil wars, the first steps are commonly taken
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance
of moderation and equity; they strive to gain
partisans by seeming to adhere ftritly to known
forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those eftablilhed institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most

' Slid. 389. Avila , a.

vigorous

B o vigorous-and decisive. Influenced by thbfe
Jllf. considerations, which; happily for the peace of
AS46. society, operate powerfully on the human mind,

the confederates could not think of throwing off
that allegiance which they regularly owed to the
head of the Empire, or of turning their arms
against him without one solemn appeal more to
his candour, and to the impartial judgment of
their fellow-fubjeas. For this purpose, they
addressed a letter to the Emperor, and a mani-
fefto to all the inhabitants of Germany, The
tenour of both was the fame. They represented
their own conduct with regard to civil affairs
as dutiful and submissive; they mentioned the
inviolable union in which they had lived with
the Emperor, as well as the many and recent
marks of his good-will and gratitude where-
withal they had been honoured; they aflerted
religion to be the sole cause of the violence
which the Emperor now meditated against them;
and in proof of this produced many arguments
to convince those who were so weak as to be
deceived by the artifices with which he endea-
voured to cover his real intentions; they de-
clared their own resolution to riek every thing
in maintenance of their religious rights, and
foretold the dissolution of the German conftitu-
tion, if the Emperor Ihould finally prevail
against them '.

Slcid. 384.

CHARLES

CHARLES, though in such a perilous fituatioh s o o

as might have inspired him with moderate senti-
ments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if Th1e s6.
his affairs had been in the mot prosperous tate. ror ptS

them unider

His only reply to the address and manifesto of the ban of
the Protestants, was to publish the bn of the Jy:uEly
Empire against the Eletor of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all
who should dare to aflift them. By this fen-
tence, the ultimate and most rigorous one which
the German jurisprudence has provided for the
punilhment of traitors, or enemies to their coun-
try, they were declared rebels and outlaws, and
deprived of every privilege which they enjoyed
as members of the Germanick body; their goods
were confiscated; their fubjets absolved from
their oath of allegiance; and it became not only
lawful but meritorious to invade their territories.
The nobles, and free cities, who framed or per-
seAed the constitution of the German govern-
ment, had not been so negligent of their own
safety and privileges as to trust the Emperor
with this formidable jurifdiion. The autho-
rity of a diet of the Empire ought to have been
interposed before any of its members could be
put under the ban. But Charles overlooked
that formality, well knowing that, if his arms
were crowned with success, there would remain
none who would have either power or courage

to

- oo to call in quetion what e had done'. The

,J; Emperor, however, did not found his sentence
156. againfl the Elector and -Lndgrave on their re-

volt from the efablihed church, or their con-
dut with regard to religion; he asseted to aflign
for it reafcns purely civil, and those too expressed
in fch general and ambiguous terms, with-
out specifying the nature or circumstances of
their guilt, as rendered it more like an a& of
defpQtick power than of a legal and limited jurif.
diction. Nor was it altogether from choice, or
to conceal his intentions, that Charles had re-
course to the ambiguity of general expressions;
he durst not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every acion which he could
have charged upon the Elector and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal justice to condemn many of the Protestants
whom he ill pretended to confider as faithful
fubjels, and whom it would have been ex-
tremely imprudent to alarm or disgust.

Ty dt. THB confederates, now perceiving all hopes
elare war
Mainn of accommodation to be at an end, had only to

l. choose whether they would submit without re-

serve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hostilities. They were not destitute of publick
spirit and resolution to make the proper choice.

Sleid. 386. DM4ont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. I1. 314
Pfffel HiR, Abregi du Droit Publ. 168. 736. 1S8.

A few

A few days after the ban of the Empire was Boo
published, they, according to the custom of that V-,
age, ent a herald to the Imperial camp with a 5S+46
solemn declaration of war against Charles, to
whom they no longer gave any other title than
that of pretended Emperor, and renounced all al-
legiance homage or duty which he might claim,
or they had hitherto yielded to him. But pre-
vious to this formality, part of their troops had
begun to at. The command of a considerable Their sirs
body of men railed by the city of Augiburg op"ations
having been given to Sebastian Schertel, a fol-
dier of fortune, who by the booty that he got
when the Imperialists plundered Rome, to-
gether with the merit of long service, had ac-
quired wealth and authority which placed hihi
on a level with the chief of the German hobles:
that gallant veteran resolved before he joined the
main body of the confederates, to attempt some-
thing suitable to his former fame and to the ex-'
petation of his countrymen. As the Pope's
forces were hastening towards Tyrol, in order
to penetrate into Germany by the narrow pases
through the mountains which run across that
country, he advanced thither with the utmost
rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cufliein,
two strong castles which commanded the prin-
cipal defiles. Without stopping a moment, he
continued his march towards Infpruck, by get-
ting poffelion of which he would have obliged

Vo.. III. B b the

Boo s the Italians to itop hort, and with a small body
^ VL . of men could have resifted all the efforts of the

j S6 greatest armies. Caftlealto, the governor of

Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would
be to the Emperor, all whose designs must have
proved abortive if his Italian auxiliaries had
been intercepted, railed a few troops with the
utmost dispatch, and threw himself into the
town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the
enterprize, and was preparing to attack the
place, when the intelligence of the approach of
the Italians, and an order from the Eletor and
Landgrave obliged him to desist. By his retreat
the pafies were left open, and the Italians en-
tered Germany without any opposition, but from
the garrisons which Schertel had placed in
Ehrenberg and Cufffsein, and these having no
hopes of being relieved, surrendered, after a
flort refiftaoce x

NOR

Scckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iftoia di fuoi tempi,
lib. 335.

* Seckendorf the induitrious author of the Commenta-

rius Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long
and fatcly followed as my guide in German affairs, was
a descendant from Schertel. With the care and folicitudc of
a German, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf
has publiihed a long digreflion concerning his ancellor,
calculated chiefly to how how Schertel was ennobled, and
his pofteiity allied to many of the mofl ancient families in
the Empire. Among other curious particulars, he gives
us In account of his wealth, the chief source of which was

the

NOR was the recalling of Schertel the only Boo

error of which the confederates were guilty. As ,
the supreme command of their army was corn- 1546.
mitted, in terms of the league of Smalkalde, to dnuI coa.
the Elecor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse
with equal authority, all the inconveniences
arising from a divided and co-ordinate autho-
rity, which is always of fatal consequence in the
operations of war, were immediately felt. The
Eleor, though intrepid in his own person to
excess, and most ardently zealous in the cause,
was flow in deliberating, uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations, and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and safe,
to such as were bold or decisive. The Land-
grave, of a more active and enterprising nature,
formed all his resolutions with promptitude,
wvifhed to execute them with spirit, and uni-
formly preferred such schemes as tended to
bring the contest to a speedy ifiue. Thus their
maxims, with regard to the conduc of the war,
differed as widely as those by which they were
influenced in preparing for it. Such perpetual
contrariety in their sentiments gave rife, imper-

the plunder he got at Rome. His landed eflate was fold by
his grandsons for fix hundred thoufind florins. By this
we may form rome idea of the riches amafled by the Condot-
tieri, or commanders of mercenary bands in that age. At the
taking of Rome Schertel was only a captain. Seckend.
lib. ii. 73.

1 b 2 ceptibly,

ROO K ceptibly, to jealousy and the spirit of contention;

V. a-. These multiplied the dissensions sowing from the
*546. incompatibility of their natural temper, and

rendered them more violent. The other mem-
bers of the league confidering themselves as in-
dependent, and fubje& to the Ele&or and Land-
grave, only in consequence of the articles of a
voluntary confederacy, did not long retain a
proper veneration for commanders, who pro.
ceeded with so little unanimity; and the nume-
rous army of the Protestants, like a vast ma-
chine whose parts are ill compaced, and which
is destitute of any power sufficient to move and
regulate the whole, a&ed with no consistency,
vigour, or effect.

The Pope's THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
troops join
the Ernpc. maining at Ratiibon, he might render it impolfi-
ors ble for the Pope's forces to join him, having

boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft ome days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the terri-
tories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly
abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave only
a finall garrison. By this time the papal troops,
amounting fully to that number which Paul
had tipulated to furnilh, had reached Landshut,

'1 and

and were soon followed by fix thousand Spa- BOO
'niards of the veteran bands stationed in Naples. V111.
The confederates, after Schertel's spirited but IS 6.
fruitless expedition, seem to have permitted these
forces to advance unmolested to the place of
rendezvous, without any attempt to attack either
them or the Emperor separately, or to prevent
their junction x. The Imperial army amounted
now to thirty-fix thousand men, and was frill
more formidable by the discipline and valour of
the troops, than by their number. Avila, com-
mendador of Alcantara, who had been present
in all the wars carried on by Charles, and had
served in the armies which gained the memorable
victory at Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and
invaded France, gives this the preference to
any martial force he had ever seen assembled Y.
OCtavio Farnese, the Pope's grandson assisted
by the ablest officers formed in the long wars
between Charles and Francis, commanded the
Italian auxiliaries. His brother, the Cardinal
Farnese, accompanied him, as papal legate;
and in order to give the war the appearance of
a religious enterprize, he proposed to march at
the head of the army, with a cross carried before
him, and to publish Indilgences wherever he
came, to all who should give them any afliftance,

a Adiani Iltoria di fuoi temFi, lib. v. 340.
Y Avila, 18.

Bb3 as

BooK as had anciently been the practice in the Cru-
a _ - fades against the Infidels. But this the Emperor

1546. ftritly prohibited, as inconsistent with all the

declarations which he had made to the Germans
of his own party ; and the legate perceiving, to
his astonishment, that the exercise of the Protest-
ant religion, the extirpation of which he con-
fidered as the sole objet of the war, was pub-
lickly permitted in the Imperial camp, soon re.
turned in disgust to Italy .

THE arrival of there troops enabled the Em-

peror to fend such a reinforcement to the garri.
son of Ratisbon, that the confederates, relinquish-
ing all hopes of reducing that town, marched
towards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to
which Charles was now encamped. They ex-
claimed loudly against the Emperor's notori-
ous violation of the laws and confitution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to
lay waste Germany, and to oppress its liberties.
As in that age, the dominion of the Roman See
was so odious to the Protestants, that the name
of the Pope alone was sufficient to inspire them
with horror at any enterprize which he counte-
nanced, and to raitf in their minds the blacke(
suspicions, it came to be universally believed
among them, that Paul, not satisfied with at-
tacking them openly by force of arms, had dif-

F. Paul, 191.

* perfed

perfed his emissaries all over Germany, to set on Boro
fire their towns and magazines, and to poison the >
wells and fountains of water. Nor did this ru- s5+6.
mour spread only among the vulgar, being ex-
travagant as well as frightful enough to make a
deep impression on their credulity; even the
leaders of the party, blinded by their prejudices,
published a declaration, in which they accused
the Pope of having employed such Antichriftian
and diabolical arts against them'. These senti-
ments of the confederates were confirmed, in
some measure, by the behaviour of the papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous to-
wards Hereticks anathematized by the church,
were guilty of great excesses in the Lutheran
territories, and aggravated the calamities of war,
by mingling with it all the cruelty of bigotted
zeal.

THE first operations in the field, however, The cone.

did not correspond with the violence of those v.lnret,-
paflions which animated individuals. The Em- p'ril
peror had prudently taken the resolution of ar"""
avoiding an action with an enemy so far superior
in numberb, especially as he forelaw that nothing
could keep a body composed of so many and
such diflimilar members, from falling to pieces,
but the prefling to attack it with an inconfide-
rate precipitancy. The confederates, though it

Seid. 399. b Avila, 8, a.

* B b4 was

Bo o was no less evident that to them every momenta
~^.,l delay was pernicious, were still prevented by the
^5+6. weakness or division of their leaders from exert-

ing that vigour, with which their situation, as
well as the ardour of their soldiers, ought to have
A,. 9s. inspired them. On their arrival at Ingoldftadt,

they found the Emperor in a camp not remark-
able for strength, and surrounded only by a flight
entrenchment. Before the camp lay a plain of
such extent, as afforded sufficient space for
drawing out their whole army, and bringing it
to aft at once. Every consideration should have
determined them to have seized this opportunity
of attacking the Emperor; and their vast fupe-
riority in numbers, the eagerness of their troops,
together with the stability of the German in-
fantry in pitched battles, afforded them the most
probable expetation of vitory. The Land-
grave urged this with great warmth, declaring
that if the sole command were vested in him, he
would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general ation the fate of the two
parties. But the Eletor, reflecting on the va-
lour and discipline of the enemy's forces, ani-
mated by the presence of the Emperor, and con-
ducted by the best officers of the age, would
not venture upon an ation, which he thought
to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body
of veterans on ground which they themselves
had chosen, and while covered by fortifications

whieh,
*

which, though imperfec, would afford them no B o o
small advantage in the combat. Notwithftand- .
ing his hesitation and remonstrances, it was s+6,
agreed to advance towards the enemy's camp
in battle array, in order to make trial whe-
ther by that insult, and by a furious can,
nonade which they began, they could draw the
Imperialists out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into
this snare. He adhered to his own system with The Empe-

'. ~ror decling

inflexible constancy; and drawing up his fol- a balc.
diers behind their trenches, that they might be
ready to receive the confederates if they should
venture upon an assault, calmly waited their ap-
proach, and carefully restrained his own men
from any excursions or skirmishes which might
bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addressing the troops of the
different nations in their own language, encou-
raged them by the cheerfulness of his voice and
countenance; he exposed himself in places of
greatest danger, and amidst the warmest fire of
the enemy's artillery, the most numerous that
had hitherto been brought into the field by any
army. Roused by his example, not a man
quitted his ranks; it was thought infamous to
discover any symptom of fear when the Emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest loldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the com-

bat
*

oo K bat at present was not the effea of timidity in

_,_"1. their general, but the result of a well weighed
1546. caution. The confederates, after firing several

hours on the Imperialists, with more noise and
terror than execution, eeing no profpe& of al-
luring them to fight on equal terms, retired to
their own camp. The Emperor employed the
night with such diligence in itrengthening his
works, that the confederates, returning to the
cannonade next day, found that, though they had
now been willing to venture upon such a bold
experiment, the opportunity of making an at-
tack with advantage was loft c.

The Tlc-
mifh tro'op, AFT ER such a discovery of their own feeble-
on chr. ness or irresolution, and of the prudence as wcU

as firmness of the Emperor's conduet, the con-
federates turned their whole attention towards
preventing the arrival of a powerful reinforce-
ment of ten thousand foot, and four thouflnd
horle, which the count de Buren was bringing
to the Emperor from the Low-Countries. But
though that general had to traverse such an ex-
tent of country; though his route lay througi!
the territories of several states warmly difpolcd
to favour the confederates; though they wcrc
apprized of his approach, and by their vait fu.

c Sleid. 395, 397. Avila, 27, ., Lamb. Hortenf. a.
Scard. ii.

periority

periority in numbers might easily have detached BOOK
a force sufficient to overpower him, he advanced i,
with such rapidity, and by such well concerted ,546.
movements, while they opposed him with such
remiflhefs, and so little military kill, that he
conduced this body to the Imperial camp with- Sert. go.
out any loss d.

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom

he placed great confidence, the Emperor altered,
in some degree, his plan of operations, and be-
gan to aa more upon the offensive, though he
still avoided a battle with the utmost indultry.
He made himself matter of Neuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen,
and several other towns, situated on the most
considerable fireams which fall into that mighty
river. By this he got the command of a great
extent of country, though not without being
obliged to engage in several fllarp encounters,
of which the success was various, nor without
the most imminent danger oftener than once of
being drawn into a battle. In this manner the staeof
whole autumn was spent; neither party gained botl"ri""'i'
any remarkable fpcriority over the other, and
nothing was yet done towards bringing the war
to a period. The Emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of

a Sleid. 493.

money

B o o money would compel the confederates to disperse
vU[.
_L _that unwieldy body, which they had neither
J546. abilities to guide, nor funds to support'; but

though he waited with impatience for the ac-
compliffment of his prediction, there was no
profpe& of that event being at hand. Mean-
while he himself began to susser from the want
of forage and provisions; even the Catholick
provinces being so much incensed at the intro-
duftion of foreigners into the Empire, that they
supplied them with reluctance, while the camp
of the confederates abounded with a profusion
of all necessaries, which the zeal of their friends
in the adjacent countries furnished with the ut-
most liberality and good-will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to
the climate or food of Germany, were become
unfit for service through sickness'. Confider-
able arrears were now due to the troops, who
had scarcely received any money from the be-
ginning of the campaign; the Emperor, ex-
periencing on this as well as on former occasions,
that his jurisdiction was more extensive than his
revenues, and that the former enabled him to
assemble a greater number of soldiers, than the
latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all these
accounts, he found it difficult to keep his army

e Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Graco fermone scrip-
tus a Joach. Camcrario, ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.

f Camcrar. ap. Frcher. 483.

11

in the field; some of his ablest generals, and Boor

VIII.

even the Duke of Alva himself, persevering and ,.
obstinate as he usually was in the prosecution of '546-
every measure, advising him to disperse his
troops into winter-quarters. But as the argu-
ments urged against any plan which he had
adopted, rarely made much impression upon the
Emperor, he paid no regard to their opinion,
and determined to continue his efforts in order
to weary out the confederates; being well affur-
ed that if he could once oblige them to separate,
there was little probability of their uniting again
in a body g. Still, however, it remained a doubt-
ful point, whether his steadiness was most likely
to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted., It was
still uncertain which party, by first dividing its
forces, would give the superiority to the other;
when an unexpected event decided the contefl,
and occasioned a fatal reverse in the affairs of
the confederates.

MARICE of Saxony having insinuated him- The

* ° fcl emeg

self into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts of Maurie
which have already been described, no sooner
saw hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
profpeAs of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to

I Thuan. 83,

him

B0 oK him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying
-.. _a his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea.
rS+6. sure the approach of civil war, as amidst the

revolutions and convulsions occasioned by it, op-
portunities of acquiring additional power or
dignity, which at other times are fought in
vain, present themselves to an enterprising
spirit. As he was thoroughly acquainted with
the itate of the two contending parties, and
the qualities of their leaders, he did not hesitate
long in determining on which fide the greatcf
advantages were to be expeced. Having re-
volved all thele things in his own mind, and
having taken his final resolution of joining the
Emperor, he prudently determined to declare
early in his favour; that by the merit of this,
he might acquire a title to a proportional re-
compenfe. With this view, he had repaired to
Ratilbon in the month of May, under pretext
of attending the diet; and after many conier-

Hi; league ences with Charles or his ministers, he, with
with the the most mysterious secrecy, concluded a treaty,

in which he engaged to concur in affliting the
Emperor as a faithful subject; and Charles, in
return, stipulated to bellow on him all the
spoils of the Ele&or of Saxony, his dignities as
well as territories h. History hardly records any

h Harzi Annal. Brabant, vol. i. 638. Struvii Corrd
1o48. Thuan. 84.

treaty

treaty that can be confidered as a more mani- Booc
fest violation of the most powerful principles ,I_
which ought to influence human actions. Mau- 1546.
rice, a professed Protestant, at a time when the
belief of religion, as well as zeal for its interests,
took strong poffeflion of every mind, binds him.
self to contribute his assistance towards carrying
on a war which had manifetily no other obje&t
than the extirpation of the Protestant doarines.
He engages to take arms against his father-in-
law, and to strip his nearest relation of his ho-
nours and dominions. Hejoins a dubious friend
against a known benefator, to whom his obli-
gations were both great and recent. Nor was
the Prince who ventured upon all this, one of
those audacious politicians, who, provided they
can accomplish their ends, and secure their
interest, avowedly disregard the most sacred
obligations, and glory in contemning whatever
is honourable or decent. Maurice's conduct, if
the whole mult be ascribed to policy, was more
artful and masterly; he executed his plan in
all its parts, and yet endeavoured to preserve,
in every ftep which he took, the appearance of
what was fair, and virtuous, and laudable. It
is probable, from his subsequent behaviour, that,
with regard to the Protestant religion at least,
his intentions were upright, that he fondly
trusted to the Emperor's promises for its security,
but that, according to the fate of all who'rclinc

too

Boo K too much in, policy, and who te- in dark arid
v..l', crooked paths, in attenpting to deceive others;
!s46. he himself was, in ome degrees deceived.

Ris artifice$ His first care, however, was to keep these
in order to
conceal his engagements with the Emperor closely con-
intention. .p.....

cealed: and so perfe&t a master was he in, the
art of dissimulation, that the confederates, not-
withstanding his declining all connexions with
them, and his remarkable assiduity in paying
court to the Emperor, seemed to have enter-
tained no suspicion of his designs. Even the
Elector of Saxony, when he marched at the be-
ginning of the campaign to join his associates,
committed his dominions to Maurice's protec-
tion, which he, with an insidious appearance of
friendship, readily undertook . But scarcely
had the Eletor taken the field, when Maurice
began to consult privately with the King of the
Romans how to invade those very territories,
with the defence of which he was entrusted.
Soon after, the Emperor ent him a copy of the
Imperial ban denounced against the Elecor and
Landgrave. As he was next heir to the for-
mer, and particularly interested in preventing
firangers from getting his dominions into their
possession, Charles required him, not only for
his own fake, but upon the allegiance and duty

i Struvii Corp. o46.

which

hi'ch he owed to the head of the Empire, in- B

VIII.

ftantly to seize and detain in his hands the for- ,
feited estates of the Ele&to; warhing himi at s546.
the fame time, that if he neglected to obey these
commands, he ihould be held as acceflary to the
crimes of his kirfman, and be liable to the fame
punishment k

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice.

himself suggested, was employed by him in or-
der that his condut towards the Elecor might
seem a matter of neceflity but not of choice, an
at of obedience to his superior, rather than a
voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman
and ally. But in order to give some tnore fpe-
cious appearance to this thin veil with which he
endeavoured to cover his ambition, he, oon
after his return from Ratisbon, had called toge-
ther the states of his country; and reprelenting to
them that a civil war between the Emperor and
toifederates of Smalkalde was now become un-
avoidable, desired their advice with regard to
the part which he hould at in that event. They
being prepared, no doubt, and tutored before-
hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their
Prince, whom they both eftecmed ad loved,
gave such counsel as they knew would be most
agreeable advising him to offer his mediation

k Sleid. 391. Thuan. 84.
VoL. IlI C c towards

B oo K towards reconciling the contending parties; but
_--. if that were rejected, and he could obtain proper
546. security for the Protestant religion, they deliver-

ed it as their opinion that, in all .oher points, he
ought to yield obedience to he Emperor.
Upon receiving the Imperial rescript, together
with the ban against the Elecor and Landgrave,
Maurice summoned the flates of his country a
second time; he laid before them the orders
which he had received, and mentioned the pu-
nifhment with which he was threatened in cafe
of disobedience; he acquainted them that the
confederates had refused to admit of his medi-
ation, and that the Emperor had given him the
most fatisfa&ory declarations with regard to re-
ligion; he pointed out his own interest in fecur-
ing poffelion of the elecoral dominions, as well
as the danger of allowing strangers to obtain an
eftablilhment in Saxony; and upon the whole,
as the point under deliberation respeCted his
fubjets no less than himself, he desired to know
their sentiments how he flould steer in that dif-
-ficult and arduous conjuncture. The states, no
less obsequious and complaisant than formerly,
relying on the Emperor's promises as a perfeC
Security for their religion, proposed that, before he
had recourse to more violent methods, they would
write to the Elector, exhorting him, as the belt
means, not only of appeaing the Emperor, but
us preventing his dominions from being fcizcd

a by

by foreign or hostile powers, to give his con- Bo K

VIIL.

sent that Maurice lhould take possession of them J
quietly and without opposition. Maurice him- s546
self seconded their arguments in a letter to the
Landgrave) his father-in-law. Such an extra-
vagant proposition was reje&ed with the scorn
and indignation which it deserved, The Land-
grave, in return to Maurice, taxed hitn with
his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinf-
man to whom he was so deeply indebted; he
treated with contemrpt his affectation of execut-
ing the imperial ban; which he could not but
know to be altogether void, by the unconftitu-
tional and arbitrary manner in which it had been
issued; he besought him, not to susser himself
to be so far blinded by ambition, as to forget
the obligations of honour and friendihip, or to
betray the Protestant religion, the extirpation
of which out of Germany, even by the acknow-
ledgment of the Pope himself, was the great
obje6t of the present war'.

BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di- He invide

the territo-

verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or lies^s t:
arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe- Soy.
cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried November.
on by artifice and diflinulation. Nor was his
boldness in ation inferior to his subtlety in con-

Slcid. 40, &c. Thuan, 8S. Carncrar. 44.

C c 2 trivance.

BOO a trivance. Having assembled about twelve thou-
,vil sand men, he suddenly invaded one part of the

^546. eletoral provinces, while Ferdinand, with an

army compoed of Bohemians and Hungarians,
over-ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp en-
counters, defeated the troops which the Ele&or
had left to guard his country; and improving
these advantages to the utmost, made himself
master of the whole Ele&orate, except Wittem.
berg, Gotha, and Eisenach, which being places
of considerable strength, and defended by sus-
ficient garrisons, refuted to open their gates.
The news of there rapid conquests soon reach-
ed the Imperial and confederate camps. In the
former, their fatisfadion with an event, which
it was foreseen would be producive of the most
important consequences, was expressed by every
possible demonstration of joy. The latter was
filled with astonishment and terror. The name
of Maurice was mentioned with execration, as
an apostate from religion, a betrayer of the
German liberty, and a contemner of the moit
sacred and natural ties. Every thing that the
rage or invention of the party could suggest, in
order to blacken and render him odious invec-
tives, satires and lampoons, the furious decla-
mations of their preachers, together with the
rude wit of their authors, were all employed
against him. While he, trusting to the arts
which he had so long praaifed, as if his ac-

tios4

tions could have admitted of any serious juftifi- B oc

VIII.

cation, published a manifesto, containing the ,
fame frivolous reasons for his condut, which 1546.
he had formerly alleged in the meeting of his
Rates, and in his letter to the Landgrave ".

tHE Eletor, upon the first intelligence of Theconfe.

Maurice's motions, proposed to return home mnak'oer.
with his troops for the defence of Saxony. But ac, mod
the deputies of the league, affcmbled at Ulm, lomnptthe
prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with
the army, and to prefer the success of the com-
mon cause before the security of his own domi-
nions. At length the sufferings and complaints
of his fubjets increased so much, that he dif-
covered the utmost impatience to set out, in or-
der to rescue them from the opprefiion of Mau-
rice, and from the cruelty of the Hungarians,
who having been accustomed to that licentious
and merciless species of war which was thought
lawful against the Turks, committed, wherever
they came, the wildest ats of rapine and vio-
lence. This desire of the Elector was so natu-
ral and so warmly urged, that the deputies at
Ulm, though fully sensible of the unhappy con-
sequences of dividing their army, durst not re-
fuse their consent, how unwilling soever to grant
it. In this perplexity, they repaired to the

Sleid. 409, 41o.

C c 3 camp

B o K camp of the confederates at Giengen on the
VIII. Brenz, in order to consult their conitituents.
,546. Nor were they less at a loss what to determine

in this pressing emergence. But, after having
confidered seriously the open desertion of some of
theirallies; the scandalous lukewarmness of others,
who had hitherto contributed nothing towards
the war; the intolerable load which had fallen
of consequence, upon such members as were
moft'zealous for the cause, or most faithful to
their engagements; the ill success of all their
endeavours to obtain foreign aid; the unusual
length of the campaign; the rigour of the sea-
son; together with the great number of soldiers,
and even officers, who had quitted the service
on that account; they concluded that no-
thing could save them, but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a
battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an
accommodation of all their differences with
Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency
and dejection which now oppressed the party,
that of these two they chose what was moil
feeble and unmanly, empowering a minister of
the Elector of Brandenburg to propound over-
tures of peace in their name to the Emperor.

which lie No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty
"'''".' confederacy, which had so lately threatened to

drive him out of Germany, condclcending to

make

make the first advances towards an agreement, B o K

VII.

than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed 1546.
the tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had
been already at his mercy, would not hear of
a negociation, but upon condition of the Elecor
of Saxony's consenting previously to give up
himself and his dominions absolutely to his dif-
pofal . As nothing more intolerable or igno-
minious could have been prescribed, even in
the worst situation of their affairs, it is no won-
der that this proportion was rejected by a party,
humbled and disconcertcd rather than subdued.
But though they refused to submit tamely to
the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pur-
sue the only plan which could have preserved
their independence; and forgetting that it ws
the union of their troops in one body which had
hitherto rendered the confederacy formidable,
and had more than once obliged the Imperialists
to think of quitting the field, they inconfide-
rately abandoned this advantage, which, in
spite of the diversion in Saxony, would still Thetroops
have kept the Emperor in awe; and yielding to "f ,he-;"-

fteeracy sc.

the Eletor's entreaties, consented to his pro- parat.
pofal of dividing the army. Nine thousand
men were left in the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in
order to protect that province, as well as the

IIortcnfus, ap. S:a!d. ii. 485,

C c 4 free

Bo00 free cities of Upper Germany .a cnfiderabo
.^..-, body marched with the Ele&or towards Saxony
1546, but the greater part returned with their refpec-

tive leaders into their own countries, and were
dispersed there',

Almot all THE moment that the troops separated, the
bhr of it confederacy ceascd to be the objet of terror;
submit t and the members of it, who, while they com-

e^ E posed part of a great body, had felt but little

anxiety about their own security, began to
tremble when they refleted that they now flood
exposed singly to the whole weight of the Em-
peror's 7engeance. Charles did not allow them
leisure to recover from their consternation, or
to form any new schemes of union. As soon
as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the
depth of winter, he resolved to keep the field,
in order to make the most of that favourable
jun&ure for which he had waited so long. Some
small towns, in which the enemy had left gar-
rifons, immediately opened their gates. Nor-
lingen, Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could
not prevent the Ele&or from levying, as he
retreated, large contributions upon the archbi-
1hop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
¢clkRfiafticks , this was more than balanced by

Slcid. 4! . ! Than. 88.

the fubinifion of Ulm, one of the chief cities B o o
of Suabia, highly distinguished by its zeal for -
the Smalkaldick league. As soon as an example 15+6,
was set of deserting the common cause, the reft
of the members became instantly impatient to
follow it, and eemed afraid left others, by
getting the start of them in returning to their
duty, should, on that account, obtain more
favourable terms. The Elecor Palatine, a
weak Prince, who, notwithstanding his profef-
sions of neutrality, had, very preposterously,
sent to the confederates four hundred horse, a
body so jnconfiderable as to be scarcely any ad-
dition to their strength, but great enough to
render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the mod abjet
manner. The inhabitants of Augsburg, shaken
by so many instances of apoitacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleated to
grant them,

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among

the first who had offered to submit, was obliged
to sue for pardon on his knees; and even after
this mortifying humiliation, obtained it with
difficulty q. Memmingen, and other free ci- 1547.
tics in the circle of Suabia, being now aban-

l Mem. do Ribipr, tom, i. 589.

doned

BO.OK doned by all their former associates, found ir

necessary to provide for their own safety, by
5 47. throwing themselves on the Emperor's mercy.

Strafburg and Franckfort on the Maine, cities
far remote from the feat of danger, discovercd
no greater steadiness than those which lay more
exposed. Thus a confederacy, lately so power.
ful as to shake the Imperial throne, fell to
pieces, and was dissolved in the space of a few
weeks; hardly any member of that formidable
combination now remaining in arms, but the
EleAor and Landgrave, whom the Emperor,
having from the beginning marked out as the
victims of his vengeance, was at no pains to re-

The rigo- concile. Nor did he grant those who submit-
o-s condi.
tions im- ted to him a generous and unconditional par-
pnled by the
Empcror. don. .Conscious of his own superiority, he

treated them both with haughtiness and rigour.
All the Princes in person, and the cities by
their deputies, were compelled to implore
mercy in the humble posture of supplicants.
As the Emperor laboured under great difficul-
ties from the want of money, he imposed heavy
fines upon them, which he levied with most
rapacious exadnefs. The Duke of Wurtcm-
berg paid three hundred thousand crowns; the
city of Augsburg an hundred and fifty thou-
sand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Franckfort
eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand;
and the reft in proportion to their abilities, or

their

their different degrees of guilt. They were Bo o'K

V111.

obliged, besides, to renounce the league of Vl.
Smalkalde; to furnif assistance, if required, 15-i7
towards executing the Imperial ban against the
Elector and Landgrave; to give up their artil-
lery and warlike itores to the Emperor; to ad-
mit garrisons into their principal cities and
places of strength; and, in this disarmed and
dependent situation, to expet the final award
which the Emperor should think proper to pro-
nounce when the war came to an issue . But,
amidst the great variety of articles dictated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to
his original plan, took care that nothing relat-
ing to religion ihould be inserted; and to such
a degree were the confederates humbled or
over-awed, that, forgetting the zeal which had
so long animated them, they were solicitous
only about their safety, without venturing to
insist on a point, the mention of which they saw
him avoiding with so much industry. Thein-
habitants of Memmingen alone made some fee-
ble efforts to procure a promise of proteCtion in
the exercise of their religion, but were checked
so severely by the Emperor's ministers, that they
instantly fell from their demand.

rSleid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib, iv. p. 15. Mem. de
Ribicr, tom. i. 6o6.

THE

Boot .THx Elktor of Cologne, whom, notwith.
I V11, standing the sentence of excommunication iflued
5 47. agrinft him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto

allowed to remain in poffelion of the archiepif.
copal fee, being now required by the Emperor
to submit to the censures of the church, this
virtuous and difnterefted prelate, unwilling to
expose his fubjets to the miseries of a war on
1^. 25. his own account, voluntarily resigned that high

dignity. With a moderation becoming his age
and charaCter, he chose to enjoy truth together
with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society
by engaging in a doubtful and violent struggle
in order to retain his office'.

he Ia&r MEANWHILE the Ele&or of Saxony reached the
Ms, to^ frontiers of his country unmolested. As Maurice
Saxony, and
,eco, i ft could aflemble no force equal to the army which

accompanied him, he, in a hort time, not only
recovered possession of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all
that belonged to him, except Dresden and Leip-
sic, which, being towns of some strength, could
not be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to
quit the field, and to Ihut himself up in his
capital, dispatched courier after courier to the

' Sleid. 418, Thuan. lib. iv, t18,

Emperor,

Emperor, repreienting his dangerous situation, Boot

VIU.

and Soliciting him with the most earnest impori. V,
tunity to march immediately to his relief. But S47.
Charles, busy at that time in prescribing terms
to such members of the league as were daily re.
turning to their allegiance, thought it sufficient
to detach Albert Marquis of Brandenburgh-An-
fpach with three thousand men to his afliftance.
Albert, though an enterprising and aive of-
sicer, was unexpectedly surprised by the Elec-
tor, who killed many of his troops, dispersed
the remainder, and took him prifoer'. Mau.
rice continued as much exposed as formerly;
and if his enemy had known how to improve
the opportunity which presented itself, his ruin
must have been immediate and unavoidable.
But the Ele&or, no less flow and dilatory when
inveted with the sole command, than he had
been formerly when joined in authority with a
partner, never gave any proof of military ai-
vity but in this enterprize against Albert. Ina
stead of marching direcly towards Maurice,
whom the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed,
he inconsiderately listened to overtures of ac-
commodation, which his artful antagonist pro-
posed with no other intention than to amuse
him, and to flacken the vigour of his opera.
tions.

Avila, 99. 6. Mem. de Rib[ir, tom. i. 620.

SL'CH,

B oOK .SSUCH, indeed,. as, the posture of the Eni.
^vnL r peror's affairs that he could not march instantly

1.547. to the relief of his ally. Soon after the fepa-

The Empe-
or prevent- ration of the confederate army, he, in order to
ed from at-
tackingthe ease himself of the brden of maintaining a

eoLangra superfluous number of troops, .hd dismissed

the count of Buren with his Flemings , ima-
gining that the Spaniards and Germans, toge-
ther with the papal forces, would be fully sis-
ficient to crush any degree of vigour that yet
remained among the members of the league.
But Paul, growing wife too late, began now to
discern the imprudence of that measure, from
which the more sagacious Venetians had endea.
voured in vain to dissuade him. The rapid
progress of the Imperial arms, and the cafe
with which they had broken a combination that
appeared no less firm than powerful, opened his
eyes at length, and made him not only forget
at once all the advantages which he had ex-
pelted from ucli a complete triumph over he-
refy, but placed, in the strongest lights his own
impolitick condut,in having contributed towards
acquiring for Charles such an immense increase
of power, as would enable him, after oppref-
sing the liberties of Germany, to give law with
absolute authority to all the states of Italy.
The moment that he perceived his error, he

u Avila, 83. 6. Mem. de Ribicr. tom .
i 92.

endcavoured

endeavoured to corre& it. Without giving the Booic

V1I,

Emperor any- warning of his intention, he or-
dered Farnese, his grandson, to return instantly Thp47.
to Italy with all the troops under his command, recalls hie
and at the fame time recalled the licence which Oop'
he had granted Charles, of appropriating, to his
own use, a large hare of the church-lands in
Spain.- He was not destitute of pretences to
juaify this abrupt desertion of his ally. The
term of fix months, during which ,the flipula-
tions in their treaty were to continue in force,
was now expired; the league, in opposition to
which their alliance had been framed, seemed to
be entirely dissipated; Charles, in all his nego-
ciations with the Princes and cities which had
submitted to his will, had neither consulted the
Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the con-
quests which he had made, nor had communi-
cated to him any lhare in the vail contributions
which he had raised. He had not even made any
provision for the fuppreflion of heresy, or the
re-eflablifhment of the catholick religion, which
were Paul's chief inducements to betlow the
treasures of the church so liberally in carrying
on the war. These colours, however specious,
did not conceal from the Emperor that fe-
cret jealousy which was the true motive of the
Pope's conduc. But, as Paul's orders with
regard to the march of his troops were no lels
peremptory than unexpeced, it was impofible

to

Boo to prevent their retreat. Charles exclaimed

v111.
%---~ loudly against his treachery, in abandoning him

'547. so unseasonably, while he was prosecuting a war

undertaken in obedience to the Papal injunc.
tions, and from which, if successful, so much
honour and advantage would redound to the
church. To complaints he added threats and
expostulations. But Paul remained inflexible;
his troops continued their march towards the
ecclesiastical state and in an elaborate memo-
rial, intended as an apology for his behaviour,
he discovered new and more manifest symptoms
of alienation from the Emperor, together with
a deep-rooted dread of his power'. Charles,
weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body
from his army, which was already much dimi.
nifhed by the number of garrisons that he had
been obliged to throw into the towns which had
capitulated, found it necessary to recruit his
forces by new levies, before he could venture to
march in person towards Saxony.

A confi- THE fame and splendor of his success could

t tn'oove- not have failed of attrating such multitudes of
rnment of soldiers into his service from all the extensive

territories now fubje to his authority, as mult
have oon put him in a condition of taking the
field against the Elector; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as

F. Paul, so8. Pallavic, par, ii. p. Thuan. t16.

well

Well as the great revolutions which that event, B oo K

VIII.

extremely mysterious in its first appearances, _
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid en- '5+7.
tangling himself in new Operations in Germany,
until he had fully discovered its source and ten.
dency. The form of government which had
'been established in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country*
though calculated to obliterate the memory of
former dissensions,' and received at first with
eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near
twenty years, give universal satisfaction to those
turbulent and factious republicans. As the en-
tire administration of affairs was now lodged in
a certain number of noble families, many en-
vying them that pre-eminence, wified for the
restitution of a popular government, to which The obje4t

of the con.

they had been accustomed, and though all re- fpirator.
verenced the difinterefled virtue of Doria, and
admired his talents, not a few were jealous
of that ascendant which he had acquired in the
councils of the commonwealth. His age, how.
ever, his moderation, and love of liberty, as-
forded ample security to his countrymen that he
would not abuse his power, nor stain the close
of his days by attempting to overturn that fa-
brick, which it had been the labour ad pride
of his life to ere&. But the authority and in-
fluence which in his hands were innocent, they
cafily saw would prove dcftruitive, if usurped

VOL. 1I.l D d by

BOO K by any citizen of greater ambition, or less vir.
a_' tue. A citizen of this dangerous character
rt57. had aually formed such pretensions, and with

some profpe& of success. Giannetino Doria,
whom his grand uncle Andrew destined to be
the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise
at being his successor in power. His temper
haughty, insolent, and overbearing to such a
degree as would hardly have been tolerated in
one born to reign, was altogether insupportable
in the citizen of a free state. The more saga-
cious among the Genoese already feared and
hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While
Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and
undifcerning affecion which persons in ad-
vanced age often contrat for the younger
members of their family, set no bounds to the
indulgence with which he treated him; seeming
less solicitous to secure and perpetuate the free-
dom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize
that undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or

whatever diffatisfation with the system of adlri-
niftration in the commonwealth, there circumn-
flances might have occasioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis Si-
efco count of Lavagna, obfirving this growing,

difguit,

disgust, had not been encouraged by it to at- B l
tempt one of the boldest aions recorded in ,_I,
history. That young nobleman, the richest and F i,547.

Fiefco count
most illustrious fubje& in the republick, pof- of Lavagna

the head of

felNed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities theco.ipi-
which win upon the human heart, which com- 'acy
mand refpet, or secure attachment. He was
graceful and majeftick in his person; magnifi-
cent to profusion; of a generosity that prevent-
ed the wishes of his friends, and exceeded' the
expectations of strangers; of an insinuating ad-
dress, gentle manners, and a flowing affability.
But under the appearance of these virtues, which
seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning
civil life, he concealed all the dispositions which
mark men out for taking the lead in the most
dangerous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable
and restless ambition, a courage unacquainted
with fear, and a mind that disdained fubordi-
nation. Such a temper could ill brook that
ltation of inferiority, wherein he was placed in
the republick; and as he envied the power
which the elder Doria had acquired, he was
filled with indignation at the thoughts of its de-
scending, like an hereditary poffefion, to Gian-
netino. These various passions, preying with
violence on his turbulent and aspiring mind,
determined him to attempt overturning that
dojlination to which he could not fbmiit.

Dd2 AT

B o o K AT first he thought of an alliance with Fran-
V1__L cis, and even proposed it to the French ambaf-
i;47. fador at Rome, as the most effetual means of

Intrigues
and prcp>. accomplifiing this; and after expelling Doria,
rations of
theconrp-. together with the Imperial faaion, by his afRit-

ance, he resolved to put the republick once more
under the protection of that Monarch, hoping
in return for that service to be entruited with
the principal share in the adminifration of go-
vernment. But having communicated his scheme
to a few chosen confidents, from whom he kept
nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a
man of desperate fortune, capable alike of ad-
vising and executing the most audacious deeds,
remonstrated with earneitnefs against the folly
of exposing himself to the most imminent dan-
ger, while he allowed another to reap all the
fruits of his success and exhorted him warmly
to aim himself at that pre-eminence in his coun-
try, to which he was destined by his illuitrious
birth; was called by the voice of his fellow-
citizens, and would be raised by the zeal of his
friends. This difcourle opened such vast pro-
fpets to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius,
that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other pcrlons
present, though sensible of the hazardous na-
ture of the undertaking, did not choose to con-
demn what their patron had so warmly approved.
It was initantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to

X Ianffinate

assassinate the two Dorias, as well as the prin- B ooK
cipal persons of their party, to overturn the _
eftabliihed system of government, and to place 1547.
Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa. Time,
however, and preparations were requisite to
ripen such a design for execution; and while
he was employed in carrying on these, Fiefco
made it his chief care to guard against every
thing that might betray his secret, or create sus-
picion. The disguise he aflumed, was of all
others the most impenetrable. He seemed to
be abandoned entirely to pleasure and diflipa-
tion. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by the
pursuit of all the amusements becoming his age
and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole
of his time and thoughts. But amidst this
hurry of diflipation, he prosecuted his plan with
the most cool attention, neither retarding the
design by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating
the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French
ambafador at Rome, though without commu-
nicating to him his real intentions, that by his
means he might secure the protection of the
French arms, if hereafter he should find it ne-
ceffary to call them to his aid. He entered
into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of
Parma, who being disgusted with the Emperor
for refuting to grant him the investiture of that
dutchy, was eager to promote any measure that

D d 3 tended

BooK tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or to
_ eT-, _ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as
1547. that of Doria. Being sensible that, in a mari-

time slate, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased
four galleys from the Pope, who probably was
not unacquainted with the design which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of these galleys to fail
on a cruise against the Turks, he not only as-
fembled a good number of his own vassals, but
,engaged in his service many bold adventurers,
whom the truce between the Emperor and Soly-
man had deprived of their usual occupation and
subsistence.

WHILE Fiefco was taking these important

fleps, he preserved so admirably his usual ap-
pearance of being devoted entirely to pleasure
and amusement, and paid court with such art-
ful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not
only on the generous and unfufpicious mind of
Andrew, but deceived Giannetino, who, con-
fcious of his own criminal intentions, was more
apt to distrust the designs of others. So many
instruments being now prepared, nothing re-
nained but to strike the blow. Various consul-
tations were held by Fiefco with his confidents,
in order to fettle the manner of doing it with
the greatest certainty and effect. At first, they

propodct

proposed to murder the Dorias and their chief B K
adherents, during the celebration of high mass l _
in the principal church; but as Andrew was 'S47.
often absent from religious folemnities, on ac-
count of his great age, that design was laid
aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco hould
invite the uncle and nephew, with all their
friends whom they had marked out as victims,
to his house; where it would be easy to cut
them off at once without danger or resistance;
but as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town
on the day which they had chosen, it became
necessary likewise to alter this plan. They at
last determined to attempt by open force, what
they found difficult to effect by stratagem, and
fixed on the night between the second and third
of January, for the execution of their enterprize.
The time was chosen with great propriety i for
as the Doge of the former year was to quit his
office, according to custom, on the first of the
month, and his successor could not be elected
sooner than the fourth, the republick remained
during that interval in a fort of anarchy, and
Fiefco might with less violence take possession
of the vacant dignity.

THE morning of that day, Fiefco employed in The c,

visiting his friends, passing some hours among %ni,
them with a spirit as gay and unembarrafisd as t'i' i,.
at other times. Towards evening, he paid court

Dd to

B oon to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpe&t,
VIII. LLCv_ and surveying their countenance and behaviour
4547. with the attention natural in his situation, was

happy to observe the perseEt security in which
they remained, without the least foresight or
dread of that florm which had been so long a-
gathering, and was now ready to burst over
their heads. From their palace he hastened to
his own, which flood by itself in the midd!e
of a large court, surrounded by a high wall.
The gates had been set open in the morning,
and all persons, without diftintion, were al-
lowed to enter, but strong guards posted within
the court suffered no one to return. Verrina,
meanwhile, and a few perfops trufled with the
secret of the conspiracy, after conducting Si-
efco's vassals, as well as the crews of his galleys
into the palace in small bodies, with as little
noise as pofible, dispersed themselves through
the city, and, in the name of their patron, in-
vited to an entertainment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the ad-
ministration of the Dorias, and to have inclina-
tion as well as courage to attempt a change in
the government. Of the vast number of per-
sons who now filled the palace, a few only knew
for what purpose they were assembled; the reft,
aftonilhed at finding, instead of the preparations
for a feat, a court crowded with armed men,
and apartments filled with the irnitruments of

Wsrj

war, gazed on each other with a mixture of cu- BOOK
riofity, impatience, and terror. -v-lX.

l 47.
WHILE their minds were in this slate of sus- Fieco'rx-

hortatisisj

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a to thm.
look full of alacrity and confidence, he address-
ed himself to the persons of chief distinction,
telling them, that they were not now called to
partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but
to join in a deed of valour, which would lead
them to liberty and immortal renown. He set
before their eyes the exorbitant as well as into-
lerable authority of the elder Doria, which the
ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of
the Emperor to a family more devoted to him
than to their country, was about to enlarge and
to render perpetual. This unrighteous domi-
nation, continued he, you have it now in your
power to ubvert, and to establish the freedom
of your country on a firm basis. The tyrants
must be cut off. I have taken the most effec-
tual meafiures for this purpose. My associates
are numerous. I can depend on allies and pro-
tectors if necessary. Happily the tyrants are as
secure as I have been provident. Their insolent
contempt of their countrymen has banished the
suspicion and timidity which usually render the
guilty quick-fighted to discern, as well as saga-
cious to guard against the vengeance which they
deserve. They will now feel the blow, before

they

BOOK they fufpe& any holfile hand to be nigh. Let
VIII. _s us then sally forth,:that: we may deliver our
'547. country by one generous effort, almost unac-

companied with danger, and certain of success.
These words, uttered with that irresistible ser-
vour which animates the mind when roused by
great obje&s, made the desired impression on
the audience. Fiefco's vaiTals, ready to execute
whatever their master should command, received
his discourse with a murmur of applause. To
many whose fortunes were desperate, the licence
and confusion of an: infurreEion afforded an
agreeable profpe&. Those of higher rank and
more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the
surprise or horror with which they were struck at
the proposal of an enterprize no less unexpected
than atrocious; as each of them imagined the
other to be in the secret of the conspiracy,
and saw himself surrounded by persons who
waited only a signal from their leader to perpe-
trate the greatest crime. With one voice then
all applauded, or feigned to applaud the under-
taking.

Hi inter. FIEsco having thus fixed and encouraged his
view with
his wire. associates, before he gave them his last orders, lie

hastened for a moment to the apartment of his
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved with tender affection, and whose beauty
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love.

The

The noise of the armed men who crowded the BOOK
court and palace, having long before this v1
reached her ears, he concluded some hazardous s547.
cntcrprize to be in hand, and she trembled for
her husband. He found her in all the anguish
of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now im-
possible to keep his design concealed, he in-
formed her of what he had undertaken. The
profpet of a scene so full of horror as well as
danger, completed her agony; and foreboding
immediately in her mind the fatal issue of it, she
endeavoured, b" her tears, her entreaties, and
her despair, to divert him from his purpole.
Fiefco, after trying in vain to sooth and to in-
spire her with hope, broke from a situation into
which an excels of tenderness had unwarily fe-
duced him, though it could not hake his refo-
lution. " Farewell, he cried, as he quitted the
apartment, you shall either never fee me more,
or you hall behold to-morrow every thing in
Genoa fubje& to your power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he They ttck

allotted each his proper station; some were ap- cy
pointed to assault and seize the different gates
of the city; some to make themselves masters
of the principal streets or places of trength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the
harbour where Doria's gallies were laid up, as
the post of chief importance, and of greatest

danger.

BOOK danger. It was now midnight, and the citizens
v11. si ept in the security of peace, when this band of
-547. conspirators, numerous, desperate, and well arm-

ed, rushed out to execute their plan. They fur-
prifed some of the gates, without meeting with
any resistance. They got poffeflion of others after
a sharp confli& with the soldiers on guard. Ver-
rina, with the galley which had been fitted out
against the Turks, blocked up the mouth of
the Darfena or little harbour where Doria's fleet
lay. All possibility of escape being cut off by
this precaution, when Fiefco attempted to enter
the galleys from the shore to which they were
made fast, they were in no condition to make
resistance, as they were not only unrigged and
disarmed, but had no crew on board, except
the slaves chained to the oar. Every quarter of
the city was now filled with noise and tumult,
all the streets resounding with the cry of Fiefco
and Liberty. At that name, so popular and be-
loved, many of the lower rank took arms, and
joined the conspirators. The nobles and parti-
fans of the aristocracy, alonilhed or affrighted,
shut the gates of their houses, and thought of
nothing but of securing them from pillage. At
last, the noise excited by this scene of violence
and confution, reached the palace of Doria;
Giannetino started immediately from his bed,
and imagining that it was occasioned by some
mutiny among the sailors, rushed out with a

few

few attendants, and hurried towards the har- Booic
bour. The gate of St. Thomas, through which v_
he had to pass, was already in thepofleffion of s547
the conspirators, who, the moment he entered,
fell upon him with' the utmost fury, and mur-
dered him on the spot. The fame must have
been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de
Fiefco had executed his brother's plan, and had
proceeded immediately to attack him in his pa-
lace; but he, from the fordid consideration of
preventing its being plundered amidst the con-
fusion, having forbid his followers to advance,
Andrew got intelligence of his nephew's death, as
well as of his own danger; and mounting on horse-
back, saved himself by flight. Amidit this gene-
ral coniternation, a few lenators had the courage
to afemble in the palace of the republickY. At
first, some of the most daring among them at-
tempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to at-
tack a body of the conspirators; but being repulf-
ed with loss, all agreed that nothing now remained,
but to treat with the party which feerred to be
irrefiltible. Deputies were accordingly sent to
learn of Fiefco what were the concessions with
which he would be satisfied, or rather to Iubmit
to whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they cll' f

were empowered to negociate, was no more. crrn.,..
Jult as he was about to leave the harbour, where

11 palazza Jdla Signoria,

every

B o t every thing had succeeded to his wish, that he
VIII.

,_ . might join his viCtorious companions, he heard
st47. some extraordinary uproar on board the Ad-

miral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fear-
ing that the slaves might break their chains,
and overpower his associates, he ran thither;
but the plank which reached from the shore to
the vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
sea, whilst he hurried forward too precipitately.
Being loaded with heavy armour, he funk to
the bottom, and perished in the very moment
when he muff have taken full poffeflion of every
thing that his ambitious heart 'could desire.
Verrina was. the first who discovered this fatal
accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its confe-
quences, concealed it with the utmost industry
from every one but a few leaders of the confpi-
racy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the darkness
and confusion of the night, to have kept it e-
cret, until a treaty with the senators should have
put the city in the power of the conspirators.
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the
imprudence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the
deputies of the senate inquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposals to him, replied with a childilh
vanity, " I am now the only person to whom
that title belongs, and with me you must treat."
These words discovered as well to his friends as
to his enemies what had happened, and made

the

the impreflion which might have been expected B o o

VIII.

upon both. The deputies, encouraged by this ,ll
event, the only one which could occasion such a 1547.
sudden revolution as might turn to their advan-
tage, assumed instantly, with admirable pretence
of mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in
their circumstances, and made high demands.
While they endeavoured to gain time by pro-
trafting the negociation, the reft of the senators
were busy in assembling their partisans, and in
forming a body capable of defending the palace
of the republick. On the other hand, the confpi-
rators, aftonilhed at the death of a man whom
they adored and trusted, and placing no confi-
dence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage
die away, and their arms fall from their hands.
That profound and amazing secrecy with which
the conspiracy had been concerted, and which
had contributed hitherto so much to its success,
proved now the chief cause of its miscarriage.
The leader was gone, the greater part of those
who acted under him, knew not his confidents,
and were strangers to the object at which lie
aimed. There was no person among them
whoe authority or abilities entitled him to at
fume Fiefco's place, or to finifl his plan; after
having loft the spirit which animated it, life and
activity deserted the whole body. Many of the
conspirators withdrew to their houses, hoping
that amidst the darkness of the night they had

pztlrd

BoO pafled unobserved, and might remain unknown
vn ' Others fought for safety by a timely retreat; and
1547. before break of day, most of them fled with pre-

cipitation from a city, which, but a few hours be.
fore, was ready to acknowledge them as masters.

Trsnqui^ty NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Ge-
edinCenoa. noa; not an enemy was to be seen; few marks

of the violence of the former night appeared,
the conspirators having conducted their enter-
prize with more noise than bloodlhed, and gain-
ed all their advantages by surprise, rather than
by force of arms. Towards evening, Andrew
Doria returned to the city, being met by all the
inhabitants, who received him with acclamations
of joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger
of the preceding night, were fresh in his mind,
and the mangled body of his kinsman still before
his eyes, such was his moderation as well as
magnanimity, that the decree issued by the fe.
nate against the conspirators, did not exceed that
just measure of severity which was requisite for
the support of government, and was dictated
neither by the violence of resentment, nor the
rancour of revenge ?

AFTER

Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrea Doria, 1196. Li

Conjuration du Compte de Fieflue, par Cardin. de Retz.
Adriani Iftoria, lib. vi. 369. Folietae Conjuratio Jo. Lud.
Fierci ap. Gr.ev. ThefC Ital. i. 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at the ae of
eightcen, onwpofcd a hiltory of this conspiracy, containing

1I t.

AFTER taking the necessary precautions for Boo

preventing the flame, which was now so happily vll
extinguished, from breaking out anew, the firit '147.

The ! mpe.

care of the senate was to fend an ambassador to f'r ai,,ic
the Empperor, to give him a particular detail of at this "'
what had happened, and to beg his affiflance
towards the reducion of Montobbio, a itrong
fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had shut himself up. Charles was
no less alarmed than astonished at an event so
strange and unexpected. He could not believe
that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever,
durst have attempted such an enterprize, but on
foreign suggestion, and from the hope of foreign
aid. Being informed that the Duke of Parma
was well acquainted with the plan of the con-
fpirators, he immediately supposed that the Pope
could not be ignorant of a measure, which his
son had countenanced. Proceeding from this to
a farther conjecture, which Paul's cautious ma-
xims of policy in other instances rendered ex-
tremely probable, he concluded that the French
King must have known and approved of the
design and he began to apprehend that this

such a difctvery of his admiration of Fiefco and his enter-
prize, that it is not surprising that a minister, so jealous
and difccrning as Richlieu, flould be led# by the perusal of
it, to predit the turbulent and dangerous pirit of that
young Eccleliaick. Mem. de Retz, tom. i. p. 13.

VOL. Il E e spark

B o ' spark might again kindle the flame of war which
V_1i j had raged so long in Italy. As he had drained
1547. his Italian territories of troops on account of
fper',d'In tfte German war, he was altogether Unprovided
hGtrm;ry. for refining any hotile attack in that country;

and on the first appearance of danger, he muff
have detached thither the greatest part of his
forces for its defence. In this situation of as-
fairs, it would have been altogether imprudent
in the Emperor to have advanced in person
againt the Elector, until he fhoiuld learn with
bme degree of certainty whether such a scene
were not about to open in Italy, as might put it
kut of his power to keep the field with an army
lufficient to oppose him.

T I-E

# BOOK IX.

S T R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V,

B OK IX,
T HE Emperor's dread of the holtile inten- BooK IX.

tions of the Pope and French King did
not proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded Francis ta.

lous of the
suspicion. Paul had already given the fcrongeft Emperor'a

power and

proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles fucctc..
could not hope, that Francis, after a rivalihip
of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the con-
federate Protestants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjecture. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefs of his arms'with deep concern, and though

E e 2 hitherto

BOOK IX. hitherto prevented, by circumflances which have

F7. - been mentioned, from interposing in order to
3547.

check them, he was now convinced that, if he
did not make some extraordinary and timely
effort, Charles mut acquire such a degree of
power as would enable him to give law to the
reft of Europe. This apprehension, which did
not take its rife from the envy of rivalhip alone,
but was entertained by the wisest politicians of
the age, suggested various expedients which
might serve to retard the course of the Emperor's
victories, and to form by degrees such a combi-
nation. againfl him as might put a flop to his
dangerous career.

WIegtoate WITH this view, Francis intru&ed his emif-
with the saries in Germany to employ all their address in

order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from submitting to the Em-
peror. He made liberal offers of his aflfifance
to the Ele&or and Landgrave, whom he knew
to be the most zealous as well as the most power.
ful of the whole body; he used every argument,
and proposed every advantage which could either
confirm their dread of the Emperor's designs,
or determine them not to imitate the inconfide-
rate credulity of their associates, in giving up
their religion and liberties to his disposal. While
he took this ftep towards continuing the civil
war which raged in Germany, he endeavoured,

likewise,

likewise, to stir up foreign enemies against the BOOK IX.
Emperor. He solicited Solyman to seise this ,7.
favourable opportunity of invading Hungary, with Soly.
which had been drained of all the troops necef-
fary for its defence, in order to form the army
against the confederates of Smalkalde. He ex-
horted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he had been
guilty in contributing to raise the Emperor to
such a formidable height of power. Finding with the

Pope and

Paul, both from the confcioufncfs of his own Venetians,
mistake, and his dread of its consequences, abun-
dantly disposed to liften to his exhortations, he
availed himself of this favourable disposition
which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argu-
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured
to convince them that nothing could save Ialy,
and even Europe, from oppression and servitude,
but their joiniig with the Pope and him, in giv-
ing the first beginning to a general confederacy,
in order to humble that ambitious potentate,
whom they had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot there negociations in the with the

southern courts, he turned his attention next i.linark
towards those in the north of Europe. As the lan' -g
King of Denmark had particular reasons to be
offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined
that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had proje&ed; and left

E e 3 considerations

BOOK IX. coniderations of caution or prudence fould

-,e. refrain him from joining in it, he attempted to

overcome these, by offering him the young
Queen of Scots in marriage to his son'. As
the ministers who governed England in the
name of Edward VI. had openly declared them-
selves converts to the opinions of the Reform-
ers, as oon as it became safe upon Henry's
death to lay aside that difgtife which his unfor.
giving bigotry had forced them to assume,
Francis flattered himself that their zeal would
not allow them to remain inactive fpe&ators of
the overthrow and deftruetion of those who
professed the fame faith with themselves. He
hoped, that notwithstanding the struggles of sac-
tion incident to a minority, and the profpet of
an approaching rupture with the Scots, he might
prevail on them likewise to take part in the com.
mon cause b.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of ex-

pedients, and exerted himself with such extra-
ordinary aivity, to route the different states
of Europe against his rival, he did not neglec
what depended on himself alone. He levied
troops in all parts of his dominions he colle&ed
military stores;, he contrated with the Swiss

·Mem. de Ribier, i. 6o0. 606,
k Mem de Ribicr, i 635.

cantonj

c~tons for a considerable body of men ; he put BooK IX.
his finances in admirable order he remitted con-
. 7

'547.

fiderable fums to the Eletor and Landgrave
and took all the other steps neceflary towards
commencing hoatilities, on the shortest warning,
and with the greatest vigoure.

OPERATIONS so complicated, and which re- The Eme.

-1~~~ r~~or grea:Ily

quired the putting so many instruments in mo- alarmed.
tion, did not escape the Emperor's observation.
He was oon informed of Francis's intrigues in
the several courts of Europe, as well as of his
domeftick preparations. and 1enfible how fat4
an interruption a foreign war would prove to
his designs in Germany, he trembled at the pro-
fpeat of that event. The danger, however, ap-
peared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and well-directed am-
bition of Solyman, and that he always chose
the season for beginning his military enter-
prises with prudence equal to the valour with
which he conduted them. 1 he Pope, as
he had good reason to believe, wanted not
pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclination
to begin hostilities. He had already made
some difcoyery of his sentiments, by expref-
sing a joy altogether ubecoming the head
of the church, upon receiving an account of
cte advantage which the Elector of Saxqny had

' Mem. de Ribicr, i. 595.

E 4 gained

BO]rcX. gained over Albert of Brandenburg ; and as he

47 was now secure of finding in the French King,

an ally of sufficient power to support him, he
was at. no pains to conceal the violence and ex-
tent of his enmity d. The Venetians, Charles
was well assured, had long observed the growth
of his power with jealousy, which added to the
solicitations and promises of France, might at
last quicken their (low counsels, and overcome
their natural caution. The Danes and English,
it was evident, had both peculiar reason to be
difgufied, as well as strong motives to at againit
him. But above all, he dreaded the active emu-
lation of Francis himself, whom he confidered as
the foul and mover of any confederacy that could
be formed against him; and, as that Monarch
had afforded protection to Verina, who failed
directly to Marseilles upon the miscarriage of
Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles expeted every mo-
ment the commencement of those hostile opera.
tions in Italy, of which he conceived the infur-
reion in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

latertlin BUT while he remained in this slate of sus.
hope from
the dcin. penfe and solicitude, there was one circumstance
in te of
Frncit, which afforded him some profpec of escaping
hlth'. the danger, The French King's health began

to decline. A disease, the effet of his intem-
perance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure,

4 Mcnm. de Ribier, tom. i. 637.

preyed

preyed gradually on his constitution. The pre- BOOK IX.
parations for war, as well as the negociations in 1s4.
the different courts, began to languish, together
with the Monarch who gave spirit to both.
The Genoese, during that interval, reduced March.
-Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and
putting him to death, together with his chief
adherents, extinguished all remains of the con-
fpiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in Ger-
many, despairing of timely aftance from
France, submitted to the Emperor. Even the
Landgrave seemed disposed to abandon the Elec-
tor, and to bring matters to a speedy accommo-
dation, on such terms as he could obtain. In
the mean time, Charles waited with impatience
the issue of a distemper, which was to decide
whether he must relinquish all other schemes, in
order to prepare for refilling a combination of
the greater part of Europe against him, or whe.
ther he might proceed to invade Saxony, with-
out interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that ome historians have called it
the Star of the House of Aufiria, did not desert
him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram- Dch of
bouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty- 'urni, ,ad
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of onhis ch-

rater and

his reign. During twenty eight years of that r.vlfhip
time, an avowed rivalfhip fubfiftd between chulic.

him

BooK IX. him and the Emperpr, which involved not only
so547 their own dominions, but the greater part of

Europe in wars, profccuted with more violent
animosity, and drawn out to a greater length
than had been known in any former period.
Many circumstances contributed to both. Their
animosity was founded in opposition of in-
terest, heightened by personal emulation, and
exasperated not only by mutual injuries, but by
reciprocal insults. At the fame time, whatever
advantage one seemed to possess towards gaining
the ascendant, was wonderfully balanced by
some favourable circumstance, peculiar to the
other. The Emperor's dominions were of great
extent, the French King's lay more compact;
Francis governed his kingdom with absolute
power; that of Charles was limited, but he sup-
plied the want of authority by address: the troops
of the former were more impetuous and enter-
prifing; those of the latter better disciplined,
and more patient of fatigue. The talents and
abilities of the two Monarchs were as different
as the advantages which they possessed, and con-
tributed no less to prolong the contest between
them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly,
prosecuted them at first with warmth, and pulh-
ed them into execution with a most adventurous
courage; but being destitute of the perseverance
necessary to surmount difficulties, he often aban-
doned his designs, or relaxed the vigour of pur-

luit,
2

fait, from impatience, and sometimes from le- BooK IX.
vity. Charles deliberated long, and determined ''
with coolness; but having once fixed his plan,
he adhered to it with inflexible obstinacy, and
neither danger nor discouragement could turn
him ade from the execution of it. The fuceefs
of their enterprizes was a different as their cha-
ra6ters, and was uniformly influenced by them.
Francis, by his impetuous aivity, often dif-
concerted the Emperor's best laid schemes;
Charles, by a more calm but steady prosecution
of his deflgns, check'd the rapidity of his rival's
career, and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous
efforts. The former, at the opening of a war
or of a campaign, broke in upon his enemy with
the violence of a torrent, and carried all before
him; the latter, waiting until he saw the force
of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the
end not only all that he had loft, but made new
acquisitions. Few of the French Monarch's at-
tempts towards conquest, whatever promising
aspet they might wear at first, were conducted
to an happy issue; many of the Emperor's en.
terprizes, even after they appeared desperate and
impracticable, terminated in the most profperoua
manner. Francis was dazzled with the plen-
dour of an undertaking; Charles was allured
by the profpet of its turning to his advantage.

IA, ~~~~~;XJL,

DooKlX. THE degree, however, of their comparative

merit and reputation, has not been fixed either
by a trift scrutiny into their abilities for govern-
ment, or by an impartial consideration of the
greatness and success of their undertakings;
and Francis is one of those Monarchs who
occupies a higher rank in the temple of'Fame,
than either his talents or performances entitle
him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed to
many different circumstances. The fuperio-
rity which Charles acquired by the viaory of
Pavia, and which from that period he pre-
served through the remainder of his reign, was
so manifest, that Francis's struggle against his
exorbitant and growing dominion was viewed
by most of the other powers, not only with the
partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with
the favour due to one who was resisting a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring.to set bounds to
a Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
charaters of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their
qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the
many errors conspicuous in his foreign policy
and domeftick administration, was nevertheleis
humane, beneficent, generous. He poflefied
dignity without pride; affability free from mean-
Mess and courtesy exempt from deceit. All

who

who had access to him, and no man of merit BOOK IX.
was ever denied that privilege, refpe&ted and 1547.
loved him. Captivated with his personal qua-
lities, his fubjets forgot his defects as a Mo-
narch, and admiring him as the moil accom-
plifhed and amiable gentleman in his dominions,
they hardly murmured at ats of male-admini-
ftration, which, in a Prince of less engaging dif-
positions, would have been deemed unpardon-
able. This admiration, however, must have
been temporary only, and would have died away,
with the courtiers who bellowed it; the illusion
arising from his private virtues must have
ceased, and poferity would have judged of his
publick condut with its usual impartiality; but
another circumstance prevented this, and hs
name hath been transmitted to posterity with in-
creasing reputation. Science and the arts had,
at that time, made little progress in France.
They were just beginning to advance beyond the
limits of Italy, where they had revived, and
which had hitherto been theironly feat. Francis
took them immediately under his protection, and
vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and muni.
ficence with which he encouraged them. He
invited learned men to his court, he conversed
with them familiarly, he employed them in bu-
finess, he raised them to offices of dignity, and
honoured them with his confidence. That race
of men, not more prone to complain when de-
nied the refpet to which they fancy themselves

entitled,

ROOK tX. entitled, han pt to be pleufed when treated
X57J. with the difihion whfh theyconfider as their

due, thought they could not exceed in gratitude
to such a benefator, and rained their inven-
tion, and employed all their ingenuity in pane.
gyrick. Succeeding authors, warmed with their
descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted their
entomiums, and refined upon temn. The ap.
pellation of Father 6f Letters -beflowed upon
?rancis, hath rendered his memnory sacred among
historians; and they feenr to have regarded it as
a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defe&s. Thus Francis, notwith-
'standing his inferior abilities, and want of fuc.
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of
"Charles. The virtues whiclh he pofefled as a
man, have entitled him to greater admiration
'and praise, than have been bestowed upon the
'extensive genius, and fortunate arts of a more
capable, but less amiable rival.

Effte, of BY his death, a considerable change was made
Francit's
Idath. in the slate of Europe. Charles, grown old in

the arts of government and command, had now
to cotltend only with younger Monarchs, who
could not be regarded as an equal match for
him, who had flood the encounter with Henry
VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honour
in all those different contefis. By this event, he
was eared of all his disquietude, and'was happy
to find, that he might begin with safety thole

operations

tperations against the Ele&or of Saxony, which Boeo It.
he had hitherto been obliged to suspend, He "''
,knew the abilities of Henry II. who had just
mounted the throne of France, to be greatly
inferior to those of his father, and foresaw that
he would be so much occupied for some time
in displacing the late King's ministers, whom he
hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands
of his own favourites, that he had nothing to
dread, either from his personal efforts, or from
any confederacy which this unexperienced Prince
could form.

BUT as it was uncertain how long such an Chaa

interval of security might continue, Charles de- "i"l'
termined instantly to improve it; and as oon as EJ^0ao ofe
he heard of Francis's demise, he began his march
from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the April "
departure of the papal troops, together with
the retreat of the Flemings, had so much dimi-
nifhed his army, that sixteen thousand men were
all he could assemble. With this inconsiderable
body he set out on an expedition, the event of
which was to decide what degree of authority
he hould possess from that period in Germany:
but as this little army consisted chiefly of the
veteran Spanilh and Italian bands, he did nor,
in trusting to them, commit much to the deci-
sion of chance; and even with so small a force
be had reason to entertain the most sanguine

hopes

Boos IX. hopes of success. The Ele&or, it;is true, had
' 47. levied an army greatly superior, in number; but

neither the experience and discipline of his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to
be compared with those of the Emperor. The
Ele&or, betides, had already been guilty of an
error, which deprived him of all the advantage
which he might have derived from his. fupe-
riority in number, and was alone sufficient to
have occasioned his ruin. Instead of keeping
his forces united, he detached one great body
towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to
facilitate his juntion with the malecontents of
that kingdom, and cantoned a considerable part
of what remained in different places of Saxony,
where he expected the Emperor would make
.the first impreflion, vainly imagining that these
open towns, with small garrisons, might be ren-
dered tenable against an enemy.

Progref of THE Emperor entered the southern frontier
hri arms of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfter.

The folly of the measure which the Elector had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted
in that town surrendering without resistance; and
those in all the other places between that and
the Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled
as the Imperialiits approached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panick with
which they seemed to be struck, advanced with-

out

out ldoing a moment. The Ele5tor, who had sooK IX,
fixed his head-quarters at Meiflen, continued '."
in his wonted ate of fluctuation and uncertain-
ty. He even became more undetermined, in
proportion as the danger drew near, and called
for prompt.arid decisive resolutions; Sometimes
he ated, as if he had resolved to defend the
banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a battle with
the enemy, as oon as the detachments which he
had calld in were able to join him. At other
times,'he-abandoned this as rash and perilous,
seeming to adopt the more prudent counsels of
those who advised him to endeavour at protract
ing the war, and for that end to retire under
the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Im-
perialifts could not attack him without manifest
disadvantage, and where he might wait, in
safety, for the succours which he expeced from
Mecklenburgh, Pomerania, and the Proteflant
cities on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either
of these plans, he 'broke down the bridge at
Meissen, and marched along the east bank of the
Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew,
and, after much hesitation, adopted one of these
middle s-hemes, which are always acceptable to
feeble minds incapable of deciding. IHe left a
detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperi-
alifts, if they hould attempt to pass at that place,
and advancing a few miles with his main body,
encamped there in expecation of the event, ac-

.YoL. I1I, F f cording

BOOK IX. cordind to which he prop6sed to regulate his
L4-7 subsequent motions.
1547.

Pases the CHARLES, meanwhile, pulhing forward, in
Elbc. ceflantly, arrived the evening of the twenty.

third of April on the banks of the Etbe, opposite
to Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was
three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet
in depth, its current rapid, and the bank possess-
ed by the Saxons was higher than that which
he occupied. Undifinayed, however, by all
these obstacles, he called together his general
officers, and, without asking their opinions, com-
municated to them his intention of attempting
next morning to force his passage over the river,
and to attack the enemy wherever he could come
up with them. They all expressed their afto.
nifhment at such a bold resolution, and even
the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring and
impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony, notwith-
standing his impatience to crush his rival the
Eletor, remonstrated earnestly against it. But
the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment
or good fortune, paid no regard to their argu-
ments, and gave the orders necelfary for execut-
ing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanilh

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incessant fire upon the enemy. The

long

long heavy muskets used in that age, did txecu- BOOK IX.
tion on the opposite bank, and many of the fol- ,
diers, hurried on by a martial ardor in order to
get nearer the enemy, ruihed into the ftreamj
and advancing breaft-high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effec. Under
cover of their fires a bridge of boats was begun
to be laid for the infantry; and a peasant hav-
ing undertaken to conduc the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well ac-
quainted, they also were put in motion, The
Saxons potled in Muhlberg endeavoured to ob-
strut there operations, by a brisk fire from a
battery which they had ereted; but as a
thick fog covered all the low grounds upon
the river, they could not take aim with any
certainty, and the Imperialists suffered very
little; at the fame time the Saxons being much
galled by the Spaniards and Italians, they set on
fire some boats which had been collected neat
the village, and prepared to retire. The Im.
perialilts perceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers
instantly stript themselves, and holding their
swords with their teeth, swam across the river,
put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to
.oppose them, saved from the flames as many
boats as were sufficient to complete their own
bridge, and by this spirited and successful action,
encouraged their companions no less than they
intimidated the enemy.

Fs a By

BboK IX. BYthis time, the cavalry, each trooper hav-

547, ing a foot soldier behind him, began to enter

the river, the light horse marching in the front,
followed by the men at arms, whomthe Empe-
ror led in person, mounted on a Spaniih horse,
drefled in afumptuous habit, and carrying ajave-
lin in his hand. Such a numerous body ftrug-
gling through a great river, in which, accord-
ing to the diretions of their guide, they were
obliged to make several turns, sometimes tread-
ing on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions, whom they left
behind, a fpeftacle equally magnificent and in-
tereting d. Their courage, at last, surmount.
ed every obstacle, no man betraying any fymp-
tor of fear, when the Emperor shared in the
danger no less than the meanest soldier. The
moment that they reached the opposite fide,
Charles, without waiting the arrival of the reft
of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with
him, who, flulhed with their good fortune, and
despising an enemy who had negleced to op-
pofl them, when it might have been done with
such 'advantage, made no account of their iupec-
rior numnbers, and niarched on as to a certain
viltory,

d Avila, i!. a.

Dua INq

DURING all these operations, which 4heceffa- Bvo IX.

rily consumed much time, the Elector remained ,-
inactive in his camp; and from an infatuation I'" COt""l

of the Lec.

which appears to be so amazing, that the best tor.
informed historians impute it to the treacherous
arts of his generals, who deceived him by flfe
intelligence, he would not believe that the Em-
peror had passed the river, or could be iy near
at hand c. Being convinced, at last, of his fa-
tal miltake, by the concurring testimony of eye-
witnefes, he gave orders for retreating towards
Wittemberg. But a German army, encumbered,
as usual, with baggage and artillery, could not
be put fuddt nly in motion. They had just be-
gun to march when the light troops of the ene-
my came in view, and the Elector saw an en-
gagement to be unavoidable. As he was no
less bold in ation than irresolute in council, he
made the difpoiGtion for battle with the greatest Battle of
pretence of mind, and in the most proper man- M lhaulcd.
ner; taking advantage of a great forest to cover
his wings, so as to prevent his being lurround-
ed by the enemy's cavalry, which were far more
numerous than his own. The Emperor, like-
wife, ranged his men in order as they came up,
and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with
few but efficacious words to do their duty. It
was with a very different spirit that the two ar-

Camerar. ap. Frehter. iii. 43. Struv. corp. hill.
Germ. 1047, 1049.

Fs3 mses

BOOK IX. mies advanced to the charge. As the day, which

147- had hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened

to clear up at that moment, this accidental cir-
cumftance made an imprefflon on the different
parties corresponding to the tone of their minds;
the Saxons, furprized and dilheartened, felt
pain at being exposed fully to the view of the
enemy; the Imperialists, being now secure that
the Protestant forces could not escape from
them, rejoiced at the return of fun Ihine, as a
certain presage of vitory. The hock of battle
would not have been long or doubtful, if the
personal courage which the Eletor displayed,
together with the activity which he exerted from
the moment that the approach of the enemy
rendered an engagement certain, and cut off all
pofflbility of hesitation, had not revived in some
degree the spirit of his troops. They repulsed
the Hungarian light horse who began the at-
tack, and received with firmness the men at
arms who next advanced to the charge; but as
these were the flower of the Imperial army, were
commanded by experienced officers, and fought
under the Emperor's eye, the Saxons oon be-
gan to give way, and the light troops rallying
at the fame time and falling on their flanks, the
flight became general. A small body of chosen

The ltor soldiers, among whom the Elector had fought
scated, in person, still continued to defend themselves,
and takcn
prifonw. and endeavoured to save their master by retiring

into

into the forest; but being surrounded on every BOOK IX.
fide, the Eleaor, wounded in the face, exhaust- ,--
ed with fatigue, and perceiving all resistance to
be vain, surrendered himself a prisoner. He
was conducted immediately towards the Empe-
ror, whom he found just returned from the pur-
suit, standing on the field of battle in the full
exultation of success, and receiving the con-
gratulations of his officers, upon this complete
victory obtained by his valour and conduct.
Even in such an unfortunate and humbling situ-
ation, the Elecor's behaviour was equally mag-
nanimous and decent. Sensible of his condition,
he approached his conqueror without any of the
sullenness or pride, which would have been im-
proper in a captive; and conscious of his own
dignity, he descended to no mean submission,
unbecoming the high station which he held
among the German Princes. " The fortune of
war, said he, has made me your prisoner, most
gracious Emperor, and I hope to be treated"
-- Here, Charles harshly interrupted him:
' And am I then, at last, acknowledged to be His harh
Emperor ? Charles of Ghent was the only .e "r"ptiun b

the Emppo.

you lately allowed me. You hall be treated as tor.
you deserve." At there words, he turned from
him abruptly with an haughty air. To this
cruel repulse, the King of the Romans added
reproaches in his own name, using expreflions
till more ungenerous and insulting. The Elec-

Fs 4 tor

opoK IX. tor made no reply; but, with an unaltered

countenance, which discovered neither atonifh-
ment nor deje&ion, accompanied the Spaniih
soldiers appointed to guard him ',

Chr,','s THIS decisive vi&tory cost the Imperialiias
itr hi. pnly fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons
vo"'y. were killed, chiefly in he pursuit, and a greater

number taken prisoners. About four hundred
kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg,
together with the electoral Prince, who had
likewise been wounded in the aion. After
refting two days in the field of battle, partly to
refresh his army, and partly to receive the de-
puties of the adjacent towns, which were impa-
tient to secure his protection by submitting to
his will, the Emperor began to move towards
Wittemberg, that he might terminate the war
at once, by the redu&ion of that city. The
unfortunate Elecor was carried along in a fort
of triumph, and exposed every where, as a cap-
tive, to his own subje&s; a fpe&acle extremely
affliEting to them who both honoured and loved
him; though the insult was so far frc;nm fubdu-
ing his firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the

oqnted tranquillity and composure of his mind.

f Sleid. hilf. r26. 'Thuan. 136. Hortenfius de Bello

Perman. ap. Scard. vol. ii. 498. Defcript. Pugna Mul-
berg. ibid, p. o9. . P. luter. Rer. Aufr. lib. xii.
F. 13. p. 98.

* s

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, Book IX.

of the elecoral branch of the Saxon family, was ,57
one of the strongest cities in Germany, and lnvebs Wit.
could not be taken, if properly defended, with-
out great difficulty, the Emperor marched
thither with the utmost dispatch, hoping that
while the consternation occasioned by his viaory
was still recent, the inhabitants might imitate
the example of their countrymen, and submit
to his power, as soon as he appeared before
their.walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the Elecor's
wife, a woman no less distinguished by her abi-
lities than her virtue, instead of abandoning
herself to tears and lamentation upon her hus-
band's misfortune, endevoured, by her ex-
ample as well as exhortations, to animate the
citizens. She inspired them with such refolu-
tion, that, when summoned to surrender, they
returned a vigorous answer, warning the Em-
peror to behave towards their sovereign with
the refped due to his rank, as they were deter-
mined to treat Albert of Brandenburg, who was
till a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner
that he treated him. The spirit of the inhabi-
tants no less than the strength of the city seemed
now to render a siege in form necessary. After
such a signal victory it would have been disgrace-
ful not to have undertaken it, though at the fame
time the EmperQr was destitute of every thing
requisite for carrying it on. But Maurice re-

moved

Boos IX. moved all difficulties, by engaging to furniih
'*~7' provisions, artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and

whatever else should be needed. Trusting to
this, Charles gave orders to open the trenches
before the town. It quickly appeared, that
Maurice's eagerness to reduce the capital of
those dominions, which he expeted as his re-
ward for taking arms against his kiifman, and
deserting the Protestant cause, had led him to
promise what exceeded his power to perform.
A battering train was, indeed, carried safely
down the Elbe from Dresden to Wittemberg;
but as Maurice had not sufficient force to pre-
serve a secure communication between his ter-
ritories and the camp of the besiegers, Count
Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of ele&o-
ril troops, destroyed a convoy of provisions and
military stores, and dispersed a band of pioneers
destined for the service of the Imperialists. This
put a fop to the progress of the siege, and con-
vinced the Emperor, that as he could not rely
on Maurice's promises, recourse ought to be
had to ome more expeditious as well as more
certain method of getting poffefion of the
town.

The imp. THx unfortunate Ele&tor was in his hands,
",o".r-t. and Charles was ungenerous and hard-hearted
T1toftht enough to take advantage of this, in order to

make an experiment whether he might not bring

~* ~ about

about his design, by working upon the tender- Boor Ix.
nefi of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety 7's
of children towards their parent. With this
view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to
open the gates, letting her know that if he
again refused to comply, the Eletor should
answer with his head for her obstinacy. To
convince her that this was not an empty threat,
he'brought his prisoner to an immediate trial.
The proceedings against him were as irregular
as the stratagem was barbarous. Initead of
consulting the states of the Empire, or remit-
ting the cause to any court, which, according
to the German constitution, might have legally
taken cognizance of the Ele&or's crime, he sub-
je6ted the greatest Prince in the Empire to the
jurifdition of a court-martial, composed of
Spanilh and Italian officers, and in which the
unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit instrument for
any at of violence, presidcd, This strange Miy ,o.
tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of the
Empire which had been issued against the pri-
soner, a sentence pronounced by the sole autho-
tity of the Emperor, and destitute of every
legal formality which could render it valid;
but preluming him to be thereby manififtly
convi&td ot treason and rebellion, the court-
martial condemned him to susser death by being
beheaded. This decree was intimated to the

!eftlor while amusing himself in playing at

C heis

Book IX Chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-

c47 prifner. He paused for a moment, though

re leie without discovering any symptom either of
tor's rag

inisty. furprize or terror; and after taking notice of

the irregularity as well as injustice of the Em-
peror's proceedings; ' It is easy, continued he,
to comprehend his scheme. I muff die, because
Wittemberg will not fuirender; and I shall lay
down my ls: with pleasure, if, by that facri-
fice, 1 can preserve the dignity of my houle,
and trnfmit to my posterity the inheritance
which belongs to them. Would to God, that
this sentence may not affect my wife and chil-
dren more than it intimidates me ! and that they,
for the fake of adding a few days to a life al-
ready too long, may not renounce honours and
territories which they were born to poffefsg!"
He then turned to his antagonist, whom he
challenged to continue the game. He played
with his usual attention and ingenuity, and hav-
ing beat Ernest, expressed all the fatisfation
which is commonly felt on gaining such vi&o-
ties. After this he withdrew to his own apart-
ment, that be might employ the reft of his time
in such religious exercises as were proper in his
situation .

IT was not with the fame indifference, or
pompofure, that the account of the Eletor's

s Thuan. i. 14. h Struvii corpus, ioo.

danger

danger was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla, BOOK IX.
who had supported with such undaunted forti-
tude her husband's misfortunes, while he ima- Thedift't

of hit fa-

gined that they could reach no farther than to di- mly.
minih h'is power or territories, felt all her refolu-
tion fail as oon as his life was threatened. So-
licitous to save that, he despised every other
consideration; and was willing to make any
sacrifice, in order to appease an incensed con-
queror. At the fame time, the Duke of Cleves,
the Elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice, to
none of whom Charles had communicated the
true motives of his violent proceedings against
the Elecor, interceded warmly with him to
spare his life. The first was prompted to do so
merely by companion for his filler, and regard
for his brother-in-law. The two other dreaded
the universal reproach that they would incur,
if, after having boasted so often of the ample
security which the Emperor had promised them
with refpet to their religion, the first effet of
their union with him hould be the public exe-
cution of a Prince, who was justly held in re-
verence asthe most zealous protetor of the Pro-
teftant cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw
that he must become the object of detestation to
,the Saxons, and could never hope to govern
them with tranquillity, if he were confidered by
them as accessary to the death of his nearelf

kinnfman,

BBOK IX. kinsman, in order that he might obtain posse

i477^ iron of his dominions.
1547.

Hir treaty WHILE they, from such various motives, so-
with
Cha.les, licited Charles, with the molt earnest iportu.
by which
befurren- nity, not to execute the nenence, Sybilla, and
e~ ac;,, his children, conjured the Elefor, by letters

as well as messengers, to scruple at no concetf
sion that would extricate him out of the present
danger, and deliver them from their fears and
anguish on his account. The Emperor, per-
ceiving that the expedient which he had tried
began to produce the effet that he intended,
fell by degrees from his former rigour, and al-
lowed himself to soften into promises of cle-
mency and forgiveness, if the Eletor would
hew himself worthy of his favour by submit-
ting to reasonable terms. The Eletor, on whom
the consideration of what he might susser himself
had made no imprefiion, was melted by the tears
of a wife whom he loved, and could not resist the
May 9. intreaties of his family. In compliance with

their repeated solicitations, he agreed to articles
of accommodation, which he would otherwise
have rejected with disdain. The chief of them
were, that he hould resign the Electoral dig-
nity, as well for himself as for his posterity,
into the Emperor's hands, to be disposed of en-
tirely at his pleasure that he hould instantly
put the Imperial troops in poffeflion of the cities

a of

of Wittemberg and Gotha that he hould set Booc IX.
Albert of Brandenburg at liberty without ran- -~
fom; that he hould fubmir to the decrees of 7.
the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in what-
ever reformation the Emperor hould make in
the constitution of that court; that he lhould'
renounce all leagues against the Emperor or
King of the Romans, and enter into no allidhce
for the future, in which they were not compre-
hended. In return for these important concef-
sions, the Emperor not only promised to spare
his life, but to fettle on him and his posterity
the city of Gotha and its territories, together
with an annual pension of fifty thousand florins,
payable out of the revenues of the ele&orate;
and likewise to grant him a fum in ready money
to be applied towards the discharge of his debts.
Even these articles of grace were clogged with and remain
the mortifying condition of his remaining thf 'Pr""'o
Emperor's prisoner during the reft of his life r
To the whole, Charles had subjoined, that he
ihould submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points
in religion; but the Ele&or, though he had
been persuaded to sacrifice all the objeets which
4tn commonly hold to be the dearest and most
valuable, was inflexible with regard to this
point; and neither threats nor intrcatics could

Sleid. 427. Thuan. i. 14z. Du Mont Corps Di.
plom. iv. p. ii, 332,

prevail

BooKIX. prevaj. to make him rehounce what be deemed

to be truth, or persuade him. to. a& in oppofi.
tior. to the ditates of his conscience.

Mauriceput , As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out
inftheEec of Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled his en-
torldomi. gagemcnts to Maurice.; and in reward for his

nmeit,in having 4eferted the Protestant cause,
andfhaving contributed with such success to-
wards the dissolution ofthe Smalkaldick league,
he gave him poffeieon of that city, together
with all the other towns in the elecorate. It
was not without relucance, however, that he
made such a sacrifice;;, the extraordinary success
of, his arms had begun to operate,, in its usual
manner upon his ambitious mind, suggesting
new and vast projects jfor the aggrandizement of
his fapmily, towards the.^ccomplifhment of which
the retaining of Saxopy would have been of the
utmot consequence. But, as this scheme was
not then ripe for execution, he durftc not yet
venture to disclose it nor would it have been
either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice,
at thatjunaure, by such a manifest violation
of all the promises, which had educed him to
abandon his natural allies. .r

eO;,c. THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was
theLoidh flill in arms; and though now left alone to
v'ae. maintain the Protestant cause, was neither a

feeble

feeble nor contemptible'eemiy. Hiis dominions BOOi IX.
were of oonfiderable exteht; his fubjeft ani- 147
mated with zeal for the Reformation; and if he
could haye held the Imperialists at bay for a
flort time, he had much to hope from a party
whoe strength was still unbroken, iwhofe union
as well M vigour might returm, and- which had
reafein to dthd, ith- 'ertainty, on being es-
fe&ually fiopited by he' King: of France.
The Labdgra#te thooghr;not of any thing so
bold or adventurous; bug' being seized with the
fame conftetnation whici :had taken pofFoffion
of his associates, h .was intent, only, ho*. to
procure favourable-terms from, the Emperr,
*hom he viwed as a conqueror, td whose will
there was a necefity of submitting. Maurice
cncotwagei tiamne abnd pai&ack fpiritby i g-
niTfing, on: Chiea hand, dhe? Emperdr'sapdweh
by boaftii; t . die' 4thero of his owiv interest'
with hii toleious .ally-.;' and by mprdfenting
the adranttagois conditions which he could not
fail of obtaiinmg- by his intercelfion for a friend,
whom he WiA so folickous to save. Sometimes
the Landgrave was induced to place such un-
bounded confidence in his promises, that he was
impatient to bring matters to a final accommo-
dation. On other occasions, the Emperor's ex.
orbitant anibiion, rcftrained neither by the
scruples of dectnty, nor the maxims of jufticc,
together with 'the recent and hocking proof

VOL. III. G g which

BOOK IX. whch- he had; given :of,.thisin his treaent of

.5i.' the.ElfJ¢or.of $axoy;, campp f ull into his

thoughts, and made such a lively impreQion on
them, that he, broke off abruptly, he negocia-
t.ois ;which Ae had bgun; seeming to be con-
vi"^ri tb.at it. ws more .prudent to depend for
fafety,o hs own arms, thao, to, cofide in
Charles's generoity. But this bod4refolution,
yhh despair had. suggested to -n impatient
spirit, fretted by disappointments, was. not of
long.continuance. Upon a more deliberate fur.
vey of the enemy's power, as well as his own
weakness, his doubts and feats returned upon
him, and together with them the spirit of nego-
ciating, and the desire of accommodation. 1

'theconi. . MAVtfpCi, and the Ele&or.of Brandenburg,
tone pre- -
fribed by ated as MediatorSi;btween him and.the Em-
the Em.
peror. peror; and after all that the former had vaunt-

ge of his influence,, the .condition prescribed to
the Landgrave were. extremely rigorous. The
articles with regard to his renouncing the league
of. Smalkalde, acklnowledging. the Emperor's
authority,. and submitting to the, decrees of the
:Imperial chamber, were the fame which had
been imposed on the Ele&or of Saxony. Be-
fides these, he was required to surrender his per-
:son and territories to the Emperor to implore
for pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred
and fifty thousand crowns towards defraying

the

-the expences of the war; to demolibh the forti. BooK rX.
fications of all the owns in his dominions ex- s47.
cept onei to oblige the garrison which he
placed in it'to tace an oath of fidelity to the
Emperor; to allow a free passage through his
territories to the Imperial troops as often as it
shall be demanded; to deliver up all: his atil-
lery and ammunition to the Emperor; to let at
liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunswick,
together with the other prisoners whom, be had
taken during the War; and neither to take arms
himself, nor to permit any of his subje&s toerve
against the Emperor or his allies for the fu-

t u r e

k

.

,

i

.1 " '

'k
; ,. ,, ,.., , ,** . , ..' ,.:.

THu Landgrave ratified there articles, though To which
rwith the, utrtmffrelu&ance, as they contained ht fbbmit
no stipulation with regard to- the manner in
which he was; to be treated, and left him en-
tirely at the Enperor's mercy. .Necefity how-
ever, compelled himn tgive hiafWent.' Charles,
who had aflumed thl» haughty and imperious
tone ofa a.conquetor; ever since the redu&ion of
Saxony, insisted on an unconditional fubmifrion,
and would permit'nothing' to be added 'o the
terms which he had prescribed, that could in
any degree limit the fulness of his power, or re.
strain him from behaving as he saw meet to-

J1eid. 43o. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.

G g 2 wards

1FPO. IX. wards Prince whom he regarded as absolutely
J-547 at his-difpofal. Butthogh he would not vouch.

safe to egociate with the Landgrave, on such
a fooring <f equality, as to susser ayrticde to
be, ihfcfed among thofi which he had diEtated
to hin, that could be confidered as a formal
stipulation for the security and freedom of his
person; he, or his ministers in his name,:.gave
the'ic6tor of Brandenburg and Maurice such
full fatisfation with regard to this point, that
they; asured the Landgrave that Charles would
behbvc to. him in the fame way as. he had done
to the iDuke of Wurtemberg, and would allow
him, whenever he had made his fubmiflion, to
return to his own territories. Upon finding the
Landgrave to be still possessed with his former
suspicions of the Emperor's intentions, and un-
willing to trust verbal or mbiguous declara-
tions, ih a matter bs. such essential concern as
his own liberty, they ent him a bond signed by
them both, containing the most solemn obliga.
tions, that if any violence whatfocver were of-
sered to his person, during his interview with
the Emperor, they would instantly frrender
themselves to his sons, and remain in their
hands to be treated by them in the fame .manner
ts the Emperor hould teat him'.

a Du Mont Corpa Diplom. iv. p. 11, 336.

THIS,

THIS, togetherwith theindifpenfable obligation BooK I.

of performing what was contained in the articlesof 47
which he had-accepted, removed his doubts and 'tHe rep,

to the fln-

fcruplesi or made it necessary to get over them, pelial court.
He repaired, for that purpose, to the Imperial
camp at Hal in Saxony, where a circumstance
occurred which revived his suspicions and in.
creased his fears. Just as he was about to enter
the chamber of pretence, in order to make his
publick fubmifllon to the Emperor, a copy. of
the articles which he had approved of was put
into his hands, in order that he might ratify
them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived
that the Imperial ministers had added two new
articles; one importing, that if any dispute
:hould arise concerning the meaning of the for-
mer conditions, the Emperor hould have the
'ight of putting what interpretation upon them
he thought most reasonable; the other, that
the Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly
to the decisions of the council of Trent. This
unworthy artifice, calculated to furprize him
into an approbation of articles, to which he
had not the most distant idea of assenting, by
proposing them to him at a time when his mind
was engroifed and disquieted with the thoughts
of that humbling ceremony which he had to
perform, filled the Landgrave with indignation,
and made him fly out into all those violent ex-
prellions of rage to which his temper was prone.

Gg 3 With

Boos IX. With some difficulty, the Electbr of Branden;

,57. burg and Maurice prevailed at length on the

Emperor's ministers to dr6p the former article
as unjust, and to explain the'latter in such a
manner, that he could agree to it, without
openly renouncing the Protestant religion.

The man- THIs obstacle being surmounted, the Land-
ner in which
the Empe- grave was impatient to finish a ceremony which,
for received

Ehm. how mortifying soever, had been declared ne-

ceffary towards his obtaining pardon. The
Emperor was eated on a magnificent throne,
with all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded
by a numerous train of the Princes of the Em.
pire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick,
lately the Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a
sudden reverse of fortune, a fpedator of his
humiliation. The Landgrave was introduced
with great solemnity, and advancing towards
the throne, fell upon his knees. His chancel-
lor, who walked behind him, immediately read,
by his master's command, a paper which con-
tained an humble confession of the crime where-
of he had been guilty; an acknowledgment
that he had merited on that account the mos
severe punishment; an absolute resignation of
himself and his dominions to be disposed of at
the Emperor's pleasure; a fubmiflive petition
for pardon, his hopes of which were founded
entirely on the Emperor's clemency and it

concluded
I

concluded with promises of behaving,. for the BOOK IX
future, like a fubje&, whose principles of loyalty 54
and obedience would be confirmed, and would
even derive new force from the sentiments of
gratitude which must hereafter fill and animate
his heart. While the chancellor was reading
this abject declaration, the eyes of all the spec-
tators were fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave;
few could behold a Prince, so powerful as well
as high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture
of a fappliant, without being touched with
commiseration, and perceiving serious reflec-
tions arise in their nlinds upon the intability
and emptiness of human grandeur. The Em-
peror viewed the whole tranfadtion with an
haughty unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profound silence himself, made a ign to one of
his secretaries to read his answer; the tenor of
which was, That though he might have justly
inflited on him the grievous punishment which
his crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his own
generosity, moved by the solicitations of several
Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and influ-
enced by his penitential acknowledgments,
he would not deal with him according to the
rigour of justice, and would subjec him to no
penalty that was not specified in the articles
which he had already subscribed. The moment
the secretary had finished, Charles turned away
abruptly, without deigning to give the unhappy

G g 4 suppliant

BooK IX. suppliant any sign of cpmpalon or reconcile-

mene. He did not venefire him to, rife from
his knees; which the. Landgrave having, ven-
tured to do unbiddea, dvanced towaruds the
Emperpt with an intention to kifs his hand,
flattering himfClf, that his guilt being now fully
expiated, 'he might presume to take that:liberty.
But the EleCtor of Brandenburg perceiving that
this familiarity would be offensive to the Em-
peror, interposed, and desired the Landgrave to
go aldng with him and Maurice to the Duke of
Alva's apartments in the catle.

.. i .. . ,. .:

HB. was received., and entertained by that

nobleman with the .refpee&.and courtesy due to
such a guest. Bt, after supper, while he was
engage4 i play, the Duke took the Elector
and Maurice aside, and communicated to them
the Emperor's orders, that the Landgrgve must
remain a priiner in that place under the cuf.

He Is de. tody of a Spanilh guard. As they had not
riocr. a hitherto entertained the moRs distant suspicion

of the Emnperor's sincerity or recitude of in-
tention, their furprize was excessive, and their
indigation not inferior to it, on discovering
how greatly they had been deceived themselves,
and how infarnoufy abused, in having been made
the instruments of deceiving add ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to
arguments and to ireaties, in order to save

themselves

themselves from that difgtace, and to extricate BooK IX.
him out of the wretched situation into which he
had been betrayed by too great confidence in
them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflex-
ible, and pleaded the necessity of executing the
Emperor's commands. By this time it grew
late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of
what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in which
he was entangled, prepared for departing, when
the fatal orders were intimated to him. He
was ftrtck dumb at first with astonishment, but
after being silent a few moments, he broke out
into all the violent expreflions, which horror at
i.uftice accompanied with fraud naturally fug-
gests, He complained, he expoftulated, he ex-
claimed; sometimes inveighing against the Em-
peror'a artifices as unworthy of a great and
generous Prince; sometimes censuring the cre-
dulity of his friends in trusting to Charles's infi-
dious promises; sometimes charging them with
meanness in itooping to lend their aliftance. to-
wards the execution of such a perfidious and dif-
honourable scheme; and in the end he required
them to remember their engagements to his
children, and instantly to fulfil them. They,
after giving way for a little to the torrent of his
passion, solemnly asserted their own innocence
and upright intention in the whole tranfa'tion,
and encouraged him to hope, that, as soon as
they.faw the Emperor, they would obtain re-

dress

BooK IX. dress of an injury, which affe&ed their own ho-

-.-~ nour, no less than it did his liberty. At the

fame time, i order to sooth his rage and im-
patience, Maurice remained with him during the
night, in the apartment where he was con-
fined .

The Eleaor NEXT morning, the Eletor and Maurice ap.
bur'and plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the
ici, ri ao' in famy to which they would be exposed through-
for" is i out Germany, if the Landgrave were detained

in custody; that they would not have advised,
nor would he himself have consented to an inter-
view, if they had fufpeaed that the loss of. his
liberty was to be the consequence of his fubmif-
sion ; that they were bound to procure his re-
lease, having plighted their faith to that effect,
and engaged their own persons as sureties for his.
Charles listened to their earnef remonstrances
with the utmost coolness. As he now stood no
longer in need of their services, they had the
mortification to find that their former obfequi-
oufnefs was forgotten, and little regard paid to
their intercession. He was ignorant, he told
them, of their particular or private tranfations
with the Landgrave, nor was his condu& to be
regulated by these; though he knew well what
he himself had promised, which was not that the

Sleid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hii.
Germ. ii. 1oSz.

Landgrave

Landgrave should be exempt from all restraint, BOOK IX.
but that he liould not be kept a prisoner du- 1547.
ring life t. Having aid this with a peremp.
tory arid decisive tone, he put an end to the con-
ference; and they feeing no probability, at that
time, of making any imprefion upon the Em-
peror, who seemed to have taken his resolution
deliberately, and to be obtinately bent on ad-
hering to it, were obliged to acquaint the un.
fortunate prisoner with the ill success of their
endeavours in his behalf. This disappointment

s- According to several hiflorians of great name, the

Emperor, in his treaty with the Landgrave, stipulated that he
would not detain him in any prison. But in executing
the deed, which was written in the German tongue, the
Imperial ministers fraudulently substituted the word mzigrr
infecad 6f iniger, and thus the treaty, in place of a promire
that he Ihould not be detained in any prison, contained only
an engagement that he Ihould not be detained in pirpetl
imprisonment. But authors, eminent for hiRtorical know-
ledge and critical accuracy have called in queflion the truth
of this common llory. The silence of Sleidan with regard
to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the various me-
morials which he has publilhed concerning the Landgrave's
imprisonment, greatly favour this opinion. But as several
books which contain the information neceflary towards dif.
cufling this point with accuracy, are written in the Ger.
man language, which I do not underhand, I cannot pretend
to inquire into this matter with the fame precision, where.
with I have endeavoured to fettle some other controverted
fads which have occurred in the course of this bifory. See
Struv. Corp. osa. Moleim's Eccles. Hit. vol. ii. p. 161,
162 Engl. Edition.

threw

BOOK IX. threw him into a new and more violent transport

'"7'. of rage, so that to prevent his proceeding tofome

desperate extremity, the Elector and Maurice
promied that they would not quit the Emperor,
until, by the frequency and fervour of their im-
portunity, they had extorted his content to set
him free. They accordingly renewed their
solicitations a few days afterwards, but found
Charles more haughty and intractable than be-
fore, and were warned that if they touched again
upon a subjea so disagreeable, and with regard
to which he had determined to hear nothing far-
ther, he would instantly give orders to convey
the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the
Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed' zeal to
serve him, they not only desisted, but left the
court, and as they did not chufe to meet the first
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning
the cause of their departure, they informed him
of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to
fulfil all that he had promised to the Emperor,
as the most certain means of procuring a speedy
release.

Hi impa. WHATIVER. violent emotions their abandon-
,,i,^d" ing his cause in this manner occasioned, the

Landgrave's impatience to recover liberty made
'him follow their advice. He paid the fum
which had been imposed on him, ordered his

fortrces

frtreffes to be razed, and renounced a11 alli- BOOK IX.
ances which could give offence. This prompt S7
compliance withthe will of the conqueror pro-
ducedno effe. He was still guarded with the
Fame vigilant severity; and being carried about,
together with the degraded Ele&or of Saxony,
wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and
his triumph was each day renewed. The forti-
tude as well as equanimity, with which the
Eleor bore these repeated insults, were not
more remarkable than the Landgrave's fretful-
ness and impatience. His ative impetuous
mind could ill brook restraint; and reflecion
upon the hameful artifices by which he had
been decoyed into that situation, as well as in.
dignation at the injustice with which he was fill
detained in it, drove him often to the wildest
excesses of palion.

THE people of the different cities, to whom The tgo

Charles thus wantonly exposed those illustrious eror' ex.
prisoners a a publick fpeaacle, were sensibly Gerny.
touched with such an insult offered to the Ger.
manick body, and murmured loudly at this in-
decent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint, and
fich as affected them more nearly, Charles pro.
ceeded to add opprcllion to insult, and arrogat-
ing to himself all the rights of a conqueror, e-
ercifed them with the utmost rigour. He or-

dered
2

BoOK IX. dered!^is troops to seize the artillery and miilt

T 7. tary ifores belonging to such ashad ,been mem-

bers of the Smalkaldickleague, and having:col-
le&ted upwards of five hundred piece.of..can-
non, agreat number in that age, ;he fentpartof
them into. the Low-CoUntries, part into Italy,
and part into Spain, in order to spread by this
means the fame of his success, and that they
might serve as monuments of his having sub-
dued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He
then levied, by his sole authority, large fums as
.well.upon those who had served him with fide-
lity during the war, as upon such as had been in
arms against him; upon the former, as their
contingent towards a war, which having been
undertaken, as he pretended, 'for the common
benefit, ought to be carried on at the common'
charge; upon the latter, as a fine by way of
punishment for their rebellion. By thece' exac-
tions he amassed above one million fix' hundred
thbufand crowns, a fum which'appeared pro-
digious in the sixteenth century. 'But so gene-
ral was the confternationi which had feized'the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his vi&torious troops, that all irfplicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at the fame
time, there extraordinary stretches of power
greatly'alarmed a people, jealous of their privi-
leges, and habituated during several ages to
confider the Imperial authority a' Ineiter cx-

tensive

tensive nor formidable. This discontent and BooK IX.
resentment, how indiulrioufy soever they con- '..-
cealed them, became universal; and the more
there passions were restrained and kept down for
the present, the more likely were they to burst
out oon with additional violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like Fcrdinand'

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub- eCC".o
je&ts in Bohemia with still greater rigour. That ofthiisbO',t
kingdom poffelfed privileges and immunities as hian fab.
extensive as those of any nation in which the
feudal institutions were eltablifhed. The pre-
rQgative of their Kings was extremely limited,
and the crown itself eleftive. Ferdinand, when
placed on the throne, had confirmed their liber-
ties with every solemnity prescribed by their ex-
celfive solicitude for the security of a conftitu-
tion of government to which they were ex-
tremely attached. He soon began, however, to
be weary of a jurifdi&ion so much circumfcrib-
ed, and to despise a. sceptre which he 'could not
transmit to his posterity; and notwithstanding
all his former engagements, he attempted to
overturn the constitution from its foundations;
that instead of an eletive kingdom he might
render it hereditary. But the Bohemians were
too high-fpirited tamely to relinquilh privi-
leges which they had long enjoyed. At the
fame time, many of them haying embraced the

dodines

Boor IX. do&rines of the Reformers, the feds of whihh'

"'.' John Huss and eorome f Praguie! hid plarted

in their country about the bignin g 6f the ps.e
ceding century, the desire of acquirinqg eigtei
liberty mingled itself with their eat for their
civil rights; and hefe two kindred pamfons
heightening, as usual, each other's force, preci-
pitated them immediately into violent measures.
They had not only refuted.to serve their fove-
reign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the'
Eleor of Saxony, they had bound themselves,
by a folermn association, to defend their ancient
constitution; and to persis, util they should
obtain fuh' additional grants as they thought
necessary towards perfecting the present mtodel
of their government, or rendering it more per.
manent. They choe Cafpat Phlug, nioble-
man of diftinaion, to be their general and
raised an army of thirty thousfand men to eiiforce
their petitions. But either from the weakness
of their leader, or from the dissensions in a great
unwieldy body, which, having united hastily;
was not thoroughly compated, or from some
other unknown cause, the subsequent operations
of the Bohemians bore no proportion to the zial
and ardour with which they took their -first rec
solutions. They suffered themselves to be amused
so long with negociations and overtures of dif.
ferent kinds, that before they could enter

Saxony,

Saxony, the battle of :Muhlberg was fought, BOOK IX,
the Elector deprived of his dignity and terri-'
tories, the Landgrave confined to close custody,
and the.league of Smalkalde entirely diflipated
The fame dread of the Emperor's power which
had seized the reft of the Germans, reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached
with a body of Imperial troops, they instantly
dispersed, thinking of nothing but how to atone
for their paRs guilt, and to acquire ome hope
of forgiveness, by a prompt fubmiflion. But
Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full of
that implacable resentment which inflames Mo-
narchs whore authority has been despised, was
not to be. mollified by the late repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious fubjeas to their
duty. He eveh heard, umoved, the intreaties
and tears of the citizens of Prague, who ap-
peared before him in the poflure of suppliants,
and implored for mercy. 'he fentehce which
he pronounced against them was rigorous to ex-
tremity; he abolished many of their privileges,
he abridged others, and new-modelled the con-
ftitution according to his pleasure. He con-
demned to death many of those who had been
inoft a&ive in forming the late association against
hinm, hd puiiflied fill a reaternumber with con-
fTcaton 6f heit goods, or perpetual bahnfhmen't.
He obliged all his subje&s, of every condition,
to give up their arms to be deppfited in forts

V¥. II. H h where

Boc IX. where he panted garrisons; and-after disarming

5L - his peopl, - he loaded them with new and exor-

.bitant taxes. Thus by an ill-conduted and
unfuccedsful effort to extend their privileges, the
Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative, when they intended to have
circumscribed it, but they almost annihilated
those liberties which they aimed at establishing
on a broader and more secure foundation 1.
D;et held THE Emperor, having now humbled, and,

as he imagined, subdued the independent and
stubborn spirit of the Germans by the terror of
arms and the rigour of punishment, held a diet
at Augsburg, in order to compose finally the
controversies with regard to religion, which had
so long diiturbed the Empire. He durst not,
however, 'trust the determination of a matter o
interesting to the free suffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds' now were to subjection.
He'entered the city at the head of his Spanifl
troops, and afligned them quarters there. The
reft of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent
villages; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were fur-
rounded by the fame army which had overcome
their countrymen. Immediately after his publick

1 Sleid. 408. 49. 434. Thuan. . iv. 19, iso. Struv.
Corp. ii.

entry,

entry, Charles gave a proof of the violence odt IX.
with which he intended to proceed. He took 547.
poflelfion by force of the cathedral, together with
one of the principal churches; and his priets
having, by variou ceeremonies, purified them
from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to
have defiled them, they re-eftablilhed with great
pomp the rites of the Romish worhip °.

THE concourse of members to this diet was Thetmpe.

·,«~~~~~~

s,

,

.  . ..~or exhort&
extraordinary; the importance of the affairs them to

rubmit to

concerning which it was to deliberate, added to the oenra
the fear of giving offence to the Emperor by council.
an absence which lay open to mifconftruAion,
biought together almost all the Princes, nobles,
and representatives of cities who had right to fit
in that aflembly. The Emperor, in the speech
with which he opened the meeting, called their
attention immediately to that point, which
eemgd chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned
the fatal effets of the religious dilfenfions which
had arisen in Germany, and taken notice of his
own unwearied endeavours to procure a general
council, which alone could provide a remedy
adequate to there evils, he exhorted them to
recognise its authority, and to stand to the
award of an assembly, to which they had origi-

* leid. 435. 437.

H h 2 nally

.o' K IX. naUy4ppealed, as haing te sole ight of judg.

, 7. mtent iBnthe cafe. , .

vrious re- BUT the council, t which Chales wifled
o·lotc, ",i them to refer all their ,ontroveies, had, by
th council. . ,.

this time, undergon a viplent .change. The
fear and jealousy, with which the Enperor's firtl
fuccefes against the confederates of $malkald
had inspired the Pope, continued..to increafc.
Not satisfied with attempting to retard the pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recal
of his troops, Paul began to confider the Empe-
ror as an enemy, the weight of whofi power he
must soon feel, and against whom he could not
be too hasty in taking precautions. He foresaw
that the immediate effet of the Emperor's ac-
quiring absolute power in Germany, would be
to render him entirely matter of ll thi decisions
of the council, if it ihould continue to meet in
Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Monarch,
so ambitious, to get the command of this for-
midable engine, which he might employ at plea-
sure to limit or overturn the papal authority.
As the only method of preventing this, he de.
termined to translate the council to some city
more immediately under his own jurisdiction,
and at a greater distance from the terror of the
Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence.
An incident fortunately occurred, which gave
this measure the appearance of being necessary.

One

One or two of the fathers of the council, toge- BooK IX.
ther with some of their domefticks, happening to ,7
die suddenly, the physicians, deceived by the
symptoms, or suborned by the Pope's legates,
pronounced the distemper to be infectious and
pestilentiaL Some of the preates, ftruck-with
a panick, retired; others were impatient to be.
gone; and after a ihort consultation, the coun- March .
cil was translated to Bologda, a city subjet to T,,annted
the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial in- to Bologna.
terest, warmly opposed thisrefolution, as taken
without necessity, and founded on false or fiivo.
lous pretexts. All the Spanilh prelates, and
most of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's ex-
press command4 remained at Trent; .the reft,
to the number of thirty-four, accompanying fthe
legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced,
in that very assembly, which had been called to
heal the divisions of Christendom; the fathers
of Bologna inveighing against those who staid at
Trent, as contumacious and regardless of the
Pope's authority; while the other accused them
of being so far intimidated by the fears of ima-
ginay danger as to remove to a place where
their consultations could prove of no service to.
ward reiablifing peace and order in Ger.

I .
4 F, Paal, 248, &w

H h 3 TH

BooK lX. THB Emperor, 'at the fame-*dt; t emioyed'
B 'y' all his interest to procure the retim'ofthe coun.
sdayptom cil to Trent. But Paul, who highly'applauded
of disgust
between the his own sagacity in having taken; a, tepF which
Pope and
Eipeor, put it out of Charles's power to aqure the di-

re&ion- of that aembly, paid no regard to a
roqueft, the objeit of which was so extremelyI
obvious. The summer, was consumed in fruit-
left negociations with refpe& to this point, the
importunity of theione and the obstinacy of the
other daily increasing At last an event hap-
pened which widened the breach irreparably,
and rendered the Pope utterly averse from lift.
cning to any .proposal: that came from the Em.
peor; Charles, as has been already observed,
had ) violently';ejafperated Peter Lewis Far-
nefe, the Pope's son, by refuing to grant him
the investiture of Parma and Placentia, that he
had watched ever' since that time:'with all tht
vigilance of refeitmennt for an opportunity of
reienging that injury. He had endeavoured to
precipitate his father into open hotilities against
the Emperor, and had earnestly solicited the
King of France to invade Italy. His hatred and
resentment extended to all those whom he knew
that the Emperor favoured; he perficuted Gon-
zaga, governor of Milan, with ill offices, and
had encouraged Fiefco in his attempt upon
the life of Andrew Doria, because both Gonzaga
an Doria pofeffed a great degree of the Ems

pcor*<

peor's esteem andconfidehce. His maev.olence BooK IX.
and secret intrigues were not unknown to the 547
Emperor, -who could notcbe more desirous to
take tvetgeice on him, thanGonzago and Doria
were to be employed as his instruments in in-
fliting it. Farnese, by the profligacy. of his
lifetr and by.enormities of every kind, equal to
those committed by the worst tyrants who.have
disgraced human nature, had renderedhimfelf
so odious, that they thought any violence what-
ever ight be attempted against him. .They
fodn funid among his own fubjets, persons who
were eager, and even deemed it meritorious to
lend their hands in such a service. As he, ani-
.pated with the jealousy which usually poeffes
petty overeigns, had employed all the cruelty
and fraud, whereby they endeavour to supply
their defect of- power, in order to humble and
extirpate the nobility subjet to his government,
five noblemen of the greatest diftin&ion in Pla- The ar*ffi,

nation of

centia, combined to avenge the injuries,. which the Pope'
they themselves had suffered, as well, as those b*
which he had offered to their order. They
formed their plan in conjuntion with Gonzaga ;
but it remains uncertain whether he originally
fugetd the chqme to ,them, or only approved

wf witthey propofd, and co-operated in carry-

ing it on. , They opcerted all the previous steps
with such foresight, condu&ed their intrigues

H h 4 with

Doo X. imW fuech focmc, and displayet. fbosh
i'7 7~ h. ~Cbhio ofiheir dcfig4 t i nwy b@-

ranked among the xsofk audaciou deed$ of-tham
#gpt Q. nature .orkatjoed'bhiOry. Qxe. ·iy of 0

conapi ators. sdrpa'=d., jv pte

d,*

the .cisdt4 of Placeotia whero . aYne rql4d,
werpowexed his guards, ad mmdeW4 has
Anothey party of themtm~jo hom . itrt
of the twn,, ad ca ld upon their fegow-oite
ens to take, arms, in orddr to rc,asuwx theit
)ibert, .'The zmd1titud@ a~'i towards the ckadl,
from wbkh sthmee great gwic , a signal conoerted
with (inzaga, had beeui ired,; nd before thbe.
could guest the cau or the authors Q te ,tu
nult, 4Oey saw the. lifelofs bo4y, of theyrtcag
hanging by, the hcos. from one Qs the window,
of he citadel? But so jiverfaliy doetablir ba4
he bcom, that po onel expeslhd1 sa siheo4I;
Qisconcern t uch a f4d. evset of foyt!~n o
giseoveed the Ieaft indipationrat this.ignmi
nionus teatnen of iercig& rinco. The
oasulcation. at the fu ccfs of he. coasiracy,
was eneral, and ill app itded tie aaors in; it#
m. the deliveers. of thcir cunwy. The body.
was tunbled into the ditch that fdrounded the
citadel,, an exposed ;o the inflts ~ofthe rAb-
bit , the re* of the citizens returned 'to their
Pfuali occupations, a itotn etrawdinry
hs4 haWpenVe

BEP!ORU

*"JkFA next monIing, .ibody of troops ar. Boor.IX

riving from the frontiers Qs the Mailanefe where 547.
they had been polted in expe&ation of the event, rhl troope
took poflb~o of rM eity in the Enmperir's take Poll
rm N a dinfttd theiunbitanta i tbc)p# phcett.i
fl of their anient pr*iiloge .Parla; which
the Iipm aifta tmntempi;e ikewife to ftprin
'a&i sisyd bybke: viQii 4nd fi4^y -f. the
o~ waix5 <;wasei bA:iW wues

]Fh th*

nmmm~iaof'the garrioaf: Tb4 deM4f ,£a ,so

IavQ& with. aztf ,f .,.prenaló wódpefs»
qwmrf.emibr no i tir^r -jipe ?ffai~£o.i
9idto 1Lfie Qs: B city, .f $flh confiqriie& as
.anemia, goeatly. embittrdhis 1iW..l He
aceued: Gazaga, i opeaciftory, of having
corOmiittd a cirueLmudeiori order t epadce
OtM way: ia an uinjb uforpaton, and immedi,-
oeliy, demandedi of the Empxroc fatisfabio for
both si theformer, by the punifhmenti of Gon
-~ga fdho latter, by the roftiution of Place-
tia to his grldfon OdaLvio its rightful owncc.
but Charlo, brho, rather than quit a prize of
such valbe,, willing not ol to expose himi
fief to the imputation of. being acteffary tlothe
ciimowhih had given an oppornity offeiaing
jt, buo to bear the infamy of defrauding his
Qwn fon-in-law of the inheritance which belong-
I to him, eluded all his solicitations, and

determined

Ba^.I~,4 determined to keep poalffeioof the city, toe-

ther ih ius territorieq. ; . ,

.
tmrts the Tare solution, owing from an ambitionifo

fg. r apcio1us, as to beit~rined by no. confidera
ing and tioi eidher -of decency or juiice, tranfpoted
tih*. the ,Pope so far beynd his usual moderation and.

caution, that he wa sager totake arms again*
the Emperor in order t be avengedo , the rnur
deters of his son a4nd to recover the. inheritance
wrested from his' faily. Confkious, howevw,
of- his own iability to contendwith such- n
enemy, he warrly flicited the French Kingand
the'republick of Vknice -to join in an; ffenive
league against Charles. But Henry was ite
at that tnie on othetObjes.. His. ncient ali
the Scots, having been defeated by the Englii
in one of the greatet. battles.ever fought ber
tween these two rival nations, he was about to
fend a numerous body of veteran troops into
that country, as well to preserve it. from being
conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a new
kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying
his 'son the Dauphin to the young Queen of
Scotland. An undertaking accompanied with
such' manifest advantages, the icfcei of which
appeared to be so certain, was notto be relin.

I F. Paul, 257. Pallavic. 41, 4.. Thua. ir. i6',

Mem. de Ribier, 59. 67. Natali Comitis Hitor. I1b. tl.'
p. 64.qui

quilhed

qui&fd for the remote profped of benefit from Booc IX.
an alliance depending upon the precarious ]4.7
life of a Pope of fourscore, whohad nothing
at heart but the gratification of his own pri-
vateittecntmcnt. Instead, therefore, -of; ruh--
ing headlong into the alliance proposed,. Henry
amised the Pope with such general profef-
fiacsi-ahd promises, as might keep him from
any:thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate
hisdifferences with the Emperor, but at the:
fame: time avoided any such engagement as
might occasion an imniediate rupture between
Charies and himself, or precipitate him- into a
war ior which he. was not prepared. The Ve-
nieia;s, though nuich alarmed at feeing Pla-
centda in the hand. of he .Imperialists, imitated
thi;tary condut of the French King, as it
ne*ly'refembled the spirit with which they
thetnfelves usually' carried On their negocia-
ti6ns' .

BVT, though the Pope found that it was not Thed;et of

in his power to kindle immediately the flames of petition for
war, he did not forget the injuries, which he h, .rn-
wa obliged for the present to endure resent- cUtoTTnt.
nmnt; fettled deeper in his mind, and became
more rancorous in proportion as he. felt the dif-
ficulty of gratifying it. It was, while these fen-

'Mem. de Ribier, ii. 63. 71. 7. 8. 95. Parota Ior.
4i Vetpe. 199. 103. Tbuan. iv. 16o.

timents

BOO IX. timents of eqn y were in Mi1 force, ad the-

3547. desire of yngeance at its hgight, that the diet of

AugIburg, by theEmperor's command, peition.
ed the ope, in name of the whole Germanick
body, to.enjoin te prate who had retired to
Boog, to:return again to Trent, and to;renew.
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to..
join in this request. Having observed a confi
derablevariety of fentimencs among the Protest-
ants with refpeA to te submission which he had
required to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether itra&able, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdic
tion upon certain conditions, he employed aU
his address in order to gain o to divide them.
He threatened and over-awed the Ele&tor Pala-
tine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vegeanee
on account of the afliftance which he had given
to the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of
procuring liberty for the Landgrave, together
With the formal confirmationof his own.el&.o-
ral dignity, overcame Maurices scruples or
prevented him from ppofing what he knew
would be agreeable to the Emperor. The Elec-
tor of Brandenburg, less inflenced by religi.
ous zeal than any Prince of that age, was easily
induced to. imitate their exnaple, in aflnting to
all that the Emperor required.. The deputies
of the cities remained Rill. to be; brought over.

They

They were more tenacious of their principles, BooK IX.
and though every thing that could operate either '547.
on their hopes or fears 'was tried, the utmost
that heyr would promise was, to acknowledge the
jurifdition of the council, if effecual provision
we*re made for securing to the divines of all
patties ire' access to' that assembly, with'entire
liberty of debate; and if all points in contro-
verfywere decided according to fcripture'and
the usage of the primitive 'church. But when
the memorial containing this declaration was
presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put
in praftice a very extraordinary artifice. With-'
out reading the paper, or taking any notice of
the conditions on Which they had insisted, he
eemed to take it for granted that they had com- oa. a9
plied with his demand, and gave thanks to the
deputies fr their ful and unreserved fubmif-
sion to the decrees of the council. The de.
puties, though astonished at what they had
heard, did not attempt to set him right, both
parties being better pleased that the matter
lhould remain under this itate of ambiguity,
than to push for an explanation, which must
have occasioned a dispute, and would have led,
,pehaps, to.a rupture'.

'HAIvNo obtained this seeming fubmiflion Th Popc
from the members of the diet. to the authority dcmand.

F. Paul, 59. Slcid. 4,o. Thunn. tom. i. 155.

of

Boor IX. of the council, Charles employed that as ai

1547. argument to enforce their petition for its return

to Trent. But the Pope, from the fatisfaiion
of mortifying the Emperor, as well as from his
own aversion to what was demanded, resolved
without hesitation, that this petition hould be
reje&ted; though, in order to avoid the impu-
tation of being influenced wholly by resentment,
he had the address to throw it upon the fathers
at Bologna, to put a direct negative upon the
request. He referred to their consideration the
petition of the diet, and they, ready to confirm
U.. 1o. by their assent whatever the legates were pleased

to dictate, declared that the council could not,
in consistence with its dignity, return to Trent,
unless the prelates who, by remaining there, had
discovered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair
to Bologna, and join their brethren and that,
even after their junction, the council could not
renew its consultations with any profpe6t of be-
nefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove
their intention of obeying its future decrees to
be sincere, by yielding immediate obedience to
those which it had already past '.

TheEmpe- THIS answer was communicated to the Empe-
ror protests
againf th ror by the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted
onil of him to comply with demands which appeared to

F. Paul, 25o. Pallav. ii. 49.

be

be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac. Boo IX.
quain:ed with the duplicity of the Pope's cha- 57
rafter than to be deceived by such a gross arti-
fice; he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst
utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and,
therefore, overlooking them as mere inftru-
ments in the hand of another, he confidered their
reply as a full discovery of the Pope's inten-
tions. As he could no longer hope to acquire
such an ascendant in the council as to render it
subservient to his own plan, he saw it to be ne-
ceffary that Paul should not have it in his power
to turn against him the authority of so venerable
an assembly. In order to prevent this, he sent ,.4'.

January 16.

two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the
pretence of the legates, protested, That the
translation of the council to that place had been
unnecessary, and founded on false or frivolous
pretexts; that while it continued to meet there,
it ought to be deemed an unlawful and fchifma-
tical conventicle ; that all its decisions ought of
course to be held as null and invalid; and that as
the Pope, together with the corrupt ecclefiafticks
who depended on him, had abandoned the care
of the church, the Emperor, as its protector,
would employ all the power which God had
committed to him, in order to preserve it from
those calamities with which it was threatened.
A few days after, the Imperial anbnfliclor at
Rome demanded an audielnc o t l'Poc, at ,,,i ,,,.

Boos IX. in presence of all the Cardinals, as well as foreign

"548. ministers, protefled against the proceedings of

the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh
and difrefpeatful .

The Empe- IT was not long before Charles proceeded to
a 'erm, to carry there threats, which greatly alarmed both
serve as a
,lt of faith the Pope and council at Bologna, into execu-
in Cce.
many.' tion. He let the diet know the ill success of his

endeavours to procure a favourable answer to
their petition, and that the Pope, equally re-
gardlcfs of their entreaties, and of his services
to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent,
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom
of debate and judgment, was not to be given
up, the prolped of it was, at present, distant
and uncertain; that, in the mean time, Ger-
many was torn in pieces by religious dissensions,
the purity of the faith corrupted, and the minds
of the people disquieted with a multiplicity of
new opinions and controversies formerly un-
known among Christians; that, moved by the
duty which he owed to them as their sovereign,
and to the Church as its protector, he had em.
ployed some divines, of known abilities and

iF. Paul, 264. Pallav. 5t. Sloid. 446. Goldati Confi
Imperial. i. 561.

learning,

learning, to prepare a system of dotrine, to BOOK IX.
which all should conform, until a councils such ,-g
as they wilhed-for, could be convocated. This
fyllem was compiled by Pflug, Helding ahd
Agricola, of whom the two former were digni-
taries in the Romish church, but remarkable
for their pacifick and healing spirit; the last was
a Protestant divine, fufpeted, not without rea-
son, of having been gained by bribes and pro-
mises, to betray or milead his party on this
occasion. The articles presented to the diet of
Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contend-
ing parties, served as a model for the prelent
work. But as the Emperor's situation was much
changed since that time, and he found it no
longer necessary to manage the Protestants with
the fame delicacy as at that juncture, the con-
ccffions in their favour were not now so nume-
rous, nor did they extend to points of so much
conlequence. The treatise contained a com-
plete system of theology, conformable in almost
every article to the tenets of the Romill church,
though expressed, for the most part, in the
softet words, or in scriptural phrafcs, or in terms
of Itudied ambiguity. Every docrine, how-
ever, peculiar to Popery, was retained; and all
the rites, which the Protestants condemned as
inventions of men introduced into the worflip

VOL. III. I i #f

Bo.K IX. of God, were enjoined. With regard to two

,548. points only, some relaxation of their rigour was

granted, and ome latitude in pratice admit-
ted. Such ecclefiafticks as had married, and
would not put away their wives, were allowed,
nevertheless, to perform all the funetions of their
sacred office; and those provinces which had
been accustomed to partake of the cup, as well
as of the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, were still indulged the privilege of re-
ceiving both. Even these were declared to be
concefions for the fake of peace, and granted
only for a season, in compliance with the weak-
nels or prejudices of their countrymen x.

'Ihi which Tils system of docrine, known afterwards
t ks c tiled
th Interim by the name of the Interim, because it contained
j ''ie;,L' temporary regulations, which were to continue
J: I, no longer in force than until a free general

council could be held, the Emperor presented
to the diet, with a pompous declaration of his
sincere intention to re-establish tranquillity and
order in the church, as well as of his hopes that
their adopting these regulations would contri-
bute greatly to bring about that desirable event.
It was read in preefnce, according to form. As
soon as it was finished, the archbishop of Mentz,

I '. Paul, 270. P.llav. ii. 60. Sleid. 4 3, 457. Struv.
C'rp. to)4. Goldall. Conflit. Imper. i. 518.

prefidcat

prcfident of the electoral college, rose up hastily, BOOK IX.
and having thanked the Emperor for his un- 1548,
wearied and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the diet,
ignified their approbation of the fyfltem of
doctrine which he had prepared, together with
their resolution of conforming to it in every par-
ticular. The whole assembly was amazed at a
declaration so unprecedented and unconftitu-
tional, as well as at the EleAor's presumption
in pretending to deliver the fnfe of the diet,
upon a point which had not hitherto been the
subjed of consultation or debate. But not one
member had the courage to contradict what the
Elector had said; some being overawed by and extorts

their apprc.

fear, others remaining silent through complai- batioaofit.
fance. The Emperor held the archbishop's de-
claration to be a full constitutional ratification
of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the ob-
fervance of it, as a decree of the Empire Y.

DURING this diet, the wife and children of the Ncmlrd

fruitless so-

Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of Sa- licirations
xony, endeavoured to interest the members in be- Landfgrav',
half of that unhappy Prince, who still languished liLe'ty
in confinement. But Charles, who did not chufe
to be brought under the necessity of rejctiln
any request that came from such a refpetable

Y Sleid. 40o. F.Paul, 273. Pallav. 3.

I i 2 body,

$.OK IX. body, in order to prevent their representations,

5'4' laid before the diet an account of his tranfac-

tions with the Landgrave, together with the
motives which had at first induced him to detain
that Prince in custody, and which rendered it
prudent, as he alleged, to keep him still under
refiraint. It was no easy matter to give any
good realon for an action, incapable of being
juffified. But he thought the most frivolous
pretexts might be produced in an assembly will-
ing to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so
much as to discover that it saw his conduct in its
true colours. His account of his own conduft
was accordingly admitted to be fully satisfactory,
and after some feeble intreaties that he would
extend his clemency to his unfortunate prisoner,
the Landgrave's concerns were no more men-
tioned .

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable

imprcflion which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his resentment, invested Mau-
rice in the elctoral dignity, with all the legal
formalities. Th1; ceremony was performed,
with extraordinary pomp0), in an open court, o
near the apartment in which the degraded Elec-
tur was lkpct a prifoncr, that he could view it

slcid. i41.

from

from his windows. Even this insult did not noo:K I.
ruffle his usual tranquillity; and turning his
eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival re-
ceiving those ensigns of dignity of which he had
been itripped, without uttering one sentiment
unbecoming the fortitude which he had pre-
served amidst all his calamities'.

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the diet, Theintercm

the Emperor ordered the Interim to be pub- n f,,lvi-f
lifhed in the German as well as Latin language. ,.", .'
It met with the usual reception of conciliating '' '-..
schemes, when proposed to men heated with dli-
putation; both parties declaimed against it with
equal violence. The Protestants condemned it
as a system containing the grossest errors of
Popery, disguised with so little art, that it could
impose only on the most ignorant, or on those
who by wilfully flitting their eyes favoured the
deception. The Papists inveighed againt it, as
a work in which ome doctrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly conceal-
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated
rather to deceive the unwary, than to inllruct
the ignorant, or to reclaim liich as were encmic s
to the truth. While the Iutheran divines fiercely
attacked it, on one hand, the general of thle o-

a 'T iuan. I-ll. lil). v. 176. Struv. Corp. o; . Invcf-

titura IMalLu itii a I'Lirencrr i)o Lucinl)uro Jtcli t;l ;l'.
SiCddiiun, ii. o08.

I i 3 Ilnillic.ils

BooK IX. minicans with no less vehemence impugned it,

148. on the other. But at Rome, as soon as the con-

tents of the Interim came to be known, the in-
dignation of the courtiers and ecclefiafticks rose
to the greatest height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the
sacerdotal fundion, in presuming, with the con-
currence of an assembly of laymen, to define
articles of faith, and to regulate modes of wor-
ship. They compared this rafi deed to that of
Uzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had
touched the ark of God; or to the bold at-
tempts of those Emperors, who had rendered
their memory detestable, by endeavouring to
model the Christian church according to their
pleasure. They even affeded to find out a re-
semblance between the Emperor's conduc and
that of Henry VIII. and expressed their fear of
his imitating the example of that apostate, by
usurping the title as well as jurisdiction belong-
ing to the head of the church. All, therefore,
contended with one voice, that as the founda-
tions of ecclesiastical authority were now shaken,
and the whole fabrick ready to be overturned by
a new enemy, some powerful method of de-
fence mufft be provided, and a vigorous refftl-
gnce mufft be made, at the beginning, befuro
he grew too formidable to be opposcd.

T H

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved BooK IX.

by lnger experience in great tranifftions, as j-; .
well as by a more extensive obLicrvation of hu- Tenl ;-

mentu of
man affairs, viewed the i:ntter with more acute :l, t'upe

with r(.~r

discernment, and derive-! contort from the very tu,.
circumstance which fill-i th'm with apprehen-
sion. He was aftoniftie, tli:tt a Prince of fich
superior sagacity as the Emperor, should be lb
intoxicated with a ingle vi Tory, as to imagine
that he might give law to mankind, and decide
even in thole matters, with regard to which they
are most impatient of dominion. He law that,
by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had it in his
power to have oppressed the other, but that the
presumption of success had now inspired him
with the vain thought of his being able to do-
mineer over both. He foretold that a system
which all attacked, and none defended, could
not be of long duration; and that, for this rea-
son, there was no need of his interposing in
order to haften its fall; for as soon as the
powerful hand which now upheld it was with-
drawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be
forgotten for ever .

'IHE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered Tle. 'rme
to his resolution of carrying it into tfll execu- , cnil.iiW

, r h tie
I iterin.
bSleid. 468. F. Paul, 271, 277. Pallav. ii. 6.

I i 4 tion.

BOOK IX. tion. But though the Elector Palatine, the

Elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice, i;flu-
enced by the fame coniiderations as formerly,
seemed ready to yield implicit obedience to
whatever he hould enjoin, he met not every
where with a like obsequious fubmilIon. John
Marquis of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he
had taken part with great zeal in the war againit
the confederates of Smalkalde, refuted to re-
nounce doctrines which he held to be sacred
and reminding the Emperor of the repeated
promises which he had given his Protelant allies
of allowing them the free exercise of their reli-
gion, he claimed, in consequence of these, to
be exempted from receiving the Interim. Some
other Princes, also, ventured to mention the
fame scruples, and to plead the fame indul-
gence. But on this, as on other trying occa-
sions, the firmness of the Eletor of Saxony
was most distinguished, and merited the highell
praise. Charles, well knowing the authority of
his example with all the Protestant party, la-
boured, with the utmost carneftnels, to gain his
approbation of the Interim, and by employing
fomctimes promises of fitting him at liberty,
sometimes threats of treating him with greater
harshness, attempted alternately to work upon
his hopes and his fears. But he was alike re-
g;ardlcis of both. After having declared his
fixed belief in the dotrines of the Reformation,

" I cal-

c" 1 cannot now, said he, in my old age, aban- BooK IX.
don the principles, for which 1 early contended; ,8
nor, in order to procure freedom during a few
declining years, will I betray that good cause,
on accountof which I have iufflered tb much, and
am still willing to susser. Better for me to en-
joy, in this Iblitude, the efleem of virtuous men,
together with the approbation of my own con-
Icience, than to return into the world, with the
imputation and guilt of apoftacy, to dilgrace
and embitter the remainder of my days." By
this magnanimous resolution, he ftt his country-
men a pattern of conduct, so very difflrent froi
that which the Emperor wished him to have ex-
hibited to them, that it drew upon himn f-efli
muarls of his ditlleafure. The rigour of his con-
finemlnt was increaced ; the number of his ser-
vants abridged; the Lutheran clergymen, who
had hitherto been permitted to attend him, were
iiliniffedl; and even the books of devotion,
which had been his chief coii!olation during a
tedious imprilonment, were taken from himl
T'he Landgrave of leiie, is comi)nion in

li.sibOrtuncI, did not m .aintail the lllae con-
.lancy. lls patience and i)ontitule were both
so much exhautildi by tlie length ol hIii; (ciline-
nlcllt, that, willing to purcliale [rce)o,; at ally
pricc, lie wrote to thll Ie lnlmpct'r, oicrli-i'( noi
only to al provc of the Interiin, bll Lo ) iyill i n

b lciil - ' .

UItii'L'Ciu'v'cd

BOOK I. unreserved fubmiflion to his will in every other

1548. particular. But Charles, who knew that what-

ever course the Landgrave might hold, neither
his example nor authority would prevail on his
children or subjes to receive the Interim, paid
no regard to his offers. He was kept confined
as ftritly as ever; and while he suffered the
cruel mortification of having his conduct let in
contrast to that of the Elector, he derived not
the smallest benefit from the mean ftep which
exposed him to such deserved censure d

The fr- BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles
Cle"'" :'*" met with the most violent opposition to the In-
nle al'ntI
rcInn terim. These small commonwealths, the citi-
tls In:el irn,

zens of which were accustomed to liberty and
independence, had embraced the doctrines of
the Reformation when firtl published, with re-
markable eagerness; the bold Ipirit of innova-
tion being peculiarly suited to the genius of free
government. Among them; the Protestant
teachers had made the greatest number of pro-
felytes. The molt eminent divines of the party
were fettled there as pallors. By having the di-
rection of the schools and other flminaries of
learning, they had trained up disciples, as well
inflruced in the articles of their faith, as zeal-
ous to defend them. Such persons were not to

Slkid. 462.

be

be guided by example, or swayed by authority; B ,o IX-
but having been taught to examine and to dc-
cide in matters of controversy, thought that they
were both qualified and entitled to judge for
themselves. As soon as the contents of the In-
terim were known, they, with one voice, joined
in refuting to admit it. Augfl urg, Ulm, Straf-
burg, Conftarce, Bremen, Magdleburg, toge-
ther with many other towns of lels note, presented
remonstrances to the Emperor, setting forth the
irregular and unconstitutional manner in which
the Interim had been enacted, and bfeeclling
him not to offer such violence to their consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of doctrine
and worflip, which appeared to them repugnant
to the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on lo many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of those
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved if tey could have been formed into
one body, lay so remote from each other, that it
was easy to oppress them separately, before it was
possible for them to unite.

IN order to accomplifhl this, the Emperor Comvlrd

saw it to be requisite that his meafurcs hould be to f.,bmit.
vigorous, and executed with such rapidity as to
allow no time for concerting any common plan
of opposition. Having laid down this maxiin

BOOK IX. as the rule of his proceedings, his first attempt

-48. was upon the city of Augfbu g, which, though

overawed by the pretence of the Spanish troops,
he knew to be as much dissatisfied with the In-
terim as any in the Empire. He ordered one
body of there troops to seize the gates; he post-
ed the reft in different quarters of the city; and
Aug. 3 afemnbling all the burgesses in the town, he, by

his sole absolute authority, published a decree,
abolilhing their present form of government,
dissolving all their corporations and fraternities,
and nominating a small number of persons, in
whom he vested for the future the right of ad-
ministration. Each of the persons, thus chosen,
took an oath to observe the Interim. An act of
power, so unprecedented as well as arbitrary,
which excluded the body of the inhabitants from
any hare in the government of their own com-
munity, and fubjeted them to men who had no
other merit than their servile devotion to the Em-
peror's will, gave general disgust; but as they
durst not venture upon resistance, they were
obliged to Lubmit in silence r. From Augsburg,
in which he left a garrison, he proceeded to
Ulm, and new modelling its government with
the fame violent hand, he seized such of their
pastors as refused to subscribe the Interim, com-
mitted them to prison, and at his departure car-

Slcid. 469.

ncd

ried them along with him in chains '. By this BOOK IX.
severity, he not only secured the reception of 48
the Interim in two of the most powerful cities,
but gave warning to the reft what such as con-
tinued refractory had to exped. Te cffect of
the example was as great as he could have
wilhed, and many towns, in order to save them-
selves from the like vengeance, found it necef-
fary to comply with what he enjoined. This
obedience, extorted by the rigour of authori-
ty, produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the
law, as was barely sufficient to screen them from
punithment. Their preachers accompanied those
ceremonies, the observation of which the Intcrim
prelcribed, with such an explication of their
tendency, as served rather to confirm than to
remove the scruples of their hearers witli regard
to them. The people, many of whom 1had
grown up to mature years fincc the eflab!ifhmlnnt
of the reformed religion, and liad becn ac- 'f-
tomed to no other form of )ublick wornhipll, be-
held the pompous pageantry of the p')pil 1fsr-
vice witli contempt or horrr al( in molt
places the Romilf (ccclcli;ili. 1 , \ l') rtu;ilm:l to
take pofi'ffion of their cllmrtii.,, culd h.ardly
be protcted fiom inful, or tir miniflitions
from interruption. Thus, notwitl.lt mlJi,- the

Skcid. 47".

apparent

BooK IX. apparent compliance of so many cities, the in-
ess habitants being accustomed to freedom, sub-

mitted with reluctance to the power which now
opprelfed them. Their underfianding as well
as inclination revolted againit the dotrines and
rites imposed on them; and though, for the
present, they concealed their indignation and
resentment, it was evident that there passions
could not always be kept under restraint, but
would break out at last in effeEts proportional
to their violence .

TIePu;- CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with
dini ii tlie

t'n^,cil,,t having bended the flubborn spirit of the Ger-
folbT"t mans to ilich general fubmiflion, departed for

the Low-Countries, fully determined to compel
the cities, which still flood out, to receive the In-
terim. He carried his two priioiers the EleCtor
of Saxony and Landgrave of Hefle along with
him, either because he durst not leave them be-
hind him in Germany, or because he wiflied to
give Ilis countrymen the F1lemings this illuflri-
ous proof of the fucccfs of his arms, and the
extent of his power. Before Charles arrived at
Sept. 17. Brufels he was informed that the Pope's le-

gates at Bologna had difnilted the council by
an indefinite prorogation, and that the prelates
aflembled there had returned to their rcli)pcive

c Mcm.dc Ribier, ii. 218. Slcid. 491.

countries.

countries. Necessity had driven the Pope into BOOK IX.
this measure. By the feceflion of those who
had voted against the translation, together with
the departure of others, who grew weary of con-
tinuing in a place where they were not suffered
to proceed to buiinefs, so few and such incon-
fiderable members remained, that the pompous
appellation of a General Council could not,
with decency, be bestowed any longer upon
them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve an
assembly which was become the object of con-
tempt, and exhibited to all Christendom a mofi
glaring proof of the impotence of the Romish
See. But unavoidable as the measure was, it
lay open to be unfavourably interpreted, and
had the appearance of withdrawing tie remedy
at the very time when those for whose recovery
it was provided, were prevailed on to acknow-
ledge its virtue, and to make trial of its efficacy.
Charles did not fail to put this conflruilon
on his conduct; and by an artful comparison of
his own efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's
scandalous inattention to a point so effcntial, he
endeavoured to render the Pontiff odious to all
zealous Catholicks. At the lsame time, he com-
manded the Prelates of his faftion to remain at
Trent, that the Council might frill appear to
have a being, and might be ready, whenever it

Wv.IS

BOOK X. was thought expedient, to resume its delibera-

5j48 tions for the good of the church h

h. E_ T THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low.

,t r, is

, Countries, betide gratifying his favourite pafion

P! !i, in of travelling from one part of his dominions to
cu:Ltit. another, was to receive Philip his only on, who

was now in the twenty-firlc year of his age,
and whom he had called thither, not only that
he might be recognized by the States of the
Netherlands as heir-apparent, but in order to
facilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the ob-
ject of which, and the reception it met with,
shall be hereafter explained. Philip, having
left the government of Spain to Maximilian,
Ferdinand's eldest son, to whom the Emperor
had given the Princess Mary his daughter in
marriage, embarked for Italy, attended by a
numerous retinue of Spanilh nobles . The
squadron which ecorted him, was commanded
by Andrew Doria, who, notwithstanding his
advanced age, insisted on the honour of per-
forming, in person, the fame duty to the Ion,
which he had often discharged towards the fa-
Nov. 25. ther. IHe landed lafely at Genoa; friom thence

he went to Milan, and proceeding through

1.s9g. Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in Irulf-
April" fels. The States of Brabant, in the first place,

i PJallav. r. ii. 72. ' Ochoa, Carolca, 3(2.

and

and those of the other provinces in their order, Bor. Ix.
acknowledge his right of fuccefflon in common 5
form, and he took the customary oath to pre-
serve all their privileges inviolatek. In all
the towns of the Low-Countries through which
Philip passed, he was received with extraordi-
nary pomp. Nothing that could express the
relpeet of the people, or contribute to his
amulement was neglected; pageants, tourna-
ments, and pblick petacles of every kind
were exhibited with that expensive magnificence
which commercial nations display, when, on
any occasion, they depart from their usual max-
ims of frugality. But amidst these scenes of
festivity and pleaiure, Philip's natural severity
of temper was discernible. Youth itself could
not render him agreeable, nor his being a
candidate for power form him to courtesy. He
maintained a haughty reserve in his behaviour,
and discovered such manifest partiality towards
his Spanish attendants, together with such an
avowed preference to the manners of their coun.
try, as highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave
rile to that antipathy, which afterwards occa-
sioned the revolution to fatal to him in that part
of his dominions '.

k Harai annal. Brabant. 62z.
J Mem. de Rihicr, ii. ?. L'lvefilue Mem. de Cardr
Cranvellc, i. 2 I.

VOL. III. K k CHARLES

BOOK IX. tWARLES was long detained in the lether-

54 lands by a violent attack of the gout, which

returned upon him so frequently, and with fich
increasing violence, that it had broken to a great
degree the vigour of his constitution. He, ne-
verthelefs, did not flacken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
bourg, after a long struggle, found it necessary
to give obedience; those of Constance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were compell-
ed by force not only to conform to the Interim,
but to renounce their privileges as a free city,
to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of
Austria, and, as his vassals, to admit an Auflrian
governor and garrison m. Magdeburg, Bremen,
Hamburg, and Lubeck were the only Imperial
cities of note that still continued refracory.

m Sleid. 474. 491-
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
