0

TRE
H I S T O RY

O F
S C 0 T L A N D

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY, AND OF KING JAMES VI.

TILL
HIS ACCESSION TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW OF THE SCOTTISH HISTORY,

PRESVOUdS O THAT PSEIOD;

iND AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING ORIGINAL PAPElS.
BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL Or TE UNIVERSITT OF EDINBUROG, AND

HISTORIOORAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY IOu SCOTLAND.

VOL. II.
THE FOURT1ENTH EDITION,

WITE ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

D U B L I N:
PRINTED FOR J. MOORE, NO. 4, COLLEGE-GREEN,

'793.
' 49.:1
tl

# BOOK VII.

BOOK VII.

~W~ HILE Scotland was torn by intelline facions, Eli- 0oo X
W zabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a proje& VII.
in agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throk-' -
morton, a Cheshire gentleman, was fufpe&ed of being Tro5
deeply concerned in the design, and on that suspicion he ton's con-
was taken into cuflody. Among his papers were found two piracy a-
lifts, one of the principal harbours in the kingdom, with an abeth.
account of their situation, and of the depth of water in each;
the other, of all the eminent Roman catholics in England.
'Ihiscircumftance confirmed the suspicion againfi him, and
some datk and desperate conspiracy was uppofed ju{t ready
to break out. At firfl he boldly avowed his innocence, and
declared that the two papers were forged by thequeen's mi- -
nifters, in order to intimidate or ensnare him; and he even
endured the rack with the utmof fortitude. But being
brought a second time to the place of totture, his resolution
failed him, and he not only acknowledged ihat he had held
a secret correspondence with the queen of Scots, but disco-
vered a dfign that was formed to invade Ehgland. The
duke of Guile, he said, undertook to furnih troops, and to
condut the enterprise. The pope and king of Spain were
to fpply the money necessary. for carrying it on; all the
English exiles were eager to take arms; many of the catho-
lics at home would be ready to join them at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanish amhaffador, who was the life of the
conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the spirit of dif-
affeaion among the Englilh, or in hastening the preparations
on the continent; and by his command, he made the two
lifts, the copies whereof had been found in his possees.
This confeflion he retraced at his trial; returned to it 4Jo
after sentence was passed upon him; and retracted i'tii
more at the place of execution .

To us in the present age, who are affided in forming our

opinion of this matter by the light whih time and hiftity
have thrown upon the designs and hartaers of the prinees
of Guise, many circumstances of Throlmorton's confelfion
appear to be extremely remote from truth, w even from prto-
bability. The duke of Guise was, at that junate, far from
being in a situation to underrake foreign conquests. With-

Hollingtbhed, 1370.

C c out

3»S

o o0 r out either power or office at court; hated by the king, and

VIi. persecuted by the favourites; he had no leisure for any

c-c * thoughts of diflurbing the quiet of neighbouring fates; his
';8. vafl and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the

foundation of that famous league which shook the throne of
France. But at the time when Elizabeth detecfed this con-
fiir.icv, the close union between the House of Guise and
Philip was remarkable to all Europe; and as their great en-
terprife againll Henry 11I. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
deavourcd to conceal that under their threatenings to invade
England, Throkmorton's discovery appeared tobe extremely
probable; and l-lizabeth, who knew how ardently all the
parties mentioned by him wilhed her downfal, thought that

rfign of the could not guard her kingdom with too much care. The
Mary' ad- indiscreet zeal of the Englih txiles increased her fears. Not
arainl Eli- iatisfied w ith incessant outcries again: her severity towards
zaibe:h. the Scottith qutcn, and her cruel persecution of her catholic

subjes, not thinking it enough that one pope had threat-
ened her with the firtence of excomnmunication, and an-
other had acually pronounced it, they now began to dif-
perse books and writings, in which they endeavoured to per-
fuade their disciples, that it would be a meritorious aion
to take away her life; they openly exhorted the maids of
honour to treat her as Judith did Holofernes, and, by such
an illultrious deed, to render their own namei honourable
and sacred in the church throughout all future ages . For
all these reasons, Elizabeth not only infliced the punifl-
ment of a traitor on Throkmorton, but commanded the
Spanish ambassador inltantly to leave England; and that she
might be in no danger of being attacked within the island,
(he determined to ule her :,tmoft efforts, in order to recover
that influence over the Scottilh councils, which (he had for
some time entirely loft.

She endea- THERE were three different methods by which Elizabeth
fous to re- might hope to accomplish this; either by furnishing such
establish her
influence in effeual aid to the banihied nobles, as would enable them
Scotland,by to assume the chief diretion of affairs; or by entering into
gaining A- such a treaty with Iar, as might intimidate her son, who

being now acculom~ed to govern, would be apt to agree to
any terms raiithan resign the sceptre, or admit an affo-
ciate in.the Krone; or by gaining the earl of Arran, to ec-
cure thed'tec&n of-,the king his matter. The last was not
only the eafefti and fpeedieft, but most likely to be be success-
ful. This-lli'zabeh resolved to pursue but without laying

* C;nmd. 497.

the
386

the othertwo altogetherafide. With this view fhefent Boo
Davison, one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities VIl-
and address, into Scotland. A minister so venal as Arran, '- J

584.

hated by his own countrymen, and holding his power by the 54
most precarious of all tenures, the favour of a youngprince,
accepted Elizabeth's offers without hesitation, and deemed the
acquisition of her protecion to be the most solid foundation
of his own greafnefs. Soon after he consented to an inter- Augult 3.
view with Lord Hunfdon, the governor of Berwick, ad be-
ing honoured with the pompous title of lieutenant general
for the king, he appeared at the place appointed with .
splendid train. 'In Hunfdon's presence he renewed his pro-
mires of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English
interest, and assured him that James should enter into no ne-
gociation which might tend to interrupt the peace between
the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth began to entertain the
fame fears and jealousies concerning the king's marriage,
which had formerly disquieted her with regard to his mo.
ther's, he undertook to prevent James from listening to any
overture of that kind, until he had previously obtained the
queen of England's conlent*.

THE banished lords and their adherents soon felt the effe&s severe pr.

of Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had per- ceedings
mitted them to take refuge in her dominions, and several banihed
of her ministers were of opinion that she ought to employ lords,
her arms in defence of their cause, the fear of this was the
only thing which restrained James and his favourite from
proceeding to such extremities againfl them, as might have
excited the pity or indignation of the English, and have
prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their be-
half. But every apprehension of this kind being now re- August aa,
moved, they ventured to call a parliament, in which an aa
was pafled, attainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great
number of their followers. Their eflates devolved to the
crown, and according to the p;aaice of the Scottith mo-
narchs, who were obliged to reward the faaion which ad-
hered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the van.
quified, James dealt out the greater part of these to Arran
and his associates t.

NOR was the treatment of the clergy less rigorous. All againf te

ministers, readers, and professors in colleges, were enjoined clergy.
to subscribe, within forty days, a paper teftifying.their ap-
probation of the laws concerning the church enaaed in last
parliament. Many, overawed or corrupted by the court,

Cald. iii. 491. Melv. 31 . See Append. No. X. t Cal.. iii. 517.

C c yielded

o o t yielded obedience; others flood out. The stipeds tof the
v . latter ere sequestered, some of the more aive committed
----) to prison, atid numbers compelled to fly the kingdom. Those
1584' who complied, fell under the suspicion of aing from mer-

cenary or ambittious motives. Those who suffered acquired
high reputation, by giving such convincing evidence of their
firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of the church were
almost entirely fuppreled. In some places fRarce as many
mtiniders remained, as to perform the duties of religious
w.orship; they oon funk in reputation among the people,
and being prohibited not only from discoursing of public as-
fairs, but obliged, by the iealoufv ot the adminitlration, to
frame every sentiment and expreflion in such a manner as to
give the court no offence, their sermons were deemed lan-
guid, insipid, and contemptible; ad it beeame the general
opinion, that together with the mos virtuous of the nobles
and the most faithful of the clergy, the power ald vigour of
religion were now banished out of the kingdom *

MtANWHtLE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those

fruitless negotiatioris with the queen of Scots, which it had
become almnol matter of form to renew every year. They
served not only to amuse that unhappy princess with fme
profpe& of liberty; but furnished an apology for eluding the
solicitations of foreign powers in her behalf; and were of
uife to overawe James, by shewing him that she could at
any time set free a dangerous rival to dirpute his authority.
These treaties (he suffered to proceed to what length she
pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them off,
when they became no longer necessary. The treaty notw on
foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which prt.
ceded it; the reasons however, which rendered it ineffec-
tual were far from being frivolous.

New con- As Ctichton, ajefuit, was failing from Slanders towatds
pit Elc - Scotland, the ship on board of which he was a pfieget
,abth. happened to be chased by pirates, who, in that age, often

infdttd the narrow seas. Crichton, i geat confusion,
tore in pieces some papers in his cultody, atindthrew them
away; but, by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the hip, and they were iiniediately taken
up by fme of the passengers, who carried them to Wade,
the clerk of the privy council. He, with great industry and
pstience, joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot said to have been forted by the
king of Spain and the duke of Guise, for invading ftglaid.

* C'ald. iii. 589.T

The
589

The people were not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety oo .
occasioned by the conspiracy in which Throkmorton had vi.
been engaged, and as his dikcoveries appeared now to be -v-
eonfirmed by additional evidence, not only all their former 154.
apprehenfiona recurred, but the consternation became gene-
ral and exeeiTlve. As all the dangers, with which England
bad been threatened for fome.years, flowed either immedi,
ately from Mary herself, or from such as made use of her
name to jullify their infurre&ions and conspiracies, this
gradually diminished the compassion due to her situation,
and the English, inflead of pitying, began to fear and to hate
'her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and pacific reign the
Englilh enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened sources of
wealth unknown to their anceRors, was extremely beloved
by all her people; and regard to her safety, not less than
to their own interest, animated them against the Scottish
queen. In order to discourage her adherents, it was thought Occafons
neceflary to convince them, by some public deed, of the an a"sia-

tion in op.

attachment of the English to their own sovereign, and that poition to
any attempt against her life would prove fatal o her rival. Mary;
With this view an Afociation was'ftrnmed, the subscribers of Otober i.
which bound themselves by the most olemn oaths, " to
' defend the queen against all her enemies, foreign and do-
"mestic; and if violence should be offered to her life, in
"order to favour the title of any pretender to the crown,

they not only engaged never to allow or acknowledge the

" person or persons by whom, or for whom, such a detefl-
< able ac& hould be committed, but vowed, in the pretence
" of the eternal God, to prosecute such person or persons to
"the death, and to pursue them, with their utmost ven-
" geance, to theirutter overthrow and extirpation ." Per-
.fok*f all ranks subscribed this combinatidh with the greatest
eagernefa and unanimity t,

MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed which

design to exclude her from all right of fucceflion, hut as the greatly
certain and immediate forerunner of her deftrutima. In lasi er
order to avert this, he made such feeble efforts as were fill
in her power, and font Nauó, her secretary, to court, with
offera of more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth, in
evqsyypoint, which had been the occasion of their long en-
miiy, than all her sufferings hitherto had been able to ex-
tort . But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her ptivi-
legea as an independent sovereign, or, yielding to the necef-
.fity of her fuation, endeavoured, by -coacelions, to ooth

* State Trials, i ill. 1 Camd. 499. t Ids ibi4.

her

3s

3 oo her rival, he was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was
VIl. imputed to obflinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign assist-

s ance; her concefions were either believed to be insincere,

cr to flow from the fear of some imminent danger. Her
present willingness, how ever, to comply with any terms was
to great, that Walsingham warmly urged his mifirefs to
come to a final agreement with her*. But Elizabeth was
persuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the allociation
which had rendered her so paflive and compliant. She al-
ways imagined that there was something mysterious and de-
ceitful in all Mary's aions, and furpeaed her of carrying
on a dangerous cot refpondence with the Englih catholics,
both within and without the kingdom. Nor were her ful-
fpicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had, about
this time, written a letter to fir Francis Inglefield, urging
him to haften the execution of what she calls the reat Plot
cr De/ignmcnt, without hefirating on account of any danger
in which it might involve her life, which he would most
willingly part with, if, by that sacrifice, he could procure
relief for so great a number of the oppressed children of the

She treat-church . Inllead, therefore, of hearkening to the over-
grear ri- tures which the Scottith queen made, or granting any miti-
f ur. gation of the hardships of which she complained, Elizabeth

resolved to take her out of the hands of the earl of Shrews-
bury, and to appoint fir Amias Paulet and fir Drue Drury
to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust
xith great fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame
time, had treated Mary with gentleness and refpe&, and had
alwavs weetened harsh commands by the humanity with
which he put them in execution. The fame politeness was
not to be expeced from men of an inferior rank, whose fe-
vere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommendation to
that employment, and the only merit by which they could
pretend to gain favour or preferment t.

f raca nre As James was no less eager than ever to deprive the ba-
^te kiD''s. nifbed nobles of Elizabeth's proteaion, he appointed the

master of Gray his ambassador to thecourt of England, and
intruded him with the condua of a negotiation for that
purpose. For this honour he was indebted to the envy and
jealousy of the earl of Arrar. Gray possessed all the talents
of a courtier; a graceful person, an insinuating address,
boundless ambition, and a restless and intriguing spirit.
During his residence in France, he had been admitted into
the most intimate familiarity with the duke of Guise, and,

See Appendix, No, Xl. - StrYPe, iii. 46. $ Camd. oo.

in
S9P

in order to gain his favour, had renounced the protestant re- B
ligion, and profefled the utmost zeal for the captive queen, vi .
who carried on a secret correspondence with him, from ~' "J
w-hich l(e expeced great advantages. On his returninto
Scotland, he paid court to James with extraordinary affi-
duity, and his accomplifhml nts did not fail to make their
usual imprefTion on the king's heart. Arran, who had intfr-
duced him, began quickly to dread his growing favour; and
flattering himself, that absence would efface any sentiments
of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed him
out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in
the kingdom for an embafly of such importance; and contri-
buted to raise him to that high dignity, in order to haflen
his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dexterity in dif-
covering the proper instruments for carrying on her designs,
endeavoured, by areffes, and by presents, to secure Gray
to her inteleft. The former flattered his vanity, which was
great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which was flill
greater. He abandoned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's
direcion, and not only undertook to retain the king under
the influence of England, but aed as a spy upon the Scot-
tifh queen, and betrayed to her rival every secret that he
could draw from her by his high pretensions of zeal in her
service t.

GR AY'S credit with the Englilh court was extremely gall. His interest

ing to the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of with the
employing her power to restore them; (he found it easier to Eg"land.
govern Scotland by corrupting thekin's-favourites; and, in beccm. 31.
compliance with Gray's solicitations, he commanded the
exiles to leave the north of England, and to remove into the
heart of the kingdom. This rendered it difficult for them to
hold any correspondence with their partisans in Scotland, and
almost impofible to return thither without her permission;
Gray, by gaining a point which James had so much at heart;
riveted himself more firmly than ever in his favour; and by
acquiring greater reputation, became capable of serving Eli-
zabeth with greater success t.

ARRAN had nowpoffefsed for rome time all the power, the 8ss-

riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could Arrauon
desire, or the fondness of a prince, -who set no limits to his and info-
liberality towards his favourites, could beflow. The office lnce.
of lord chancellor, the highest and mofi important in the
kingdom, was conferred upon him, even during the life of
the earl of Argyll, who succeeded Athol in that dignity s§;

f'Strype, iii. 3oa. Melv. 316. Cald. iii; 643. Crawf. Offic.
of State, App. 447.

and '

391

oo and the public beheld, with aitonilhment and indignation,
v11. a man educated a foldicr of fortune, ignorant of law,
- and a contemner of justice, appointed to prefide-in parlia-

5 raent, in the privy council, in the court of felion, and in-

trafted with the supreme disposal of the property of his
fellow-fubjeas. He was, at the fame time, governor of the
catles of Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in
Scotland; provost of the city of Edinburgh: and as if by
all these accumulated dignities his merits were not fuffi-
ciently recompenfed, he had been created lieutenant gene-
ral over the whole kingdom. No person was admitted into
the king's presence without his permiflion; no favour could
be obtained but by his mediation. James, occupied with
youthful amusements, devolved upon him the whole regal
authority. Such unmerited elevation increased his natural
arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was no
longer content with the condition of a subjel, but pretend-
ed to derive his pedigree from Murdo duke of Albany;
and boasted openly, that his title to the crown was prefer-
able to that of the king himself. But, together with these
thoughts of royalty, he retained the meanness suitable to his
primitive indigence. His venality as a judge was scandalous,
and was exceeded only by that of his wife, who, in defi-
ance of decency, made herself a party in almoit every quef-
tion which came to be decided, employed her influence to
corrupt or te overawe the judges, and almoR openly dicated
their decisions i. His rapaciousness as a minister was in-
satiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many offices
with the estate and honours which belonged to the family
f Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands,
which had fallen to his share; he grasped at the possessions
of several of the nobles. He required lord Maxwell to ex-
change part of his eflate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil;
and because he was unwilling to quit an ancient inheritance
for a poffeflion so precarious, he ffirred up againfi him his
hereditary rival, the laird of Johnston, and involved that cor-
ner of the kingdom in a civil war. He committed to
prison the earl' of Athol, lord Home, and the master of
Caffis; the sirs, because he would not divorce his wife,
the daughter of the earl of Gowrie, and entail his eflate on
him; the second, because he was unwilling topart with some
lands adjacent to one of Arran's estates; and the third, for
refuing to lend him money. His spies and informers
filld the whole country, and intruded tbemfelves into

i CA iU 331. Scotavct'b stagdni SIRr, .

every
392

every company. The nearest neighbours iftrqfied and B OOK
feared each other. All familiar society was at an end. vii.
Even the common intercourses of humanity were inter- -
rupted, no man knowing in whom to confide, or where to £585'
utter his complaits. There is not perhaps in hitlory an
example of a minister so universally detestable to. a nation, or
who more juRtly deserved its detetation *.

ARR AN, notwithstanding, regardlefsof the sentiments, and

despising the murmurs of the people, gave a loose to his
natural temper, and proceeded to aEs still more violent.
David Home of Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having
received letters fronm ne of the bapifhed lords, about private
bufinfrs, were condemned and put to death, for holding cor-
refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drumwhafel,
and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of honour and re-
putation, were accused of having conspired with the exiled
nobles to seize the king's person. A single witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence
was unanswerable; their accuser himself not long after ac-
knowledged that he had been suborned by Arran; and all
men believed the charge against them to be groundless: they Feb. 9.
were found guilty, notwithfaanding, and suffered the death
of traitors t.

ABOUT the fame time as there gentlemen were punished Parry'scon-

for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was endangered fpireY.
by a real one. Parry, a docor of laws, and a member of the abf Et -
houfeof commons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a refo-
lute spirit, had lately been reconciled to the church of Rome;
and fraught with the zeal of a new convert, he offered to
demonfirate the sincerity of his attachment to the religion
which he had embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal
Allen had publithed a book, to prove the murder of an ex-
communicated prince to be not only lawful, but a merito-
rioqs ailion. The pope's nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the
'design. The pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and
granted him for his encouragement, a plenary indulgence,
and remission of his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote to him
a letter to the fame purpole. But thopgh he often got
access to the queen, fear, or some remaining sense of duty
restrained him from perpetrating the crime. Happily, his
intention was at lafl difcevered by Nevil, the only person
in England to whom he bad commupicated it; and having March

* hgt1w. 33 3. t Ibid. 331. C4. 5i. 794.

himself

393

EB0 himself voluntarily confessed his guilt, he suffered the pu-
vi". nifhment which it deserved *.

TH ES E repeated conspiracies against their sovereign awak.

Afcrefa- ened the indignation of the Englilh parliament, and pro-
tute, which duced a very extraordinary flatute, which, in the end, proved
r-fat' fatal to the queen of Scots. By-this law the association in

defence of Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further
enaaed, " That if any rebellion hall be excited in the

kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of her
majelly's person, by orfor any person pretending a title

"to the crown, the queen shall empower twenty-four per-
" sons by a commiflion under the great feal, to examine into,
"and pass sentence upon such offences; and after judg-
" ment given, a proclamation hall be issued, declaring the

persons whom they find guilty, excluded from any right

"to the crown; and her majefly's fubjeas may. lawfully
" urfue every one of them to the death, with all their
o aiders and abettors: and if any design againfi the life of
"the queen take effe&, the persons by orfor whom such a
"detestable a is executed, and their issues, being any
" wife assenting or privy to the fame, hall be disabled for
" ever from pretending to the crown, and be pursued to
"death in the like mannert. This a was plainly le-
velled at the queen of Scots; and whether we confider it as
a voluntary expression of the zeal and concern of the nation
for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we impute it to the in-
fluence which that artful princess preserved over her par-
liaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles of jutice or humanity. Mary was thereby ren-
dered accountable not only for her own aions, but for
those of others; in consequence of which, she might for-
feit her right of succession, and even herlife itself.

The igonur MARY justly confidered this aa as a warning to prepare
(hca wh for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's minifiers, it ispro-
treated, in- bable, had resolved by this time to take away her life; and
crcatsd. suffered books to be published, in order to persuade the na-

tion that this cruel and unprecedented measure as not
only necessary but jufit . Even that short period of her
days which remained, they rendered uncomfortable, by
every hardhip and dignity which it was in their power
to inflit. Almost all her servants were dismissed, he
was treated no longer with the refpee due to a queen; and,
though the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had

* State Trial, vol. i. 103. t Ibid. 113. $ Strype, iii. 99.

broken
394

broken her conSfitution, he was confined to two ruinous B O O K
chambers, scarcely habitable, even in the middle of summer vI1.
by reason of cold. Notwithflanding the scantiness of her 'YJ
revenue, he had been accustomed to distribute regularly
some alms among the poor in the village adjoining to the
cafile. Paulet now refued her liberty to perform this
pious and humane office, which had afforded her great con-
folation amidst her own sufferings. The castle in which
(he resided was converted into a common prison; and a
young man, fufpeaed of popery, was confined there, and
treated under her eye with such rigour, that he died of the
ill usage. She often complained to Elizabeth of these mul-
tiplied injuries, and expoftulated as became a woman and
a queen; but as no political reason now obliged that princess
to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes, far from
granting her any redress, he did not even deign to give her
any answer. The king of France, closely allied to Elizabeth,
on whom he depended for affiflance against his rebellious
fubjeas, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause with any
warmth; and all his solicitations in her behalf were feeble,
formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French am-
baffador, whose compassion and zeal for the unhappy queen
supplied the defeas in his infiruaions, remonfirated with
such vigour against the indignities to which he was ex-
posed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed at length to
have her removed to Tuthbury; though he was confined
the greater part of another winter in her present wretched
habitation *.

NEIT HER the insults of her enemies, nor the negleS of her A breach

friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as the ingrati- betwen,
tude of her son. James had hitherto treated his mother frf. "
with filial refpea, and had even entered into negotiations
with her, which gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was
not her interest that his good correspondence hould con-
tinue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, found his
favour with the king greatly increased by the success of
his embassy, persuaded him to write a harsh and undutiful
letter to his mother, in which he expressly refused to ac-
knowledge her to be queen of Scotland, or to confider his
affairs as conne&ed, in any wife, with hers. This cruel
requital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary
with sorrow and despair. " Was it for this," aid he, in March 24.
a letter to the French ambassador, " that I have endured
f' so much, in order to preserve for him thq inheritance to

Jcbb, v ii. 576-59.

"s which

395

s o o " which I have a juR right ? I am far from envying his
vnI. "authori:y in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor
- " wiih to set my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for

"1 the plealure of once embracing a on, whom I have

hitherto loved with too tender affetion. Whatever he
' either enjoys or expecs he derived it from me. From

him I never received atEftance, fipply, or benefit of any
kind. Let not my allies treat hin any longer as a king:

"he holds that dignity by my content; and ii a speedy
"repentance do not appeafe.my just resentment, 1 will
· load him with a parent's curse, and surrender my crown,

with all my pretentions, to one who will receive them
"v i:hgratiiude, and defend them with vigour ." The love
wl.icn James bore to his mother, whom he had never
known, and whom he had been early taught to confider as
one or the most abandoned perforts of her se.x cannot be
supposed ever to have been ardent; and he did pot now
take any pains to regain her favour. But whe.her her
indignation at his undutiful behaviour, added to her bi-
gored attachment to popery, prompted Mary at any time
to think ferioutly of disinheriting her son; or whether tbefe
threatenings were uttered in a sudden sally of disappointed
affcdion, it is no'. no easy matter to determine. Some
papers which are dtill extant seem to render the former not
improbable I.

D-c.csC.s CARES of another kind, and no lefsdifquieting, occupied
-:i-.c-: Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm which the had long en-

joyed, seemed now to be at an end; and such storms were
gathering in every quarter, as filled her with jus alarm.
All the neighbouring nations had undergone revolutions
extremely to her disadvantage. The great qualities which
Henry 11. had displayed in his youth, and which railed the
expecations of his fubjeas o high, vanished on his ascend-
ing the throne; and his acquiring supreme power seems
not only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired
his underflanding. He oon loft the esteem and affetion
of the nation; and a life divided between the aufltrities of
a fuperilitious devotion, andthe extravagancies of the mod
dissolute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as he
was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his profusion,
and the fondness with which he doated on many unwor-
thy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fen-
timents of the people burst out with violence. Henry had
no children, and though but thirty-two years of age, the

*Murdin, 566. Jebb. ii. 57. See Appefd. No. XII.

See A- end. No. X1I.

fuccefion
.95

fuccellon of the crown was already confidered as open. B OK
The king of Navarre, a ditlant descendant of the royal fa- vil-
niily, but the undoubted heir to the crown, was a zealous ^ '
protefiant. The profped of an event so fatal to their from the
religion, as his ascending the throne of France, alarmed all progress of
the catholics in Europe; and the duke of Guise, counte- h: league;
nanced by the people, and aided by the king of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romish faith, and the as-
ferter of the cardinal of Bburbon's right to the crown.
lri order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy was
formed, difiingifihed by the name of the Holy League. All
ranks of tmen joined in it with emulation. The firit
spread with the irresistible rapidity which was natural to re-
ligious passions in that age. The deltrusion of the Re-
formatiol, not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed
to be the objea and wish of the whole party; and the
duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zealous body,
acquired authority in the kingdom, far superior to that
which the king himself possessed. Philip II. by the con- from the
quelf of Portugal, had greatly increased the naval power of rower cf
Spain, and had at lads reduced under his dominions all that Philip 11
portion of the continent which lies beyond the P'yrenean
mountains, and which nature seems to have destincd to
form one great monarchy. William prince of Orange, who
first encouraged the inhabitants of the Netherlands to assert
their liberties, and whose wisdom and valour formed and
proteaed the riling commonwealth, had fallen by the'hands
of an aaflin. The superior genius of the Prince of Parma
had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in the Lov
Countries: all his enterprizes, concerted with consummate
$kill, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended
with success; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity,
were on the point of falling under the dominion of their an-
cient mker.

NON of those circumflances, to which Elizabeth had hi- Her wife

therto owed her security, existed any longer. She could and vigor-
derive no advantage from the jealousy which had fubfilted OUscondu.e
between France and Spain ; Philip, by means of his confe-
deracy ith the duke of Guise, had an equal sway in the
councils of both ingdoms. The hugonots were unable to
contend with the power of the league: and little could
be expected from any diversion they rhight create. Nor
was it probable that the Netherlands could long employ
the arts, or 'divide the firength of Spain. In this fitua-
tion of the affairs of Europe, it became neceffary'for Eliza-
beth to form a new plan of condu&t; and her wisdom in

forming

B 00 K forming it was not greater than the vigour with which tie
VI. carried it on. The measures most uitable to her natural

e temper, and which he had hitherto pursued, were cau-

tious and safe; those which he now adopted were enter-
prifing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by necef-
fity, not only of defending herself with spirit, but of attack-
ing her enemies with a boldness which averted danger from
her own dominions. She immediately furnished the hugo-
nots with a considerable supply in money. She carried
on a private negotiation with Henry III. who, though com-
pelled to join the league, hated the leaders of it, and wished
for their deflruaion. She openly undertook the protec-
tion of the Dutch commonwealth, and ent a powerful
army to its afifance. She endeavoured to form a general
confederacy of the protestant princes, in opposition to the

Reolv-e- to popish league. She determined to proceed with the utmost
puni' rigour againfl the queen of Scots, whole fufferings.and
Mary' and rights afforded her enemies a specious pretence for invad-
kirg. ing her dominions. She resolved to redouble her endea-

vours, in order to effee a closer union with Scotland, and
to extend and perpetuate her influence over the councils of
that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce moll of the

Scottish courtiers to promote all her designs. Gray, fir
John Maitland, who had been advanced to the office of
secretary, which his brother formerly held, fir Lewis Bel-
lenden, the justice clerk, who had succeeded Gray as the
king's resident at London, were the persons in whom he
chiefly'confided. In order to direc and quicken their mo-
'4.r 29. tions, she dispatched fir Edward Wotton along with Bel-

lenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, and
entertaining; he excelled in all the exercises for which James
had a paflion, and amused the young king by relating the
adventures which he had met with, and the observations he
had made during a long residence in foreign countries;
but under the veil of there superficial qualities, he concealed
a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high
favour with James, and while he was seemingly attentive
only to pleasure and diversions, he acquired influence over
the public councils, to a degree which was indecent for a
stranger to possess ..

Propoft. a NOTHIING, however, could be more acceptable to the.na-
!-ague with tion, than the proposal he made of a lri& alliance betwen
Scotland.

Mclv'. 317.
398

the two kingdoms, in defence of the refotmed religion. oos
The rapid and alarming progrels of the popish league seemed vii.
to call on all protestant princes to unite for the preservation -J
of their common faith. James embraced the overture with 's5s-
warmth, and a convention of estates empowered him to con- July 29.
elude uch a treaty, and engage to ratify it in parliament .
The alacrity with which James concurred in this measure
mull not be wholly acribed either to his own zeal, or to
Wotton's addrels; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's libe-
rality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the
young king, he fettled on him an annual pension of five
thousand pounds: the fame fum which her father had al-
lotted her before (he acended the throne. This circum.
fiance, which she took care to mention, rendered a fum,
which in that age was far from being inconsiderable, a very
acceptable present to the king, whose revenue;, during a
long minority, had been almoll totally dissipated §.

BuT the chief objection of Wotton's intrigues was to ruin Undermines

Arran. While a minion so odious to the nation continued Arrar.'.
to govern the king, his affitlance could be of little advantage pow"-
to Elizabeth. And though Arran, ever since his interview
with Hunfdon, had appeared extremely for her interest, he
could place no great confidence in a man whose condua wasfo
capricious and irregular, and who, notwithstanding his pro-
teflations to the contrary, fill continued a secret corref-
pondence both with Mary and with the duke of Guise.
The banished lords were attached to England from affecion
as well as principle, and were the only persons among the
Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, she could thoroughly
truR. Before Bellenden left London, they had been fum-
moned thither, under colour of vindicating themselves from
his accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the mofl
proper measures for reftoring.them to their country. Wotton
pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen it fr execution;
and it was greatly facilitated by an event neither uncommon
nor considerable. Sir John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft,
the English and Scottiih wardens of the middle marches,
having met, according to the cutlom of the borders, about
midsummer, a fray arose, and lord Ruffel, the earl of Bed-
ford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This scuffle was
purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a
design formed by Ker, at the infRigation of Arran, to in-
volve the two kingdoms in war. She infifed that both
should be delivered up to her; and though James eluded

t Spotfw. 339, § Cald. iii. 50,

that

Aook that demand, he was obliged to confine Arran in St.
vl1. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. During his abrence from

court, Wotton and his associates carried on their intrigues

,T.t he without interruption. By their advice, the banilhed nobles
.nihed endeavoured to accommodate their differences with lord
aob. j John and lord Cland, the duke of Chatelherault's two sons,
o: :. wxl.om Morton's tio!ence had driven out of the kingdom.

Their common sufferings, and common interest, induced
both parties to br- in oblivion the ancient discord which
lh.d flfibnfihe between the honfes of Hamilton and Douglas.
!v; Elizabeth's permison, they returned in a body to the
hiJrde s of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered
favc::r, infilltd on putting the kingdom in a posture of de-
fr-ce: hut Gray; ,c:ienden, ard Maitland secretly thwarted
fll his rreafures. Somne necessary orders they prevented
from bl inZ issued; o:!ers tilhe rendered ineffeaual by the
mrn!ier of eecttinon; and ll of them were obeyed lowly,
and with reluftarce. t

\W oTrTC's fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with

nnother and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to
seize the kindr, and to carry him by force into England.
But the design uas happily discovered; and, in order to
avoid the puvnifhment his treachery merited, he departed
without taking leave .

V- -I re-a-l MSE A\HVl i. E the banished lords haitened the execution of
-:o Scot- their enterprise; and as their friends and vaflals were now

c;.' T'i ready to join ther they entered Scotland. Wherever they

ci:-d to tS:e came, they were welcomed as the deliverers of their country,
k:in-. and the molt fervent prayers were addressed to heaven for

the success of their arms. They advanced, without losing a
moment, towards Stirling, at the head of ten thouand men.
The king, though he had assembled an army filperior in
number, could not venture to meet them in the field, with
troops whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who at
befd were far from being hearty in the cause; nor was
either the town or caflle provided for a siege. The gates,
however, of both were flitr, and the nobles encamped at St.
:."" . Ninian's. That fame night they surprised the town, or

more probably it was betrayed into their hands; and Arran,
who had undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save hinr-
self by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invested the
cafle, in which there were not provifiois for twenty-four
hours; and James was neceflitated immediately to hearken
to terms of accommodation. They were not so elated with

$ Srotw. 34C. Melv. 35.

success
eo

success as to urge extravagant demands, nor was the king o
unwilling to make every reasonable conceflion. They ob- VI'.
rained a pardon, in the moll ample form, of all the offences ' -
which they had committed; the principal forts in the king-
dom were, by way of security, put into their hands; Craw-
ford, Montrose, and colonel Stewart, were removed from
the king's presence; and a parliament was called, in order
to eftablith tranquillity in the nation .

THOU GH a great majority in this parliament confifed of A prlia

the confederate nobles and their adherents, they were far Dmert.
from discovering a vindiaive spirit. Satisfied with pro-
curing an at, refloring them to their ancient honours anti
elates, and ratifying the pardon granted by the king, they
seemed willing to forget all palt errors in the adminillration,
and spared James the mortification of feeing his ministers
branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone, de-
prived of all his honours, firipped of his borrowed spoils,
and declared an enemy to his country by public proclama-
tion, funk back into obscurity, and must henceforth be men-
tioned by his primitive title of captain James Stewart. As
he had been, during his unmerited profperitv, the objeE of
the hatred and indignation of his countrymen, they beheld
his fall without pity, nor did all his sufferings mitigate their
resentment in the leafy degree.

THE clergy were the only body of men who obtained no l as-

redress of their grievances by this revolution. The con-
federate nobles had all along affeled to be confidered as
guardians of the privileges and discipline of the church. In
all their manifestos they had declared their resolution to re-
store these; and by that popular pretence had gained many
friends. It was now natural to expeE some fruit of there
promises, and some returns of gratitude towards many of
the most eminent preachers who had suffered in their cause,
and who demanded the repeal of the laws pafged the pre-
ceding year." The king, however, was resolute to maintain
these laws in full authority; and as the nobles were ex-
tremely solicitous not to disgust him, by infiiting on any
disagreeable requefi, the claims of the church in this, as well
as in many former inflances, were sacrificed to the interest
of the laity. The miniflers gave vent to their indignation
in the pulpit, and their impatience under the disappoint-
ment broke out in Ibme expressions extremely difrefpeaful
even, towards the king himself .

* Cald. iii. 79. + Spotw. 343.

Dd $pts.333

4oa
D d

7" 3

0 0 K 'THE archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the effecs of
vii. their anger. The provincial fynod of Fife fumnmoned him
t--__ to appear, and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of

1586. former assemblies, in prefuning to exercise the funaion of

a bithop. Though he refuted to acknowledge the jurif-
diaion of the court, and appealed from it to the king, a
sentence of excommunication, equally indecent and irre-
gular was pronounced against him. Adamson, with no less
indecency, thundered hs arcliepifcopal excommunication
against Melvil, and ome other of his opponents.
Ari! 1i. SooN after, a general assembly was held, in which the

king with some difficulty, obtained an at, permitting the
name and office of bishop still to continue in the church.
The power of the order, however, was considerably re-
trenched. The exercile of discipline, and the infpecdion of
the life and doEtrine of the clergy, were committed to pref-
byteries, in which hifhops should be allowed no other pre-
eminence but that of presiding as perpetual moderators.
They themselves were declared to be subjeE, in the fame
manner as other paflors, to t'e jurifdiaion of the general
assembly. As the difculion of the archhifhop's appeal might
have kindled unusual heats in the assembly, that affair was
terminated by a compromise. He renounced any clai of
supremacy over the chuich, and promised to demean him-
self fuitabiy to the characer of a bishop, as described by
St. Paul. The assembly, without examining the foundations
of the sentence of excommunication, declared that it hould
be held of no effet, and restored to him all the privileges
which he enjoyed before it was pronounced. Notwithfland-
ing the extraordinary tenderness hewn for the honour of
the fynod, and the delicacy and refpeA with which its juril-
diaion was treated, several members were so zealous as to
protest against this decision .

A ipe THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons so
-ith Eng- warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the
clirded. two kingdoms, which had been proposed last year, met with

no interruption, but from D'Efneval the French envoy.
James himself firfi offered to renew the negotiation. Eli-
zabeth did not susser such a favourable opportunity to flip,
and instantly dispatched Randolph to conclude a treaty,
'2's 5· which he so much desired. The danger to which the pro-

tefltant religion was eposed, by the lite combination of the
popi-h powers for its defirufion, and the necessity of a
.tria confederacy among those who had embraced the Re-

Cald. iii. U4. Spotfw. 346.

formation
40a

formation, in order to obftru& their pernicious designs, Boo
were mentioned as the foundation of the league. The chief VI1.
articles in it were, that both parties should bind themelves ó-'
to defend the evangelic religion; that the league hould be
offensive and defensive against all who shall endeavour to
diflurb the exercise of religion in either kingdom; that if
one of the two parties be invaded, the other, notwithstanding
any former alliance, should not, direcly or indirecly, affil
the invader; that if England he invaded in any part remote
from Scotland, James should affit the queen with two
thousand horle and five thousand foot; that if the enemy
landed or approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the
king should take the field with his whole forces, in the fame
manner as he would do in defence of his own kingdom.
Elizabeth, in return, undertook to a in defence of Scot-
land, if it should be invaded. At the fame time she assured
the king that no fep should be taken, which might derogate
in any degree from his pretensions to the Englilh crown *.
Elizabeth expressed great fatisfaaion with a treaty, which
rendered. Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dangerous
neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that
fide, which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none ot them
had been ble to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with
the blefings of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed
during a considerable period, had so far abated the violence
of national antipathy, that the king's conduc was universally
acceptable to his own people -.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time, exposed,

James to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply
engaged in the conlpiracy against the life ot the king his
father. Both Mort9n and Binny ,two of his own servants,.
who suffered for that crime, had accused him of being pre-
sent at the murder t. He had escaped punishment by fying
into England, and James had often required Elizabeth to
deliver up a person so unworthy of her protecion. He now
obtained a licence, from the king himself, to return into.
Scotland; and after undergoing a mock-trial, calculated to
conceal, rather than to dete his guilt, he was not only
taken into favour by the king, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable character of his ambassador.
James was now of such an age, that his youth and inex-
perience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this indecent tranf-
ation. It mufl be imputed to the exceflive facility of his

" Spotfw. 351,. f Camd. 5 3.
& See Append. N°. XIV. Arnot, Grim. Trials, 7, &c.

D d temper,

403

B O O K temper, which often led him to gratify his courtiers at the

vii. expence of his own dignity and reputation .

1- - NOT long after, the inconsiderate affe&idn of the Eng-
R o 6Ba liih catholics towards Mary, and their implacable resent-
bisngon's ment against Elizabeth, gave rife to a conspiracy which
confpiacy proved fatal to the one queen, left an indelible (lain on the
zatbc t. reputation of the other, and presented a spectacle to Europe,

of which there had been hitherto no example in the history
of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, andHodgfon, prierts

educated in the seminary at Rheims, had adopted an ex-
travagant and enthufiafiic notion, that the bull of Pius V.
against Elizabeth was diaated immediately by the Holy
Ghost. This wild opinion they instilled into Savage, an
officer in the Spanish army, noted for his furious zeal and
daring courage; and persuaded him that no service could
be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an,
AF-il 6. excommunicated heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the

crown of martyrdom, bound himself by a solemn vow to
kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a pragmatical priest of that fe-
minary, had at that time come over to Paris, and solicited
Mendoza the Spanish ambassador there, to procure an inva-
sion of England, while the affairs of the league were so
prosperous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so many
of the queen's bell troops into the Netherlands. Paget
and the English exiles demonitrated the fruitlessness of such
an attempt unless Elizabeth were first cut off, or the in-
vaders secured of a powerful concurrence on their landing.
If it could be hoped that either of there events would hap-
pen, effectual aid was promised; and in the mean time
Ballard was sent back to renew his intrigues.
iYi 15,. HE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a

young gentleman in Derbyshire, of a large fortune, and
many amiable qualities, who having contraced, during his
residence in France, a familiarity with the archbishop of
Glasgow, had been recommended by him to the queen of
Scots. He concurred with Paget, in confidering the death
of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any invasion.
Ballard gave him hopes that an end would oon be put to
her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now
in London wailing for an opportunity to strike the blow.
But Babington thought the attempt of too much import-
once, to rely on a single hand for the execution of it, and
propoled that five resolute gentlemen should be joined with

* Spotfw. 348. Cald. i. 917.

Savage
404

Savage in an enterprise, the success of which was the foun- a OO
dation of all their hopes. He offered to find out persons vla.
willing to undertake the service, whose honour, secrecy, and L*
courage they might safely trust. He accordingly opened i586
the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salilbury, Charles
Tilney, ChidiocTichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers,
Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John Jones,
and Robert Polly; all of them, except Polly, whose bufrling
forward eal introduced him into their society, gentlemen,
of good families, united together in the bonds of private
friendship, flrengthened by the more powerful tie of reli-
gious eal. Many consultations were held; their plan of
operations was at last fettled; and their different parts as- June.
signed. Babington himself was appointed to rescue theThe chene
queen of Scots; Salisbury, with ome others, undertook to of the con-
excite several counties to take arms ; the murder of the queen,
the moRl dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. So totally
had their bigoted prejudices extinguished the principles of
honour, and the sentiments of humanity suitable to their
rank, that, without scruple or compuntion, they under.
took an aion which is viewed with horror, even when
committed by the meanelf and moll profligate of mankind
This attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less
honourable than it was desperate; and in order to perpe-
tuate the memory of it, they had a pi&ure drawn contain-
ing the portraits of the fix aflaffins, with that of Babington
in the middle, and a motto intimating that they werejointly
embarked in rome hazardous design.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and im- Discovered

prudent infiance of vanity, seem to have thought a disco- by Walfing.
very scarcely possible, and neither diftrulted the fidelity of ham
their companions, nor doubted the success of their under-
taking. But while they believed that their machinations
were carried on with the motl profound and impenetrable
secrecy, every flep they took was fully known to Walfing-
ham. Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into
the conspiracy, with no other design than to betray his affo-
ciates. Gilbert Gifford too, having been sent over to Eng-
land to quicken the motions of the confpiratoFs, had been
gained by Walsingham, and gave him Cure intelligence of
all their projecs. That vigilant minilter immediately im-
parted the discoveries which he had made to Elizabeth;
and without communicating the matter to any other of the
counsellors, they agreed, in order to underfiand the plot

more

40

B o o K more perfealy, to wait until it was ripened into some form,

vil. and brought near the point of execution.

t.- -'. A AT lail, Flizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to
Th'are expole her own lite, and to tempt Providence any farther.
fcized and Ballard, the prine mover in the whole confpiracvy was ar-
spunid. refled. His associates, disconcerted and itruck with aflo-
Au;U:r 4 nifhment, endeavoured to save themselves by flight. But

within a few davs, all of them, except Windlor, were
itizd in different places of the kingdom and committed to
the Tower. Though they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit of aflaflins; and,
influenced by fear or by hope, at once confessed all that
they knew. ' he indignation ot the people, and their im-
patience to eve.,ge such an execrable combination against
the life of their sovereign, hafleed their trial, and all of

Sept. Is. them uffered the-,death of traitors *.
Mar i ac- THUS far Elizabeth's conduEt may be pronounced both
cufcd ofbc- prudent and laudable, nor can she be accused of violating
ing an ac- any law of humanity, or of taking any precautions beyond
the conipi- what ere neceliar-y for her own safety. But a tragical
lacy. scene fllowed, with regard to which posterity will pass a

very different judgment,

THE frantic zeal of a few ash young men accounts sus-

ficiently for all the wild and wicked designs which they had
formed. But this was not the light in which Elizabeth
and her ministers chose to place the conspiracy. They
wished to persuade the nation that Babington and his as-
fociates hould be confidered merely as instruments em-
ploved by the queen of Scots, the real though secret author
of Io many attempts againf the life of Elizabeth, and the
peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters, which
thev acribed to her in support of this charge. These, as
the evve out, had come into their hands by the following
singular and mysterious method of conveyance. 'Gifford,
on his return into England, had been trufled by some of
the exiles with letters to Miary ; but in order to make a trial
of his fidelity and address, they were only blank papers
made up in that form. These being tafely delivered by
tim, he was afterwards employed without farther scruple.
Walfirgham having found means to gain this man, he,
by the permiflion of that minifier, and the connivance of
Paalet, bribed a tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chart-
ley, whither Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the
letters in a hole in the wall of the cattle, covered with a

Caxnd. 515. State Trials, vol. i. ito

oore
40o6

toofe flone. Thence they were taken by the queen, and o o
in the fame manner her anfwets returned. All these were vii.
carried to Waliingham; opened by him, decyphered, fealed --
again so dexterously that the fraud cou.d riot be perceived, s'
and then transmitted to the persons to whom they were di-
reced. Two letters t Babington, with several to Men-
doza, Paget, Englefield, and the English fugitives, were
procured by this artifice. It was given out that in these
letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and even of the
alaffination; that (he direaced them to proceed with the
utmost circumfpe6ion, and not to take args until foreign
auxiliaries were ready to join them; that she recommended
the earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young earl of
Northumberland, as proper persons to conduct and to add
reputation to their enterprise; that she advised them, if
possible, to excite at the fame time some commotion in Ire-
land; and above all, besought them to concert with care the
means of her own escape, fuggelting to them several expe-
dients for that putpofe.

ALL there circumfiances were oened at the trial of the The indig.
eonfpirators; and while he nation was under the influence nation of

the Engliai

of those terrors which the association had railed, and the agaift her
late danger had augmented, they were believed without he- on that ac,
fitation or inquiry, and spread a general alarm. Mary's co"ur.
teal for her religion was well known; and in that age, ex-
amples of the violent and sanguinary spirit which it inspired
were numerous; All the cabals against the peace of the
kingdom for many years had been carried on in her name;
and it now appears evidently, said the Englith, that the
safety of the one queen is incompatible with that of the
other. Why then, added they, should the tranquillity of
England be sacrificed for the fake of a iranger? Why is
a life so dear to the nation exposed to the repeated assaults
of an exasperated rival ? The cafe supposed in the affocia-
tion has now happened, the sacred perlon of our sovereign
has been threatened, and why should not an injured people
execute that just vengeance which they had vowed?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to Eli-

zabeth and her ministers. They themselves had at firtl rrole to
propagated them among the people, and they now served proceed to
both as an apology and a motive for their proceeding to the utmost
such extremities against the Scottish queen as they had long extremiti
meditateh. The more numerous the injuries were which
Elizabeth had heaped on Mary, the more he feared and
hated that unhappy queen, and came at last to be persuaded
that there could be no other security for her own life, but the

deith

4»7

Bo o K death of her rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted
vii. lo zealouflv all her measures with regard to Scottish affairs,
:. -y-J and had aed with so little reserve in opposition to Mary,
Is86. that they had reason to dread the molf violent effets of her

lefentment, if ever he should mount the throne of England.
From this additional consideration they endeavoured, with
the utmost earnftnefs, to hinder an event so fatal to them-
ftlve,, b confi ming their mifirefs's fear and hatred of the
conttifh queen.

Hr dom.r- M wEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unufualvigilancey
tics. .rp-, and gre.it cate as taken to keep her ignorant of the disco-
&c :iizcd. e' y ot the conspiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at latlt ent

fiom court to acquaint her both f it, and of the imputation

ith hich the w.:s loaded as accessary to that crime; and
he furprnfd her with the account just as Ihe had got on
hor'eback to ride out along with her keepers. She was
ftluck iih aitcnifhinent, and would have returned to her
apartment, hut she was not permitted; and in her absence,
her private closet was broke open, her cabinet and papers
were seized, ealed, and sent up to court. Her principal
domestics too were arrefled, and committed to different
keepers. Nsu and Curie, her two secretaries, the one a
:;ative of Fra. ce, the other of Scotland, were carried pri-
1ciners to London. All the money in her custody, amount-
ing to little more than two thousand pounds, was secured '.
And after leading her about for some days, from 6ne gen-
tleman's house to another, he was conveyed to Fotheringay,
a strong caftie in Northamptonshire .

Deberes No further evidence could now be expe&ed against Mary~

concerrng and nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate.
the method \ith regard to this, Elizabeth, and those ministers in
of proceed- whom he chiefly confided, seem to have taken their refolu-

tion; but there was still great variety of sentiments among
her other counfeliors. Some thought it sufficient to difiifs
all Miary's attendants, and to keep her under such close re-
firaint, as would cut off all poffibiliry of corresponding
with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her constitution,
broken by long confinement, and her spirit dejeEed with
so many cares, could not long support such an additional
load, the queen and nation would oon be delivered from
all their fears. But though it might be easy to secure Mary's
own person, it was impossible to diminish the reverence
which the Roman catholics had for her name, or to extin-
guifh the compassion with which they viewed her sufferings,

* See Appendix, V' XV.

1- Cunsd. 5t
w i

while
40o

*hile such sentiments continued, infurretions and invafons B o o C
would never be wanting for her relief, and the only effet vii
of any new rigour would be to render there attempts more --
frequent and more dangerous. For this reason the expe- '586.
dient was rejected.

A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the mod unexampled, Determines!

was judged the most unexceptionable method of proceed- to try her
ing; and it had, at the fame time, a fembiance of jultice, publicly.
accompanied with an air ot dignity. It was in vain to
search the ancient records for any flatute or precedent to
justify such an uncommon flep, as the trial of a foreign
prince, who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but had
fled thither for refuge. The proceedings againil her were
founded on the a of last parliament, and by applying it
in this manner, the intention of those who had framed
that severe statute became more apparent .

-ELIZABETH resolved that no circumnlance of pompor so-

lemnity-fhould be wanting, which could render this tranf-
atlion such as became the dignity of the perron to be tried.
She appointed, by a commiflion under the great feal, forty
persons, the nioft illuflrious in the kingdom by their birth
or offices, together with five of the judges to hear and
decide this great cause. Many difficulties were ltarted by
the lawyers about the name and title by which Mary should
be arranged; and while the essentials of justice were so
grosly violated, the empty forms of it were the objets
of their care. They at length agreed that she should be
filed " Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late king

of Scots, commonly called queen of Scots and dowager
t' of France t."

AFTER the many indignities which she had lately suffered,

Mary could no longer doubt but that her destruction, was
determined. She expe&ed every moment to end her days
by poison, or by some of those secret means usually employed
againfl captive princes. Left lhe malice of her enemies, at
the fame time that it deprived her of life, should endeavour
likewise to blast her reputation, she wrote to the duke of
Guise, and vindicated herself in the flrongeft terms, from
the imputation of encouraging or of being accessary to the
conspiracy for assassinating Elizabeth . In the solitude of
her prison, the strange resolution of bringing her to a public
trial had not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing
so unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal majefly, once
enter into her thoughts.

Cared. 519 Johaft. it. 1t.
i l. Strype, ii. V6. f Jcbb, i. 283.

ON

409

J o o ON the eleventh of Oaober, the commissioners appoiniit

vl" by Flizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they
'- S' delivered a letter from their overeign to Mary, in which;

Th-trial at after the bitterest reproaches and accusations, he informed
Fo-crio- her; that tgaid for the happiness of the nation had at last

rendered it necessary to make a public inquiry into her cons
duO, and therefore required her, as the had lived so long
under the poteAton of the laws of England, to submit now
to the trial hich they ordained to be taken of her crimes:

Mary re- Mary, though urprized at this mefflge, was neither appalled
sue at f6rR. at the danger nor unmindful of her own dignity. She pro-

telted in the mofi olemn manner, that he was innocent of
the crime laid to her charge, and had never countenanced
any attempt aRainfl the life of the queen of England; but at
the tame time retufed to acknowledge the jurifdiaion of her
commiflioners. ",I came into the kingdom," said he " an
" independent sovereign, to implorethequeen's affitance, not
" to fujet myfelfto her authority. Nor is'my spirit so
· broken by its pall misfortunes, or so intimidated by present
" dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbecoming the majetty

of a crowned head, or that will disgrace the anceflors from -

L whom I am descended, and the son to whom I hall leave
"my throne. If I mull be tried, princes alone can be my

peers. The queen of England's fubjeds, however noble
' their birth may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. '/ivet

since my arrival in this kingdom I have been confined as a
' prisoner. Its laws never afforded me any protecion.
' Let them not now be perverted, in order to take away my

life."
THE commhilioners employed arguments and intreaties to

overcome Mary's resolution, They even threatened to pro-
ceed according to the forms of law, and to pass sentence
againit her on account of her contumacy in refufimg to plead;
ihe perfited, however, for two days to decline their jurif-
diction. An argument used by Hatton, the vice-chamberlain
at lait prevailed. He told her, that, by avoiding a trial, she
injured her own reputation, and deprived herself of the only
opportunity of setting her innocence in a clear light; and
that nothing would be more agreeable to them, or more
acceptable to the queen their mistress, than to be convinced,
by undoubted evidence, that she had been unjustly loaded
with foul aspersions.
Colents No wonder pretexts so plausible ifhuld impore on-the un-

ewtvcr to wary queen, or that he, unaffifed at that time by any friend
X* 0 or counsellor, hould not be able to detec and elude all the

artificec of Elizabeth's ab'.e m:initers. In a situation equally

melancholy,
41t

1elancholy, and under circumstances nearly similar, her B oon
grandson, Charles I. refuled, with the utmof firmness, to VIl.
acknowledge the usurped juiifdi&ion of the high court of.' " -
juiice; and posterity has approved his eondua, as suitable
to the dignity of a king. If Mary was less conltant in her
resolution, it must be imputed solely to her anxious desire
of vindicating her own honour.

AT her appearance before the judges, who were feated in oa. 14.

the great hall of the cafle, where they received her with
much ceremony, she took care to protefl, that, by conde-
scending to hear and to give an answer to the accuations
which hould be brought against her, he neither acknow-
ledged the jrifdiiion of the court, nor admitted of the
validity and juilice of those as by which they pretended to
try her.

THE chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured
to vindicate the authority of the court.

'TRENl Elizabeth's attorney and folicitoropened the charge The accfA.

against her, with all the circumstances of the late conipiracy. tion

,agan.

Copies of Mary's letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield,
and Paget, were produced. Babington's confeflion, those of
Ballard, Savage, and theother conspirators, together with the
declarations of Nau and Curie, her secretaries, were read,
and the whole ralnged in the most specious order which the
art of the lawyers could devise, and heightened by everfco-
lour their eloquence could add.

MARY listened to their harangues attentively, and without

emotion, But at the mention of the earl of Arundel's name,
who wxas then confined in the Tower, he broke out into
this tender and generous exclamation: " Alas ! how much
" has the noble house of Howard suffered for my fake !"

WHEN the queen's counsel had finihfed, Mary flood up, Her de.

and with great magnanimity, and equal presence of mind, fencE
began her defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her
own situation, that after a captivity of nineteen years, during
which she had suffered treatment no less cruel than unme-
rited, (he was at last loaded with an accusation, which
tended not only to rob her of her right of succession, and to
deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her name with in-
famy to future ages: That, without regarding the sacred
rights of sovereignty, he was now fubje.ted to laws framed
against private persons; though an anointed queen, com-
manded to appear before the tribunal of fubjeQs; and, like
a cormon criminal, her honour exposed to the petulant
tongues of lawyers, capable of wresting her words, and'of
miifreprefenting her aaions: that, even in this dishonourable

situation,

4"t

0o o situation, lhe was denied the privileges usually grantedkto
VIz. criminals, and obliged to undertake her own defence, with-

out theprefence of any friend with whom to advise, without
the aid of counsel, and without the use of her own papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accu-

fation. She absolutely denied any correspondence with Ba-
bineton or Ballard: copies only of her preten4ed letters to
thrm were produced; though nothing less than her hand-
writing or subscription was sufficient to convia her of such
an odious crime : no proof could be brought that the letters
were delivered into her hands, or that any answer was re-
turned b her direalon: the conftefions of wretches con-
demned and execu;ed for such a deteflable aion, were of
little weight; tear or hope might extort from them many
ihings inconfiflent with truth, nor ought the honour of a
queen to be trained by such vile teflimony. The declaration
of her fecreralies was not more conclusive: promises and
threats might eaf;iy overcome the resolution of two liran-
gers; in order to creen themselves, they might throw the
blame on her; but they could discover nothing to her pre-
judice, without violating, in the first place, the oath of
fidelity which they had iforn to her; and their perjury, in
one instance, rendered them unworthy of credit in another:
the letters to the Spanilh ambassador were either arothing
more than copies, or contained only what was perfectly in-
nocent: "1 have often," continued he, made such es-
' forts for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to a
" human creature. Convinced, by the fad experience of
" so many years, that it is in vain to expe& it from the
" justice or generofit/ of the queen of England, I have fre-
" quently olicited foreign princes, and called upon all my
" friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I
"have likewise endeavoured to procure for the English ca-

tholics ome mitigation of the rigour with which they are
now treated; and if I could hope, by my death, to deli-

" ver them from oppreflion, I am willing to die for their
" fake, I wish, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
"not of Judith, and would rather make interceflion for my

people, than hed the blood of the meanest creature, in

" order to save them. I have often checked the intempe-
"rate zeal of my adherents,, when either the severity of
"their own persecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of

injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate
" them into violent councils. I have even warned the queen

of dangers to which there harsh proceedings exposed her-
self. And worn out, as I now am, with cares and sus-

" ferings,

#' ferings, the profpe& of a crown is not so inviting, that I B oO K.
*' should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am no firan- vli.
s( ger to the feelings of humanity, nor unacquainted with I-.
t' the duties of religion, and abhor the detestable crime of 86

affaflination, as equally repugnant toboth. And, if ever

" I have given content by my words, or evenby my thoughts,
" to any attempt against the life of the queen of Fngland, far
" from declining the judgment of men, I thall not even pray
" for the mercy of God "

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and

in every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity
of a queen, tempered with the gentleness and nwdety of a
woman.

THE c6mmiffoners, by Elizabeth's express command ad- sentence

journed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the star- againb her.
chamber in Weftminfer. When assembled in that place,
Nau and Curie were brought into court, and confirmed their
former declaration upon oath; and after reviewing all their
proceedings, the commiflioners unanimously declared Mary
" To be accessary to Babington's conspiracy, and to have
' imagined diverse matters, tending to the hurt, death, and
,C destruction of Elizabeth, contrary to the express words of
1( the statute made for the security of the queen's life ."

IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injustice Irregula-

rities in th

in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in conducing it, trial
were greatest and molt flagrant. By what right did Eliza-
beth claim authority over an independent queen,? Was Mary
bound to comply with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How
could the fubjefs of another prince become her judges ? or
if such an insult on royalty were allowed, ought not the
common forms 'of jutrice to have been observed ? If the
testimony of Babington and his associates were so explicit,
why did not Elizabeth pare them for a few weeks, and by
confronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with the fuil.
conviction of her crimes Nau and Curie were both alive,
wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for what
reason were they produced in the ftar-chamber, where Mary
was not present to hear what they deposed ? Was this sus-
picious evidence enough. to condemn a queen ? Ought the
meanest criminal to have been found guilty upon such feeble
and incoyclufive proofs ?

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her

trial, that the sentence against Mary was founded. That
served as a pretence to justify, but was not the cause of the

* Caed. Sie, &c.

violent
t Ibid. 5$5.

414
B o K violent fieps taken by Elizabeth and her ministers towards
vl . her deflrudion; and was employed to give some appearance

'ui» -
- of jutlice to hat-was the offspring of jealousy and fear.

'i 6. The nation, blinaed wiih resentment against Mary, and

solicitous to secure the life ot its own sovereign from every
danger, observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defeas in the proof, but grasped at the sus-
picions and prohabilitins, as if they had been irrefragable de-
monfirations.

The rarl:a- THE parliament met a few days after fettence was pro-
n'Cet con- nounced againlt Mary. In that illultrious assembly more
f.irm th -
fcenc: temper and discernment than are to be found among the

people, might have been expected. Both lords and com-
nons, however, were equally under the dominion of popular
prejudices and pffions, and the fame exceifes of zeal, or of
lear, hich preaided in the nation, are apparent in all their
proceedings. Thev entcred with impatience upon an in-
quiry into the conspiracy, and the danger which threatened
the queen's lite as well is the peace ot the kingdom. All.
the papers which had been produced at Fotheringay, were
laid before them; and after many violent invetives' again.l
the queen of Scots, both houles unanimously ratified the
proceedings of the commiflioners by whom The had beeli
tried, ad declared the entence against her to be just and

," ddarr-rd well founded. Not fatistied with this, they presented a
the ecu- joint address to the queen, befetching her, as fie regarded

ber own fatety, the preservation of the protestant religion,
the welfare and ilhes of her people, to pblilh, the fen-
tence; and without farther delay to infli on a rival, no
less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punilfment which the.
had merited by so many crimes. This request, dictated by
tears unworthy of that great affenmb)y was enforced by.
reasons still more unworthy, They were drawn not from,
jullice but from conveniency. The molt rigorous confine-
ment, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing,
spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to be
an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keep-
ers: the severest penal laws could. not restrain her adherents,
who, while they believed her peifor to be sacred, would
despise any danger to which themselves alone were exposed:'
several foreign princes were ready to recond.their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading the king-
dom, and aflerting the Scottish queen's title to the crown.
Her life, they contended, was, ful hefe eafons, incompa-
tible with Elizabeth's safety; and if he were spared ott of
a fije ciemtncy, the queen's person' the religion and li-

berties

berties of the kingdom, could not be one moment secure. a oo K
Neceflity required that he hould be sacrificed in order to vil.
preserve these; and to prove this sacrifice to be no less '-v-
Just than necessary, several examples in hiflory were pro-
duced, and many texts of scripture quoted; but both the one
and the other were misapplied, and diltorted from their true
meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to .I;za- Elirabeth's

beth, than an address in this frain. It extricatedher out ti.anU
of a situation extremely embarrafing; and without de-
priving her of the power of sparing, it enabled her to punilh
her rival with less appearance of blame. If the chfe the
former, the whole honour would redound to her own cle-
mency. If he determined on the latter, whatever was
rigorous might now seem tobe extorted by the solicitations
of her people, rather than flow from her own inclination.
Her answer, however, was in a flyle which he often used,
ambiguous and evasive, under the appearance of openness
and candour; full of such professions of regard for her
people, as served to heighten their loyalty; of such com-
plaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite
their indignation; and of such insinuations that her own
life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the end, he besought them to save her the infamy and
the pain of delivering up a queen, her nearest kinswoman,
to punishment; and to confider whether it might not fiil
be possible to provide for the public security, without force-
ing her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily underflood.

The lords and commons renewed their former request with
additional importunity, which was far from being either
unexpe&ed or offensive. Elizabeth did not return any
answer more explicit; and having obtained such a public
fanaion of her proceedings, there was no longer any reason
for protracing this scene of diffimlatin ; there was even
some danger that her feigned difficulties might at last be
treated as real ones; she therefore adjourned the par-
liament, and reserved in her own hands the sole dfpolal of
her rival's fate *.

ALL the princes in Europe observed the proceedings againf Frnnc in-
Mary with atonifhment and horror; and even Henry III. terpafc
notwithlfanding his known aversion to the house of Guise, beebalf of
was obliged to interpose In her behalf, and to appear in de- Mary.,
fence of the common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his

* Canaed.. . DEwe, 375.

resident

o o resident ambalfidor, and Bellievre, who was ent with an
vit. extraorninary commiflion to the fame purpose, interceded
Iv'^

t for Mary with great appearance of warmth. They employed
ov5. . all the arguments which the cause naturally suggested; they

pleaded from jufice, from gererofity, and humanity; they
intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all there Eli-
zabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and having received
some intimation of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of
the Scottih queen, and knowing his antipathy to all the race
of Guise, he trufled that there loud remonstrances would be
followed by no violent resentment. '.

Jamen en- SHE paid no greate! regard to the solicitations of the
deavour to Scottish king, which, as they were urged with greater since-
rave ii mo-
tr.- life. rity, merited more attention. Though her commissioners

had been extremely careful to sooth James, by publishing a
declaration that their sentence against Mary did, in no de-
gree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate any title which
he formerly pofleffed; he beheld the indignities to which
his mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the sentiments which became a king. The pride of the
Scottish nation was rolfed bv the insult offered to the
blood of their monarchs, and called upon him to employ the
rnmo vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to revenge the
queen's death.

AT first, he could hardly believe that Elizabeth would

venture upon an a&ion so unprecedented, which tended o
visibly to render the persons of princes less sacred in the
eves of the people, and which degraded the regal dignity, of
which, at other times, she was so remarkably jealous. But
as soon as the extraordinary fleps which she took discovered
her intention, he dispatched fir William Keith to London;
who, together with Douglas his ambassador in ordinary,
remonstrated, in the ftronge' terms, against the injury done
to an independent queen, in ubje&ing her to be tried like
a private person, and by laws to which he owedno obe-
dience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to'this injury,
by suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dilfhnour-
able to the king of Scots, to be put into execution ......

F.LIZABETH returning noanfwerto there remonfirances

of his ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand,
complaining in the bitterest terms of her condut, not with-
out threats that both his duty and his honour would oblige
him to renounce her friendlhip, and to a& as became a so

Cirr.d. 531.
+ See Arpcnd. No, XVI. Mgrdia, 573, &c. Birch. Mern. i. 5t.

when
41i

when called to revenge his mother's wrongs . At the fame B oo K
time he assembled the nobles, who promised to stand by him vi.
in so good a cause. He appointed ambassadors to France, '- J
Spain and Denmark, in order to implore the aid of these is
courts; and took other teps towards executing his threats
with vigour. The high frain of his letter enraged Elizabeth
to such a degree, that he was ready to dismiss his ambaf-
fAdors wi hout any reply. But his preparations alarmed and
embarraflied her ministers, and at their entreaty the returned
a soft and evasive answer, promising to liflen to any overture
from the king, that tended to his mother's safety; and to
suspend the execution of the sentence, until the arrival of new
ambaflTdors from Scotland t.

MEANWHILE, he commanded the sentence againfl Mary Dec. 6.

to be published, and forgot not to inform the people, that The fen-
this was extorted from her by the repeated entreaty of both Maypub-
houses of parliament. At the fame time he dispatched lord liled.
Buckhurft and Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and
how importunately the nation demanded the execution of it;
and though she had not hitherto yielded to there solicitations,
she advised her to prepare for an event which might become
necessary for securing the proteflant religion, as well as
quieting the minds of the people. Mary received the mef-
sage not only without symptoms of fear, but with expref-
sions of triumph. " No wonder," said he, " the English
" should now thirdt for the blood of a foreign prince, they
" having often offered violence to their own monarchs. But
" after so many sufferings, death comes to me as a welcome
"deliverer, I am proud to think that my life is deemed of
"importance to the catholic religion, and as a martyr for it
" am now willing to die §."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was firip- She is treat-

ped of every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of cd with the
slate in her apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her utmost r-
chamber, and approached her perron without any ceremony;
and even appeared covered in her pretence. Shocked with
these indignities, and offended at this gross familiarity, to
which he had never been accuflomed, Mary once more
complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame time, as her last Dec. 19.
request, entreated that she would permit her servants to carry
her dead body into France, to be laid among her anceflors in
hallowed ground; that rome of her domestics might be pre-
sent at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm
adherence to the catholic faith; that all her servants might
· Birch, Mem. i. 5s. Spotfw. %s i. Cald. iv. 5. § Camnd. 5X8 Jcbb, i91.

Ee be

417

B o O be suffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those finall
viz. legacies which (he should bettow on them, as testimonies of
.--.-J her affe&ion; and that, in the mean time, her almnoner, or
S186 some other catholic pried, might be allowed to attend her,

and to afift her in preparing for an eternal world. She be-
fought her, in the name of Jesus, by the foql and memory
of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their near co>-
sanguinity, and the royal dignity with which they were both
inveRted, to gratify her in these particulars and to indulge
her so far as to signify her compliance by a letter under her
own hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever delivered to
Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returned, and no
regard paid to her requests. She was offered a proteftanRt
bishop or dean to attend her. Them {he rejeed, and with-
out any clergyman to direc herdevotions, he prepared, in
great tranquility, for the approach of death, which he now
believed to be at no great distance t.

;57. JAMES, without losing a moment, sent new ambafladors

3'ah.O .to London. These were the maser of Gray, and fir Robert
liitations Melvil. In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered
in hr b- that their master would become bound that no conspiracy
anuary . should be undertaken against her person, or the peace of the

kingdom, with Mary's consent; and for the faithful per-
formance of this, would deliver Come of the mol confider-
able of the Scottish nobles as holtages. If this were not
thought sufficient, they proposed that Mary should resign all
her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing
injurious to the protestant religion, or inconsistent with Eli-
zabeth's safety, could be feared. The former proposal Eli-
zabeth reje&ed as insecure; thelatter, as dangerous. The
ambalTacors were then inftruled to talk in a higher tone;
and Melvil executed the conmmilion with fidelity and with
zeal. But Gray, with his usual perfidy, deceived his msa
fler, who trusted him with a negociation of so much import-
ance, and betrayed the queen whom he was employed-to
save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth to execute the
sentence against her rival. He often repeated the old pro-
verbial sentence, " The dead cannot bite." Aud whatever
liould happen, he undertook to pacify the king's rage, or at
least to prevent any violent effeas of his resentment §.

lizabeth's ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of
,xi- y and the motl violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She
fiinu'a;. lhunned society, she was often found in a melancholy and

muting poflure, and repeating with much emphasis these
t Camd. iS%. Jcbb., i a,. i Stfw. 35a.Murdin, 68. Sec App. No.XVJI.

sentences
41S

sentences which he borrowed from some of the devices then B oo
in vogue; Aut fr aut feri; neferiar, feri. Much, no v,..
doubt, of this apparent uneasiness mull be imputed to diffi- -'
mulation; it was impossible, however, that a princess, na-
turally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an aCion,
which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life
and kingdom to danger, without reflecing deeply, and hefi-
tating long. The people waited her deterinnation in sus-
penfe and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal hould
subside, rumours of danger were artfully invented, and pro.
pagated with the utmost indufiry. Aubefpine, the French
ambassador, was accused of having suborned an affalfin to
murder the queen. The Spanish fleet was said by some o
be already arrived at Milfordhaven. Others affirmed that
the duke of Guise had landed with a Rrong army in Suffex.
Now, it was reported that the northern counties were up in
arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with
all their forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on
foot for seizing the queen and burning the city. The panic
grew every day more violent; and the people, astonished
and enraged, called for the execution of the sentence against
Mary, as the only thing which could restore tranquillity to
the kingdom t.

WHILE there sentiments prevailed among her subje&s, Waiantor

Elizabeth thoaght The might safely venture to strike the blow ction riga-
which (he had so long meditated. She commanded Davison, ed.
one of the secretaries of state, to bring to her the fatal war- February .
rant; and her behaviour on that oocafion plainly (hewed, that
it is not to humanity that we must acribe her forbearance
hitherto. At the very moment he was signing the writ
which gave up a woman, a queen, and her own nearest
relation, into the hands of the executioner, he was capable
of jesting. " Go," fays he to Davison, " and tell Wal-
'. fingham what I have now done, though I am afraid he
"? will die for grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety
was how to secure the A4vantages which would arise from
Mary's death, without appearing to have given her content
to a deed so odious. She often hinted to Paulet and Drury,
as well as to some othercourtiers, that now was the time to
discover the sincerity of their. concern for her safety, and
that fle expeced their zeal would extricate her out of her
prfent perplexity. But they were wife enough to seem not
to understand her meaning. Even after the warrant was
signed, fle commanded a letter to be written to Paulet, in

t Camd. 533, $34.

E e 2 less

oo K less ambiguous terms, complaining of his remissness in spar-
viz. ing so long the life of her capital enemy, and begging him
- '--.*< to remember at last what was incumbent on him as an assec-
,587' tionate subjea, as well as what he was bound to do by the

oath of association, and to deliver his sovereign from conti-
nual fear and danger, by Ihortening the days of his prisoner.
Paulet, though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal in the
discharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. He rejet-
ed the proposal with disdain; and lamenting that he {hould
ever have been deemed capable of aing the part of an affaf-
fin, he declared that the queen might dispose of his life at
her pleasure, but that he would never slain his own honour,
nor leave an everlaffing mark of infamy on his posterity, by
lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a crime. On the re-
ceipt of this anf, er, Elizabeth became extremely peevish;
and calling him a dainty and precie fellow, who would pro-
mise much, but perform nothing, the proposed to employ
one Wingfield, who had both courage and inclination to
firike the blow t. But Davison remonatrating against this, as
a deed dishonourable in itself, and of dangerous example, she
again declared her intention that the sentence pronounced by
the commiflioners should be executed according to law; and
as she had already signed the warrant, flie begged that no
farther application might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themselves sufficiently au-
thorifed to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by
zeal for the queen's safety, or infligated, as is more probable,
bv the apprehension of the danger to which they would them-
selves be exposed, if the life of the queen of Scots were
spared, they afembled in the council chamber; and by a
letter under all their hands empowered the earls of Shrews-
bury and Kent, together with the high sheriss of the county,
to fee the sentence put in execution §.

Mary's be- ON Tuesday the seventh of February, the two earls ar-
haviourat rived at Fotheringay, and denmaded access to the queen,

read in her presence the warrant r execution, and required
her to prepare to die next morning. Mary heard them to
the end without emotion, and crofling herself in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghofi, "That

foul," said he, " is not worthy thejoys of heaven, which
repines because the body must endure the firoke of the exe-

"cutioner; and though I did not expec that the queen of
" England would set the firtt example of violating the sacred
$ Biogr. Britaa. article Dai/fo. § Camd. 34. Strype, iii. 361. 364.

" person
420

" person of a sovereign prince, I willingly submit to that Bo K
" which Providence has decreed to be my lot;" and laying VIl.
her hand on a Bible, which happened to be near her, he L-
solemnly protefRed that she was innocent of that conspiracy '8
which Babington had carried on againit Elizabeth's life*.
She then mentioned the requefis contained in her letter to
Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfaCory answer. She en-
treated with particular earnestness, that now in her last mo-
ments her almoner might be suffered to attend her, and that
The might enjoy the consolation of those pious inflitutions
prescribed by her religion. Even this favour, which is usually
granted to the vilelf criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in

tears, .and though overawed by the presence of the two earls,
with difficulty suppressed their anguish; but no sooner did
Kent and Shrewsbury withdraw, than they ran to their
miflrefs, and burf out in the moR paflionate expreflions of
tenderness and sorrow. Mary, however, not only retained
perfet composure of mind herself, but endeavoured to mo-
derate their excessive grief; and falling on her knees, with
all her domestics round her, he thanked Heaven that her
sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that she
might be enabled to endure what ill remained with decency
and with fortitude. The greater part of the evening the
employed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote her
testament with her own hand. Her money, her jewels, and
her clothes, he distributed among her servants, according to
their rank or merit. She wrote a hort letter to the-king of
France, and another to the duke of Guise, full of tender but
magnanimous sentiments, and recommended her foul to their
prayers, and her affliaed servants to their protection. At
supper he ate emperately, as usual, and converted not only
with ease, but with cheerfulness; she drank to every one of
her servants, and aked their forgiveness, if ever (he had
failed in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted
time he went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early
in the morning he retired into her closet, and employed a
considerable time in devotion. At eight o'clock the high
sheriss and his officers entered her chamber, and found her
still kneeling at the altar. She immediately flarted up, and
with a majestic mein, and a countenance undismayed, and
even cheerful, advanced towards the place of execution,
leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in a
mourning habit, but with an elegance and fplendourwhich he

* Jrbb, ii. 301..

had

42l-

ooK had long laid aside, except on a few festival days. Al
v11. Agnus Dci hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beadw
v- --. at her girdle; and in her hand he carried a crucifix of ivory.
1587 At the bottom of the flairs the two earls, attended by several

gentlemen from the neighbouring counties, received her;
and there fir Andrew Melvil, the mailer of her houfhold,
who had been secluded for ome weeks from her presence,
was permitted to take his lafi farewel. At the fight of a
mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a situation, he
melted into tears; and as he was bewailing her condition,
and complaining of his o n hard fate, in being appointed to
carry the account of such a mournful event into Scotland,
Mary replied, " Weep not, good MAelvil, there is at present

great cause of rejoicing. Thou halt this day fee Mary
Stewart delivered from ail her cares, and such an end put
to er tedious fufferins, as she has long expeled. Bear
witness that die constant in my religion; firm in my si-
delitv toward~ Scotland; and unchanged in my affeaion
to France. Commend me to my son. Tell him I have
' done nothing injurious to his kingdom, to his honour, or

to his rights; and God forgive all those who have thirfled
"without cause, for my blood."

WITH much difficulty, and after many entreaties, he

prevailed on the two earls to allow Melvil, together with
three of her men servants and two of her maids, to attend her
to the scaffold. It was ereced in the fame hall where he
had been tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered,
as well as a chair, the cushion, and block, with black cloth.
Mary mounted the fleps with alacrity, bheli all this appa-
r.Mus of death with an unaltered countenance, and signing
herself with the cross, he fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which
the lifterred with a careless air, and like one occupied in
other thoughts. Then the dean of Peterborough began adevout
discourse, suitable to her present condition, and offered up
prayers to Heaven in her behalf; but he declared that he
could not in conscience hearken to the one, nor join with the
other; and kneeling down, repeated a Latin prayer. Whea
the dean had finished his devotions, he, with an audible
voice, and in the Engil[h tongue, recommended unto God
the afflited (late of the church, and prayed for prosperity
to her son, and for a long life and peaceable reign to Eliza-
beth. She declared that (he hoped for mercy only through
the death of Chris, at the foot of whose image he now
willingly hed her blood; and lifting up and kiflingthe cru-
cifix, he thus addressed it; " As thy arms, O Jesus, were

" extended
4J»

" extended on the cross: so with the outstretched arms of B o o

thy mercy receive, me, and forgive my fins." viz.
SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil L-v"

and upper garments; and one of the executioners rudely ',7.
endeavouring to affifl, he gently checked him, and aid,
with a smile, that she had not been accustomed to undress
before so many fpedators, nor to be served by such valets.
With calm but undaunted fortitude, he laid her neck on the
block; and while one executioner held her hands, the other,
at the second stroke, cut off her head, which falling out of
its attire, discovered her hair already grown quite gray with
cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up till fiream-
ing with blood, and the dean crying out, " So perith all
( queen Elizabeth's enemies," the earl of Kent alone an-
fwered Amen. The reft of the fpeaators continued silent,
and-drowned in tears; being incapable, at that moment, of
any other sentiments but those of pity or admiration t.

SuCH was the tragical death of Mary queen of Scots, Sentiments

of historian*

after a life of forty four years and two months, almost nine- concern
teen years of which he paged in captivity. The political her.
parties which' were formed in the kingdom, during her
reign, have fubfifed, under various denominations, ever
since that time. The rancour, with which they were at
first animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and their
prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even augmented. Among historians, who were under the
dominion of all these paflions, and who have either ascribed
to her every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed
to her all the'vices of which the human heart is fuceptible,
we search in vain for Mary's real charater. She neither
merited the exaggerated praises of the one, nor the undiftin-
guifhed censure of the other.

To'all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of Her Cha.

external form, she added those accomplishments which ren- iaaer'
der their impreflion irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating,
sprightly, and capable of speaking and of writing with equal
ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all her
attachments; because her heart was warm and unfufpicous.
Impatient of contradiaion; because he had been accustom-
ed from her infancy to be treated as a queen. No firanger,
on some occasions, to difimulation; which, in that perfi-
dious court where he received her education, was reckoned
among the necessary arts of government. Not insensible of
flattery, or unconscious of that -pleasure with which amoft

- Cmd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jbb, ii. 3oo, StrypM iii. 38. SceAppad
o. XVIeve

every

4z3

Boo0 every woman beholds the influence of her own beauty.
vII. Formed with the qualities which we love, not with the ta-
'-. , _s lents that we admire; he was an agreeable woman, rather

1587- than an illustrious queen. The vivacity of her spirit not

sufficiently tempered with found judgment, and the warmth
of her heart, which was not at all times under the restraint
of discretion, betrayed her both into errors and into crimes.
To fay that he was always unfortunate, will not account
for that long and almost uninterrupted fucceflion of cala-
mities which besel her; we mull likewise add, that he was
often imprudent. Her paflion for Darnly was ra(h, youthful
and exceflive; and though the sudden transition to the oppo-
file extreme, was the natural effe& of her ill-requited love,
and of his ingratitude, insolence, and brutality; yet nei-
ther there, nor Bothwell's artful address and important ser-
vices, can juilify her attachment to that nobleman. Even
the manners of the age, licentious as they were, are no
apology for this unhappy passion; nor can they induce us
to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil
over this part of her characer which it cannot approve, and
may, perhaps, prompt some to impute some of her ations
to her situation, more than to her dispositions; and to la-
ment the unhappiness of the former, rather than accuse the
perverseness of the latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both
in degree and in duration, those tragical distresses which
fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her
frailties, we think of her faults with less indignation, and
approve of our tears, as if they were Ihed for a person
who had attained much nearer to pure virtue.

WITH regard to the queen's person, acircumftance not

to be omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all
contemporary authors agree in ascribing to Mary the ut-
mot beauty of countenance, and elegance of ihape, of
which the human form is capable. Her hair was black,
though, according to the fashion of that age, he frequently
wore borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her eyes
were a dark gray; her complexion was exquisitely fine; and
her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to hape
and colour. Her tlature was of an heighf that rose to the
majestic. She danced, he walked, and rode with equal
grace. Her taste for music was juss, and he both sung
and played upon the lute with uncommon skill. Towards
the end of her life, long confinement, and the coldness of
the houses in which he had been imprisoned, brought on

a rheu-
424

a rheumatism, which often deprived her of the use of her £ oo
limbs. No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld her person ,
without admiration and love, or will read her hiflory without,
sorrow. 587.

No N E of her women were suffered to come near her dead

body, which was carried into a room adjoining to the place
of execution, where it lay for some days, covered with a
coarse cloth torn from a billiard table. The block, the
scaffold, the aprons of the executioners, and every thing
slained with her blood, were reduced to ashes. Not long
after, Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
cathedral of Peterborough with royal magnificence. But
this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pageantry of
a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those in-
juries which laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after
his accession to the Englilh throne, ordered her body to be
removed to Welfminfler-Abbey, and to be deposited among
the monarchs of England.

ELIZABETH affeaed to receive the accounts of Mary's Elizabeth

death with the mofi violent emotions of surprise and of affeasto
concern. Sighs, tears, lamentations, and mourning, were lament Ma-
all employed to display the reality and greatness of her for- rys death
row. Evident marks of diflfmulation and artifice may be
traced through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
against the life of the Scottish queen. The comifion for
bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly extorted from
her by the entreaties of her privy counsellors. She delayed
publishing the sentence agamft her till she was twice soli-
cited by both houses of parliament. Nor did he sign the
warrant for execution without the utmofi apparent reluc-
tance. One scene more of the boldelt and most solemn
deceit remained to be exhibited. She undertook to make
the world believe that Mary had been put to death without
her knowledge, and againlt her will. Davison, who neither
fufpe&ed her intention nor his own danger, was her in-
firument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a vi&im
to it.

IT was his duty, as secretary of slate, to lay before her the

warrant for execution, in order to be signed; and, by her
command, he carried it to the great feal. She pretended,
however, that (he had charged him not to communicate
what she had done to any person, nor to susser the warrant-
to go out of his hands, without her express permiflion; that,-
in contempt of this order, he had not only revealed the
matter to several of her minifiers, but had, in concert with
them, affembld her privy counsellors, by whom,. without

her

oo
00 her consent or knowledge, the warrant was iuedo and the
vil. earls of Shrewlbury and Kent impowered to put it in execu-
\v- tion. Though Davison denied all this, and with circum-

fiances which bear the firongeft marks of truth and credi-
bility; though it can scarcely be conceived that her privy
council, composed of the persons in whom {he molt con-
fided, of her minislers and favourites, would assemble within
the walls of her palace, and venture to tranfa& a matter of
so much importance without her privity, and contrary to
her inclination; yet so far did he carry her dilffliulation,
that with all the signs ot displeasure and of rage, he banish-
ed most of her counsellors out of her pretence; and treated
Burleigh, in particular, so harshly, and with such marks of
diCuR,f that he gave up himself for loft, and in the deepest
afflicion wrote to the queen, begging leave to resign all his
places, that he might retire to his own eflate. Davison she
inflantly deprived of his office, and committed him a close
Marc. prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a

solemn trial in the Star Chamber, condemned to pay a fine
of ten thcufand pounds, and to be imprisoned during the
queen's pleasure. He languithed several years in confine-
ment, and never recovered any degree of favour or of
power. As her jealousy and fear had bereaved the queen
of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of her condue,
Elizabeth made no cruple of sacrificing the reputation and
happiness of one of the moil virtuous and able men in her
kingdom t.

EGribeth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, fur-

endeao"r niflied Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the king of
Juams. Scots. As the profpea of his mother's danger had ex-

cited the king's filial care and concern, the account of her
death filled him with grief and resentment. His fabje&s
felt the dishonour done to him and to the nation. In order
to sooth both, Elizabeth inflantly dispatched Robert Carey,
one of lord Hunfdon's sons, with a letter exprefling her ex-
treme afflicion on account of that rriferable accident,
which, as he pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment or intention. James would not permit her
messenger to enter Scotland; ard with some difficulty re-
ceived a memorial which he sent from Berwick. It con-
tained the tale concerning Davison, dressed up with all the
1ircumaances which tended to exculpate Eli.abethi and to
throw the whole blame on his rashness or treachery. Such a
defence gave little fatisfaaion, and was confidered as mock-
t C~d 536. Strypc, iii. 30o, See Append. H Cabala, as9, &c.

ery
416

pry added to insult; and many of the nobles, as well as the X o o K
king, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was ex- vil.
tremely solicitous to pacify them, and he wanted neither '
able infiruments, nor plausible reasons, in order to accomplish l587'
this. LeiceRer wrote to the king and Walsingham to fe-
cretary Maitland. They weprefented the certain deftruc-
tion to which James would expos- himself, if, with the
forces of Scotland alone, he should venture to attack a king-
dom so far superior in power; that the hiflory of pal ages,
as well as his mother's fad experience, might convince him,
that nothing could be more dangerous, or deceitful, than de-
pendance' on foreign aid; that the king of France would
never with to fee the British kingdoms united under one
monarch, nor contribute to invest a prince so nearly allied
to the house of Guise with such formidable power; that
Philip might be a more aaive ally, but would certainly
prove a more dangerous one, and, under pretence of assist-
ing him, would assert his own right to the Englilh crown,
which he already began openly to claim; that the fame
statute, on which the sentence of death againit his mother
had been founded, would justify the excluding him from
the fucceflion to the crown; that the English, naturally
averse from the dominion -of firangers, would not fail, if ex-
afperated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner; that
Elizabeth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the
mother had suffered, by her tenderness and affe&ion towards
the son; and that, by engaging in a fruitless war, he would
deprive himself of a noble inheritance, which, by cultivating
her friendship, he must infallibly obtain. These reprefenta-
tions, added to the consciousness of his own weakness, to
the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous spirit of some
of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that faaion which was entirely at Elizabeth's de-
votion, convinced James that a war with England, however
just, would in the present jun&ure be altogether impolitical.
All these considerations induced him to tifle his resentment;
to appear satisfied with the punishment infliEed on Davison;
and to preserve all the semblances of friendship with the
Englilh court f. In this manner did the cloud which threat-
ened such a form pass away. Mary's death, like that of
a common criminal, remained unavenged by any prince; and
whatever infamy Elizabeth might incur, fie was exposed to
no new dangerg that account.

MARY'S however, proved fatal to the master of Disgrace of

i Xon&. 3»,l Cal iv , 14. StYpeiii. 37.

Gray,

00 oK Gray, and loft him the king's favour which he had sot'
VIt some time pofeffed. He was become as odious to the na-

tion as favourites, who acquire power without merit, and
5 exercise it without discretion, usually are. The treacherous

part which he had aeduring his late embassy, was no
secret, and filled James, who as length came to the know-
ledge of it, with aftonilhment. The courtiers observed the
fvmptoms of diftgul arising in the king's mind, his enemies
seized the opportunity, and Sir William Stewart, in revenge
ot the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his brother
May 1o. captain James, publicly accused him before a convention of

nobles not only of having contributed, by his advice and
fuggefiions, to take away the life of the queen, but of hold-
ing correfponderce with popish princes, in order to subvert
the religion established in the kingdom. Gray, unsupported
hy the king, deserted by all, and conscious of his own guilt,
made a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual
baniihment, a punishment very unequal to his crimes. But
the king was unwilling to abandon one whom he had once
favoured so highly, to the rigour of jultice; and lord Ha-
milton, his near relation, and the other nobles who had
litely returned from exile, in gratitude for the zeal with
which he had served them, interceded warmly in his be-
half.

HAVING thus accomplished the deftruaion of one of his

enemies, captain James Stewart thought the junature fa-
vourable for prosecuting his revenge on them all. He fin-
gled out secretary Maitland, the mpfl eminent both for abili-
ties and enmity to him; and offeredto prove that he was no
less accessary than Gray to the queen's death, and had even
formed a design of delivering up the king himself into the
hands of the English. But time and absence had, in a
great measure, extinguished the king's affecion for a mi-
nion who so little deserved it. All the courtiers combined
against him as a common enemy; and instead of gaining his
point, he had the mortification to fee the office of chan-
cellor conferred upon Maitland, who, together with that
dignity, enjoyed all the power and influence of a prime
minister.

In the assembly of the church, which met this year, the

fame hatred to the order of bishops, and the famejealoufy
and fear of their encroachments, appeared. But as the king
was now of full age, and a parliament was summoned on that
occasion, the clergy remained satisfied with appointing some
of their number to represent their grievances to that court,
from which great things were expected.

PREVIOUS

PREVIous tothis meetingof parliament, James attempted Ba 0 o

a work worthy of a king. The deadly feuds which ub- vii.
Tfied between many of the great families, and which were t.v -
transmitted from one generation to another, weakened the The king
firength of the kingdom; contributed, more than any other attempts o
circumstance, o preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit among unite the
the nobles; and proved the occasion of many difailers to
themselves and to their country. After many preparatory
negotiations, he invited the contending parties to a royal
entertainment in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; and partly
by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained their
promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion. From
thence he conduted them, in folermn procession, through the
tlreets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand
with his enemy. A collation of wine and sweetmeats was
prepared at the public cross, and there they drank to each
other, with all the signs of reciprocal forgiveness and of future
friendship. The people, who were present at a fpecacle
so unusual, conceived the mos sanguine hopes of feeing
concord and tranquility eflablifhed in every part of the
kingdom, and testified their atisfation by repeated accla-
mations*. Unhappily, the effects of this reconciliation were
not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of the king,
or the fond wishes of the people.

THE firfl care of the parliament was the security of the

protetlant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since
the Reformation, were ratified: and a new and severe one
was enaaed against seminary priefis and jesuits, whose reft-
leSs industry in making proselytes, brought many of them
into Scotland about this time. Two aas of this parliament
deserve more particular notice on account of the confe-
quences with which they were followed.

THE one refpe&ed the lands of the church. As the pub- General anr
lic revenues were not sufficient for defraying the king's or- nexatioof

chrch

dinary charges; as the adminiflration of the government be land,.
came more complicated and more expensive; as James was
naturally profuse, and a stranger to ceconomy; it was ne-
ceffary, on all these accounts, to provide ome fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable faim could
be levied on the commons, who did not enjoy the benefit of
an extensive commerce. The nobles were unaccustomed to
bear the burden of heavy taxes. The revenues of the church
were theonly source whence a proper supply could bedrawn.
Notwithstanding all the depredations of the laity since

* Spotfw. 164. Cald. iv. >

the

429

vii. employed to seize the church lands, some considerable por-
.-'r tion of them remained ftil unalienated, and were held
'Si- either by the biihops who poffefled the benefices, or were

granted to laymen during pleasure. All there lands were,
in this parliament, annexed, by one general law', to the
crown, and th, king was empowered to apply the rents of
them to his own use. She tithes alone were reserved for
the maintenance of the persons who served the cure, and
the principal mansion house, with a few acres of land, by
way of glebe, allotted for their residence. By this great ac-
ceflion of property, it is natural to conclude that the king
mulf have acquired a vast increase of power, and the influ-
ence of the nobles have suffered a proportionable dimipution.
The very reverse of this seems, however, to have been the
cafe. Almost all grants of church-lands, prior to this aa,
were thereby confirmed; and titles, which were formerly
reckoned precarious, derived from thence the fan&ion of
parliamentary authority. James was likewise authorised,
during a limited time, to make new alienations; and such
was the facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the so-
licitations of his servants, and to gratify their molt extra-
yagant demands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually employed
in bellowing, and his parliament in ratifying, grants of this
kind to his nobles; hence little advantage accrued to the
crown from that which might have been so valuable an ad-
dition to its revenue. The bishops, however, were great
sufferers by the law. But at this junture neither the king
nor his ministers were solicitous about the interefls of an
order of men, odious to the people, and persecuted by the
clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with the utmost
zeal. The profpe& of sharing in their spoils induced all
parties to consent to it; and after a tep so fatal to the wealth
and power es the dignified clergy, it was no difficult matter
to introduce that change in the government of the church
which soon after took placet.

pAecr b- THE change which the other statute produced in the civil
:r-n admit- conflitution was no less remarkable. Under the feudal sys-
red ito par-
"iament by tem, every freeholder or vall of the crown had a right to
·Eeir reprc- be present in parliament. These freeholders were originally

few in number, but pofeiffed of great and extensive property.
By degrees these vast poffellions were divided by the pro-
prietors themselves, or parcelled out by the prince, or split

* Par . 1. Jac. VI. c. a. + Spotfw. 365;

by

HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.
+3e

by other accidents. The number of freeholders became o o
greater, and their condition more unequal; besides the an- Yi.
cient barons, who preserved their estates and their power
unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights were '785
the fame, though their wealth and influence were tar inferior.
But, in rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
tremely imperfet, when parliaments were seldom aflembled,
and deliberated on matters little inrerefting to a martial
people, few of the leser barons took their feats, and the whole
parliamentary jurifdi&ion was exercised by the greater barons,
in conjunction with the ecclefiafiical order. James I. fond
of imitating the forms of the English constitution, to which
he had been long accustomed, and desirous of providing a
counterpoise to the power of the great nobles, procured an
a& in the year one thousand four hundred and twentyfeven,
dispensing with the personal attendance of the lesser barons,
and empowering thofein each county to chute two commis-
fioners to represent them in parliament. This law, like
many other regulations of that wife prince, produced little
effet. All the kings vassals continued, as formerly, pofeffed
of a right to be present in parliament; but, unless in some
extraordinary conjuntures, the greater barons alone attend-
ed. But, by means of the Reformation, the conflitution
had undergone a great change. The ariflocratical power of
the nobles had been much increased, and the influence of the
ecclefiafticalorder, which the crown usually employed to
check their usurpations, and to balance their authority, had
diminished in proportion. Many of the abbies and priories
had been ereted into temporal peerages; and the protestant
bishops, an indigent race of men, and odious to the nation,
were far from poflefling the weight and credit which their
predecessors derived from their own exorbitant wealth, and
the fuperlitious reverence of the people. In this situation,
the king had recourse to.the expedient employed by James I.
and obtained a law reviving the fatute of one thousand four
hundred and twenty-feven; and from that time the commons
of Scotland have sent their representatives to parliament. An
at, which tended so visibly to abridge their authority, did
not pass without opposition from many of the nobles. But
as the king had a right to summon the lesser barons to attend
in person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled
with a multitude of his dependants, and consented the
more willingly to a law which laid them under the reflri&ion
of appearing only by their representatives. 58

THE year one thousand five hundred and eighty-eight be- The ap-
gan with an universal expecation throughout all Europe, Po"'h of

that armadil
that armado.

43t

B o o that it was to be distinguished by wonderful events and revo-
vii. lutions. S-veral arologers, according to the accounts of

_

.v--. contemporary hiflorians, had predicted this; and the fitua-
5sss. tion of affairs in the two principal kingdomrof Europe was

such, that a fagacions obrerver, without any supernatural in-
telligence, might have hazarded the predicion, and have
foreseen the approach of ome grand crisis. In France, it was
evident from the afonifhingprogrefs of the league, conducted
bv a leader who'e ambition was refrained by ro scruples, and
whose genius had hitherto ftiurmonnied all difficulties; as well
as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry
III. that either that monarch muto submit to abandon the
throne, of which he was unworthy, or by some sudden and
daring blow cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in
the beginning of the year, the duke of Guise drove his master
out of his capital city, and forced him to conclude a peace,
which left him only the hadow of royalty; and before the
\ear expired, he himself fell a vicim to the resentment and
tear of Henry, and to his own security. In Spain the opera-
tions were such as promiied something ill more uncommon.
During three years Philip had employed all the power of his
European dominions, and exhaufled the treasures of the In-
dies, in vail preparations tor war. A fleet, thegreatefl that
had ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Lif-
bon, and a numerous land army was assembled to embark
on board of it. Its destination was still unknown, though
man' circumfiances made it probable that the blow was aim-
ed, in the first place, against EIngland. Elizabeth had long
given secret aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Coun-
tries, and now openly afforded them her protecion. A nu-
merous body of her troops was in their service; the earl
of Leicefier commanded their armies; he had great sway in
the civil government of the republic; and ome of its most
considerable towns were in her polTeffion. Her fleets had in-
fu!ted the coafis of Spain, intercepted the galleons from the
\Vel Indies, and threatened the colonies there. Roused by
so many injuries, allured by views of ambition, and ani-
mated by a fuperlitious zeal for propagating the Romish
religion, Philip resolved not only to invade, but to conquer
England, to which his decent from the houfeof Lancaster,
and the donation of po pe Sixtus V. gave him in his own opi-
nion a double title.

*-.;:c ELIZABETH1 saw the danger approach, and prepared to
lde o'i encounter it. The meacures for the defence of'her kingdom
tiOCsa ° were concerted and carried on with the wisdom and vigour

which diltinguifhed her reign. Her chief care was to secure

the
432

the friendship of the king of Scots. She had treated BOO
the queen his mother with a rigour unknown among viI.
princes; she had often nsed himself harshly, and with con- . -
tempt; and though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his '8
resentment of these injuries, she did not believe it to be alto-
getherextinguifhled, and was afraid that, in her present situ-
ation it might burR out with a fatal violence. Philip, fen-
fible how much an alliance with Scotland would facilitate his
enterprise, courted James with the utmost assiduity. He
excited him to revenge his mother's wrong; he flattered him
with the hopes of sharing his conquests; and offered him in
marriage his daughter the infants Ifahella. At the fame
time, Scotland swarmed with priefis, his emissaries, who fe-
duced some of the nobles to popery, and corrupted others
with bribes and promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were
the heads of a fa&ion which openly espoused the interest of
Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving from that court, began to
aflemble his followers, and to take arms, that he might be
ready to join the Spaniards. In order to counterbalance all
there, Elizabeth made the warmest profeflions of friendihip
to the king; and Affby, her embaffador, entertained him
with magnificent hopes and promises. He allured him, that
his right of succession to the crown hould be publicly ac-
knowledged in England; that he thould be created a duke
in that kingdom; that he should be admitted to some (hare
in the government; and receive a considerable pension an-
nually. James, it is probable, was too well acquainted
with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on there promises. Bt
he understood his own interest in the present junture, and
pursued it with much fleadinefs. He rejeced an alliance
with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
presence an ambassador from the pope. He seized colonel
Semple, an agent of the prince of Parma. He drove many
of the seminary priests out of the kingdom. He marched
suddenly to Dumnfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and
took him prisoner. In a convention of the nobles, he de-
clared his resolution to adhere inviolably to the league with
England; and, without listening to the fuggeflions of re-
venge, determined to aE in concert with Elizabeth, against
the common enemy of the protestant faith. He put the
kingdom in a polture of defence, and levied troops to ob-
llru6c the landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an
army to Elizabeth's assistance, and told her ambassador, that
he expeaed no other favour from the king of Spain, but that
which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that when he

F f had

433

a o o had devoured all his companions, he would make him hi.
v. laiR morsel .

88 ' THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not infc-

& ato l rior to that of the king; and the extraordinary danger, with
eVeant in which they were threatened, suggested to them an extraor-
fa
of dinary expedient for their security. A bond was framed for

the maintenance of true religion, as well as the defence of
the king's person and government, in opposition to aU ene-
mies, foreign and domelfic. This contained a confefion
of the protestant faith, a particular renunciation of the errors
of popery, and the molt solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each other in
supporting he former, and contending againR the latter, to
the utmost of their powert. The king, the nobles, the
clergy, and the people, subscribed with equal alacrity.
Strange and uncommon as such a combination may now ap-
pear, many circumstances contributed at that time to recom-
mend it, and to render the idea familiar to the Scots. When
roused by any extraordinary event, or alarmed by any public
danger, the people of Israel were accustomed to bind them-
selves, by a solemn covenant, to adhere to that religion which
the Almighty had eablifhed among them; this the Scots
confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to
imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprise was under-
taken in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which
all concerned reckoned necessary for their security. The
form of this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
those political ones, of which so many infiances have occur-
red; the articles, stipulations, and peculiar modes of expref-
sion, are exaaly the fame in both. AlmoRf all the confider-
able popish princes were then joined in a league for extirpat-
ing the reformed religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-
association, in order to oppose the progress of that formidable
conspiracy. To these causes did thecovenant, which is become
so famous in hifory,oweits origin. It was renewed at different
times during the reign of James . It was revived with great
solemnity, though with considerable alterations, in the year
one thousand fix hundred and thirty-eight. It was adopted
by the English in the year one thousand fix hundred and
forty-three, and enforced by the civil and ecclesiastical autho-
rity of both kingdoms. The political purposes to which it was
then made subservient, and the violent and uncontitutional

* Camp. 544 Johnt. 139. Sptfw. 369.
+ Danlop's CoU"en. of Consef. vol. ii. o18 Cald. v. 9.

measure
43+4

neafures which it was then employed to promote, it is not a o o K
our province to explain. But at the junaure in which it viz.
was first introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a
prudent and laudable device for the defence of the religion i
and liberties of the nation; nor were the terms in which it
was conceived, other than might have been expeced from
men alarmed with the impending danger of popery, and
threatened with an invasion by the moll bigoted and most
powerful prince in Europe.

PHLIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him

either with the vigour or dispatch necessary to ensure the
luccefs of o mighty an enterprise. His fleet, whichought
to have failed in April, did not enter the English channel till
the middle of July. It hovered many days on the coast, in
expeftation of being joined by the prince of Parma, who was
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch squadron.
Continual disasters pursued the Spaniards during that time; The arma-
lucceflive forms and battles, which are well known, con- dectfated.
tpired with their own ill condu& to disappoint their enter-
prise. And, by the blefling of Providence, which watched
with remarkable care over the proteflant religion and the li-
berties of Britain, the English valour Scattered and destroyed
the Armado, on which Philip had arrogantly bellowed the
name of Invincible. After being driven out of the Englilh
seas, their hattered ships were forced to steer their course
toward Spain, round Scotland and Ireland. Many of them
suffered shipwreck on these dangerous and unknown coasts.
Though James kept his fubjeas under arms, to watch the
motion of the'Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
an hoflile manner, he received with great humanity seven
hundred who were forced ashore by a tempef, and after
supplying them with necessaries, permitted them to return
into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambaf-

fador to congratulate with James; and to compliment him
on the firmness and generosity he- had discovered during a
conjuncure so dangerous. But none of Afhby's promises
were any longer remembered; that minister was even ac-
cufed of having exceeded his powers, by his too liberal of-
sers; and conscious of his own falsehood, or ashamed of
being disowned by his court, he withdrew secretly out of
Scotland.

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own rafhners s19.
in attempting the. conquest of England, by a naval anna- li' i

Scotland.
Johns. 134. Camd. 548. Murdi; 635. 788.

435
F f

ment,

a oo K ment, equipped at so great a distance, and fubjeaed, in all

vl- its operations, to the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties,
,.t"' arising from few and winds, resolved to make his attack in

another form, and to adopt the plan which the princes of
Lorrain had long meditated, of invadingEngland through
Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might be
easily wafted over from the Low Countries to that kingdom,
ard if they could once obtain footing, or procure aflilfance
theie, the frontier of England was open and defenceless, and
the northern counties full of Roman catholics, who would
:eceive them with open arms. Meanwhile, a descent might
be threatened on the southern coast, which would divide the
Ere!ilh army, diftraa their councils, and throw the whole
kingdom into terrible convulsions. In order to prepare the
v.av for the execution of this design, he remitted a confider-
able furn of money to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scotland,
:and employed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, cottifh jesuits, to gain over as many persons of

?:;:, diflirn.ion as possible to his interest. Zeal for popery, and
ncble. ccc- the artful infitnations of these emissaries, induced several
-~.¢ inoblemen to favour a meafore which tended so manifetly to

the deflru&ion of their country. Huntly, though the king
had lately given him in marriage the daughter of his fa-
vouri:e the duke of Lennox, continued warmly attached to
the Romilh church. Crawford and Errol were animated
v th the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in.a cor-
refpor.dence with the prince of Parma, and, in their letters
to him, offered their service to the king of Spain, and un-
dertock, with the aid of fix thousand men, to render him
mailer of Scotland, and to bring so many of their vaflals
into the field, that he should be able to.enter England with
a numerous army. Francis Stewart, grandson of James V*i
v hom the king had created earl of Bothwell, though in-
fluenccd by nomotive of religion, for he still adhered to the
protestant faith, was prompted merely by caprice, and the
refleffnefs of his nature, to join in this treasonable corre-
fpcndnce.
F-b. . ALL there letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth,

alarmed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom,
sent them immediately to the king, and, reproaching him
with his former lenity towards the popifs-party, calledupon
him to check this formidable conspiracy by a proper severity.

The king's But James, though firmly attached to the proteftantreligion,
itth retafd though profoundly versed in the theological controversies be-

per He was the son of John Prior of Cidingham, one of James's naturl

children.

tween
436

t ween the Reformers and the church of Rome, though he B o o
had employed himself, at that early period'of life, in writ- VI-
ing a commentary on the Revelations, in which he laboured I W
to prove the pope to be antichrist, had nevertheless adopted
already those maxims concerning the treatment of the Ro-
man catholics, to which he adhered through thereft of his life.
The Roman catholics were at that time a powerful and aaive
party in England; they were far from being an incoAfiderable
fation in his own kingdom. The pope and king' of Spain
were ready to take part in all theirmachinations, and to fe-
cond every effort of their bigotry. The opposition of such a
body to his fuiccefion to the crown of England, added to the
averfenefsof the English from the governmentof firangers,
might create him many difficulties. In order to avoid these,
he thought it necessary to sooth rather than to irritate the
Roman catholics, and to reconcile them to his fucceflon, by
*he hopes of gentler treatment, and ome mitigation of the
rigour of those laws, which were now in force against them.
Ihis attempt to gain one party by promires of indulgence
4id ads of clemency, while he adhered with all the obfti-
'nacy of a disputant to the doctrines and tenets of the other,
has given an air of myflery, and even of contradiction, to
this part of the king's character. The papifis, with the
credplity of a fe& struggling to obtain power, believed his
heart to be wholly theirs; and the protestants,' with the jea-
lousy inseparable from those who are already in pofTeflion of
power, viewed every a& of lenity as a mark of indifference,
or a symptom of apoftacy. In order to please both, James
often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled with diffi-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfetion of govern-
ment and of kingcraft to consist.

His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these ge- H;i exx-.

neral maxims. Notwithstanding the folicitationscf the queen five lEnity
of England, enforced by the zealous remonfirances of his ,rators.
own clergy, a hort imprisonment was the only punishment
'he infliced upon Huntly and his associates. But he Coon
had reason to repent an act of clemency so inconfiflent with
the dignity of government. The first use which the confpi-
rators made of their liberty was, to assemble their followers,
and, under pretence of removing chancellor Maitland,
an able minister, but warmly devoted to the English interest,
from' the king's councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James hitfelf. This attempt being defeated, partly
by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by theirown ill-condA,
they were forced to retire to the North, where they openly
ereaed the fandard of rebellion. But as the king's govern-

men

437

B 00 ment was not generally unpopular, or his minilters odious,

vI 1. their own vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no zeal
l S- ' in the cause. Theking, in person, advancing againtl them

with such forces as he could suddenly levy, they durst not
rely so much on the fidelity of the troops, which, though
superior in number, followed them with reluaance, as to
hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they fur-
rendered to the king, and threw themselves on his mercy.
Huntly, Errol, Crawford, .and Bothwell, were all brought
to a public trial. Repeated as of treason were easily
proved againfi them. The king, however, did not permit
any sentence to be pronounced; and, after keeping them a
few months in confinement, he took occasion, amidRf the
public festivity, and rejoicings at the approach of his mar-
riage, to set them at liberty '.

Trhe king's As James was the only descendant of the ancient monarchs
mrriage of Scotland in the direc line; as all hopes of uniting th&.
efDnmark. crown of the two kingdoms would have expired with him*.

as the earl of Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne,
was lunatic; the king's marriage was, on all these account,
an event which the nation wished for with the utmoRt ardour.
He himself was no less desirous of accomplithing it; and
had made overtures for that purpose to the eldest daughter
of Frederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous
of every thing that would render the acceflion of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to the Englilh, endeavoured to
perplex James, in the fame manner she had done Mary;
and employed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his
marriage. His ministers, gained by bribes and promises
seconded her intention; and though. several different am-
baffadors were sent from 'Scotland to Denmark, they pro-
duced powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so extra-
vagant, that Frederick could not believe the king to be in
earnef; and fufpecing that there was some design to de-
ceive or amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to the
duke of Brunswick. Not discouraged by this disappoint-
ment, which he imputed entirely to the conduce of his own
ministers, James made addresses to the princess Anne,
Frederick's second daughter. Though Elizabeth endeavour-
ed to divert him from this by recommending Catherine the
king of Navarre's fiRter, as a more advantageous match;
though he prevailed on the privy council of Scotland to
declare against the alliance with Denmark, he persisted in
his choice; and despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of

Spotw. 373. Cald. iv. 103-130.

his
43g

his own ministers in any other manner, he secretly e- oo
couraged the citizens of Edinburgh to take arms. They vi.
threatened to tear in-pieces the chancellor, whom they Y*
accused as the person whole artifices had hitherto difap- '589
pointed the wishes of the king and the expe&ations of his
people. In consequence of this, the earl marifchal was
sent into Denmark at the head of a fplend d embassy. He
received ample powers and inruadons, drawn with the
king's own hand. The marriage articles were quickly agreed
upon, and the young queen set fail towards Scotland. James
made great preparations for her reception, and waited her
landing with all the impatience of a lover; when the un-
welcome account arrived, that a violent tempest had arisen,
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition so
Thattered, that there was little hope of its putting again to
sea before thefpring. This unexpe&ed disappointment he
felt with the utmost sensibility. He inflantly fitted out
some ships, and, without communicating his intention to
any of his council, failed in person, attending by the chan-
cellor, several noblemen, and a train of three hundred
persons, in quell of his bride. He arrived safely in a oa.
small harbour near Upilo, where the queen then resided.
There the marriage was solemnized; and as it would have Nov. 24.
been rash to trust those boisterous seas in the winter season,
James accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and
repairing to Copenhagen, passed several months there, amidst
continual seasing and amusements, in which both the queen
and himself had great delight*.

No event in the king's life appears to be a wider deviation

from his general characer, than this sudden sally. His ton
Charles I. was capable of that exceflive admiration of the
other sex, which arises from great sensibility of heart,
heightened by elegance of taste; and the romantic air of
his journey to Spain suited such a disposition. But James
was not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and always ex-
prelfed that contempt for the female characer which a
pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to
inspire. He was exasperated, however, and rendered im-
patient by the many obstacles which had been laid in his
way. He was anxious to secure the political advantages
which he expeced from marriage; and fearing that a delay
might afford Elizabeth and his own ministers an opportunity
of thwarting him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the
resolution of preventing them, by a voyage from which he

Mclvil, 35. Spotfw.377. Murdin, 637.

expeaed

o o expeEed to return in a few weeks. The nation seemed to
VI1. applaud his condu&, and to be pleased with this appearance
Y~' of amorous ardour in a young prince. Notwithstanding his
'589. abfencc so long beyond the time he expeced, the nobles,

the clergy, and the people, vied with one another in loyalty
and obedience; and no. period in the king's reign was more
remarkable for tranquility, or more free from any eruption
of those fations which so often disturbed the kingdom.

BOOK
44°

# BOOK VIII.

B 0OOK VIII.
O N the fir of May the king and queen arrived at Leith, B o o

and were received by their subje&s with every poflible viii.

expreflon of joy. The solemnity of the queen's coronation '-v-J
was conduced with great magnificence; but o low had the Th king
order of bilhops fallen in the opinion of the public, that and queen
none of them were present on that occasion, and Mr. Robert arrive i.
Bruce, a presbyterian minister of great reputation, set the Scotland.
crown on her head, administered the sacred unaion, and
performed the other customary ceremonies.

THE zealand success with which many of the clergy had

contributed towards preserving peace and order in the king-
dom, during his absence, reconciled James, in a great de-
gree, to their persons, and even to the presbyterian form of
government. In presence of an assembly, which met this Augut 4.
year, he made high encomiums on the discipline as well as
the docrine of thechurch, promised to adhere inviolably to
both, and permitted the aflembly to frame such as as
gradually abolised all the remains of epifcopsl jurifdi&ion,
and paved the way for a full and legal eablithment of the
pretbyterian model .

AN event happened oon after, which afforded the clergy ,.

no small triumph. Archbishop Adamson, their ancient op-
ponent, having fallen under the king's displeasure, having
been deprived of the revenues of his fee in consequence of
the ad of annexation, and being oppressed with age, with
poverty, and diseases, made the meanest fubmiflion to the
clergy, and delivered to the assembly a formal recantation of
all his opinions concerning church government, which had
been matter of offence to the presbyterians. Such a con-
feflion, from the most learned person of the episcopal order,
was confidered as a teflimony which the force of truth had
extorted from an adversary t.

MEANWHILE, the king's exceflive clemency towards of- Disorders in

fenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such the king-
acs of violence, as brought his government under contempt,
and proved fatal to many of his subje&s. The hifRory of
several years, about this time, is filled with accounts of the

* Cald. iv. o4, t Spotfw. 385. Cald. iv. z14.

deadly

441

B o00 deadly quarrels between the great families, and of murders
VIl.- and affaflinations perpetrated in the most audacious manner,

.**/ and with circumstances of the utmoRl barbaritv. All the,

defects in the feudal ariflocracy were now felt more sensibly,
perhaps, that at any other period in the hiltoryof Scotland,
and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree
scarce confiflent with the preservation of society: while the
king, too gentle to publish, or too feeble to aft with vigour,
suffered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

An attempt BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft,
of Both- which is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his atten-
ainlt the tion, and thore fufpeaed of it felt the whole weight of his
king. authority. Many persons, neither extremely old nor wretch-

edly poor, which were usually held to be certain indications
of this crime, but maters of families, and matrons of ade-
cent rank, and in the middle age of life, were seized and
tortured. Though their confeflionscontained the mofi absurd
and incredible circumflances, the king's prejudices, those of
the clergy and of the people, conspired in believing their
extravaganrcies without hesitation, and in punishing their
persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers
accused Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know
the time of the king's death, and of having employed their
art, to raise the storms which had endangered the queen's
life, and had detained James o long in Denmark. Upon
this evidence that nobleman was committed to prison. His
turbulent and haughty spirit could neither submit to the
reflraint, nor brook such an indignity. Having gained his
keepers, he made his escape, and imputing the accusation to
the artifices of his enemy the chancellor, he afembled his
followers, under pretence of driving him from the king's
councils. Being favoured by rome of the king's attendants,
he was admitted by a secret paTage under cloud of night,
into the court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He ad-
vanced direfly towards the royal apartment, but happily
before he entered, the alarm was taken, and the doors shut.
D:c. 7. Whilehe attempted to burst open some of them, and to set

fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh had time to run to
their arms, and he escaped with the utmost difficulty; owing
his safety to the darkness of the night, and the precipitancy
with which he fled*.
-5. 1 HE retired towards the north, and the king having unad-

vifedly given a commiflion to the earl of Huntly to perfue
him and his followers with fire and sword, he, under colour of

Melv. 388. Spotfw. 36.

executing
44

executing that commiflion gratified his private revenge, and o o
surrounding the house of the earl of Murray, burnt it to vxl.
the ground, aud flew Murray himself. The murder of a
young nobleman of such promising virtues, and the eir of Feb,59
the regent Murray, the darling of the people, excited uni-
versal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in a
tumultuous manner; and though they were restrained, by
the care of the magistrates, from any a& of violence, they
threw aside all refpe& for the king and his ministers, and
openly insulted and threatened both. While this mutinous
spirit continued, James thought it prudent to withdraw from
the city, and fixed his residence for some time at Glasgow.
There Huntly surrendered himself to justice; and, notwith-
standing the atrociousness of his crime, and the clamours of
the people, the power.of the chancellor, with whom he was
now closely confederated, and the king's regard for the me-
mory of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, not only proteted him from the sentence which such
an odious aaion merited, but exempted him even from the
formality of a public trial *.

A STEP of much importance was taken oon after with re- Presbyterian

gard to the government of the church. The clergy had long church go-
complained of the encroachments made upon their privi- eb;me
leges and jurifdiaion by the as of the parliament one thou- by law.
sand five hundred and eighty-four, and though these laws
had now loft much of their force, they resolved to petition
the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in
form. The juncure for pufling such a measure was well
chosen. The king had loft much of the public favour by
his lenity towards the popish fa&ion, and still more by his
remiffnefsin pursuing the murderers of the earl of Murray.
The chancellor had not only a powerful party of the cour-
tiers combined against him, but was become odious to the
people, who imputed to him every false ftep in the king's
condut. Bothwell still lurked in the kingdom, and being
secretly supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-
ftration, was ready every moment to renew his audacious
enterprises. James, for all there reasons, was extremely'
willing to indulge the clergy in their request, and not only
consented to a law, whereby the as of one thousand five
hundred and eighty-four were rescinded or explained, but
he carried his complaisance still further, and permitted the,
parliament to establish the presbyterian government, in its
general assemblies, provincial synods, prefbyteries, and kirk

S jots. 387.

letions,

443

o oo sessions; with all the different branches of their discipline
vi i. andjurifdiiion, in the moll ample manner. All the zeal
r'-c-r - and authority of the clergy, even under the administration

'192- of regents, from whom they might have expeaed rhe mods

partia favour, could nor obtain the fanebon of law, in con-
firmation of their mode of ecciefialtical government. No
prince was ever lets disposed than James to approve a sys-
tem, whose republican genius inspired a paflion for liberty,
so repugnant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative.
Nor could any aversion be more inveterate than his, to the
austere and uncompl)ing characer of the presbyterian
clergy in that age; ho, more eminent for zeal than Tor
policy, often contradiced his opinions, and cenfnred his
condua, with a freedom equally offensive to his dogmatism
as a theologian, and to his pride as a king. His situation,
however, obliged him frequently to conceal, or to dissemble,
his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his fubje-ts, by
indulging the popilh fa&ion more than they approved, he
endeavoured to atone for this by conceflions to the prefby-
terian clergy, more liberal than he himself would otherwise
have chosen to grant .

Is. this parl-ament, Bothwell and all his adherents were

attainted. But he soon made a new attempt to seize the
king at Falkland; and James, betrayed by some of his
courtiers, and feebly defended by others, who wished well
to Bothwecl, as the chancellor's avowed enemy, owre.his
fafetv to the fidelity and vigilance of fir Robert Melvil, and
to the irrefolu;ion of Bothwell's afrociates A.

A r'w c- SCARCELY 'as this danger over, when the nation was
sre'l "l alarmed with the discovery of a new and more formidable

:. conspiracy. George Ker, the lord Newbattle's brother, be-

ing leized as he was ready to set fail for Spain, many fufpi-
cious papers were found in his custody, andamong these,
leveral blanks, signed by the earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this extraordinary precaution they hoped to
escape any darger of discovery. But Ker's resolution
shrinking when torture was threatened, he confessed that
he was empioved by these oblftnen to carry on a negotia-
t!on with the king of Spain; that the blanks subscribed with
the;r name Acre to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie;
that tev w.ere inlfruaed to offer the faithful service of the
three earls to that monarch, and to solicit him to land a
body of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the mouth of
C_, ',;tah which they undertook, in the firt place, to

+ _* .
: ., 252. S ';-.7. ~-., { M-!r. 402.

.stablish

establish the Roman catholic religion in Scotland, and thei: o00 O
to invade England with the whole forces of the kingdom. v.ri.
David Graham of Fintt ;y, and Barday of Ladyland, whorri he ' - -v
accused of being privy to the conipiracy, were taken into '592
cufiody, and confirmed all the circumntlancesof hisconfeffio"-.

THE nation having been for Come time in continual terror ,593.

and agitation by so many fucceflive conspiracies, the disc: Zeal o; the
very of this new danger completed the panic. All ranks P'ople,
of men, as if the enemy had already been at their gates,
thought themselves called upon to fland forth in de-
fence of their country. The ministers of Edinburgh,
without waiting for any warrant from the king, who hap-
pened at that time to be absent from the capital, and without
having received any legal commiflion, assembled a confi-
derable number of peers and barons, in order to provide-an
inflant remedy against the impending danger. They seized
the earl of Angus, and committed him to the cafile; they
examined Ker; and prepared a remonflrance to be laid
before the king, concerning the (late of the nation, and
the necessity of prosecuting the conspirators with becoming
vigour. James, though jealous of every encroachment on andproceed.
his prerogative, and offended with fubjeEts, who, inflead ingsof the
of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, found. it necef- kingagai't
fary, during the violence of the ferment, not only to-adopt
their plan, but even to declare that no confederation should
ever induce him to pardon those who had been euiltyof so
odionusa treason. He summoned the earls of Huntly and'
Errol to furrenderthemfelves tojultice. Graham of Fintry, Jan 8,
whom his peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he'corn
manded to be publicly beheaded; and marching into the
north at the head of an army, the two earls, together with
Angus, who had escaped out of prison, retired to the moun-
tains. He placed garrisons in the cafiles which belonged
to them-; compelled their vassals, and the barons in the adja-
cent countries, to subscribe a bond containing profeflions
of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence
to the protestant faith; and the better to secure the tran-
quillity of that part of the kingdom, constituted the earls of
Athol and Marifchal his lieutenants there t.

HAVING finished hisexpedition, James returnedto Edin- March is.
burgh, where he found lord Borrough, an extraordinary am- Elizabeth

foicits him

baffador from the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at to treat
the discovery of a conspiracy which she confidered as no lets thi n vit:
formidable to her own kingdom than to Scotland, rer: '' .

'k Rymer, xvi. Igo. + Spotw-. 301. Cald. iv. 2g9.

Tro? cl '

B o pt roached James with his former remissness, and urged him,
vil. as be regarded the preservation of the proteflant religion,
L- . -- or the dignity of his own crown, to punish this repeated

'593- treason with rigour; and if he could not apprehend the

persons, at leaf to confiscate the estates, of such audacious
rebels. She weakened however the force of these requefRs,
by interceding at the fame time in behalf of Bothwell,
whom, according to her usual policy in nourilhing a facious
spirit among the Scottish nobles, he had taken under her
proteaion. James absolutely refused to lifien to any
intercefion in favour of one who had so often, and with
so much outrage, insulted both his government and his
perron. With regard to the popish conspirators, he de-
clared his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but
that he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a
small fm of money from Elizabeth, which he, diRruflful
perhaps of the manner in which he might apply it, shewed
no inclination to grant. The zeal, however, and impor-
tunity of his own fuhje&s obliged him to call a parliament,
in order to pass an a& of attainder againfR the three earls.
But before it met, Ker made his escape out of prison, and,
en pretence that legal evidence of their guilt could not be
produced, nothing was concluded against them. The king
himself was universally fufpeaed of having contrived this
rnifice, on purpose to elude the requests of the queen of
England, and to disappoint the wishes of his own people;
and, therefore, in order to sooth the clergy, who exclaimed
loudly againfi his conduct, he gave way to the paling of an
a&, which ordained those who obstinately contemned the
censures of the church to be declared outlaws *.

Bothwvc WHILE the terror excited by the popish conspiracy posses-
frprifs the fed the nation, the court had been divided by two rival sac-
l""s. tioos, which contended for the chief direcion of affairs.

At the head of one was the chancellor, in whom the king
reposed entire confidence. For that very reason, perhaps,
he had fallen early under the queen's displeasure. The duke
of Lennox, the earl of Athol, lord Ochiltree, and all of the
name of Stewart, espoused her quarrel, and widened the
breach. James, fond no less of domeflic tranquillity than
of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, for some
time, in hopes that the queen's resentment would subside.
But as he flood in need, in the present juncure, of the as-
filtance of an able minister, he had recalled him tocourt. In
order to prevent him from recovering his former power, the

Cald. iv. 343. Spotfw. 393. ParL 13 Jac, V. c. 164.

Stewarts
46

Stewarts had recourse to an expedient no less illegal than o o K
desperate. Having combined with Bothwell, who wasof viI.
the fame name, they brought him back secretly into Scot- - -
land; and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced him I'93-
in the royal -apartment with a numerous train of armed J"ly 14.
followers. James, though deserted byall his courtiers, and
incapable of refinance, discovered more indignation than
fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on
the earl to finish his treasons by piercing his sovereign to
the heart. But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored
pardon. The king was not in a condition to refuse his de-
mands. A few days after le signed a capitulation with
this fuccelsful traitor, to whom he was really a prisoner,
whereby he bound himself to grant him a remiflion for all past
offences, and to procure the ratification of it in parliament;
and in the mean time to dismiss the chancellor, the mailer
of Glamis, lord Home, and fir George Home, from his
councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part, consented
to remove from court, though he left there as many of his
afiociates as he thought sufficient to prevent the return of
the adverse facion.

BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the king under He recovers

the fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often sub- his liberty.
je& during his minority. He discovered so much impa. Sept 7.
tience to (hake off his fetters, that those who had imposed,
durit not continue, the reitraint. They permitted him to
call a convention of the nobles at Stirling, and to repair
thither himself. ,All Bothwell's enemies, and all who were
desirous of gaining the king's favour by appearing to be so,
obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the king's person and authority to be high treason, and
declared him absolved from any obligation to observe con-
ditions extorted by force, and which violated so essentially
his royal prerogative. James, however, ill proffered him
a pardon, provided he would sue for it as an a of mercy,
and promise to retire out of the kingdom. These condi-
tions Bothwell reje&ed with disdain, and betaking himself
once more to arms, attempted to surprise the king; but
finding him on his guard, fled to the borders f.

THE king's ardour againit Bothwell, compared with his Sufpeaedof

flow and evasive proceedings againR the popilh lords, oc- fth'v'"ll
cafioned a general disgust among his fubjeas; and was im- lords.
puted either to an excessive attachment to the persons of those
conspirators, or to a secret partiality towards their opinions;

Clld. iv. 316. Spotfw. 395.

both

4*7

B o o . both which gave rife to no unreasonable fears. The clergy,
vrir. a the immediate guardians of the protefnatit religion,
--- 'v- thought themfeltv bound, in such a junc&ure, to take ex-
'5c93 traordinary eps for its prefcrvation. The provincial fynod

of Fife Irappening to meet at that time, a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as
ohftinate and irredaimable papists; and though none of
the conspirators resided within the bounds of the fynod, or
were fubje to its jurifdicion, such was the zeal of the
members, that, overlooking this irregularity, they pro-
nounced againfl them the sentence of excommunication, to
which the a of last parliament added new terrors. Left
this hould be imputed to a few ien, and accounted the
aS of a small part of the church, deputies were appointed
to attend the adjacent synods, and to desire their approba-
tion and concurrence.

I.s. t~t AI. event happened a few weeks after which increased
towards the people's furpicions of the king. As he was marching
them. on an expedition againfi the borderers, the three popish
Oi°'. earls coming suddenly into his presence, offered to submit

themfeives to a legal trial; and James, without committing
them to cuflody, appointed a day for that purpose. They
prepared to appear with a formidable train of their friends
and vassals. But in the mean time the clergy, together
with many peers and barons, assembling at Edinburgh, re-
monftrated againfi the king's extreme inidulgence with great
boMnefs, and demanded of him, according to the regular
course of justice, to commit to sure cuflody persons charged
with the highest ats of treason, who could not be brought
to a legal trial, until they were absolved from the censures
of the church; and to call a convention of eates, to deli-
berate concerning the method of proceeding against them.
At the fame time they offered to accompany him in arms
to the place of trial, left such audacious and powerful cri-
minals should overawe justice, and diaate to the judges to
whom they pretended to submit. James, though extremely
offended, both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient
to put off the day of trial, and to call a convention of estates.
in order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By
being humoured in this point, their fufplcions began gradu-
ally to abate, and the chancellor managed the convention
so artfully, that he himself, together with a few other mem-
bers, was impowered to pronounce a final sentence upon the
Xov. 6. conspirators. After much deliberation they ordained, that

the three earls and their associates hould be exempted from.

all

all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of their cor- o
refpondence with Spain; that, before the firfi day of Fe- vxt.
bruary, they hould either submit to the church, and pub- *
licly renounce the errors of popery, or remove out of the 1
kingdom; that, before the fiRt of January, they hould de-
clare which of there alternatives they would embrace; that
they hould find surety for their peaceable demeanor for the
future; and that if they failed to signify their choice in due
time, they should lore the benefit of this ad of abolition, and
remain exposed to all the pains of law *.

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred ,594

much reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to thp
popish superstition, fubmillive to all the dictates of their
prieits, and buoyed up with hopes and promires of foreign
aid, the three earls refused to accept of the conditions, and
continued their treasonable correspondence with the court
of Spain. A convention of estates pronounced them to have . 8
forfeited the benefit of the articles which were offered;
and the king required them, by proclamation, to surrender
themselves to jufice. The presence of the English am-
baffador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of there pro-
ceedings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to James's motions,
and imputing his relucance to punifl the popish lords to
a secret approbation of their designs, had sent lord Zouche
to represent, once more, the danger to which he exposed
himself, by this false moderation; and to require him to
exercise that rigour which their crimes, as well as the
poflure of 'affairs, rendered necessary. Though the fleps
now taken by the king silenced all complaints on that head,
yet Zouche, forgetful of his characer as an ambassador,
entered into private negotiations with fich of the Scottilh
nobles as disapproved of the king's measures, and held al-
moll an open correspondence with Bothwell, who, according
to the uual artifice of malecontents, pretended much soli-
citude for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
and covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal
againfi those counsellors who restrained the king from pur-
suing the avowed enemies of the protestant faith. Zouche
encouraged him, in the name of his miltrefs, to take arms
againfl his sovereign.

MEANWUILE, the king and the clergy were filled with

mutual diftrufl of each other. They were jealous, perhaps, tAet oaf
to excess, that James's affections leaned too much towards the Bothwell's,
popish faAion; he fufpeded them, without good reason, of

Cald. iv. 330. Spotrw. 397.

G g prompting

440

·o o v prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even of supplying him
viil. with money for that purpose. Little inigation, indeed,

was wanting to route such a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's
ss to any daring enterpiife. He appeared suddenly within a

mile of Edinburgh, at the head of four hundred horse. The
pretences, by which he endeavoured tojuftify this infurrec-
tion, were extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to
popery, concern for the king's honour, and for the liberties
of the nation. James was totally unprovided for his own
defence; he had no infantry, and was accompanied only
.with a few horsemen of lord Home's train. In this extre-
mity, henimplored the aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and,
in order to encourage them to at with zeal, he promised
to proceed against the popish lords with the utmost rigour
of law. Animated by their ministers, the citizens ran
cheerfully to their arms, and advanced, with the king at
their head, against Bothwell; but he, notwithlsanding his
success in putting to flight lord Home, wlio had ralhly
charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry, retired
to Dalkeith without daring to attack the king. His fol-
lowers abandoned him soon after, and discouraged by so
many successive disappointments, could never afterwards be
brought to venture into the field. He betook himself to
his usual lurking places in the north of England; but Eli-
zabeth, in compliance with the king's remonstrances, obliged
him to quit his retreat .

Frdh dan- No sooner was the king delivered from one danger, than
ern from he was called to attend to another. The popifb lords, in con-
ordp. sequence of their negotiations with Spain, received in the
April 3. spring a upply of money from Philip. What bold designs

this might inspire, it was no easy matter to conjeaure.
From men under the dominion of bigotry, and whom in-
dulgence could not reclaim, the most desperate a&ions were
to be dreaded. The assembly of the church immediately
took the alarm; remonltrated against them with more
bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified the sentence
cf excommunication pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their ohfiinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only he
enerally displeasing to his own fhbiecs, but give rife to
unfavourable suspicions among the Engllh, exerted himself
rn- i. with unusual vigont. He called a parliament; laid before it

all the circumilances and aggravations of the conspiracy; and
though there were but few members present, and several

S*otfw. 403. Cald. iv. 359.

Of

bs there connected with the conspirators by blood or friend- B o O
Ihip, he prevailed on them, by his influence and importu- vizi.
nity, to pronounce the most rigorous sentence which the law I
can infli&. They were declared to be guilty of high treason '594.
and their estates and honours forfeited. At the fame titme
itatutes, more evere than ever, were enaaed against the
professors of the popish religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of Battle of

great difficulty. Three powerful barons, cantoned in a part Glelivat.
of the country of difficult access, surrounded with numerous
vassals, and supported by aid from a foreign prince, were
more than an overmatch for a Scottish monarch. No in-
treaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money ne-.
ceffary for defraying the expences of an epedition against
them. To attack them in person, with his own forces alone,
might have exposed James both to disgrace and to danger,
He had recourse to the only expedient which remained in
such a situation, for aiding the impotence of sovereign au-
thority; he delegated h authority to the earl of Argyll and
lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity with the
conspirators; and gave them a commission to invade their
lands, and to seize the cafiles which belonged to them.
Bothwell, notwithllanding all his high pretensions of zeal
for the protestant religion, having now entered into a close
confederacy with them, the danger became every day more
urging. Atgyll, solicited by the king, and routed by the
clergv, took the field at the head of seven thousand men.
Huntly and Errcl met him at Glenlivat, with an army far
inferior in number, but composed chiefly ot gentlemen of
the low countries, mounted on horseback, and who brought
along with them a train of field-pieces. They encountered c.
each other with all the fury which hereditary enmity and
ancient rvalhip add to undifcip!ined courage. But the l595.
Highlanders, disconcerted by the first discharge of the can-
ron, to which they were little accustomed, and unable to
refilt the impression of cavalry, were soon put to fight; and
Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation at their
disgrace, and calling on them to (land, and to vindicate the
honour of their name .

ON the firtt intelligence of his -'feat, James, though

obliged to pawn his jewels in order to rase money tf assem-
bled a small bodyior troops, and marched towards the north.
He was joined by the rvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and

Cald. iv. 408. t Birch, Mem. i. 186.

Gg

other

Vl". lotl several of their principal followers at Glrnlivat,,and

others refuting to bear arms againtl the king in person, were
obliged to retire to the mountains. James wafted their'
lands; put garritons in some of their caales; burnt others;
and left the duke of Lennox as his lieutenant in that pait of
the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to restrain their
from gathering to any head there, or from infefing the

PopFih lords low country. Reduced at last to extreme distress by the
driseo out
of the king rigour of the season, and the desertion of their followers,
dom. they obtained the king's permission to go beyond seas, and

gave ecurity that they should neither return without his li-
celnfe, nor engage in any new intrigues against the protestant
re igion, or the peace of the kingdom .

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eflablifhed in the north

of Scotland; and the firmness and vigour which James had
displayed in his last proceedings againl' them, regained himr,
in a great degree, the confidence of his protestant fubjeas.

The Ro- But he funk, in the fame proportion, and for the fame rea-
man catho- son, in the eRteem of the Roman catholics. They had as-
lic incensed ferted his mother's right to the crown of England with so
against
Jmes much warmth, that they could not, with any deCency, re-

je& his; and the indulgence, with which he affeaed to
treat the professors of that religion, inspired them withfuch
hopes, that they viewed his acceflion to the throne as no un-
desirable event. But the rigour with which the king had
lately pursued the conspirators, and the everefiatutesagainft
popery to which he had given his consent, convinced them
that these hopes were vil.onary; and they began to look
about in qutft of ome new filccelTor, whose rights they
mi.:ht oppose to his. The apilis who resided in England
turned their eves towards lhe earl of Effex, whose generous
mind, thobgh firmly eflablilhed in the proteflant faith, ab-
horred the severities infliaed in that age on account of reli-
gious opinions. Those of the lame fe&, who were in exile,
formed a bolder scheme, and one nore suitable to their situ-
ation. They advanced lie claim of the infanta of Spain;
and Parsons the jesuit publifed a book, in which, by falf
quotations from history, by fabulous genealogies, and ab-
surd arguments, intermingled ith bitter invecives againfl
the king of Scots, he, ndeavoured to prove the infanta's title
to th tEnglifh gown to be preferable to his. Philip, though
involved already in a war both with France and England, and
scarce able to defend the remains of the Burgundian provinces

Spotfw. 404. Caid. 373, &c.

againfi

1-11TOR1Y OF SO.TLAND.
4;3

againl. the Dutch commonwealth, .eagerly grasped at this BOOK
airy projeE. The dread of a Spanih pretender to ihe crown, vitr.
and the opposition which the papifls began to form againAf '-
the king's fucceflion, contributed not a little to remove the 9
prejudices of the protestants, and to prepare the way for
that event.

BOT HWELL, whole name has been so often mentioned asPBothwell

the difturher of the king's tranquillity, and of the peace offorced to fly
the kingdom, was now in a wretched condition. Aban-
doned by the queen of England, on account of his confede-
racy with the popish lords.; excommunicated by the church
for the fame reason; and deserted in his difrefs by his yn
followers;. he was obliged to fly for safety to Franc, and
thence to Spain and Italy, whete, after renouncing th pro-
teftant faith, he led many years an obscure and indigent life,
remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery. The
king, though extremely ready to.facrfice,the Itrongoet re-
fentment .to the flighted acknowledgments, could never, be
softened by his submission, nor be induced to liten to any
intercefioln in his behalf *.

TiIS year the king loft chancellor Maitland, an able mi-

niifer, on whom he had long devolved the whole weight of
public affairs. As James loved him while alive, he wrote,
in honour of his memory, a copy of verses, which, when
compared with the compositions of that age, are far from
being inelegant t.

SOON after his death, a confiderabl change was made in A chadn in

the administration, At that time, the annual charges offtration.
government far exceeded the king's revenues. The queen
was fond of expensive amusements. James himself was a
franger to ceconomy. -It became necessary, for all there
reasons, to levy the public revenues with greater order and
rigour, and to hulband them with more care. Thisimport-
ant trust was committed to eight gentlemen of the law ,
who, from their number, were called Ocavians. The
powers vested in them were ample, and almofR unlimited.
The king bound himself neither.to add to their number, nor
to supply. any vacancy that might happen, without their con-
sent: and knowing.the.facility of his own temper, agreed
that uo alienation of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or
order on the treasury, hould be held valid, unless it were
ratified by the subscription of five of the commissioners; all

' Winw. Mem. i. Spotfw. 410. - Spotrw. 411.
$ Alexander Seaton president of the eflion, Walter Stewart commendator

of Blantyre lord privy eal, David'Carnegy, John Lindsay, James Elphingfton,
Thomas Hamilton, John Skeae cerk register, and Peter Young elemofynar.

their

o0o X their as and decisions were declared to he of equal Force
vzll. with the sentence of judges in :ivil courts; and in confe-

quence of them, and without any other warrant, any perfoqr
might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such extensive
jurifdi&ion, together with the ahfolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the government
into their hands. United among themselves, they gradually
undermined the reft of the king's ministers, and seized on
every lucrative or honourable office. The ancient servants
of the crown repined at being obliged to quit their flations
to new men. The favourites and young courtiers murmured
at feeing the king's liberality sinted by their prescriptions.
And the clergy exclaimed against some of them as known
apoflates to popery, and fufpeaed others of secretly favour-
ing it. They retained their power, however, notwithftand-
ing this general combination against them; and hey owed
it entirely to the order and ceconomy which they introduced
into the adminifiration of the finances, by which the necef-
fary expences of government were more easily defrayed than
in any other period of the king's reign .

THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said

thc iato, to be carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scot-
agaft the land with the dread of a new invasion. James took proper
rpoh ordt. measures for the defence of his kingdom. But these did not

satisfy the zeal of the clergy, whose suspicions for the king's
sincerity began to revive; and as he had permitted the wives
of the banished peers to levy the rents of their estates, and
to live in their houses, they charged him with rendering the
a& of forfeiture ineffecual, by supporting the avowed ene-
mies of the protestant faith. The assembly of the church
took under'confideration the slate of the kingdom, and hav-
ing appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly renewed
the covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to
the proteflant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors.
A committee, consisting of the most eminent clergymen, and
of manv barons and gentlemen of diftinaion, waited on the
king, and laid before him a plan for the security of the king-
dom, a: d the preser.vation of religion. They urged him to
appropriate the eflates of the banished lords as a fund for
the maintenance of soldiers to take the ftri&eft precautions
for preventing the return of such turbulent subje&s into the
country; and to pursue all who were fufpeted of being their
adherents with the utmost rigour.

Spotfw. 413. 435.

NOHING

No T IN G could bemore repugnanttotheking'sfchemes, a o oK

or more disagreeable to his inclination, than there propofi- vii'
tions. Averse, through his whole life, to any course where ' -~
he expected opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his '5S6.
ends with the character of moderation, and by. the arts ofTeni;ffi'neg'
policy, he observed with concern the prejudices againf him with regard
which were growing among the Roman catholics, and re-to them.
solved to make Come atonement for that part of his cond&Et
which had drawn upon him their indignation. Elizabeth
was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been in
danger; if any popish competitor hould arise to dispute his
right of fucceflion, a faction so powerful as that of the ba-
nifhed lords might be extremely formidable; and any divi-
sion among his own subje&s might prove fatal at a jun&ure
which would require their united and moi vigorous efforts.
Inftear, therefore, of the additional severities which the
assembly proposed, James had thoughts of mitigating the
punishment which they already fufered. And as they were
surrounded, during their residence in foreign parts, by Philip's
emissaries; as resentment might dispose them to lifien more
favourably than ever to their fuggefiions; as-defpair might
drive them to ill more atrocious a&ions; he resolved to
recall them, under certain conditions, into their native
country. ' Encouraged by these sentiments of the king in
their favour, of which they did not want intelligence, and
wearied already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,
they ventured to return secretly to Scotland. Soon after,
they presented a petition to the king, begging his permifliont
to reside at their own houses, and offering to give security
for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour. James called a
convention'of estates to deliberate on a matter of such iim-
portance, and by their advice he granted the petition.

As son as'they' were informed of this, the' members of

a conrmittee, appointed by the last genelal affmbly, iimet ai The ralh
Edinburgh, and with all the precipitancy of fear, and'of pro'eedgs

of the

.zeal, took such 'resolutions as they thought necessary for the clergy and

afetly of the'kingdom. They wrote circular letters to all people.
the prefbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the
approaching danger; they exhorted. them to stir up their
people to the detence of their jut' rights; they commanded
them to publifb, in all their' pulpits, the at excomniuni-
cating the popifti'lords; and enjoined them to lay all those
who were fufpeeted of favouring popery under the fame
censure by a fumrnary sentence, and without observing the
usual formalities of trial. ' As the danger seemed too pref-
sing to wait' for the ftRted meetings of the judicatories of the

church

45S

o o church, they made choice of the molt eminent clergymen
vilS. in different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to re-
'-
. fide constantly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with

the ministers of that city, under the name of the Standing
Council of the Church, and vefied in this body the supreme
authority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the church should receive no de-
trirent.

THESE proceedings, no less unconflitutional than un-

precedented, were manifefi encroachments on the royal
prerogative, and bold steps towards open rebellion. The
king's condu3, however, jultified in some degree such ex-
cesses. His lenity towards the papilts, so repugnant to the
principles of that age; his pardoning the conspirators, not-
withstanding repeated prornifes to the contrary; the refpeC
he paid to lady Huntly, who was attached to the Rognifh
religion no less than her husband; his committing the care
of his daughter, the princess Elizabeth, to lady Levingfton,
who was infeaed with the fame fuperflition; the contempt
with which he talked, on all occasions, both of the characer
of minifiers, and of their funcion; were circumstances
which might have filled minds, not prone by nature to
jealousy, with some suspicions; and might have precipitated
into rah counsels those who were far removed from intem-
perate zeal. But, however powerful the motives might be
which influenced the clergy, or however laudable the end
they had in view, they conducted their measures with no
address, and even with little prudence. James discovered
a firong inclination to avoid a rupture with the church, and,
jealous as he was of his prerogative, would willingly have
made many conceflions for the fake of peace. By his com-
mand ome of the privy counsellors had an interview with
the more moderate among the clergy, and inquired whether
Huntly and his associates might not, upon making proper
acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom of the
church, and be exempted from any further punishment on
account of their pati apoftacy and treasons.- They replied,
that though the gate of mercy flood always open for those
who repented and returned, yetas these noblemen had been
guilty of idolatry, a crime deserving death both by the law
of God and of man, the civil magistrate could not legally
grant them a pardon; and even though;the church hould
absolve them, it was his duty to inflic punishment upon
them. This inflexibility in those who were reckoned the
most compliant of the order, filled the king with indigna-

tion,
4$6

tion, which the imprudence and obflinacy of a private clergy- » o o K
man heightened into rage. vl' .

MR. DAVID BLAC K, minifieS of St. Andrew's, discoursing

in one of his sermons, according to custom, concerning the Seditious
ftlte of the nation, affirmed that the king had permitted the dotrine

taught by

popish lords to return into Scotland, and by that acion had Blac.
discovered the treachery of his own heart; that all kings
were the devil's children; that Satan had now the guidance
of the court; that the queen of England was an atheist;
that the judges were miscreants and bribers; the nobility
godless and degenerate; the privy counsellors cormorants,
and men of no religion; and in his prayer for the queen he
used these words, we must pray for her for fafhion-fake, but
we have no cause, (he will never do us good. James com- Nov. o.
manded him to be summoned before the privy council, to The clerhi
answer for such seditious expressions; and the clergy, instead defence.
of abandoning him to the punilhment which such a petulant
and criminal attack on his superiors deserved, were so im-
prudent as to espouse his cause, as if it had been the com-
mon one of the whole order. The controversy concerning
the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of the clergy
to testiss against vices of every kind, which had been agitated
in one thousand five hundred and eighty-four, was now re-
vived. It was pretended that, with regard to their sacred
funcion, ministers were fubje& to the church alone; that
it belonged only to their ecclesiastical superiors to judge of
the truth or falsehood of doEtrines delivered in the pulpit;
that if, upon any pretence whatever, the king usurped this
jurifdidion, the church would, from that moment, fink
under servitude to the civil magifrate; that, inltead of.re-
proving vice with that honest boldness which had often
been of advantage to individuals, and salutary to the king-
dom, the clergy would learn to flatter the paflions of the
prince, and to connive at the vices of others; that the king's
eagerness to punish the indiscretion of a protestant minister,
while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of popilh con-
£pirators, called on them to fland upon their guard, and
that. now was the time to contend for their privileges, and
to prevent any encroachment on those rights, of which the
church had been in possession ever since the Reformation.
Influenced by these considerations, the council of the church
enjoined Black to decline the jurifdi&ion of the privy council.
Proud of such an opportunity to display his zeal, he pre-
sented a paper to that purpose, and with the utmost firmncfs
refused to plead, or to answer the questions which were put
to him. In order to add greater weight to these proceed

ings,

45t

a o o a ings, the council of the church transmitted the drlinaure
v'i. to all the prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and enjoined

every minister to subscribe' it, in testimony of his appro-
i'se, bation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour than they

were attacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his
authority mut fall, if the clergy hould be permitted pub-
licly, and with impunity, to calumniate his ministers, and
even to censure himlelf; and knowing, by former examples,
what unequal reparation for such offences he might expert
from the judicatories of the church, he urged on the in-
quiry into Black's conduc, and iued a proclamation, com-
manding the members of the council of the church to leave
Edinburgh, and to return to their own parihes. , Black, in-
ltead of ubmitting, renewed his declinature ; and the mem-
bers of the council, in defiance of the proclamation, declared,
that as they met by the authority of the church, obedience
to it was a duty ill more sacred than that which they owed
to the king himself. 'The privy council, notwithstanding
Black's refifing to plead, proceeded in he trial; and, after
a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty'bf the crimes of
which he had been acculed; but referred it to the king to
appoint what punishment he should spsser.

MEA IWLH LE,many endeavourswere used tobringmatters

to accommodation. Almost every day produced fame new
scheme of reconcilement; but through the king's fickleness,
the obfIinacy of the clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers;
they all proved ineffe&ual. Both parties appealed to the
people, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accusations en-
deavoured to render each other odious. Insolence, sedition,
treason, were the crimes with which James charged the
clergy; while they made the pulpits resound with com-
plaints of his exceflive lenity towards papiRs, and of the no
les excessive rigour with which he oppressed the established
church. Exasperated by their bold invecives, he, at last,
lentenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to
reside there during his pleasure; and once more command-
ing the members of the flanding council to depart from
idinburgh, he required all the ministers in the kingdom to
fubcnrbe a bond, obliging themselves to submit, in the fame
manner as other fubjeas, to the jurifdiaion of the civil
courts in matters of a civil nature.

A t:.u in iHIS decisive measure excited all the violent passions
EG:irh. hich posess d fappointed facions; and deeds no less violent

i.nmtdiarei foltowed. These muff be imputed in part to
the artfices of some courtiers, who expeded to reap ad-

vantage
458

vantage from the calamities of their country, or who hoped o o
to lessen the authority' of the Otavians, by engaging them viil.
in hostilities with the church. On one hand, they informed l .
the king, that the citizens of Edinburgh were under arms '196.
every night, and had planted a strong guard round the houses
of their minillers. James, in order to put a stop to this ima-
ginary insult on his government, iflued a proclamation, com-
manding twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave the
town within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to
the ministers, advising them to look to their own safety, as
Huntly had been secretly admitted to an interview with the
king, and had been the author of the evere proclamation
againfi the citizens of Edinburgh . They doubted ro more
of the truth of this intelligence, than the king had done of
that which he received, and fell as blindly into the snare.
The letter came to their hands just as one of their number
was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved that he
thould acquaint the people of their danger: and he paintedDeccm. r7.
kt with all the firong colours which men naturally employ
in describing any dreadful and inflant calamity. Wheh the
sermon was over, he desired the nobles and gentlemen to
aftemble in the Little Church, The whole multitude, ter-
rified at what they had heard, crowded thither; they pro-
mlifed and vowed to fland by the clergy; they drew up a
petition to the king, craving the redress of those grievances,
of which the church complained, and beseeching him to
deliver them from all future apprehensions of danger, by
removing such of his counsellors as were known to be ene-
mies of the protestant religion. Two peers, two gentlemen,
two burgefles, and two ministers, were appointed to present
it. The king happened to be in the great hall of the Tol-
booth, where the court of feflion was fitting. The manner The king
in which the petition was delivered, as well as its contents, in danier.
offended him. He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners
infifed with warmth; and a promiscuous multitude pressing
into the room, James retired abruptly into another apart-
ment, and commanded the gates to be hut behind him.
The deputies returned to the multitude, who were ill
assembled, and to whom a miniRter had been reading, in
their absence, the fory of Hamap. When they reported

* Though matters were induftrioufiy aggavated by persons, who wished

both parties to pursue violent measures, neither of thele reports was altoge-
ther destitute of foundation. As their miniftes were supposed to be in dan-
ger, some of the more zealous citizens bad etermined to defend them by
force of arms. Birch. Mem. ii. 15o. Huntly had been privately in Edin-
burgh, where he had an interview, if not with the king, at lea with fume
9f hi miniftrs. Birch. Ibid. 3o.

that

Bo o that the king had refused to lifien to their petitions, tile

VI1'- church was filled i a moment with noise, threatenings, exe-
-~' crations, and all the outrage and confusion of a popular

66 tmult. Some called for their arms, ome to bring out the

wicked Hanan; others cried, The sword of the Lord and
of Gideon; and, rtfhing out with the rofi furious im-
petuofity, surrounded the 'lolbooth, threatening the king
himctf, and demanding ome of his counsellors, whom they
named, that they might tear them in pieces. The nmgi,
firates of the city, partly by authority, partly by force,
endreavored to uell the tumult; the king attempted to
foohe the tmeconrents, by promising to receive their peti-
tions, hn presented in. a regular manner; the minifers,
sensible of their own ra4hnels in kindling such a fame,
leconded both; and the rage of the populace subsiding as
foddenv as it bad risen, they all di(perfed, and the 'king
returned to the palace; happy in thiving escaped from an
infurretio., which, though the onfantaneous ad uncon-
certed effe&.of popular fury, had exposed his life to immi-
nent danger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable
affrnt to hisanuhority *.

Asfoon as he retired, the leaders of the maleconenrts
ffemlbted, in order to prepare their petition. The pu-
niibmet of the .pifi lords; the removal of those coun-
ielors who were ffpecied of favouring their persons. or
opinions; the repeal of all the late aas of council, sub-
'erfive of the authority of the church; together with an ac
appovring the proceedings of the flanding council; were
she chief of their demands. But the king's indignation
was ftil so high, that the deputies, chosen for this purpose,
dost not venture that night to present requefis, which could

- lr-. not fad of kindling his rage anew. Betore next morning,
i:,ó,tra Camres, with all his attendants, withdrew to Lirithgow;
I-: *r7- the fettion and other courts of justice, were required, to

:- leave a city where it was no longer confident either with
5~'.e ;' ' their safety, ortheir dignity, t remain: and the noblemen

and barons were commanded to return to their own houses,
and not to reaffewble without the king's permission. The
vigour with which the king aed, firuck a damp upon
the pirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how
much they would susser by his absence, and the removal of
the courts of juflice, repented already of their condut.
The ministers alone resolved to maintain the contest. They
endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dispersing; they

SFotfw. 41-, S&c. Cald. v: 54, &c. Birch Mcm. ii. 235.

inflamed
46p

inflamed the people by violent inve&cives against the king; B O O
they laboured to procure subscriptions to an association tor viei.
their mutual delenc ; and confciuus what lufire and power ---.
the junclion of fomne of the greater nobles mould add t 596.
their cause, the ministers of Edinburgh wrote to lord
Hamilton, that the people, moved by the word of God, and
provoked by the injuries offered to the church, had taken
arms; that many of the nobles had determined to proteE
the proteflant religion, which owed its establishment to the
piety and valour of their ancestors; that they wanted only
a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with vigour;
that his zeal for the good cause, no lels than his noble
birth, entitled him to that honour: they conjured him,
therefore, not to disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to
refute the suffering church that aid which he so much
needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of complying with their 1597.
desire, carried the letter direcly to the king, whom this
new insult irritated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magistrates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their mi-
nifters, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion.
The magistrates, in order to regain the king's favour, were
preparing to obey; and the miniflers, who saw no other
hope of safety, fled towards England'.

THIS unsuccessful infurre&ion, instead of overturning The kin

established the king's authority. Those concerned in it humblesthe
were confounded and dispersed. The reft of James's sub- roer of

the church.

jeas, in order to avoid suspicion, or to gain his favour, Jan. 3.
contended who should be most forward to execute his
vengeance. A convention of estates being called, pro-
nounced the late infurreCion to be high treason; ordained
every minister to subscribe a declaration of his fubmifiion
to the king's jurifdiaion, in all matters civil and criminal;
impowered magistrates to commit, inftantiv, to prison any
minister, who, in his sermons, should utter any indecent
refletions on the king's condut; prohibited any ecclesia-
flical judicatory to meet without the king's licence; com-
manded that no person hould be eleaed a magiitrate of
Edinburgh, for the future, without the king's approbation;
and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates should
either discover and infliEt condign punishment. on the
authors of the late tumult, or the city itself should be sub-
je&ed to all the penalties of that treasonable aaiont

ARMED with the authority of these decrees; James re- Abridges
solved to cruh entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjecs. the privi-

lcges of the
citizens of
Spotfw. 451. CV. 26. - Cald. v.'i47. Edinburgh.

46

46

B o o t As the clergy had hitherto derived their chief credit and
vi11. flrength from the favour and zeal of the citizens of Edin-

.

- ' burgh, his first care was to humble them. Though the
'597' magistrates submitted to him in the moit abject terms;

though they vindicated themselves, and their fellow-
citizens, from the most distant intention of violating his
royal person or authority; though, after the firicefl- cru-
tiny, no cireumtances that could fix on them the suspicion
of premeditated rebellion had been dficovered; though
manv of the nobles, and uch of the clergy as dill retained
any degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither
acknowledgments nor interceflions were of the leat avail *.
Feb. 8. The king continued inexorable; the city was declared to

have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to be
liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital of the
kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted by its ministers,
abandoned by the courts of justice, and proscribed by the
king, remained in desolation and despair. The courtiers
even threatened to rare the city to the foundation, and to
ere& a pillar where it food, as an everlasting monument of
the king's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who interpoed in
their favour, and moved by the continual solicitations of
March ii. the nobles, James absolved the citizens from the penalties

of law, but at the fame time he fRripped them of their most
important privileges; they were neither allowed to elet
their own magistrates nor their own ministers; many new
burdens were imposed on them; and a great fum of money
was exaced by way of peace-offering .

New teg- JAMES was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, and no less
lations with successful, in circumscribing the jurifdiaion of the church.
regard to Experience had discovered that to attempt this, by as of

parliament, and entences of privy council, was both in-
effeEtual and odious. Ile had recourse now to an expedients
more artful, and better calculated for obtaining his end.
The ecclefalRical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extremely in-
digent, and unprovided of legal flipends; the minifler in
the neighbourhood of- Edinburgh, notwiihALanding the
parity eflablithed by the presbyterian government, had as.
fumed a leading in the church, which filled- their brethren
with envy; every numerous body of men is fdfcep-
tible of sudden and firong impreflions, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these

Cald. v. 149. t
Spotfw. 434. 444.

confidera-

confideratiots, James thought it possible to gain the B o o
clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to subdue. vtii.
Proper agents were et to work all over the kingdom; pro- .
mites, flattery, and threats, were employed; the ufurpa- 1597.
tions of the brethren near the capital were aggravated; the
jealoufv of their power, which was growing in the distant
provinces, was augmented; and two different general as-
femblies were held, in both which, notwithstanding the
zeal and boldness wherewith a few leading clergymen
defended the privileges of the church, a majority de-
clared in favour of those measures which were agree-
able to the king. Many pracices, which continued since
the Reformation, were condemned; many points of
discipline, which had hitherto been reckoned sacred
and uncontroverted, were given up; the license, with
which ministers discoursed of political matters, was re-
strained; the freedom, with which they inveighed against
particuilar persons, censured; sentences of summary ex-
comnlunication declared unlawful; the convoking a ge-
neral assembly, without the king's permission, prohibited;
and the right of nominating ministers to the principal towns,
veRled in the crown. Thus, the clergy themselves furren-
dered privileges, which it would have beeo dangerous to
invade, and voluntarily submitted to a yoke more into-
lerable than any James would have ventured to impose by
force; while such as continued to oppose his measures, in-
stead of their former popular topic of the king's violent
encroachments on a jurifdi&ion which did not belong to
him, were obliged to turn their outcries against the corrup-
tions of their own order '.

BY the authority of there general assemblies, the popish Popifi lords

earls were allowed to make a public recantation of their pardoned.
errors; were absolved from the sentence of excommunica-
tion; and received into the bosom of the church. But, not
many years after, they relapsed into their former errors, were
again reconciled to the church of Rome, and by their apo-
ftacy justified, in ome degree, the fears and cruples of the
clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE ministers of dinburgh owed to the intercefrion of

there assemblies the liberty of returning to their charges in
the city. But this liberty was clogged in such a manner as
greatly abridged their power. The city was divided into
difin& parishes; the number of ministers doubled; persons
on whore fidelity the king could rely were fixed in the new

* Spotfw. 433. Cald. v. I89, 33.

parifies;

463

Boot parishes; and these circumfiances, added to the'au*
VI'. thority of the late decrees of the church, contributed
-' t to confirm that ablolute dominion in ecclefiatical as-
597. fairs, which James poffefled during the remainder of his

reign.

TH E king was so intent on new modelling the church, that

the other tranfaaions of this period scarce deserve to be re-
membered. The OcIavians, envied by the other courtiers,
and splitting into factions among themselves, resigned their
commiflion; and the adminifRration of the revenue return-
ing into its former channel, both the king and the nation
were deprived of the benefit of their regular and frugal
cconomy.
Dec. 19. TOWARDS the end of the year a parliament was held, in

order to restore Huntly and his associates to their eflates and
honours, by repealing the acQ of forfeiture paGed against
them. The authority of this supreme court was likewise
employed to introduce a farther innovation into the church;
but, conformable to the fyflem which the king had now
adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife from the

Eccefiaftic- clergy themselves. As the a of general annexation, and
rcflored to

feat in that establishing the presbyterian government, had reduced
paruamcst. the few bishops, who frill survived, to poverty and con-

tempt; as tho!e who possessed the abbeys and priories were
mere laymen, and many of them temporal peers, few or
none of the ecclesiastical order remained to vote in parlia-
ment, and, by means of that, the influence of the crown
was considerably diminished there, and a proper balance to
the power and number of the nobles was wanting. But the
prejudices the nation had conceived against the name and
character of bilhops were so violent, that James was obliged,
with the utmofl care, to avoid the appearance of a design to
revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commilfion
appointedby the lafl general assembly to complain to the par-
liament, that the chuich was the only body in the kingdom def-
titute of its reprerentatives in that supreme court, where it so
nearly concerned every order to haveftome, who were bound
to defend its rights; and to crave that a competent number
of the clergy hould be admitted, according to ancient cuf-
tom, to a ft there. In compliance with this requeit, an
a& was pffed, by which those ministers, on whom the king
should confer he vacant biflopricks and abbeys, were intitled
to vote in parliament; and that the clergy might conceive
no jealousy of any encroachment upon their privileges, it
was remitted to the general afrembly, to determine what fpi-

ritual

ritual jurifdiin'oi r authority in the government ds the 6 b it
chureh there petfons hould plfes *. Viii.

THe king, however, found it no easy matter tb obtain 'i-'.iL

the concutrence bs he etcleliafctal judicatories, in which .
the at of parliamenrt met with fierce opposition. Though
the clergy perceived how much lustre this new privilege
would rflea upon their order; though they were not iri-
sensible of the great aceelion of personal power nd dignity,
which many of them woOld acquire, by being admitted irit'6
the supreme council of the nation, their abhorrence 6f epif-
copacy wasextrere; and to that they sacrificed every confi-
leration of interefd or ambition. All the king's profeflos
of regard for the present conflitution of the church did not
cfivirce thehi of his firierity; all the devices that could be
invented for refraining and circumscribing the jurifdiaiot
of' ftsh as were to be ried to this new honour, did not dih
mififh their jealousy knd fear. Their own experience bad
taught them, with iwht insinuating progress the hierarchy
advances, and though admitted at firftwith mrderate autho-
tity, and under fplecioas pretences, how rapidlty it'esteCds
its dominion. " Varnilh over this scheme," faiddre of rh
leading cletrgymtinc ' with what colobrs you please; t

d ~the

intruder with the itrfolt art; under all this difgdi, I fee
the horns of his mtitre:" The fame fntitnentsi irevailed
*mohg many of his brethren, aind iduced them to tejeEt
powers and honours, with as mnch zeal as ever those of theit
order cotted them. Many, hoever, were allured by the
hopes of preferment; the kig himi'elf ad his ihilters
etmployed the fame arts, which they' had tried fuccfifftlly
las year; and after long debates, aid much dppofiti't, the
generil affeibly declared that it was lawful for mtiimtl rs to
ac'ept of a set in patliament;' Yhit 'i would b higlily behf- March 7.
ficial to the ci~'d;, to htae its tefentitives in tha fu-
pretie court arid that fifty-one- perFbis, a number nearlt
teual to that f irb ecclefnaties who were anciently called
to pltliament, Ihould be ch'osen firm aoing the &rgy fir
th purpfe. The tnnner of teil leEtion, together i ith
the powers toble ve in therm, were lft undded* fbt
the piefent, sin futrnfied .intter of fulirt defibertit t.

As the' pfiOfpta 6f tueceeditd* to t cr~h -6o Ehsnad 599.

dew neaeer, Jamei mnitiplied preaiutions in 6rdr t trtei James cnj
it certain. A he was allied to mny f tfieptincs of Oe r- w ucce

·ks li H9 lid·t i~~

s ~iiini~with fucccLs

mhjiy by his uitrviage he Cent anibaisdors' e~rtdiiin to to gain a
their several dortns in order to eilain the juftnei' o'hib Earty i

Spotfw. 450. Parl. iSth Jac. VI.-c. t3S. t Spotfw. 450. Cald. v. t78.

h title

46

B o o K title to the English throne, and to desire tbeiralifiance if
VUI.- any competitor should arise to dispute his undoubted rights.
L --~-.' These pr.nces readily acknowled the equity of his claim;

'599 but the aid which they could afford him was distant and

feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs,
his ambassador at the English court, solicited Elizabeth, with
the utmolt warmth, to recognize, his title by some public
deed, and to deliver her own fubjeas from the calamities
which are occasioned by an uncertain or disputed succession.
But age.had firengthened all the paflions which had. hi-
therto induced Elizabeth to keep this great quellion obscure
and undecided; and a general, and evasive answer was all
that James could obtain. As no impreflion could be made
on the queen, the ambassador was commanded.-to found the
disposition of her fulijeas,. and to try what progress he could
make in gaining them, Bruce pofeffed all the talents of ft-
crecy, judgment and address, requisite for conducting a
negociation no less delicate than important. A minitter of
this chara er. was ititled to the confidence of the English.
Many,of the higheaf rank uobofomed tbherfelves to him
witbout reserve, and gave,him repeated assurances of .their
resolution to aflert his mafler's right, in oppofitien to every
preteMner *.,; As several pamphlets.were dispersed,. at this
time, ip Eigland,. contaiing ohje&ions to his title, James
empoyedfome learned men in his kingdom to answer these
cavilliys, and to explain the advantages, which w.ould.refult
to both kingdoms by the union of the crowns., hT;efc, books
were eager!i read, and contributed not a-little to reconcile
the English ato that event. . A book publfjhed this year by
the king hinflcf, produced.an effea Qil more favourable,
It was entitled Bafilif n Dorn, and conlaipe4 precept.con.
cernig the. art ot government, addreffthd to prince, Henry
his fin. ., Notwithstanding the great altertions. a;nd refine.
ment ia naional tafe since that ime, we mul allowi-hi
to be no ontemptible performance, ad not to be, inferior
to the.works of mo contemporajy writers, either iq purity
of fyle orjuftnefsof composition. Eenthe vain parade of
erudition with which it abounds, and which now.diguifts
us, raised the dmicatiop of that age; and,. as it was filled
with .thofegen eral rules, which speculative autbhs deliver for
rnder4ingalion happy, and of whichjaimes could di.
cousie ,-wih great paubility, though .ofteno ncapable. Q
putting te i opracice, the English corneived an high opi-
nioi,. f - his abilities, and expe&ed an increafei,of nati tjo

- .* .obo. .4.
4 . hon

honour

honour and prosperity, under a prince so profoundly'fkilled oo c.
in politics, and who gave such a pecimen both of his wis- vi I.
dom and of his love to his people *.

THE queen of England's sentiments concerning James '59s9

were very different from those of her fubjeas. His eXcef-
five indulgence towards the popish lords; the facility with
which he pardoned their repeated treasons; his reltoring
Beaton, the popish archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled
out of Scotland at the time of the reformation, to the pof-
feflion of the temporalities of that benefice; the appointing
him his mbaffador at the court of France; the applause he
beltowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to
the queen his mother; Elizabeth cdnfidered as so many indi-
cations of a mind alienated from the protestant religion ;and
fufpeced that he would soon revolt from the profeflion of it.
These fulpicions seemed to be fully confirmed by a discovery
which came from the master of Gray, who resided at that Accuetshii
-time in Italy, and who, rather than susser his intriguing-fpirit of o'rre
,to be idle, demeaned himself so far as to a& as a spy for the with the
English court. He conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a P P.
letter. written by James to pope Clement VIII. in which
the king, after many exprefionrof regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution
Jo treat the Roman catholics with indulgence; and in order
to render the intercourse between the court of Rome and
Scotland more frequent and familiar, he folicited'the pope
to promote Drummond, bishop of Vaifon, a Scotsman, to
the dignity of acardinal t. Elizabeth, who had received by
another channel t, some imperfea intelligence of this cor-
refpondence, was filled with juitfurprize, and immediately
dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into
the truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an aaioh
so unbecoming a protestant prince. He was astonished at
the aceufation, and with a cnfidence, which nothing but
the consciousness of innocence could inspire, affirmed the
whole to be a mere calumny, and the letter itself to be forged
by his enemies, on purpose to bring his sincerity in religion
to be fufpered. Elphingfton the secretary of state denied
the matter with equal olemnity. It came to be kriownby
a very fipgular accident, which happened ome years after,
that the information which Elizabeth had received wam welU
founded, though at the fame time the king's declarations of
his own innocence were perfetly confident. with truth.
Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply which he publihed to aton-

Camd Spotfw. 457. ' - Cald. ss. 1 Winw. Mtm. voL i. 37.; 5,

H h 2 troverfial

467

vill. him of having abadooed the favourable sentiments which
:c J.' h be had once entertained of the Roman catholic religion, and;

a9 s a proof of this, quoted his letter to Clemnt VIII. It
was impolible, any longer, to believe this to be a frfion;
*nd it was a matter too delicate to be pafied over without
iria inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingifon,
and his confeflion unravelled the whole mystery. He ac'
knowledged that he had shuffled in this letter among other
papers, which he laid before the king to be signed, who,
fufpe&ig no fch deceit, subscribed it together with the
reft, and without knowing what it contained; that he had
noother motive, however, to this a&ion, but zeal for his ma-
jefy's service; and, by flattering the Roman catholics with
hopes of indulgence under the king's government, he imagined
that he was paving the way for a more easy accession to the
English throne. The privy council of England entertained
very different sentiments of the secretary's condua. In their
opinion, not only the king's reputation had been exposed to
reproach, but his life to danger, by this ralh imposture; they
even imputed the gunpowder treason to the rage and difap-
pointimentof the papiits, upon finding that the hopes which
this letter inspired were frultrated. The secretary was sent
a prioner into Scotland, to be tried for high treason. His
peers found him guilty, but, by the queen's interceftion, he
obtained a pardon .

ACCOstING to the account of other hiflorians, James

hinmelf was no stranger to this correfpoodence with the pope;
and, if we believe them, Elphingflon, being intimidated by
the threats of the Engiifh council, and deceived by the arti-
sices of the earl of Dunbar, concealed forme circumnfances
in his arraive of this tranfacion, and falfied others; and
at the expeoce of his own fame, and with the danger of his
life, endeavoured todrawa veil over this part of hislafler's
cond~t f,

Jame; a; BiT wbhether we impute the writing of this letter to the
great pains icretry's officious teal, or to the king's commnd, it is
to gain the
Roman ca. eertain, that, about this time, James was at the utmost
tholics. pains to:ain the frieotfhip of the Roman cathodei princes,

as a necessary precaution towards facilitating his accefion to
thI Englith throne. Lord Home, who was himself a papist,
was erttftd ith a.fecret commiflion to the pope t; the
srchbifhop of Glasgow was an ative infrument with thote

Stte Trial, vol. i. 419- Soiw. 4

. 507. Johns. 448.
$- - C OL v. 3oL . v . i47. t Wia-: Meu,. vol. ii. 5$.

Of

HA-STORRY O SCOTLLAND.
6S

of his own religion . The pope expressed such favourable- o o
sentiments both of the king, and of his right to the crown viii.
of England, that James thought himself bound, some years ''
after, to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner. . s99
Sir James Lindsay made great progress in gaining the Eng-
lifh papits to acknowledge his majesty's title. Of all these
intrigues Elizabeth received obscure hints from different
quarters. The more imperfe&cy he knew, the more vio-
lently she fufpe&ed the king's designs; and the natural jea-
lousy of her temper increasing with age, he observed his
condu& with greater solicitude than ever.

THE queflions with regard to the elecion and power of 1600.

the representatives of the church, were finally decided this cr Jgua-
year by the general assembly, which met at Montrose. That tion with
pace was chosen as mol convenient for the minilters of the regard to
North, among whom the king's influence chiefly lay. Al- the church.
though great numbers resorted from the northern provinces,
and the king employed his whole interest, and the authority
of his own presence, to gain a majority, the following re-
gulations were with difficulty agreed on: That the general
assembly (hall recommend fix persons to every vacant bene-
fice, which gave a title to a feat in parliament, out of whom
the king hould nominate one; that the person so eleced,
after obtaining his feat in parliament, shall neither propose
nor content to any thing there, that may affe& the interest
of the church, without special inflruaions to that purpose;
that he shall be answerable for his condu& to every general
assembly; and submit to its censure, without appeal, upon
pain of infamy and excommunication; that he shall discharge
.the duties of a-paftor, in a particular congregation; that he
(hall not usurp any ecclesiastical jurifdiaion, superior to that
of his other brethren; that if the church inflit on him the
censure of deprivation, he hall thereby forfeit his feat in
parliament; that he hall annually resign his commiflion to
the general assembly, which may be restored to him, or not,
as the assembly, with the king's approbation, shall judge
moll expedient for the good of the church . Nothing could
be more repugnant to the idea of episcopal government, than
these regulations. It was not in consequence of rights de-
rived from their office, but of powers conferred by a com-
mifflon, that the ecclefiaflical persons were to be admitted to
a feat in parliament ; they were the representatives, not the
superiors of the clergy. Detitute of all spiritual authority,

Cald. vol. vi. 147. t Ibid, vol. v. 604.
t Spotfw. 453.457. Cald. vl. v. 368.

even

B oo K even their civil jurifdi&ion was temporary. James, how-
vil. ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able to shake

off these fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges
i600. which belonged to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded

the fame thing; and of course he contended for the nomina-
tion of these commiflioncrs, as they opposed it, not so
much on account of the powers then veiled in them, as of
those to which it was believed they would soon attain .

Gi;e.s DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual
r£iracy. tranquillity. The clergy, aftermany flruggles, were brought

under great fubjeaion; the popish earls were restored to
their ellates and honours, by the authority of parliament,
and with the consent of the church; the reft of the nobles
were at peace among themselves, and obedient to the royal
authority; when, in the midst of this security, the. king's
life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a conspiracy al-
together unexpeced, and almof inexplicable. The authors
of it were John Ruthven, earl of Gowrie, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that earl who was beheaded in the
year one thouland five hundred and eighty-four. Nature
had adorned both these young men, epecially the elder bro-
ther, with many accomplishments, to which education.had
added its mofl elegant improvements. More learned than is
usual among persons of their rank; more religious than is
common at their age of life; generous, brave, popular;
their countrymen, far from thinking them capable of any -
atrocious crime, conceived the moR sanguine hopes of their
early virtues. Notwithflanding all these noble qualities,
some unknown motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which,
if we adhere to the account commonly received, mull be
transmitted to poflerity, as one of the mos wicked, as well
as one of the wori concerted, of which history makes any
mention.

Os the fifth of August, as the king, who resided during

the hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out
to his sport early in the morning, he was. accofled by Mr,
Alexander Ruthven, who, with an air of great importance,
told the king, that the evening before he had met an un-
known man, of a suspicious afpe, walking alone in a by
path, near his brother's house at Perth; and on searching
him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a great
quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately seized
both him and his treasure, and, without commupicating the
matter to any person, had kept him confined and bound in a

Spotfw. 44.

fo!itary
47°

solitary house; and that he thought it his duty to impart o
such a singular event, firt of all to his majesty. . James inm VIIm
mediately fufpe&ed this unknown person to be a femiAary ''- ..
priei, supplied with foreign coin, in order to excite new '
commotions in the kingdom; and. resolved to impower the
magistrates of. Perth to call the person before them, and in-
quire into all the circumfiances of the ory. Ruthven vio-
lently opposed this resolution, and.with many arguments
urged the king to ride dire&ly to Perth, and to examine the
matter with his own eyes. Meanwhile the chace began;
and James, notwithstanding his passion for that aufement,
could not help ruminating upon the strangeness of the tale,
and on Ruthven's importunity. At last he called him,: and
promised, when the sport was over, to set out for.Perth.
The chace, however, continued long; and Ruthver5 who
all the while kept close by the king, was rill urging him to
make haRe. At the death of the buck he would not allow.
James to fay till a frelh horse was brought him; and ob-:
serving the duke of Lennox and the earl of. Mar preparing
to accompany the king, he intreated him to countermand.
them. This James refused; and though Ruthven's impa-
tience and anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation in
his whole behaviour, raised some suspicions in his mind;
yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed
on him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the
town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his brother of the
king's arrival, though he had already dispatched two mef-
fengers for that purpose. At a little diflance from the town,
the earl, attended by several of the citizens, met the king, ,
who had only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the king's entertainment; the earl appeared
pensive and embarrassed, and was at no pains to atone, by
his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he,
treated his guests. When the king's repalt was over, his
attendants were led to dine in another robm, and he being left
almplt alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go.to the chamber where the unknown person was
kept. James commanded him to bring SirThomas Elfkine
along with them; but, inflead of that, Ruthven. ordered
him not to follow; and conducing the king up a flair-cafe,
and then through several apartments, the doors of which he
locked behind him, led him at las into a small Ipdy, in
which there flood a man clad in armour, with a fwotd,.and
dagger by his fide. The king, who expeced to have .foand
pne disarmed and bound, started at the fight,and. inquired
if this was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger

from

47r

Bo aK from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding it to the
vi i. king's breast," Remember," laid he," how unjustly my father
. A" suffered by your command; you are now my prisoner;

r600 submit to my disposal without refifance or outcry, or this
· dagger shall instantly avenge his blood." James expoftu-
latedwith Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him. The man
whom he found in the fudy ftod,'al the while, trembling
and dismayed, without courage either to aid the king, or
to second bis aggressor. Ruthven protefled, that if the
king raised no outcry his life hould be safe; and, moved
by some unknown reason, retired in order to call his bro-
ther, leaving to the man in armour the tare of the. king,
whom he bound by oath not to make any'noife during his
absence.

WHILE the king was in this dangerous fiuation, his at-

tendants growing impatient to know whither he had retired,
one of Gowrie's domeflics entered the room. hafiiy, and
told them that the king had just rode away towards Falk-
land. All of them rushed out into the- bet; and he
earl, in the utmost hurry, called for their hrses. But by
this time his brother had returned to the king, and frear-
ing that now there was no remedy, he nmufdie, offered to
hind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he fconied to
ubbmit to that indignity; and closing with the assassin, a
fierce fruggle ensued. The man in armour stood; as for-
merly, amazed and motionless: and the king dragging
Ruthven towards a window, which, during his absence,
he had persuaded the person with-whom he. was left to
open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, ". Treason t
" Treason! Help! lan murdered!" Hisattendats heard,
and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand,
which grasped the king's neck with violence. They flew
with precipitation to his affifance. Lennox and Mar,
with the greater number, ran up the principal stair-case,
where they found all the doors shut, which they battered
with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burf-them open.
But Sir John Ramsey, entering by a back-fair, which led
to the apartment where the king was, found the door open;
and rushing upon Ruthven, who was till struggling with
the king, struck him twice with his dagger, and thrust him
towards the flair cafe,. where Sir Thomas Erikine and Sir
Hugh Herries met, and killed him; he crying with his aift
breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this ation." Dur-
ing this scuffle, the man who had been concealed in the
tAdy escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsey, Erikine,
and HIerrie eone Wilson, a footman, entered the room

where
472

where the king wae, and before they had time to ihut the- B o K-
door, Gowrie. rushed in with a drawn sword in each hand, vYii.
followed by seven of his attendants well armed, and with -v-
a loud voice threatened them all with initant death. They '6
immediately thrust the king into. the little ftudyt and shut-
ting the door upon him, encountered the earl. Notwith-
flanding the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey
pierced Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers, baving received
several wounds, immediately fled. Three of the king's
defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A dreadful
noise continued flill at the opposite door, where many per-
sons laboured in vain to force a passage; and the king be-
ing assured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other
friends, i was opened on the inside. They ran to the
king, whom they unexpectedly found safe, with tranfpons
of congratulation; and he, falling on his knees, with all
his attendants around him, offered: solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however,
was not yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whose
provost Gowriewas, and by whom he was extremely beloved,
hearing the fate of the two brothers, ran to their arms, and
surrounded the house, threatening revenge, with many info-
lent and opprobrious speeches against the king. James en-
deavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by speaking to
them from the window; he admitted their magiflrates into-
the house; related to them all the circumstances of the
fa&; and their fury subsiding by degrees, they dispersed.
On searching. the earl's pockets for papers that might dif-
cover his designs and accomplices, nothing was found but
a small parchment bag, full of magical characersand words
of enchantent; and if we may believe the account of the
conspiracy published by the king, " while there were about
" him, the wound of which he died bled not; but as oon
" as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in great
"abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this
busy day, the king returned in the evening to Falland,
having committed the dead bodies of the two brothers to,
the cuflody of the magistrates of Perth.

NOTWITHST ANDING the minute detail which theking Themotives

gave of all the circumfances of this conspiracy against his of the con-
life, the motives which induced the two brothers to at- firtorsl ot
tempt at aEtion fodeteftable, theend-they had in view, and plained.
the accomplices on whore aid they depended, were alto.
gether unknown. The words of Ruthven to the king gave
some grounds to think- that the desire of revenging their

father's

BooK father's death had infligated them to this attempt. But,
vii. whatever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarcely
-v --' probable that they could impute them to the king, whose
60'-. youth, as well as his fubjeaion at that time to the violence

of a faion, exempted him Irom being the objet of resent-
ment, on account of acions which were not done by his
command. James had even endeavoured to repair the
wrongs which the father had suffered, by benefits to his
children; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour, had
acknowledged it with the warmest exprefflions of gratitude.
Three of the eall's attendants, being conviced of aflifling
him in this assault on the king's servants, were executed at
Perth; but-they could give no light into the motives which
had prompted their mafler to an ation so repugnant to
there acknowledgments. Diligent search was made for the
person concealed in the fludy, and from him great disco-
veries were expeced. But Andrew Henderson, the earl's
fleward, who, upon a promise of pardon, confessed him-
self to be the man, was as much a firanger to his master's
design as the relt; and though placed in the fudy by
Gowrie's command, he did not even know for what end
that station had been afligned him. The whole tranfation
remained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two bro-
thers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme without
either confident or accomplice, with unexampled secrecy
as well as wickedness.

AN accident, no less flrange than the other circumstance4

.^tr!: I;- of the fory, and which happened nine years after, disco-
ccccr.r.g vered that his opinion, howeverplaufible, was ill-founded;

and that the two brothers had not carried on their machi-
n3aions all alone. One Sprot, a notary, having whispered.
among several persons, that he knew some secrets relating
to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the mat-
ter worthy their attention, and ordered him to be seized.
His confeflion was partly voluntary, and partly forced from
himr-by torture. According to his account, Logan of Re-
1alrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, butof dissolute
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an ac-
complice in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frr-
quent interviews with Logan, in order to concert the plan
of their operations; the earl had corresponded with him to
-the fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's confident, was
trutled with the secret, andcarried the letters between them.
Both Logan and Bour were now dead. But Sprot affirmed
that he had read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan on
that eccafion; and, inconfirmation of his tefiimony, several

cf
47+

475

of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to himself had B o o
prompted Sprot to steal from among Bour's papers, were v.
produced t. These were compared, by the privy council, ' "''
with papers of Logan's hand-writing, and the refemhlance 6o.
was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit, and well qua-
lified to judge of the matter, examined them, and-fwore to
their authenticity. Death itself did not exempt Logan from
prosecution; his bones were dug up and tried for high trea-
son, and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal t, his lands
were forfeited, and his polterity declared infamous. Sprot
was condemned to be hanged for misprision of treason. He
adhered to his cotfeflion to the last, and having promised,
on the scaffold, to give the fpe&ators a sign in confirmation
of the truth of what he had deposed, he thrice clapped

t Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another to Gowrie, and

three of them without any direction; nor could Sprot discover the name of the
person to whom they were written. Logn give him the appellation of Rigt
Honwrable. It appearsfrom this, however, and from other word s in the letter,
Cron. 95. that there were several persons privy to the conspiracy. The date
of the first letter is July 8th. Mr. Ruthen had communicated the matter
to Logan only five days before. Ibid. It appears from the uriginalfummcs of
forfasltwr against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addressed to
him with regard to a conspiracy equally dangerous and important, was so illi-
terate that he could not read. " Jacobus Bour, litcrarum prorfus ignarus,
"difti Georgii opera in legendis omnibus cfriptis ad eum missis, velpertinen-
"tibus, utebatur." This is altogether strange; and nothing but the capricious
charater of Logan can account for his chufing such a confident.

t By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of high treason might be

tried even after death. The practice was adopted by the Scots, without auy
limitation, Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was
soon conceived to be dangerous; and the crown was laid under proper reftric-
tions, by an ac A. D. 154, which has never been printed. The words of it
are, " And because the said lords (i. e. the lords of articles) think the said aa
(viz. in 1540) too general, and prejudicial to the barons in the realm, there-
fore fatutes and ordains that the said a (hall have no place in time coming,
but against the heirs of them that notoriously commit, or (hall commit lefe
majesty againt the king's person, against the realm for averting the fame,
and against them that hall happen to betray the king's army allenarly, and
being notoriously known in their time; and the heirs of there persons to be
called and judged within five years after the decease of the said persons com-
mitters of the said crimes; and the said time being bypaf, the laid heirs never
to be pursued for the fame." The sentence against Logan violated this flatute in
two particulars He was not notourly known during his life to be an accomplice
in the crime for which he was tried; and his heir was called in question more
than five years after his death. It is remarkable that this statute seems not
to have been attended to inthe parliament which surfeited Logan. Another fin-
gular circumstance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no person
can be tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms,
and.often absurd in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that, in
any process against a dead person, his corpse or bones hall be presented at the
bar. Examples of this occur frequently in the Scottih biftory. After the battle
of Corrichie, the dead body of the earl of Huntly was presented in parliameut,
before thefentence of forfaulture was pronounced aaint him. For the fame
reason the bodies of Gowrie and his brother were preserved, in order that
they might be produced in parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with
the fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz. Crim. Law, book i. tit. 6. § zz.

his

HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

o o his hands after he was thrown off the ladder by the execu.
vt1l. tionert.
<"-<^~' BUT though it be thus unexpeEedly discovered that

Gowrie did not at without aflociates, little additional light
is thrown by this discovery on the motives and intention of
his condua. It appears almost incredible that two young
men of such distinguished virtue hould revolt all at once
from their duty, and attempt a crime foatrocious, as the
murder o their sovereign. It appears Rill more improbable,
that they should have concerted their undertaking with so
little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the
deed should have remained concealed, tey could: net have
chosen amore improper scene for executing it than their
own house. If they intended that Henderson (tiould have
firuck the blow, they could not have pitched on a man
more destitute of the courage that muf dire& the hand of
an affaflin; nor could they xpe that he, ufolicited, and
unacquainted with their purpose, would venture on such a
desperate aion. If Ruthven meant to flab the king with
his own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it was
pointed at his breafi? How could he leave the king, after
such a plain declaration of his intention? Was it not pre-
polterous to commit him to the keeping of filch a timid and
sa!fe affociatr as Hgnderfon For what purpose didhe wafle

- It appIr that arrhbibicp Spotiwood waiprfent at the execution of Sprot,

Cr. 1i ;. and yet he frems to have given no credit to his discoveries. The
manner in which he peaks of him is remarkable, "whether or no I (houldt
mention the arraignment and execution of George Sprot, who fiufred at Edin.
buarh, I am doubtful. His confeffon, though voluntary and constant, carrying
small probability. The man deposed, &c. It seemed to be a very.fition, and
a mere invention of the man's own brain, for neither did he siew the letter,
nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so
secretly, would have communicated the matter to such a man asLogan was
known to be." p. SoB. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with
which Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of
hi letters. He himfelfwa' probably present in parliament at the trial. The
earl of Dunbar, of whom he always Ipesks with the highest refpet,' was the
rerfon who dire&ed the proccfs against Logan. Such a peremptorydeclaration
zgainft the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithstanding all these circm(ftances,
is frprifig. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the king's advocate at that time, and
afterwards earl of Hadington, reprelents the proof produced at Logan's trial
a2 extremely convincing; and in an original letter of his to the king, the 2 z
oi une 1609 (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.), after mentioning the manler in which
t.e trial had been conducted, he thus goe on:

When the probation of the summons was referred to the lords of articles

votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice, the aid summons to be so clear-
ly proved, that they seemed to contend who hould be able most zealously to
express the satisfaction of his heart, not only by the most pithy words, but by
tears of joy; diverse of the best rank confessing, that that whereof they doubt-
rd at their entry into the honfe was now so manifest, that they behoved to
eCtcem them traitors who should any longer refuse to declare their assured
.rB:;-..;. of Ite :ruth of that treason."

time, in binding the bands of an unarmed man, whom he -toox
might easily have dispatched with the sword? Had Provi- viii.
dence permitted them to embrue their hands in the blood of -v-
their sovereign, whatadvantaecould have accrued to them ob
by his death? and what claims or pretensions could they
have opposed to the rights of his children t ? Inevitable and
inltant vengeance, together with perpeiual infamy, were the
only consequences they could expet to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impofliTie to believe that the king

had formed any design against the life of the two brothers.
They had not incurred his indignation by any crime; and
were in no degree the obje&s of his jealousy or hatred t;
nor was he of a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for ralh
arid desperate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
in their own house, where they were surrounded with many
domeflics, he only with a iender and unarmed train;
where they could call to their afiltance the inhabitants of a
city, at the devotion of their family, white he was at a dif-
tance from all aid; and leat of all would he have chosen
for his aflociates in such anenterprize, the earl of Mar and
the duke of Lennox, the former conneaed in dose friend-

t- It has been aflerted, that in consequence of the king's death, the earl of

Cowrie might have pretended to the crown of England, as the fun of Dorothea
Stewart, daughter of lord Methven by Margaret of England, who, after her
divorce from theearl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband: Bor-
net, Hill. of his own Times. But this aflertion is ill-founded. It appears, from
undoubted evidence, that lord Methveu had only one child by queen Margaret,
which died in its infancy, and Dorothea lady Ruthven was not the daughter of
queen Margaret, but of Janet Stewart, lord Methven's fccond wife, a daughter
of John earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer, 39. And though Gowrie had really
been descended from the blood-royal of England, the king at that time had
a son and a daughter; and bcfides them, lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of
Charles earl of Lennox, had a preferable title to the crown of England.

i Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death

of the two brothers to a cause hot mentioned to any of our historians. "Our
of Scotland we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffi-
dence betwixt the king and his wife, and many are of opinion that the disco-
very of fame affeeion between her and the earl of Gowrie's brother (who was
killed with.him) was the truest cause and motive of that tragedy." Winw.
Mem. vdl. i. 274 Whether the following passages in Nicholson's letter be any
coafiraation of that fiupicion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter, Sept.
ia, 16oz, he mentions the return of Gowrie's two younger bothers into Scot.
land, and adds, " The coming in of these two, and the queen of Scots deal-
ing with them, and fending away and frnilhing Mrs. Beatrix their tfiter
with such information as Sir Thomas Eriine has given, hath bred great fui-
picion in the king of Scots, tat they come not in but upon some dangerous
plot." In another letter, January , 16o3. " The day of writing my lift
Mrs, Beatrix Rutieen was brought by the lady Paifcy and Mrs of sAngus as
one of their gentlewomen, into the court in the evening, and flowed in a
chamber prepared for ter by the queen's direclion, where the queen had much
time and coiference with her. OP this the king got notice and hewed his
dilike thereof to the queen, gently reproving her for it, and examining qui-
etly of the queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters thereunto be
longing, with fich discretion nd secrecy i* require such a matter."

ship

aBOO flip with the houre of Gowrie, and the latter married to
vinl. one of the earl's fiRers.
' V-' WHICHSOEVER of there opposite fyflems we embrace;

A6oo- whether we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie or

ture con- to the king; insuperable difficulties arise, and we are in-
cerning the volved in darkness, myflery, and contraditions. Perhaps
intention
of the cn- the source of the whole conspiracy ought to be searched for
fpirator. deeper, and by deriving it from a more remote cause, we

may difover it to be less criminal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual dependance, was

one great objec of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this,
she sometimes soothed him, and ometimes bribed his mi-
nilters and favourites; and when he failed of attaining her
end by these means, (he encouraged theclergy to render
any administration which she dillruffed unpopular, by de-
crying it, or stirred up some faaion of the nobles to oppose
and to overturn it. In that fierce age, men little acquainted
with the arts of undermining a minifiry by intrigue, had re-
course to the ruder praaice of rendering themselves maslers
of the king's person, that they might thereby obtain the
direcions of his councils. Those nobles, who seized the
king at the Raid of Ruttven, were infiigated and supported
byElizabeth. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed
her protection, and when they miscarried, he was secure
of retreat in her dominions. The connexions-which James
had been forming of late with the Roman catholic princes,
his secret negotiations in England with her fubjecs, and
the maxims by which he governed his own kingdom, all
contributed to excite her jealousy. - She dreaded rome great
revolution in Scotland to be approaching, and it was her in-
teresa to prevent it. The earl of Gowrie was one of the
mofi powerful of the Scottilh nobles, and descended from an-
ceftors warmly attached to the Englil interelf. He had
adopted the fame fyfiem, and believed the welfare of his
country to be inseparably conneaed with the fubfilence'of
the alliance between the two kingdoms. During his refi-
dence at Paris, he had contraced an intimate friendship
with Sir Henry Neville, the queen's ambassador there, and
was recommended by him to his court, as a person of
whom great use might be made*. Elizabeth received him,
as he passed through England, with distinguished marks of
refpeC and favour. From all these circumstances a fufpi-
cion may arise, that the plan of the conspiracy againf the
king was formed at that time, in concert with her. Such

Winw. i. 156.

a furpi-
478

s ufpicion prevailed in that age, and from the letters of OOK .
Nicholson, lizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to vZ,.
be deltitute of foundation. An English ship was .observed i -,,--
hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the Frith of Forth. *60-
The earls two younger brothers fled into. England after the
ill success of the conspiracy, and were prote&ed by Eliza-
beth. James himself, though he prudently concealed it,
took great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of
Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt the king's
person, but only to circumncribe his authority, and to
thwart his schemes. His life was the surest safeguard of
her own, and restrained the popish pretenders to her crown,
and their abettors, from desperate attempts, to which their
impatience and bigotry might, otherwile, have urged them
on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a& of the utmodt impru-
dence. Nor does this seem to have been te intention of
the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to
decoy the king to Perth, without any attendants. When
these proved more.,numerous than was expeaed, the earl
employed a .ratagein in order to separate them from the
king, by pretending that he rode away towards Falkland,
and. by calling hastily for their horses that they might follow
him. By their Shutting James up, meanwhile, in a difiant
corner of, the house, and.by attempting to bIind his hands,
their design seems to have been rather to seize than to
aflaffinate him. Though Gowrie had not colleEted his
followers. in such numbers as to have been able to detain
him-long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom, by open
force, he might soon have been conveyed aboard the
English hfip, which waited, perhaps to :receive them, and
he might have been landed at Faft-caftle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many, obscure hints
in his letters, some rendezvous of. the conspirators was
to be held. Amidfl the surprise and terror, into which the
king muf haye beep thrown by the violence offered to.him,
it was extremely natural for him to conclude that his life was
fought. It was the interest of all his followers to confirm
him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to
add to the importance and merit of their own services.
Thus hisfear and their anity, aided by the credulity and
wonder which.the contemplation of any great and tragical
event, when not fully understood, is apt to inspire, augment-
ed the whole tranfafion. -On the other hand, the extra-
vagance and improbability of the circumfiances which were
added, detraed from the credit of those which really

happened;

oo l happened; and even furnished pretences for calling in
vi". question the truth of the whole conspiracy.
''" ' Trtz account of what had happened at Perth reached
Many di- Edinburgh next morning. The privy council commanded
believe the the miniflers of that city instantly to aflemble theit people;
pufiaetdb and after relating to them the circumstances of the cbofpi-
the kin. racy formed againfi the king's life, to return public thanks

to God, for the protetion which he had so visibly afforded
him. But as the firtf accounts transmitted to Edinburgh,
written in a hurry, and while the circumstances of the con-
fpiracy were but imperfecly known, and the passions which
it excited ftrorgly felt, were indiflin&, exaggerated, and
contradisory, the minifiers laid hold of this; and though
they offered to give public thanks to God for the king's safety,
they refused to enter into any detail of particulars, or to
utter from the chair of truth, what appeared to be still du-
bious and uncertain.

A FEw days after, the king returned to Edinburgh, and

though Galloway, the minilter of his own chapel, made an
harangue to the people at the public cross, in which he
recited all the circumfaances of the conspiracy; though he
himself, in their hearing, confirmed his account; though he
commanded a narrative of the whole tranfaaion to be pub-
lithed; the miniflers of that city, as well as many of their
brethren, ill continued incredulous and unconvinced. Their
high esteer of Gowrie, their jealoiify of every part bs the
king's condou, added to some false and many improbable
circumstances in the narrative, not only led them to fufpe&
the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility.
But at length, the king, partly by arguments, partly by
threats; prevailed on a of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce,
to own that they were convinced of the truth of the con-
fpiracy. He could be brought no farther than to declare,
that he reverenced the king's account of the tranfac&ion,
but could not fay that he himself was perfiaded of the
truth of it. The scruples or ofinacy of a single man would
have been little regarded; but as the fame spirit of incredu-
lity began to spread among the people, the example of one
in so high reputation for integrity and abilities, was extreme-
ly dangerous. The king as at the utmost pains to convince
and to gain Bruce, but finding it impcfible to remove his
doubts, he deprived him of his benefice, and after repeated
delays, and many attempts towards a reconcilement, barifihed
him the kingdom *.

Spotw. 461, &e. Cild. t. 389, &ec.
i8

4i1

The proceedings of parliament were nor retarded by any , oo

scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers vixl.
were produced there, according to law; an indi&ment for --
high treason was preferred againlt them; witnesses were 6oc.dng

0 s were

,i *" r , * Proceedings

examined: and by an unanimous sentence, their estates of Parlia-
and honours were forfeited; the punishment due to mentagainlf
traitors was inflied on their dead bodies; and, as if the con'i:

rators.

the punishment hitherto in use did not express sufficient
detellation of their crimes, the parliament enaEed that the
surname of Ruthven should be aolifhed; and in order to
preserve the memory of the king's miraculous escape, and
to declare the fefile which the nation had of the divine
goodnef; to all future ages, appointed the fifth of August
to be obierved, annualy, as a day of public thanks-
giving .

THOUGH

* A few week', after the death of the two brothers, the king published a

dJifcrje f their vile andr nns'ural cnfpiracy aainfl i life. In the year 1 7 3,
George earl of Cromartle publiflied an " Historical account of the conspiracy
by the earl of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Rellalrig, against kingJamesVl."
He seems not to have seen the account which the king himself had given of
that matter, and borrows the whole historical part from Spotfwood and other
authors; but he has extraeed frcom the public records the depositions of the
witnesses produced by the king's council, in order to make good the charge
againff the two brothers, and Logan their associate. From there two treaties
our knowledge of all the material circumnftances of the conspiracy is derived.
The evidence which they contain, one would expe& to be authentic and decisive.
An account of a saC, fill recent, published by royal authority, and the ori-
ginaldepofitions of persons examined in pretence of the highest court in the
nation, ought to convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in historical
relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But as every
thing with regard to this tranliadion is dark and problematical, the king's ac-
count and the depositions of the witnesses not only vary, but contradiC each
other in so many circumstances, that much room is fill left for hefitatiou and
historical scepticism. The testimony of Henderson is the fullet and most im-
portant; but in several particulars the king's account and his are contradito-
ry. I. According to the king's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the
dagger at his breast, " the fellow in the RIudy flood quaking and trembling,"
Disc. 17. But Henderson fays, that he himself wrested the dagger out of Mr.
Ruthven's hands. Disc. 53. Crom. 54. Henderfonlikewife boafled to hiswife,
that he had that day twice saved the king from being stabbed. Dilc. 54.
Crom. 5g. II. The king asserts that Henderlbn opened the window during
Mr. Ruthven's absence. Disc. 3. Henderfondepoes, that he was only at-
tempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned, and that during the struggle
between the king and him, he opened it. Disc. 53. 54. Crom 5r. . Ill.
If we may believe the king, the fellow in the study flood, during the struggle,
behind the king's back, inactive and trembling all the time. Disc. 7. But
Henderson affirms, that he snatched away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven
attempted to bind the king; that he pulled back Mr. Ruthven's hand, while
he was endeavouring to flop the king's mouth, and that he opened the win-
dow. Disc. 54. Crom. 5. IV. By the king's account, Mr. Ruthven left
him in the fludy, and went away in order to meet with his brother, and the
earl came up the flairs for the lame purpole. " Disc. 3. Henderson deposes,
that when Mr. Ruthven left the king, " he believes that he did not pass from
the door." Crom. St. It is apparent, both from the situation of the house,

i and

HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

o o TH OUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a
vi i. great alarm, it was followed by no consequences of imports

t ance; and having been concerted by the two brothers, either

ETxs cono

without any aTociates, or with such as were unknown, and

r-arc a- chose to remain so, the danger was over, as soon as disco-
painflEli- vered. But not long after, a conspiracy broke out in Eng-

a land againtf Elizabeth, which, though the first danger was

intlantly dispelled, produced tragical effets, that rendered
the close of that queen's reign dismal and unhappy. As
James was deeply interested in that event, it merits our par-
ticular notice.

THHE court of England was at this time divided between

two powerful faaions, which contended for the supreme

ind from other circnmfances, that there could not poflbly have been any in.
terview between the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the privy council

in August, and next at Edinburgh before the parliament in November. Not to
mention some less variations between thefedepofitions, wefhall pointout two
which are remarkable. In his first deposition, Mr. Henderson relates the mods
material circmftance of the whole in thee words: " Mr. Ruthven pulled out
the deponent's dagger, and held the fame to his majesty's breat, faying, " re-
mnemteryr of yfather's ~arder ;. *y Jball nms die fir it :" and pointing to
his highness's heart with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr.
Ruthven's hands, and swore, that as God should judge his foul, that if Mr.
Ruthven had retained the dagger in his hand, the space a man may go fix fleps.
he would have firicken the king to the hilts with i." Dife. 5. But at his
second examination he varied from this in two material circumflances. Firfi,
the words he at that time put in Mr. Ruthven's mouth while he held the dagger
at the king's breafd are, " Sir, s nrmf be mr pfriJfner; remember on myfather's
deanr." Secondly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to deter
him from making any noise. " IHldylr trrtae, or by Crift yn Jball die."
2. In his firfr deposition, the words of Mr Ruthven, when he returned to the
chamber where he had left the king, are, " here is *i remedy, by GodyoY muYt
die." But in hit second deposition, " By God there is no remedy, and offered
to bind his majesty's hands." Crom. 51. The material wordsyi mtif die are
omitted. The firR deposition fems plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's
intention to murder the king. The 'ccond would lead us to conclude that he
had no other defiga than to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradi&ions in the ieftimonies of the

a:her witndcfs. . In the discourse publified by authority, it is insinuated thai
the tumult of the inhabitants was raised againil the king, and that it required
iome art to pacify them. Disc. 31. The duke of Lennox confirms this in his
deposition. Crom. 44 An a& of privy council summoning the magistrates of
Perth to answer for that riot is fill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the
baillies of the town, deposes, that he himself raised the people, and that they
took arms in order to affit the king. Crom. 66. a. Henderson deposes, that
he gave an evasive answer to Mr. John Moncrief, who inquired where he had
been that morning, because the earl had commanded him not to let any man
know that he had been at Falkland. Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame
purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George Hay, afterwards lord Kinnoul, and the
chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, drpofe, that the earl, in their preence,
ated Henderson, " Whom he found with the king at Falkland ?" Crom. 70.
-1. Which question seems to prove that he did not aim at keeping that jour-
aey a secret. In the Coiletfion of Criminal Trials, publilhed by Mr. Arnot
·n 785, the evidence against the two brothers ha been confidered with great
a*t;tic. P. sod
&c.

diretion

dire&ion of affairs. The leader of the one was Robert n oo K
D'Evreux, earl of Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, thefonof lord VYs.
treasurer Burleigh, was at the head o the other. The for- *
mer was the moR accomp!ished and the-moft popular of all 1601.
the English nobles; brave, generous, affable; though im-
petuous, yet willing to lifen to the counsels of those whom
he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable enemy; a friend
no less constant than warm; incapable of disguising his own
sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others; better
fitted for a camp than for a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the adminiitration, with
a spirit which scorned the second as below his merit. He
was soon distinguished by the queen, who, with a profusion
uncommon to her, conferred on him, even in his earliest
youth, the highest honours. Nor did this diminilh the esteem
and affetion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity,
he was at once the favourite of his sovereign, and the darling
of the people. Cecil, on the other hand, educated in a
court, and trained under a father deeply skilled in all its arts,
was crafty, insinuating, industrious; and though possessed of
talents which fitted him for the highest offices, he did not
rely upon his merit alone for attaining them, but availed
himself of every advantage, which his own address, or the
mistakes of others, afforded him. Two such men were
formed to be rivals and enemies. Effex despised the arts of
Cecil as low and base. To Cecil, the earl's magnanimity ap-
peared to be presumption and folly. All the military men,
except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Mot of the courtiers ad-
hered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly resembled their
own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle between His corre-

these facions became more violent. Effex, in order to fpondence
flrengthen himself, had early courted the friendship of the scttih
king of Scots, for whose right of succession he was a zealous king.
advocate, and held a close correspondence both with him
and with his principal ministers. Cecil, devoted to the
queen alone, rose daily to new honours by the afllduity of
his services, and the patience with which he expe/ced the
reward of them; while the earl's high spirit and impetuo-
fity sometimes exposed him to checks from a mistress, who,
though partial in her affeCtion toward him, could not easily
bear contradicion, and who conferred favours often unwil-
lingly, and always slowly. His own solicitations, however,
seconded maliciously by his enemies, who wished to remove
him at a distance from court, advanced him to the command
of the army employed in Ireland against Tyrone, and to

I i 2 the

B o . the ofEce of lord lieutenant of that kingdom, with a cortn
viIt. mifion almost unlimited. His success in that expedition did
'- '-. not equal either his own promises, or the expectations of

''160 Elizabeth. The queen, peevish from her disappointment,

and exasperated againll Effex by the artifices of his enemies,
wrote im a harlh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
These his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first
transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a
part of his army into England, and, by driving his enemies
from the queen's pretence, to reinfate himself in favour and
in power. But, upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned
this ralh design, and, setting fail with a few officers devoted
to his peron, landed in England, and posted directly to
court. Elizabeth received hint without any symptom either
of affeaion or of displeasure. By proper compliances and
acknowledgments, he might have regained his former as-
cendant over the queen. But he thought himself too deeply
injured to submit to these. Elizabeth, on the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her
severity drew from him the mofi humble letters, she confined
him to the lord keeper's house, and appointed commifioners
to try him, both tor his conduc during his government of
Ireland, and for leaving that kingdom without her permif-
sion. By their sentence, he was uifpended from all his of-
ices, except that of matier of the horse, and continued a
prisoner darirg the queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having
mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not fffer the
sentence to be recorded, and soon after allowed him to retire
to his own house. During these tranfaaions, which occu-
pied several months, Effex ffuEtated between the allegiance
he owed to his sovereign, and the desire of revenge; and
Sometimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other. In
one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he sent a mef-
fenger into Scotland, to encourage the king to assert his own
right to the fucceflion by force of arms, and to pronaife that,
besides the affiflance of the earl and all his friends in England,
lord Mountjoy, now lord lieutenant of Ireland, would join

Tames's him with five thousand men from that kingdom. But James
au°us did not chute to hazard the losing a kingdom, of which be

was julf about to obtain pofeflion, by a premature attempt
to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise, and
Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; allthoughts of ambition
appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

The W;;d TH IS moderation, which was merely the effee of difgufl
attempts o and disappointment, was not of long continuance; and the

queen, having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant

.which
48+

which fle had formerly bestowed, but even to admit him BOO
into her pretence, that new injury drove a temper naturally vxl.
impatient, and now much fretted, to absolute derpair. His '
friends, instead of soothing his rage, or reitraining his im- 60o.
petuofity, added to both by their imprudent and interested
zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined to
s attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. But being con-

fcious how unpopular such an enterprise would be, if it ap-
peared to proceed from motives of private revenge alone, he
endeavoured to give it the emblance of public utility, by
mingling the king of Scotland's interest with his own. He
wrote to James, that the fa&ion which now predominated in
the English court had resolved to support the pretenfions'of
the infanta of Spain to the crown; that the places of the
greatest importance in the kingdom were put into the hands
of his avowed enemies; and that unless he sent ambarfadors,
without delay, to infifl on the immediate declaration of his
right of fuccefflion, their measures were so well concerted,
that all his hopes would be derperate. James, who knew
how disagreeable such a proposal would be to the queen of
England, was not willing rashly to expose himself to her dif-
pleasure. Effex, nevertheless, blinded by resentment, and
impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to there paflions,
and aed like a man guided by phrenzy or despair. With
two or three hundred followers incompletely armed, he at-
tempted to assault a throne the best established in Europe.
Sallying at their head out of his own house, he called on
the citizens of London, if they either valued his life, or
wished to preserve the kingdom from the dominion of the
Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his standard. He ad-
vanced towards the palace with an intention to drive Cecil
and his faaion out of the queen's pretence, and to obtain a
declaration of the Scottish king's right of fucceflion *. But,
though almost adored by the citizens, not a man would join
him in this wild enterprise. Dispirited by their indifference,
deserted by some of his own attendants, and almost fur-
rounded by the troops which marched against him underdif-
ferent leaders into the city, he retreated to his own house;
and without any bold effort, suitable to his present condition,
or worthy of his former reputation for courage, he furren-
dered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he appointed

the earl of Mar, and Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his
ambassadors to the court of England. The former of there

* Birch. Mcnm. ii. 477.

was

4B5

BOK was the person by whose means Effex had carried on his
viii. correspondence with the king. He was a passionate admirer
- .v- of the earl's charaaer, and disposed to attempt every thing
1601. that could contribute to his faiety. Bruce, united in a close

friendihip with Mar, was ready to second him with equal
zeal. Nor was the purpose of the embatfy less friendly to
Effex, than the choice of his ambassadors; they were com-
manded to solicit, in the warmed manner, for the eatl's life,
and if they found that the king, by avowing his friends,
could either promote their designs or contribute to their
safety, they were impowered to lay aide all disguise, and
to promise that he would put himfelt at their head, and claim
f.t dlta. what was due to him b. iorce of arms t. But before the

ambassadors could reach London, Effex had suffered the pu-
nifhment which he merited by his treason. Perhaps, the
fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his pardon, ha-
flened his deth. Elizabeth continued, for some time, irre-
solute concerning his fate, and could not bring herself to
consign into the hands of the executioner, a man who had
once possessed her favour so entirely, without a painful
struggle between her resentment againil his late mifcondu&,
and her ancient affection towards him. The diflrefs to
which he was now reduced, tended naturally to soften the
former, while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and
the interceffon of one faithful friend, who had interest with
the queen, might perhaps have saved his life, and have pro-
cured him a remiflion, which, of herself, she was ashamed to
grant. But this generous nobleman had at that time no such
friend. Elizabeth, solicited incessantly by her ministers, and
offended with the haughtiness of Effex, who, as she ima-
gined, scorned to sue for pardon, at last commanded the fen-
tence to be put in execution. No sooner was the blow
firuck, than the repented of her own rashness, and bewailed
his death with the deepest sorrow. James always confidered
him as one who had fallen a martyr to his service, and, after
his accefion to the English throne, refiored his son to his
honours, as well as all his associates in the conspiracy, and
diflinguilhed them with his favour t.

Jre- con- T HE Scottiih ambafladors, finding that they had arrived
trJes bhi too late to execute the chief business committed to their
EUgd charge, not only concealed that part of their inftruaions with

the utmoficare; but congratulated the queen, in their ma-
iler's name, on her happy escape from such an audacious
conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no stranger to theking's

- Jo&.n. 9Sg. BiErh. Mem. ii. 56. t Camd. Spotfw. 464.

correspond-
4S6

correspondence with Effex, or to that nobleman's intentions B o o I
of aflerting James's right to the crown, was not willing that VIil.
there should be known to the people, and, for that reason, '_
received the congratulations of the Scottish ambassadors with '60"'
all possible marks of credit and good will; and in order to
sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union be-
tween the two courts, increased the subsidy which he paid
him annually. The ambassadors resided for fame time in
England, and were employed, with greatfuccefs, in renew-
ing and extending the intrigues which Bruce had formerly
entered into with the English nobles. As Elizabeth ad-
vanced in years, the English turned their eyes more and more
towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each other
in courting the favour of their future monarch. Aflurances
of attachment, profeflions of regard, and promises of support,
were offered to James from every corner of the kingdom.
Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded on
the friendship of the Scottish king, and what advantages he
might have derived from it, thought it prudent to stand on
longer at a distance from a prince, who might so soon be-
come his mafler. But being sensible at the fame time how
dangerous such an intercourse might prove, under a miflrefs
naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew fironger with old
age; though he entered into a correspondence with him, he
carried it on with all the secrecy and caution neceflary in his
situation,* and peculiar to his chara&er , James having
gained the man whose oppQfition and influence he had hi-
therto chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfea security, till that
event should happen, which would open his way to the
throne of England t. It was with some difficulty that he re-
frained within proper bounds his adherents in that kingdom,
who, labouring to distinguish themselves by that officious
zeal with which a prince, who has a near profpec of mount-
ing the throne, is always served, urged him to allow a mo-
tion to be made in parliament for declaring his right of fuc-
ceflion to the crown. James prudently discouraged that de-
sign; but it was with no small fatisfadion that he observed
the ascendant he was acquiring in a court, the ditiates of

* See Append, No. XX.
+ Dr. Birch, in his Life of Prince Henry, p. 231, has given ome account

of the mysterious mode in which this correspondence was carried on, and how
the letters were conveyed from London to Dublin, and from thence to Scot-
land. Notwithstanding the solicitude which Cecil repeatedly discovers, that his
letters hould be destroyed as soon as the king had read them, a confiderabic
iumber of them has been preserved, and publilhed by Sir David Dalrymple in
the year 1766. They were written by lord Henry Howard, under the in-
fpetion of Cecil, in a style affcacdly obfcre. The whoje correspondence is
inare curious than iafruiv.

which

Boo which he had been so long obliged to obey; and which had
V11 . either prescribed or thwarted every flep he had taken during

^"v3 ' the whole course of his reign *.
Atempt to NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the poli-
civilize the tical fa&ions which divided the court, and the frequent revo-
Highad- lutions which had happened there, since the king first took

the reins of government into his ou n hands, Scotland had
enjoyed unusual tranquillity; being undiftlrbed by any so-
reign enemy, and free from any intestine commotion of long
continuance. During this period, James endeavoured to
civilize the Highlands and the Isles, a part of his dominions
too much negleded by former monarchs, though the refor:n-
ation of it was an obe3 highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of sub-
during the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of refrain-
ing their depredations, often no less ruinous to their coun-
trymen than to their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low
Country began, gradually, to forget the use of arms, and
to become attentive to the arts of peace. But the High-
landers, retaining their natural fierceness, averse from la-
-bour, and in;rd to rapine, infelted their more industrious
neighbo:urs by ti er continual incursions. James, being so-
Iicitous not only to repress their inroads, but to render them
useful fubjedst, had at different times enaoed many wife
laws extremely conducive to there ends. All landlords, or
chiefs or clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to reside
in their eflates, who could not find sufficient surety for their
good behaviour; they were required to make a lift of all
suspicious persons under their jurifdition, to bind them-
selves to deliver them tojuflice, and to indemnify those who
should susser by their robberies; and, in order to ascertain
the faithful performance of these articles, the chiefs them-
selves were obliged to give hoflages to the king, or to put
pledges in his hands. Three towns which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and com-
merce, were appointed to be built in different parts of the
Highlands; one in Cantire, another in Lochaber, and a
third in the isle of Lewis; and, in order to draw inhabitants
thither, all the privileges of royal boroughs were to be con-
ferred upon them. Finding it, however, to be no easy mat-
ter to inspire the natives of those countries with the love of
industry, a resolution was taken to plant among them colo-
nies of people from the more industrious counties. The first
experiment was made in the isle of Lewis; and as it was ad-

* Spotfw. 467. 47. Bi-ch. Mem. ii. 514. - Basil. Dor. 39.

vantageoufly
433

vantageoufly situated for the fishing trade, a source from B o
which Scotland ought naturally to derive great wealth, the vii.
colon) transported thither was drawn out of Fife, the inha- L'-_
bitants of which were well skilled in that branch of corn- 60o
merce. But before they had remained there long enough to
manifest the good effe&s of this intitution, the islanders,
enraged at feeing their country occupied by those intruders,
took arms, and surprising them in the night-time, murdered
some of them, and compelled the reft to abandon the fttle-
ment. The king's attention being soon after turned to other
objets, we hear no more of this salutary projet. Though
James did not pursue the design with tha' steady application
and perseverance, without which it is impossible to change
the manners es a whole people, he had the glory, however,
not only of having first conceived the thought, but of hav-
ing first pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the island '.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good ttate of health, the Elizabeth's

effe& of a found constitution, and the reward of uncommon lat ilinets,
regularity and temperance, Elizabeth began this winter to and death.
feel her vigour decrease, and to be sensible of the infirmities
of old age. Having removed on a very ltormy day from
Weftminfler to Richmond, whither (he was impatient to
retire, her complaints increased. She had no formed fever; 1603.
her pulse was good; but she eat little, and could not sleep. January 31.
Her difiemper seemed to proceed from a deep melancholy,
which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in solitude, she fat contfantly in the dark and was
often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the queen's indisposition known, than per-

sons of all ranks, and of all different seas and parties, re-
doubled their applications to the king of Scots, and vied with
each other in profeflions of attachment to his person, and in
promises of submission to his government. Even some of
Elizabeth's own servants, weary of the length of her reign,
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the burthen of grati-
tude for past benefits, and expecing to share in the liberality
of a new prince, began to desert her: and crowds of people
hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre.occupy the favour of
the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

MEANWHILE, the queen's difeafeincreafed, and her me-

lancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various
conjeaures were formed concerning the causes of a disorder,

tp F. L1587 1594. 3597. Spotfw, 465.

from

489

B o o from which she seemed to be exempted by the natural cheer,
vilx. fulness of her temper. Some imputed it to her being forced
'-t-' contrary to her inclination, to pardon the earl of Tyrone,

160;. whole rebellion had for many years created her much trouble.

Others imagined that it arose from obfcrving the ingratitude
of her courtiers, and the letity of her peop'e, who beheld her
health declining with motl indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the accession of the Scotilh king, with an impa-
tience which they could not conceal. The most common
opinion, at that time, and perhaps the most probable, was,
that it flowed from grief for the earl of Effex. She retained
an extraordinary regard for the memory of that unfortunate
nobleman; and though she often complairled of his obstinacy,
seldom mentioned his name without tearst. An accident
happened soon after her retiring to Richmond, which Le-
vived her affeaion with new tendernels, and embittered her
sorrows. The countess of Nottingham, being on her death
bed, desired to fee the queen, in order to reveal something
to her, without discovering which, fle could not die in peace.
\Vhen the queen came into her chamber, she told her, that

,while Eifex lay under fenience of death, he was desirous of

imploring pardon in the manner which the queen herself had
prescribed, by returning a ring, which during the height of his
favour ihe had given him, with a promise that if, in any fu-
ture diltrefs, he ent that back to her as a token, it fhotuld
intile him to her protection; that lady Scroop was the per-
foi he intended to employ in order to present it; that, by a
mistake, it was put into her hands instead of lady Scroop's,
and that she having communicated the matter to her husband,
one oi Essex's molt implacable-enemies, he had forbid her
either to carry the ring to the queen, or to return it to the
earl. 'he countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged
the queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both
the malice of the earl's enemies, and how unjustly she had
fufpested him of inflexible obflinacy, replied, " God may
forgive you, but I never can ;" and left the room in great
emotion t. From that moment, her spirit funk entirely; she

could

+- Birch. Mem. ii. 505.
t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was f.rft published by O/borne, Mem.

of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony of de Manrier, Mem. 60,
and by the traditional evidence of lady Elizabeth Spelman, publified by Dr.
Birch. Negoc. 1o6. Camden mentions the queen's grief for Essex's death as
one of the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain, which
prove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birch. Mem. ii. o56.
Ifex, however, had been beheaded two years before her death, and there seems
to have been no other reason, but that which we have afligaed, why her for
rows should revive with so much violence at so great a distance of time. As
the death of the countess of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before

g.

could scarce taste food; she refused all the medicines pre- B ooK
fcribed by her physicians; declaring that he wished to die, vili.
and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail on *
her to go to bed; he fat on cushions, during ten days and '693.
nights, pensive and silent, holding her finger almost con-
tinually in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the
ground. The only thing to which she seemed to give any
attention was the ads of devotion performed in her apart-
ment by the archbishop of Canterbury; and in these he
joined with great appearance of fervour. Walled, at last, as
well by anguifl of mind, as by long abstinence, he expired
without a Siruggle, on Thursday the twenty-fourth day of
March, in the seventieth year of her age, and in the forty-
fifth of her reign t.

FoREIGNERS oftenaccufe the Englilh of indifference and Her cht

difrefpea towards their princes. But without reason; no raar.,
people are more grateful than they to those monarchs who
merit their gratitude. The names of Edward II[. and
Henry V. are mentioned by the English of this age with
the fame warmth as they were by those who (hared in the
bleeings and splendour of their reigns. The memory of
Elizabeth is ill adored in England. The historians of that
kingdom, after celebrating her love of her people; her
sagacity in discerning their true interest; her steadiness in
pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her ministers;
the glory he acquired by arms; the tranquility lhe secured
to her fubjecs; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of
commerce, which were the fruits of all there; justly rank
her among the most illulrious princes. Even the deteEs in
her ciacaer, they observe, were not of a kind pernicious to
her p-olpe. Her excessive frugality was not accompanied
with the love of boarding; and though it prevented some
great undertakings, and rendered the success of others in-
complete, it introduced economy into her adminifiration,
and exempted the nation from many burdens, which a mo-
narch, more profuse or more enterprising, muff have im-
posed. Her tlownefs in rewarding her servants sometimes
discouraged useful merit; but it prevented the undeferving

the queen's death, the coincidence of there events, together with the other
cvidencementioned,addsfomuchprobabilitytotheftory by Olborne, as
will entitle it to a place in history. The only objction to the account we have
given of Elizabeth's attachment to Effex, arises from her great age. At the
ageof 68, the amorous paffiors are commonlyabundantlycool, and the violence
of all the paflions, except one, is much abated. But the force of this objec-
tion is entirely removed by an author who has illustrated many paflages in the
English history, and adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and Noble Author,
,Article Effex.

t Card. Birch. Mem. ii. o56. Birch. Negoc. ao6. Strype, iv. 373.

from

4Sr

j o o c from acquiring power and wealth, to which they had no
vix. Xtitle. Her extreme jealousy of those princes who pretended

to dispute her right to the crown, led her to take such pre-
63' cautions, a; tended no less to the public safety, than to her

own; and to courtthe affecions of her people, as the firmedi
support of her throne. Such is the picture which the English
draw of this great queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the hillory of Scotland,

finds hirnfelf obliged, frequently to view her in a very
different, and in a less amiable light. Her authority in that
kingdom, during ihe greater p:art of her reign, was little
interior to that which flie poffelTed in her o'in. But this
authority, acquired'at first by a service of grcat importance
to the nation, he exercised in a mannerextirenwly pernicious
to its happiness. By her indufiry in fomenting the rage of
the two contending facions; by supplying the one with
partial aid ; bv feeding the other with false hopes; by ba-
lancing their power o artfully, that each of them was able
to dilefs, and neither of them to subdue the other; she
rendered Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion, and
bloodshed: and her craft and intrigues, effecing what the
valour of her anceflors could not accomplih, reduced that
kingdom to a slate of dependance on England. The maxims
of policy, often little consonant to those of morality, may,
perhaps, justify this condua, But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to queen Mary; a scene of dissimulation
without neccititv; and of severity beyond example. In al-
rno!l all her other ations, Elizabeth is the obje& of our
hiheft admiration; in this we mufi allow that she n only
hid aside the magnanimity which became a queen, but the
feelings natural to a woman.

.m,? r-O. THOUGH Elizabeth would never permit thequeflioncon-
C '.imzd cerning the right of succession to the crown to be determined
kEzr'^d. in parliament; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a

point which the wilhed to remain an impenetrable myflery;
The had, however, formed no design of excluding the Scot-
tilh king from an inheritance to which his title was un-
doubted. A hort time before her death, Ihe broke the
silence which she had so long preserved on that subjea, and
told Cecil and the lord admiral, " That her throne was the
throne of kings; that he would have no mean person to
ascend it, and that her cousin the king of Scots should be
her successor." This she confirmed on her death-bed. As
soon as he breathed her last, the lords of the privy council
proclaimed James king of England. All the intrigues carried
on by foreigners in favour of the infanta, all the cabals

formed

formed within the kingdom to support the titles of lady oo K
Arabella and the earl of Hertford, disappeared in a moment; vil.
the nobles and people, forgetting their ancient hostilities ---
with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of firan- g603
gers, teflified their fatisfaCion with louder acclamations
than were usual at the accetfion of their native princes.
Amidrt this tumult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots,
who proposed to pefcribe Come conditions to the successor,
and to exact from him the redress of ome grievances, before
they called him to the throne, was Icacely heard; and
Cecil, by flifling it, added to his flock of merit with his new
maler. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the earl of Northum-
berland, and Thomas Somerset, the earl of Worcester's son,
were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to the king,
signed by all the peers and privy counsellors then in London;
informing him of the queen's death, of his acceflion to the
throne, of their care to recognize his title, and of the
univeFfal applaife with which the public proclamation of it
had been attended. T7hey made the utmofi haste to deliver
this welcome metlge; but were prevented by the zeal of
fir Robert Carey, lord Hunfdon's youngefl son, who setting
out a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edinburgh
on Saturday night, just as the king had gone to bed. He
was immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and
kneeling by the king's bed, acquainted him with the death
of Elizabeth, saluted him king of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland; and as a token of the truth of the intelligence
which he brought, presented him a ring, which his filter
lady Scroop had taken from the queen's finger after her
death. James heard him with a decent composure. But as
Carey was only a private messenger, the information which
he brought was not made public, and the king kept his
apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his
titles were solemnly proclaimed; and his own subje&s ex-
pressed no less joy, then the English, at this increase of his
dignity. As his presence was absolutely necessary in England,
where the people were extremely impatient to fee their new
sovereign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom without
delay. He appointed hisqueen to follow him within a few
weeks. He committed the government of Scotland to his
privy council. He intruded the care of his children to dif-
ferent noblemen. On the Sunday before his departure, he
repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the preacher displayed the greatness of the
divine goodness in raising him to the throne of such a
powerful kingdom without oppofion or bloodlhed, and ex-

horted

49k

a o o K horted him to express his gratitude, by promoting, to the
VIlI. utmofl, the happiness and prosperity of his fubjeas; the
-v*-- king rose up, and addrefing himself to the people, made
ó0'3 many profeflions of unalterable affetion towards them;

promised frequently to visit Scotland; assured them that his
Scottish fubjets, notwithflanding his absence, ihould feel
that he was their native prince, no less than when he re-
fided among them; and might still trust that his ears should
be always open to their petitions, which he would answer
with the alacrity and love of a parent. His words were
often interrupted by the tears of the whole audience; who,
though they exulted at the king's prosperity, were melted
into sorrow by there declarations 1.

Take- pi- ON the fifth of April he began his journey, with a fplen-
feffonoithe did, but not a numerous train; and next day he entered
throe. Berwick. Wherever he came, immense multitudes were

assembled to welcome him; and the principal persons in the
different counties through which he passed, displayed all their
wealth and magnificence in entertainments prepared for him
at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long in England,
that most of her subje&s remembered no other court but
hers, and their notions of the manners and decorums suit.
able to a prince were formed to what they had observed
there. It was natural to apply this ftandard'to the behaviour
and aions of their new monarch, and to compare him, it
sirs fight, with the queen, on whose throne he was to be
placed. James, whose manners were extremely different
from hers, suffered by the comparison. He had not that
flowing affability, by which Elizabeth captivated the hearts
of her people; and, though easy among a few whom he
loved, his indolence could not bear the fatigue of render-
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He was no
less a firanger to that dignity with which Elizabeth tempered
her familiarity. And, instead of that well-judged frugality
with which she conferred titles of honour, he befllowed them
with an undilfinguifed profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of diftin&ion, or rewards of merit. But theft
were the refle&ions of the few alone; the multitude con-
tinued their acclamations; and amidIt there, James entered
London on the 7th of May, and took peaceable poffefion of
the throne of England.
Concluion. THU s were united two kingdoms, divided from the arlief

accounts of time, but defined, by their situation, to form
one great monarchy. By this juntion of its whole native

t Spotfw. 4.

force
494

force, Great Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority a o o
in Europe, which England and Scotland could never have viil.
attained.

TH E Scots had so long confidered their monarchs as next A view of

heirs to the Englilh throne, that they had full leisure to the Revolu-
reflea on all the consequences of their being advanced to tions in the

Confsitution'

that dignity. But, dazzfed with the glory of giving a so- of Scotland
vereign to their powerful enemy, relying on the partiality of since the ac
their native prince, and in full expetation of sharing libe- ce'flio
rally in the wealth and honours which he would now be
able to beflow, they attended little to the mol obvious
consequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his acceflion
to the throne of England, as if it had been no less bene-
ficial to the kingdom, than honourable to the king. They
soon had reason, however, to adopt very different sentiments;
and from that period we may date a total alteration in the
political constitution of Scotland.

Tn E feudal ariflocracy, which had been ubverted in molt

nations of Europe by Ihe policy of their princes, or had
been undermined by the progress of commerce, fill sub-
sifted with full force in Scotland. Many causes had con-
tributed gradually to augment the power of the Scottish
nobles; and even the Reformation, which, in every other
country where it prevailed, added to the authority of the
monarch, had increased their wealth and influence. A king
possessed of a small revenue, with a prerogative extremely
limited and unsupported by a flanding army, could not
exercise much authority over such potent fubjeas. He was
obliged to govern by expedients; and the laws derived their
force not from his power to execute them, but from the
voluntary fubmiflion of the nobles. But though this pro-
duced a species of government extremely feeble and irregular;
though Scotland, under the name, and with ali the outward en-
signs of a monarchy, was really fubje& to an aristocracy, the
people were not altogether unhappy; and even in this wild
form of a constitution, there were principles, which tended
to their security and advantage. The king, checked and
overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no a of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the king, whose claims
and pretensions were many, though his power was fnall,
were afraid of irritating their dependants by unreasonable
exacions, and tempered the rigour of arriftocratical tyranny,
with a mildness and equality to which it is naturally a
firanger. As long as the military genius of the feudal
government remained in vigour, the vassals both of the
crown and of the barons were generally not only free from

opprecon,

495

X o o t oppreflon, but were courted by their superiors, whore power
vil. and importance were founded on their attachment and
'-*v--J love.

BUT, by his acceflion to the throne of England, James

acquired such an immense acceflion of wealth; of power,
andof splendour, that the nobles, aflonifhed and intimidated,
thought it vain to firuggle for privileges which they were
now unable to defend. Nor was it from fear alone
that they submitted to the yoke; James, partial to his
countrymen, and willing that they (hould partake in his
good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and
the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of his
power n taming their fierce and independent spirits. The
will of the prince became the supreme law in Scotland; and
the nobles firove, with emujation, who should molt im-
plicitly obey commands, which they had formerly been ac-
cultomed to contemn. Satisfied with having fubje&ed the
nobles to the crown, the king left them in full possession of
their ancient juiifdiaion over their own vasals. The ex-
tensive rights, vefed in a feudal chief, became in their
hands dreadful intfruments of oppreflion, and the military
ideas, on which these rights were founded, being gradually
loft or disregarded, nothing remained to correc or to miti-
gate the rigour with which they were exercised. The nobles,
exhausting their fortunes by the expence of frequent at-
tendance upon the English court, and by attempts to imitate
the manners and luxury of their more wealthy neighbours,
multiplied exactions upon the people, who durst hardly
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the
ear of their sovereign, nor move him to grant them any re-
dress. From the union of the crowns to the revolution
in 688, Scotland was placed in a political situation, of all
others the molf singular and the most unhappy: fubje&ed
at once to the absolute will of a monarch, and to the op-
prefivejurifdiaion of an aristocracy, it suffered all the mise-
ies'peculiar to both these forms of government. Its kings
were despotic; its nobles were slaves and tyrants; and the
people groaned under the rigorous domination of both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one es-

fort to hake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient inde-
pendency. After the death of James, the Scottish nation
was no longer viewed by our monarchs with any partial
affe&ion. Charles I. educated among the English, disco-
vered no peculiar attachment to the kingdom of which
he was a native. The nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be
mew in hands less friendly, and swayed by a prince t ith

whom

*thom they had little connexion, and over whose coutiils i oox
they had little influence, no longer submitted with the famne VtI-
implicit obedience. Provoked by some encroachments of "
the king on their order, ana apprehensive of others, the re-
tmains of their ancient spirit began to appear. They com-
plained and remonstrated. The people being, at the fame
time, violently disgusted at the innovations in religion, the
nobles secretly heightened this dilguft; and their artifices,
together with the ill-condud of the court, raised such a
spirit, that the whole nation took arms against their fove-
reign, with an union and animosity of which there had for-
merly been no example. Charles brought againftthem the
forces of England, and notwithstanding their own union,
and the 7eal of the people, the nobles must have funk in
the ftrugele. But the difaffeAion which wasgrowingamong
his English subje&s, prevented the king from aaing with
vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms; and
after many battles and revolutions, which are well known,
the Scottish nobles, who rfirt began the war, were involved
in the fame ruin with the throne. At the restoration,
Charles 11. regained full poffeilion of the royal prerogative
in Scotland; and the nobles, whose estates were wafted,
or their spirit broken, by the calamities to which they had
been exposed, were less able and less willing than ever to
resist the power of the crown, During his reign, and that
of James VII. the di6lates of the monarch were received in
Scotland with most abject fubmiflion. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them
meaner laves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The
people, always neglected, were now odious, and loaded with
every injury, on account of their attachment to religious and
political principles, extremely repugnant to those adopted by
their princes.

THE revolution introduced other maxims into the govern-

ment of Scotland. To increase the authority of the prince,
or to secure the privilege,,of the nobles, had hitherto beert
almost the sole objet of our laws. The rights of the people
were hardly ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the welfare of
the people. By the claim of right, their liberties were fe-
cured; and the number of their representatives being in-
creased, they gradually acquired new weight and confider-
ation in parliament. As they came to enjoy more fecu-
rity and greater power, their minds began to open, and to
form more extensive plans of commerce, of induifry, and of
police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which still predominated,

K k together

497

a o 0 X together with many other accidents, retarded the improve.
voi. ment and happiness of the nation.
'L-' ANOTHER great event completed what the revolution hai

begun. The political power of the nobles, already broken
.by the union of the two crowns, was almost annihilated by
the union of the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part,
as formerly, of the supreme aembly of the nation, instead
of bearing the mos considerable sway there, the peers of
Scotland are admitted into the British parliament by their
.representatives only, and form but an inconsiderable part of
one of those bodies in which the legislative authority is veled.
They themselves are excluded absolutely from the house of
commons, and even their elder sons are not permitted to
represent their countrymen in that august assembly. Nor
have their feudal privileges remained, to compensate for
this extinction of their political authority. As commerce
advanced in its progress, and government attained nearer to
perfecion, these were infenfibiy circumscribed, and at laR,
by laws no less salutary to the public, than fatal to the
nobles, they have been almost totally abolished. As the
nobles were deprived of power, the people acquired liberty.
Exempted from burdens to which they were formerly ub-
jea; screened from opprefiion, to which they had been
long exposed, and adopted into a conflitution whose genius
and laws were more liberal than their own, they have ex-
tended their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts
and sciences.
*i ~THIS frvey of the political lRate of Scotland, in which

events and their causes have been mentioned rather than de-
veloped, enables us to point out three eras, from each of
which we may date some great alteration in one or other of
the three different members of which the supreme legislative
aflembly in our constitution is composed. At their accefion
tothe throne of England, the kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became, in an infRant, the moR absolute
princes in Europe, and ezercifed a despotic authority, which
their parliaments were unable to controul, or their nobles to
resist. At the union of the two kingdoms, the feudal ari-
,iocracy, which had fubfited so many ages, and with power

so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scottish nobles, hav-
ing surrendered rights and pre-eminences peculiar to their
order, reduced themselves to a condition which is no longer
the terror and envy of other subje&s. Since the union, the
commons, anciently negleed by their kings, and seldom
courted by the nobles, have emerged into dignity; and, be-

ing

Ing admitted to a participation of all the privileges which s o o
the English had purchased at the expence of so much blood, vli.
must now be esteemed a body not les considerable in the -
one kingdom, than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the e'ffe&s of the absolute power which

the king acquired by his acceflion ; and its revolutions, too,
are worthy of notice. James, during the last three years of his
administration in Scotland, had revived the name ahd office
of bishops. But they poffefled no ecclefiaflical jurifdiaion
or pre-eminence; their revenues were inconsiderable, and
they were Icarcely distinguished by any thing but by their
feat in parliament, and by being the obje& of the clergy's
jealoufv, and the people's hatred. The king, delighted with
.he splendor and authority which the Englilh bishops enjoy-
ed, and eager to effect an union in the ecclefialtical policy,
which he had, in vain, attempted in the civil government of
the two kingdoms, resolved to bring both churches to an
exa& conformity with each other. Three Scotsmen wete
consecrated bishops at London. From them, their brethren
were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed; and though the clergy, less obfe-
quious than the nobles, boldly oppored these innovations,
James, long pra&ised and well-fkilled in the arts of ma-
naging them, obtained at length their compliance. But
Charles I. a fuperttitious pince, unacquainted with the
genius of the Scots, imprudent and precipitant in all the
measures he pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly
the reception of the Englifl liturgy, and indiscreetly at-
tempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames
of civil war; and the people being left at liberty to indulge
their own withes, the episcopal church was overturned, and
the presbyterian government and discipline were re-efta-
blilhed with new vigour. Together with monarchy, episcopacy
was rfored in Scotland. A form of government, so odi-
ous to the people, required force to uphold it; and though
not only the whole rigour of authority, but all the barba-
rity of persecution were employed in its support, the aver-
sion of the nation was informountable, and it fubfifed with
difficulty. At the revolution, the inclinations of the people
were thought worthy the attention of the legislature, the
presbyterian government was again eflabliflhed, and, being
ratified by the union, is fill maintained in the kingdom.

NoR did the influence of the acceflion extend to the civil

and ecclefiaflical constitutions alone; the genius of the na-
tion, its tafe and spirit, things of a nature fill mo?e delicate,
were sensibly affeQed by that event. When;learning re-

K k 2 vived

49

a o a o vived in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, all the modern
Vl 1. lauguages were in a tlate equally barbarous, devoid of ele-

gance of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No author thought
of writing in languages so ill adapted to express and embel-
lilh his sentiments, or of ereting a work for immortality
with such rude and perishable materials. As the spirit,
which prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited by id-
miration of the ancients, their compositions were deemred
not only the flandards of taste and of entiment, but of
ftvle; and even the languages in which they wrote
m.ere thought to be peculiar, and almost consecrated to
learning and the muses. Not only the manner of the
ancients was imitated, but their language copied: and, ex-
travagant as the attempt may appear to write in a dead
tongue, in which men were not accustomed to think, and
which they could not speak, or even pronounce, the success
of it was astonishing. As they formed their style upon the
purest models; as they were unirnfe&ed with those barba-
rifms, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the
affeaation of courts, intercourse with itrangers, and a thou-
sand other causes, introduce into living languages; many
moderns have attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin
compofirions, which the Romans themselves scarce possessed
beyond the limits of the Augustan age. While this was
almost the only fpcies of composition, and all authors, by
using one common language, could be brought to a nearer
comparison, the Scottish writers were not - inferior to
thole of any other nation. The happy genius of Bu-
chanan, equally formed to excel in prose and in verse,
more various, more original, and more elegant, than
that of almost any other modern, who writes in Latin,
Tefleas, with regard to this particular, the greatest lutfre on
his country.

BuT the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was

irksome; the unequal return for their industry which authors
met with, who could be read and admired only within the
narrow circle of the learned, was mortifying; and men,
nftlead of wafting half their lives in learning the language
of the Romans, began to refine and to polilh their own.
The modern tongues were found to be susceptible of beauties
and graces, which, if not equal to those of the ancient.
ones, were at least more attainable. The Italians having
first set the example, Latin was no longer used in the works
of taste; it was confined to booksof science; and the politer
nations have banished it even from these. The Scots, we

may
o00

may presume, would have had no cause to regret this change o o K
in the public taste, and would fill have been able to main- v'".
tain some equality with other nations, in their pursuit of li-
terary honour. The Englifl and Scottith languages, de-
rived from -the fame sources, were at the end of the fix-
teenth century, in a slate nearly similar, differing from one
another romewhat in orthography, though not only the
words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters of
several Scottish ltatefmen of that age are not inferior in ele-
gance, or in purity, to those of the English miniffers with
whom they corresponded. James himself was malter of a
style far from contemptible; and by his example and en-
couragement, the Scottish language might have kept pace
with the English in refinement. Scotland might have had
a series of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin lan-
guage, to boast of; and the improvements in taste, in the
arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the other
polished nations of Europe, would not have been unknown
there.

BUT, atthe very time when other nations were beginning

to drop the use of Latin in works of talte, and to make trial
of the flrength and compass of their own languages, Scotland
ceased to be a kingdom. The transports of joy, which the
acceflion at first occasioned, were soon over: and the Scots,
being at oncedeprived of all the objeas that refine or animate
a people; of the presence of their prince, of the concourse
of nobles, of the splendour and elegance of a court, an uni-
versal dejetion of spirit seems to have seized the nation.
The court being withdrawn, no domeflic flandard of pro-
priety and corredtnefs of speech remained; the few compo-
fitions that Scotland produced were tried by the Englilh
standard, and every word or phrase that varied in the least
from that, was condemned as barbarous; whereas, if the
two nations had continued diftint, each might have re-
tained idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itfelfi and
these rendered falhionable by the example of a court, and
supported by the authority of writers of reputation, might
have been confidered in the fame light with the varieties
occasioned by the different diale&s in the Greek tongue;
might have been confidered as beauties; and, in many
cafes, might have been used promiscuously by the authors of
both nations. But, by the accfflion, the Englith naturally
became the sole judges and lawgivers in language, and re-
je&ed as solecisms, every form of speech to which their ear
was not accutomed. Nor did the Sots, while the inter-

0curse

501

Boo course between the two nations was inconsiderable *, and
viii. ancient prejudices were ftillfo violent as to prevent imita-
' D-v--J tion, possess the means of refining their own tongue ac-

cording to the purity of the English flandard. On the
contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from every different
source. The clergy of Scotland, in that age, were more
eminent for piety than for learning; and though there did
not arise many authors among them, yet being in possession
of the privilege of discoursing publicly to the people, and
their sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent,
such hasty productions could not be elegant, and many
slovenly and incorrea modes of expreiflon may be traced
back to that original, The pleadings of lawyers were
equally loose and inaccurate, and that profession having
furnilhed more authors, and the matters of which they
treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many
of those vicious forms of speech, which are denominated
Scotticifmn, have been introduced by them into the language.
Nor did either the language or public taste receive any im-
provement in parliament, where a more liberal and more
correa eloquence might have been expeded. All business
was tranaaed there by the lords of articles, and they were
so fervilelv devoted to the court, that few debates arose, and,
prior to the revolution, none were conduced with the
Ipirit and vigour natural to a popular afembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the English

were gradually refining their language and their taste; in
Scotland the former was much debated, and the latter al-
most entirely loft. In the beginning of that period, both
nations were emerging out of barbarity; but the diltance
between them, which was then inconsiderable, became,
before the end of it, immense. Even after science had
once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking
back into ignorance and obscurity; and afive and intelligent
as they naturally are, they continued, while other nations
were eager in the pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a slate
of languor. This, however, mjit be imputed to the un-

· A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the Englilh and Scots

before the union of the crowns, is to be found in two curious Papers, one
published by Haynes. the other by Strype. In the year 567, Elizabeth com-
inanded the bishop of London to take a survey of all the Irangers within the
cities of London and Weftminner. By this report, which is very minute, it
appears that the whole number of Scots at that time was 58. Haynes, 455.
A survey of the fame kind was made by Sir Thomas Row, lord mayor, A. D.
I j68. The number of Scot, had then increased to 88. Strype, iv. Supple-
ment, No I. On the accefilon of James, a considerable number of Scots,
eiteciallv of. the higher rank, resorted to England; hut it was not till the
*.O that the intercourse between the two kingdoms became great. -

happiness
5O;

happiness of their political situation, not to any defea of Boo K
genius; for no foener was the one removed in any de- vli.
gree than the other began to display itself. The a abo- '- i
lifhing the power of the lords of articles, and other salutary
laws palted at the revolution, having introduced freedom of
debate into the Scottih parliament, eloquence, with all the
arts that accompany or perfec it, became immediate objets
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone
is sufficient to hew that the Scots were ill capable of ge-
nerous sentiments, and, notwithftandiog some peculiar
idioms, were able to express themselves with energy, and
with elegance.

AT length the union having incorporated the two nations,

and rendered them one people, the diftintions which had
fubfifed for many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities
disappear; the fame manners prevail in both parts of the
island; the fame authors are read and admired; the fame
entertainments are frequented by the elegant and polite;
and the fame fandard of taste, and of purity in language,
is elablifhed. The Scots, after being placed, during a
whole century, in a situation not less fatal to the liberty than
to the taRe and genius of the nation, were at once put in
polfeflion of privileges more valuable than those which their
ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and every obftruaion that
had retarded their pursuits. or prevented their acquisition of
literary fame, was totally removed.

A CRI.

503

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

E 504 1

A

CR T I C A L
DISSERTATION

I r C
S S E R T A N G

COGaTcEKNtK
The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness

of the Queen's Letters to Bothwel.

T is not my itention to engage in all the cotroverfiesto
which the murder of king Henry, or the letters from

queen Mary to Bthwell, have given rife; far less to ap-
pear as an adversary to any particular author, who hath
treated of them. To repeat, and to expose all the ill-
founded aferions with regard to these points, which have
flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from partiality,
from makvolnce, and from dishonesty, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of my readers.
All 1 propose, is to assist others in forming some judgment
concerning the fads in dispute, by flating the proofs pro-
duced on each fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will
admit, and with the fame attention and impartiality which I
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other controverted
points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the king's murder, two different

fyflems have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell to
have contrived and executed this crime. The other imputes
it to the earls of Murray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted faEs in history, is a

matter rather of curiofitv than of use. They fland detached;
and whatever we determine with regard to them, the fabric
of the ltory remains untouched. But the fa& under dif-
pute in this place is a fundamentai and essential one, and
according to the opinion which an hiRorian adopts with
regard to it, he muf vary and dispose the whole of his sub-
sequent narration. An hiltorical fyfiem may be tried in two
different ways, whether it be confifent with probability,
and whether it be supported by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the king's murder upon Bothwell, ar-
gue in the following manner; and though their reasonings

have

have been mentioned already in different placesof the narrative
it is necessary to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly,
fay they, was a sudden and youthful pallion. The beauty
of his person, set off by some external frivolous accomplish-
ments, was his chief merit. His capricious temper soon
raised in the queen a disgust, which broke out on different
occasions. His engaging in the conspiracy against izio,
converted this disgust into an antipathy, which he was at
no pains to conceal. This breach was, perhaps, in its own
nature, irreparable; the king certainly wanted that art and
condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widen-
ed every day, and a deep and fettled hatred cffaced all re-
mains of affecion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompt-
ed by ambition, and perhaps by love, to found upon it a
scheme, which proved fatal both to the queen and to him-
seif. He had served Mary at different times with fidelity
and success. He insinuated himself into her favour, by ad-
dress and by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart. In
order to gratify his love, or at least his ambition, it was ne.
ceffaryto get rid of the king. Mary had rejeaed the pro-
pofal which, it is siid, had been made to her for obtaining a
divorce. The king was equally hated by the partisans of the
house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the kingdom; by
Murray, one of the most powerful and popular persons in his
country; by Morton and his associates, whom he had de-
ceived? and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest by a
recent favour. Among the people Darnly was fallen under
extreme contempt. Bothwell might expet for all these
realbns, that the murder of the king would pass without any
inquiry, and might trust to Mary's love, and to his own ad-
dress and good fortune, for the accomplishment of the reft of
his wishes. What Bothwell expeaed really came to pass.
Mary, if not privy herfeif to thedefign, connived at an action
which rid her of a man whom he had such good reason to
detest. A few months after the murder of her husband, she
married the person who was both fufpe&ed and accused of
having perpetrated that odious crime.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party

reason in this manner: Murray, they fay, was a man of
boundless ambition. Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his
birth, he had early formed a defien of usurping the crown.
On the queen's return into Scotland, he insinuated him-
self into her favour, and engrossed the whole power into
his own hands. He set himself against every proposal or mar-
riage which was made to her, left his own chance of fuc-
ceeding to the crown should be destroyed. He hated Darnly,

and

505

and was no lfT hated by hn. In order to be revenged on
him, he entered into a udden friendship with Bothwell, his
ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to aflaf-
finate Henry, b g:ving him hopes of marrying the queen.
All this was done with a design to throw upon the queen
herfeif the imputation of being acceflary to the murder, and,
under that pretext, to detlroy Bothwell, to depose and im-
prison her, and to seize the sceptre which he had wrested
out of her hands.

THE former of these flems has an air of probability, is

confilent with itfelt, and solves appearances. In the latter,
some alTertions are talfe, foine links are wanting in the chain,
and effecs appear, of which no fuhficient cause is produced.
lIurray, on the queen's return into Scotland, served her with
great fidelity, and by his prudent administration rendered
her so popular and so powerful, as enabled her with ease to
quash a formidable infurreaion raised by the party of which
he was the leader in the year 565. What motive could in-
duce Mlurray to murder a prince without capacity, without
followers, without influence over the nobles, whom the
queen, by her neglect, had reduced to the lowelld late of
contempt, and who, after a long disgrace, had regained (ac-
cording to the mod favourable fuppolition) the precarious
poffrfiion of her favour only a few days before his death? It
is difficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from the
king's lite. It is flill a more difficult matter to guels what
he could gain by his death. If we filDpofe that the queen
had no previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear
more chimerical than a scheme to persuade her to marry a
man, uhofe wife vas rill alive, and who was not onlyffuf-
peded, but accused, of murdering herformer huiband. But
that such a scheme hould really ucceed is flill more extra-
_oldinary.-If Murrav had instigated Bothwellto commit the
crime, or had himfeif been accessary to the commission of it,
what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
tfom a fellow-criminal all the prosecutions which he suffered,
vithout ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing
the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud
had fubfiled between Murray and Bothwell; the queen with
difficulty had brought them to some terms of agreement.
But is it probable that Murray would chufe an enemy, to
whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his confident in
the comniflion of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on the
other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a
wife man, firlt to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes
that afterwards he should render him odious, by accusing

him

DISSERTATION ON K. HENRY's MURDER, ec.

him of crimes which he had not committed, and, in confe-
quenceof this unjuit charge, should he enabled to deprive
him of that power ? The most adventurous politician never
hazarded such a dangerous experiment. The mrot credu-
lous folly never trulied such an uncertain chance.

How frong soever thete general reasonings may appear to

be, it is not upon them alone that we must decide, but ac-
cording to the particular evidence that is produced. This
we now proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the kings murder, appears,
I. From the concurring testimony of all the contemporary
hiflorians. 2. From the confession of those persons who
suffered for affiling at the commission of the crime, and who
entered into a minute detail of all its circumliances. An-
derf. ii. 65. 3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's own
commifioners, who allow Bothwell to have been one of those
who were guilty of this crime. Good. ii. 213. 4. From
theexprefs teflimony of Lefly, bilhop of Ro(s, to the fame
effe& with the former. Def. of Q. Mary's Hon. And. i.
76. Id. iii. p. 3X. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that
Bothwell had solicited him, at different times, to concur in
the conspiracy formed against the life of the King; and that
he was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conipira-
tors, that Bothwell was present at the murder. Crawf.
Mem. App. 4. The letter from Douglas to the queen,
which I have published in the Appendix toVol. 11. No. XIV.
confirms Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herries promises, in
his own name, and in the names of the nobles who adhered
to the queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell
as the murderer of the king. Append. Vol. I. No. XXIV.

THE mofi direa charge ever brought against Murray i in

these words of bifhDp Lefly: " Is it unknown," addressing
himself to the earl of Murray, " what the lord Herries laid
" to your face openly, even at your own table, a few days
" after the murder was committed? Did he not charge you
" with the foreknowledge of the fame murder? Did he not,

nulla cir~tione ufur, flatly and plainly burden you, that

" riding in Fife> and coming with one of your most assured
" and trully servants the fame day whereon you departed
" from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This

night ere morning lord Darnly hall lose his life ?" De-

fence of Q. Mary, Anders. ii. 75. But the assertion of a
man so heated with facion as Lefly, unless it were supported
by proper evidence, is of little weight. The servant to whom
Murray is said to have spoken these words, is not named;
nor the manner in which this secret conversation was bought

to

to light mentioned. Lord Herries was one of the most zea-
lous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable that, in all his
negociation at the court of England, he never once repeated
this accuf-tion of Murray. In answering the challenge
given him by lord Lindsay, Herries had a fair opportunity of
mentioning NMurray's knowledge of the murder; but though
he openly accuses of that crime ome of those who adhered
to Murray, he indlftrioufly avoids any insinuation against
Murray hm!elf. Keith, lrefxii. Mary herself, in con-
verfaicon with Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and
Maitlind of being privy to the murder, but does not men-
tion Murray. And. iv. 55. W hen the bihop of Ross and
lord Herriesappeared before the English council, January I 1,
1 569, they declared themselves ready, in obedience to the
queen's command, to accuse Murray and his aociates of
being accelTary to the murder, but " they being also re-
" quired, whether they, or any of them, as of themselves,
" would accuse the said earl in special, or any of his adhe.

rents, or thought them guilty thereof;" they answered,

" that they took God to witness that none of them did ever
" know any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or were

in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither who were
' devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it was

publickly discovered long thereafterby some of the assassins,

' who suffered death on that account." Good. ii. 308.
These words are taken out of a Register kept by Ross and
Herries themselves, and seem to be a direc confutation of
the bishop's assertion.

'H E earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protefiationtouch-

ing the Murder of the, King of Scorf, after mentioning the con-
ference at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, add, " So after
"these premises, the murder of the king following, wejudge
" in our consciences, and hold for certain and truth, that
" the earl of Murray and Secretary Lethington were authors,
" inventors, counsellors, and cufers of the fame murder,
" in what manner, or by whatsoever persons the fame was
"executed." Ander. iv. 88. But, . This is nothing
more than the private opinion orperfonal affirmation of there
two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no
connecion with the premises on which they found it: Be-
cause Murray proposed to obtain for the queen a divorce
from her huiband with her own conlent, it does not follow
that therefore he committed the murder without her know-
ledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll were at that time the leaders
of that party opposite to Murray, and animated with all the
rage of faaion. 4. Both of them were Murray's personal

enemies.
50s

enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment which his
family and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll
was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he
lived on no good terms, Knox, 328. and by whom he had
no children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's ifler,
and by his interest he had obftruaed that design. Keith, 55 r.
These circumflances would go far towards invalidating a po-
fitive teflimony; they more than counterbalance an indeter-
mtinate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether
Hunt'y and Argyll ever subscribed this proteflatton. A copy
o fch a protellation as the queen thought would be of ad-
vantage to her caufc, was tranlmittted to them by her. An-
derf. iv. b. ii. 186. The pro'eltaion itself, publiflied by
Anderson, is taken from an unfuhfcrihed copy with blanks
for the dale and place of liibfcrhirg. On the back of this
copp, there is palled, indeed, a paper, which Cecil has
mirked " Anfwerof the earl of IMurray to a writing of the

earls of Huntly and Argyll." Anders. 194, 195. But it
can hardly be deemed a reply to the above-mentioned pro-
tellation. Murray's answer hears date at London, January
19, 1568. The queen's letter, in which he closed the
copy of the proteflation, bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5, 568.
Now it is scarce to be fuppofec that the copy could be fern
into Scotland, be fublcribed by the two earls, and be seen
and answered by Murray within so hort a time. Murray's
reply seems intended only to prevent the impreflion hich
the vague and uncertain accusation of his enemies ight
make in his absence. Cecil had got the original of the
queen's letter into his cutody. Anders. iv. 85. This na-
turally leads us to conjeture that the letter itlelf, together
with the incloled proteflation, were intercepted before they
came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecture alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the pro-
teflation was inclosed, is to be found ; Cott. Lib. Cal. c. .
fol. 280. and isan original subscribed by Mary, though not
written by her own hand, because she eldom chore to write
in the Engliff language. The protestation is in the fame
volume, fol. 282. and is manifestly written by the fame per-
lbn who wrote the queen's letter. This seems to render it
highly probable that both were intercepted. So that much
has been founded on a paper not subscribed by the earls,
and probably never seen by them. Besides, this method
which the queen took of fending a copy to the two earls, of
what was proper for them to declare with regard to a con-
ference held in their own presence, appears somewhat fufpi-
cious. It would have been more natural, and not so liable

to

509

to any misinterpretation, to have desired themto write the
moss exat account, which they could recolle&, of what had
passed at the conversation at Craigmillar. 6. But even if all
this reasoning hould be set aside, and the authenticity of the
proteflation hould be admitted in its full extent, it may still
be a question, what degree of credit should be given to the
assertion of the two earls, who were not only present in the
firlt parliament, held by Murray as regent in December 567,
in which the one carried the sceptre, and the other the sword
of late, Spotfw. 1 1 4 but were both members of the corn.
mittee of lords of articles, and in that capacity assisted in
framing all the as by which the queen was deprived of the
crom n, and her Ion feated on the throne; and in particular
concurred in the a by which it was declared, that what.
ever had befallen the queen, " was in her awin default, in
fa far as, be divers hir previe letters written halelie with hir
awin hand, and fend by hir to James fometyme erie o
Borhwell, chief executour of the said horribill murthour, a'
weill befoir the committing thairof as thairaftir: And be hir
ungodlie and difhonouraiill proceeding to ane pretendit mar-
riaee with him, fuddaindl e and unprovifitlie thairefiir, it is
main certane that fclie was previe, airt and pairt, of the
aaual devile and deid of the foirnamit murthour of the king
her lauchful husband, and thairfoir juilie defirvisquhatfum-
ever hes bene done to hir in ony tyme bygaine, or that fal be
ufit towards hir, for the said cause." Anders. ii. 221.

THE queen's commissioners at the conferences in England

accused Murray and his associates of having murdered the
king. Good. ii. 281. But this charge is to be confideredas
a recrimination, extorted by the accusation preferred againt
the queen, and contains nothing more than loose and gene-
ral affirmations, without descending to such particular cir-
cumftances as either ascertain their truth, or discover their
falsehood. The fame accusation is repeated by the noblei
assembled at Dumbarton, Sept. 1 568. Good. ii. 359. And
the fame observation may be made concerning it.

ALL the queen's advocates have endeavoured to account

for Murray's murdering of the king, by supposing that it was
done on purpose that he might have the pretence of dilurb-
ing the queen's adminifiration, and thereby rendering inef
feaual her general revocation of crown lands, which would
have deprived him and his associates of the bet part of their
efRates. Lefly Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73. Anders. i
part ii. 130. But whoever confiders the limited powers of
Scottish monarch, will fee that such a revocation could not
be very formidable to the nobles. Every king of Scotlanl

bega
j1»

began his reign with such a revocation; and as often as it
was renewed, the power of the nobles rendered it ineffec-
tual. The bel vindication of Murray and his party rom'
this accusation, is that which they presented to the queen of
England, and which hath never hitherto been publithed.
Answers to the Objetions and Alledganc of the uzeen, alledg- Paper Of-

ing the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of lorton, fice.
Mar, Glenrairn, Hume, Ruthven, Uc. to have been moved
to armour, for tat thry abhorred and miht not abide her Re-
vocation of the Alienation made of her Property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but [i. e. withoutl all

appearances, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance of
all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my lord regent, he never had occasion to

grudge thereat, in refpec the queen made him privy to the
fame, and took relolution with him for the execution thereof,
letting his lordihip know ihe would assuredly in the famine
except all things she had given to him, and ratefy them in
the next parliament as she did indeed; and for that cause
wished my lord to leave behind him mailer John Wood, to
attend upon the fame, to whom she declared, that als well
in that as in all other her grants it should be piovided, yea of
free will did promise and offer before ever he demanded, as
it came to pass without any lett or impediment; for all was
ratified by her command, and hand write, at the parliament,
but [i. e. without] any difficulty.

ITEM as to my lord of Morton, he could not grudge

thereat quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars
that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Lindsay.
ONLY my lord of Marr, had ane little hing of the pro-

perty quilk alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him,
in the said parliament preceding a year; was never ane had
any cause of mifcontenr of--that revocation, far less to have
put their lives and heritage to so open and manifest ane dan-
ger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

GYt ever any did make evill countenance, and show any

miscontentment of the said revocation, it was my lord of
Argyll in fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of parlia-
ment thairanents to the queen berfelf, and did complain of
the manifefl corruption of ane at of parlirment par upon

her

St",

her majefy's return, and fa did let any revocation at that
time; but the armour for revenge of the king's deid. was not
till twa months after, at quhat time there was no occafio
given thereof, nor even a man had mind thereof.

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been pro-

duced againf the earl of Murray and Bothwell; we hall
text proceed to inquire whether the queen herself was ac-
ceffarv to the murder of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than

firong suspicions arose, among ome of her subje&s, that
Marv had given her consent to the commiflion of that crime.
And. ii. 56. We are informed, by herown ambassador in
France, the archbishop of Glasgow, that the sentiments of
foreigners, on this head, were no less unfavourable to her.
Keith, Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly accused her of
that crime, and a great part of the nation, by supporting
them, eem to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature, that they

hardly admit of a positive or dret proof. Deeds of dark-
ness can seldom be brought perfectly to light. Where per-
sons are accused not of being principals, but only of being
acceifaries in the commifflon of a crime; not of having per-
petrated it themselves, but only of giving content to the corn
miflion of it by others; the proof becomes fill more diffi-
cult: and unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a
proof by circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all that
can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such evidence is
sometimes held to be futficient for condemning criminals.
The degree of convicion which such evidence carries along
with it, is often not inferior to that which arises from pofi-
tive testimony; and a concurring series of circumstances fa-
tisfies the underflanding no leTs than the express declaration
of witneftes.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been produced against

Mary. We shall first confider that which is founded upon
circnmflances alone.

SOME of these suspicious circumrnances preceded the king's

death; others were subsequent to it. With regard to the
former, we may observe that the queen's violent love of
Darnly was soon converted into an aversion to him no less
violent; and that his own ill conduct and excesses of every
kind, were such that if they did not justify, at lead they
account for this sudden change of her disposition towards
him. The rife and progress of this domefic rupture, I have
traced with great care in the hiffory, and to the proofs of it

which

which may be found in papers publilhed by other authors, '
have added those contained in App. No. XVI. and XVII
LeCroc, the French ambassador, who was an eye;wimefs
of what he describes, not only represents her aversion to
Darnly to be extreme, but declares that there could be no
hopes of a reconcilement between them. " The queen is Dec. i,
in the hands of physicians, and I do assure you is not at all S5
well; and do believe the principal part of her disease to
consist in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem possible
to make her forget the fame. Still he repeats these
words, I could wijb to be dead. You know very well that
the injury (he has received is exceeding great, and her
majesty will never forget it-To speak my mind freely to
you, I do not expet, upon several accounts, any good under-
flanding between them [i. e. the king and queen]4 unless
God effeaually put to his hand.-His bad deportment Dec.
is incurable; nor can there be any good expe&ed from
him, for several reasons, hich I might tell you was I pre~
sent with you. I cannot pretend to foretell how all may
turn, but I will fay, that matters cannot fubflft long as they
are, without being accompanied with sundry bad eonfe-
quences." Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural
death at this junture, it mutl have been confidered as a
very fortunate event to the queen, and as a seasonable deli-
veratce from a husband who had become altogether odious
to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks after-
wards, and as nothing had happened to render the queen's
aversion to him less violent, the opinibn of those who con-
fider Mary as the author of an event which was manifelfly
so agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of our
readers to be neither unnatural nor over-refined. If we add
to this, what has been observed in the history, that in pro-
portion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her husband,
Bothwell made progress in her favour, and that he became
the obje& not only of her confidence but her attachment,
that opinion acquires new firength. It is easy to 6bferve
many advantages which might redound to Mary as well as
to Bothwell from the king's death; but excepting them no
person, and no party in the kingdom, could derive the leaf
benefit from that event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered
the king, and it was, in that age, thought no unwarranted
imputation on Mary's charater, to tippofe that lhe had
consented to the deed.

THE fleps which the queen took after her husband's death

add strength to that supposition. i. Melvil, who as in
Edinburgh at the time of the king's deaths asserts, that

' I .- " every

"every body furpe&ed the earl of Bothwell; and thoe. who
dura speak freely to others, said plainly that it, was He,"
p. 155. 2. Mary having issued a proclamation, on the l2th
of February, offering a reward to any person who hould
discover those who had killed her husband; And. i. 36;
a paper in consequence of this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth, February 6, in which Bothwell was named
as the chief perron guilty of that crime, and the queen her-
self was accused of having given her confern to it. And. ii.

56. 3. Soon after, February 20, the earl of Lennox, the
king's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring her, by every mo-
tive, to prosecute the murderers with the utmof rigour.
Se plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell, and
-pointed out a method of proceeding against him, and for
discovering the authors of that crime, no less obvious than
equitable: He advised her to seize, and to commit to sure
custody, Bothwell himfelfi and such as were already named
as his accomplices; to call an assembly of the nobles; to
issue a proclamation, inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear;
and if, on that encouragement, no person appeared toaccufe
them, to hold them as innocent, and todifmifs them without
farther trial. And. i. 4. 4. Archbiihop Beatoun, her
ambassador in France, in a latter to Mary, March 9th, em-
ploys arguments of the utmot weight to persuade her to
profecuie the murderers with the greatest severity. " I can
conclude nathing (ays he) by quhat Zour majefy writes to
me zourfe!f; that fed it has plefit God to conserve zow to
make a rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be
not acually taine, it appears to me better in this warld that
ze had loft life and all. I afl your majeftie pardon, that
I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing to our prejudife, but I
m an contraindly writ the famin, that all may come.to zour
knawledge; for the better remede may be put thereto, Heir
it is needfull that e forth thaw now rather than ever of
before, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and constance that
God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall over-
come this moll heavy envie and difplefir of the committing
thereof, and conserve that reputation in all godliness, ze have
conquift of lang, quhich can appear na wayis mair clearlie,
4.ke than that zou dofick justice that the hall world may declare

zour innocence, and give testimony for ever of their treason

,ts that has committed, (ut fear of God'or man) so cruel and
wb ungodly a murther, quhairof there is fa mikle ill spoken,

that I am conftrainit to ark zou mercy, that neither can I or
. willImaketherehearfalthereof, whichisowr odious. But
alas! madame, all over Europe'this day, there is na purpose in

head

head f requent as of zour majeftie, and of the present
Itate of zour realnm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit
finiferl) ' Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Eliiabeth, as appears from
Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the fame thing in itrong
terms. 6. The circumtances of thecafeitfelf, nolefs than
these folicitatiors and remonfirances, called for the utmost
vigour in her proceedings; Her husband had been murL
dered in a cruel manner, almost in her owr presence. Her
subje&s were filled with the utmolt horror at that crime.
Bothwell, one of her principal favourites, had been pub-
licly accued as the author of it. Refleiions etremely
dishonourable to herself, had been thrown out. If indig-
nation, and the love of justice, did not prompt her to pursue
the murderers with ardour, decency, at lealt, and concern for
vindicating her own characer, hould have induced her to
avoid any appearance of remiflnefs or want of .eal;

BUT inead of this; Mary continued to discover in all

her actions the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. On the
15th of February, five days after the murder, he beflowed
on him the reversion of the fpetiority of the town of Leith,
which, in the year 565, she had mortgaged to thecitizens
of Edinburgh. This grant was of muth importance, as it
gave him not only the crilrrand of the principal port in the
kingdom, but a great afeendant over the citizens of Edin-
burgh, who withed much to keep pofefflion of it*. 2. Both-

well
i Cp y rom te riginal i t cAarter-loue of the city of Ediswtrgh of a

jnatio to t the rverjioa of the flperrity of Leith by qeen MSary, t the
earl of Botbhetll.

Maria Dei gratia Regisa Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos

prarentes litera pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam redu-
centes multiplexbonum verum et fidelifervitium, nontantum quondam noRtrz
chariflimn matri Mari Reginz regni noftri pro tempore in noftra minoritate
fa&um et iipenfum, verum etiam nobifmetipfis, tam intra partesGallie quam
intrahoc notrun regnum, adextentioneri noftri honoris et au&oritatisin puni-
tione furum, malefa&orum, eitranfgefforum infraidem, pernoftrum confifum
eonfanguinenm et conflliarium jacobum comitemr Bothuilej ddmninum Halis,
Creighton; et Liddifdale, magnum admiralltm regni noftri, commiflioncm et
onerationem ad hunc effeaum habentem, perquas ipfe fuum corpus ctvitam in
iagno periculopofuit; ac etiam, in perforniatidne etextentione niofridi&i ser-
vitii, fuam herditatem, fuprafrurmam viginti millium mercaruim hujus notri
tegni, alienavit ac zaflt. Et nos cogitantes quod, ex noftrr principali ionore et
deveiaditum nordrum tonfifumcodfanguideum & coniliarium eunm quodam
accidenteet gratitudine recompenfare et gratificareincumbit qua noscommoda
fibi concedcrcpoierimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus affuturistemporibus
effcpotcit, et ad hujufmodiperformandum inbonnibus cufis feueveitibus. Ii
recompenfationem quonm premifforum, ac pro diverfisaliisnolrtisrationabili-
buscaufisetconfideratioibusuosmoveritibus,Fecimus Jacobum co
vmitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos hredes mafculos quofcunqu nottros legitimos,
&c. afiignatos in et ad literas reverlionis faras, &c. per Symonem PreRton de
eodcimilitem4 prpeofitum, balivos, confule,, t commuaitatem hujusnoftr

L 1 bur

S'S

well being extremely desirous to obtain the command of.
the cafile of Edinburgh, the queen, in order to prevail on
the earl of Mar to surrender the government of irt offered.
to commit the young prince to his cuflody. Mar con-
sented; and the inltantly appointed Bothwell governor of
the castle. And. i. Pref. 64. Keithi 379. note (d).
3. The inquiry into the murder, previous to Bothwell'a
trial, seems to have been conduced with the utrmo& remiss-
ness. Buchanan exclaims loudly againfl this. And. ii. 24.
Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evident from
a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson, one of
the king's servants, who was in the house when his matRer
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbifll.
Being examined on the Monday after the king's death,
1' This deponar fehew that Bonkle had the key of the
cellare, and the qneenis fervandis the keys of her halmir.
Quhilk the laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair,
here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai left
of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition." And. iv.
p. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to search into the
bottom of the matter, a circumflance of so much importance
merited the rmoft careful inquiry. 4. Notwithitading
Lennox's repeated solicitations, notwithlandmg the reason-
ablenefs of his demands, and the necefity of complying with
them, in order to encourage any accurer to appear against
Bothwell, she not only refused to commit him to custody,
or even t6 remove him from her presence and councils;
And. . 42. 48. but by the grants which we have mentioned,
and by other circumstances, difeovered an increase of at*
tachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell
to a public trial; but ihe permitted hirrn to fit as a mrmber
in that meeting of the privy council which direced his own
trial; and the trial itself was carried on with such unnecef-
fary precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious eircum-
fiances, as render his acquitta rathef an argument of his
guilt than a proof of his innocence. These circumstances

burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus, &c. nobis, noflrifque
heredibus, fuccefforibus, et aflignatis pro redemFtione, &c. fuperioritatis to-
tius villr deLeith, &c. impignorata per nosdiais przpofito, &c. ub rever-
sone alienate continentis fummam decem millium mercarum moneta pre-
feriptz numerandum etgalculandum inparochiali ecclfia deEdinburgh, super
premonitione qpadriginta dierum, ut moris eft, veluti in diais reverloois li-
teris, &c. de data 8 Oaob. 1565, &c. (The reft is form, and contains a
clause of absolute warrandice.) I cuVus REI TrSTiwUrrM pr*fefatbus
magnum figillum nostrum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh decln~ qinto
die menss Februarii, anno Domiri miclfimo quipgeatcfmo fexagefmoI.xto
et rcgai fltri yiceim quinto.

The grcit fcal eat-.

hane
f16

have all been mentioned at length in Book IV. and there-
fore are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days after the
trial, Mary gave a public proof of her regard for Bothwell,
%by appointing him to carry the ceptre before her at the
meeting of parliament, Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament,
she granted him a ratification of all the vast possessions and
honours which she had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the Cervices he had
performed. And. i. 17. 8. Though Melvil, whoforefaw
that her attachment to Bothwell would at length induce
her to marry him, warned her of the infamy and danger
which would attend that aion, he not Qnly disregarded this
salutary admonition, but discovercd what had pafled be-
tween them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil to his re-
fentment. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwellfeized Maryas fe re-
turned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this without
her knowledge and consent, such an insult could not have
failed to have filled her with the moR violent indignation.
But according to the account of an old MS. " The friendly
love was so iglilycontracted between this great princess
and her enormous subjea, that there was no end thereof
(for it was conflantly eeemed by all men, that either of
them loved other carnally), so that she suffered patiently to
be led where the lover lift, and all the way neither made ob-
flacle, impediment, clamour, or refinance, as in such acci-
dents use to be, or that (he might have done by her princely
authority, being accompanied with the noble earl of Huntly
and secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tell us that
the officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that no-
thing was done without-the queen's consent. Melv. 58.
to. On the ath of May, a few days before her marriage,
Mary declared that fle was then at full liberty, and that
though Bothwell had offended her by seizing her person, she
was so much satisfied with his dutiful behaviour since that
time, and so indebted to him for past services, that she not
only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him to
higher honours. And. i. 87. i . Even after the confe-
derate nobles had driven Bothwell from the queen's pre-
fence, and though she saw that he was confidered as the
murderer of her former husband by o great a art of her
fubjecs, her affe&ion did not in the leaf abate, and he
continued to express the most unalterable attachment to him.
" I can perceive (faysair N. Thr6kmorton) that the rigour
with which the queen is kept, proceedeth by order from
these men, because that the queen will not by any means be

induced

57

induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murderer;
nor will not consent by any persuasion to abandon the lord
Bothwell for her husband, but avoweth constantly that she
will live and die with him; and faith, that if it were put to
her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the lord
Bothwell, he would leave her kingdom and dignity togo a
simple damsel with him, and that he will never content that
he shall fare worse, or have more harm than herself."
Append. to Vol. i. No. XXII. In all their negotiations with
Throkmorton, the confederates mention this unalterable at-
tachment of the queen to Bothwell, as a sufficient reason for
rejeting his proposals of an accommodation with their so-
vereign. Keith, 419. 449. This aftertion they renewed
in the conferences at York. Anders. iv. part ii. p. 66.
Murray in his interview with Mary in Lochlevin, charged
her with persisting in her inordinate affection to Bothwell.
Keith, 446. All there, however, may be confidered merely
as accusations brought by the confederates, in order to vin-
dicate their rigour towards the queen. But Throkmorton,
who, by his residence in Edinburgh, and by his intercourse
with the queen's partizans, as well as with her enemies,
had many opportunities of discovering whether or not
Mary had exprefed herself in such terms, and who was dif-
posed to view her aiops in the moil favourable light, ap-
pears, by the passage which I have quoted from his letter
of the 14th of July, to be persuaded that the confederates
had not misrepresented her sentiments. He had oon an
opportunity of being confirmed with greater certainty in
this opinion. Although the confederates had refused him
access to the captive queen, he found means of holding a
secret correspondence with her and endeavoured to persuade
her to give her consent to have her marriage with Bothwell
dissolved by a sentence of divorce, as the most probable
means of regaining her liberty. She hath ent me word
that he will in no wife consent unto that, but rather die.
Append. to Vol.I. No. XXII. There is evidenceof the con-
tinuance of Mary's attachment (till more explicit. Lor4
Herries, in the Parliament held the $5th of December 567,
acknowledged the queen's inordinate affection to that wicked
man, and that he could not he induced by persuasion to
leave him; and that in sequestering her within Lochlevin,
the confederates had done the duty of noblemen. App. tq
Vol. I. No. XXIV. In the year 571. conference was held
by some deputies from a convention of Clergy, with the
dukeof Chatelherault, secretary Maitflnd, SirJames Balfour,
and Kirkaldy; and an account of it written by Mr. Craig,

one

one of the ministers of Edinburgh, is extant in Calder-
wood MSS. Hid. ii. $44. In pretence of all these persons,
moll of whom were in Edinburgh when the queen was tken
at Carberry, Maitland, who was now an avowed partizan of
Mary, declares, that on the fame night he was'brought to
Edinburgh, he himself had offered, that if he would aban-
don Bothwell, he would have as thankful obedience as;
ever he had since he came to Scotland. But no wife
would he consent to leave Bothwell. According to fir
James Melvil, the queen found means of writing a-letter to
Bothwell on the evening of that day, when he was con-
duaed as a prisoner to Edinburgh, in which he declared
her affecion to him in the most tender expressions, and her
resolution never to abandon him. This letter, he fays, was
intercepted by the confederates, and determined them to
confine Mary in the catle of Lochlevin. But as neither
Buchanan nor Knox, both abundantly disposed to avail
themselves of every fa& and report that could be employed
in order to represent Mary's condut as improper and cri-
minal, mention this letter; and as the confederates them-
selves, in their negotiations with Throkmorton, as well as
in their accusations of the queen before the English com-
miAlioners at York and Westminster, maintain the fame
silence with regard to it, I am satisfied that Melvil, who
wrote his memoirs for the information of his son in his old
age, and long after the events which he records happened,'
has been mifaken with regard to this particular. From
this long enumeration of circumstances, we may, without
violence, draw the following conclusion: Had Mary really
been accessary to the murder of her husband; had Bothwell
perpetrated the crime with her consent, or at her command;'
and had he intended to flifle the evidence against him, .and
to prevent the difovery of his guilt, he could scarcely have
taken any other steps than those which he took, nor could!
her condu& have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THt positive evidence produced agaiflt Mary may be
claffedunder two heads.

j. THE depositions of some persons who were employed

in committing the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert
who, in the writings of that age, is called French Paris. This
person, who was Bothwell's servant, and much trulled by
him,' was twice examined, and the original of one of his
depositions, and a copy of the other, are still extant. It is
pretended that both tfe are notorious forgeries. But they
are remarkable for a simplicity and naivet which it is almobf

impoffbie

impossible to imitate; they abound-with a number of minute
fas and particularities,which the most dexterousQorger could
not have easily assembled and conneced together with any
appearance of probability; and they are filled with circum-
flances, which can scarcely be supposed to have entered the
imagination of any man but one of Paris's rank and cha-
raaer. But, at the fame time, it mufl be acknowledged,
that his depositions contain ome improbable circumstances.
He seems to have been a foolilh talkative fellow; the fearsof
death, the violence of torture, and the desire of pleasing
those in whose power he was, tempted him, perhaps, to
feign some circumflances, and to exaggerate others. To fay
that some circumflances in an affidavit are improbable or
faife, is very different from faying that the whole is forged.
I fufpec the former to be the cafe here; but I fee no ap-
pearanceof tihelatter. Be thatasit will, ome of the molf
material faas in Paris's affidavits refl upon his single tefti-
mony; and for that reason, I have not in the Hiaory, nor
thall I in this place, lay any firess upon them.

2. THs letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell.

These have been frequently published, The accident by
which the queen's enemies got them into their possession, is
related in Book V. When the authenticity ps any ancient
paper is dubious or contested, it may be acerlained either
by external of internal evidence. Both thee have been pro-
duced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of theenuinenefs of Mary's letters.

1. Murray, and the nobles who adhered to him, affirm upon
their word and honour, that the letters were written with
the queen's own hand, with which they were all ac-
quainted. Good. ii. 64. 92. a. The letters were publicly
produced in the parliament of Scotland, December 1567;
and were o far confidered as genuine, that they are men-
tioned in the a against Mary, as one chief argument of
her guilt. Good. ii. 66. 67. 3. They were Ihewn privately
to the duke of Norfolk, the earl of SuTffe, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, Elizabeth's commiflioners at York. In the account
which they gave of this matter to their miflrefs, they seem
to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion
of any forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter
contained in them is such, that it could hardly be invented
and devised by any other than herself; for that they dif-
course of some things, which were unknown to any other
than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is hard tocounter-
feit so many, so the matter of themand the manner how
these men came by them, is such, as it feemeth that God, in

whose

whose fight murder and-loodfhed of the innocent is abo-
minable, would not permit the fame to be hid or concealed."
Good. ii. 142. They seem to have made such an impteflion
on the duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter to Pem-
broke, Leicester, and Cecil, he has there words: " If the
ratter hall be thought as deteflable andmanifeft to you, as
for ought we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good.
ii. 154. Nor did Norfolk declare these to be his sentiments
only in public official letters, he expressed himself in the
fame manner to his moit confidential friends. In a secret
conference with the bihop of Ross at York, the duke in-
formed him, that he had seen the letters, &c. which the
regent had to produce against the queen, whereby there
would be such matter proved against her, as would dif-
honour her for ever. State Trials, Edition of Hargrave, i. 91.
Murdin, 52. The bishop of Ross, if he had known the
letters to be a notorious forgery, must have been naturally
led in consequence of this declaration, to undeceive the
duke, and to expose the impoflure. But, instead of this,
the duke and he, and Lethington, after consulting together,
agreed that the bishop should write to Mary, then at Bolton,
and inftruQ her to make such a proposal to Elizabeth as
might prevent the public producion of the letters and other
evidence. State Trials, i. 94. Murdio 45. Indeed the
whole of this secret conference seems to imply, that Lething-
ton, Ross, and Norfolk, were conscious of some defe in
Mary's cause, and therefore exerted all their ingenuity in
order to avoid a public accusation. Murdin, 52, 53. To
Banister, whom the duke seems to have trusted more en-
tirely than any other of his servants, he expressed himself in
similar terms with refpea to the queen of Scots. State
Trials, i. 98. The words of Banifler's evidence are re-
markable: " I confers that I, waiting of my lord and master,
when the earl of Suffex and Mr. Chancellor of the dutchy
that now is, were in commission at York, did hear his grace
fay, that upon examinationof the matter of the murder, it
did appear that the queen of Scots was guilty and privy to
the murder of lord Darn!y, whereby I verily thought that
his grace would never join in marriage with her." Mur-
din, I34. Elizabeth, in her infiru&ions to the earl of
Shrewsbury and Beale in 1583, asserts, that both the duke
and earl of Arundel did declare to herself, that the proof,
by the view of her letters, did fall out sufficient against the
q6een of Scots; however, they were after drawn to cover
her faults and pronounce her innocency. MS. Advot. Li-
brary. A. iii. 28. p. 314. from Cot. Lib. Calig. 9. 4. A

similar

5zt

similar impreflion was made upon other contemporaries of
Mary by the producion of the letters, which implies a full
belief of their being genuine. Cecil in his correspondence
with fir Henry Norris, the Englilh ambffador in France,
relates this tranfaaion in terms which leave no room to
doubt with refpe& to his own private opinion. In his letter,
Decem. I4th, 1568, the very day on which the letters, &c.

elie laid before the meeting of privy counfellorsand peers,
he informs him, f' That the regent was driven, for his de-
fence, to disclose a full fardel of the naughty matter, tending
to convince the queen as deviser of the murther, and the
earl of Bothwell as her executour; and now the queen's
party, so great, refute to make any answer, and press that
tbeir mistress may come in person toanfwer the matter her-
self, before the queen's majesty, which is thought not fit to
be granted until the great blot o the marriage with her
husband's murtheter, and the evident charges, by letters of
her own, to be deviser of the murther, be somewhat razed
out or recovered; for that as the matters are exhibited
against her, it is far unseemly for any prince, or for chafle
ears, to be annoyed with the filthy noise thereof; and yet,
as being a commitTloner, I must and will forbear to pro-
nounce any thing herein certainly, though as a private person,
I cannot but with horror and trembling think thereof."
Cabala, 56. 5. From the correspondence of Bowes, the
Fnglifh resident in Scotland, with Walsingham in the year
l 582, publilhed towards the close of this dissertation, it is'
nanifetl that both in England and Scotland, both by Eli-
zabeth and James, both by the duke of Lennox and earl of
Gowrie, the letters were deemed to be genuine. Theeager-
ness on one fide to obtain, and on the other to keep, pof-
fefion of the calket and letters, implies that this was the
belief of both. These sentiments, of contemporaries, who
\rere in a situation to be thoroughly informed, and who had
abilities to judge with discernment, will, in the opinion of
many of my readers, far outweigh theories, suppositions,
and conjecures, formed at the diflance of two centuries.
6. The letters were fubjeaed to a solemn and judicial exa-
minnation with relpea to their authenticity, as far as that
could be ascertained by resemblance of characer and fahion
of writing: for after the conferences at York and Weft-
mintler were finished, Elizabeth, as I have related, assembled
her privy counsellors, and, joining to them several of the
mos eminent noblemen in her kingdom, laid before them
all the proceedings againit the Scottish queen, and par-
ticularly ordered, that " the letters and writings exhibited

by

by the regent, as the queen of Scots' letters and wrii:;;gr,
ihould also be shewed, and conference [i. e. comparilocil
thereof made in their fight, with the letters of he laid
queen's, being extant, and heretofore written wilh iher own
hand, and sent to the queen's majesty; whereby :nay be
searched and examined what difference is betwixt them."
Good. ii. 252. They aflembled accordingly, at Hampton
Court, December 14 and 15, 1568; and, " The oiignals
of the letters fuppoled to be written with the queen of
Scots' own hand, were then also presently produced and
perused; and, being read, were duly conferred and com-
pared, for the manner of writing, and fashion of orthogra-
phy, with sundry other letters long since heretofore written,
and sent by the said queen f Scots to the queen's majesty.
In collation whereof no difference was found." Good. ii. 256.
7. Mary having written an apologetical letter for her conduct
to the counters of Lenpox, July 10, 1570*, hetranfmitfed
it to her husband then in Scotland; and he returned to the
counters the following answer; " Seeing you have remittit
to me, to apfwcr the queen the king's mother's letters sent
to you, what can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir
writ the belt can for hirfef, to feame to purge her of that,
quhairof many befyde me are certainly perfuadit of the con-
trary, and I not only affurit, by my awin knawledge, but by
her hand writ, the confeflions of men gone to the death,

* lary's letter has never been pblilhed, ad ought to have a place here,

where evidence on all fides is fairly produced. Madam, if the wrang and false
reportis of rebellis, enemies weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace ts
muche trusted of me byzoure advice, hadnotfofarfturredyouaganismy inlo-
cency (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zoo have not onelie as it were
condempnitme wrangfullic, but so hated me, as some wordis andopene deideis
hesteftifeittoallthewarldc, amanyfeft miflikingin zowaganis zourawnblud\),
I wold not haveomittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me of
those untrewreporties made of me. But hoping with Godisgrace and tyrnie t
have my innocency knawin to ow, as I trust it is already to the maift pairtoF
all indifferent perfonis, I thocht it best not to trouble zou for a tyme till that
such a matter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure
littil son, andmy oneliechild inthiscountrey. To the quhilk albeit be never
fa willing, I wald be glad to have zoure advyfe therein, as in all other thingis
tuiching him. I have born him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him
and meboith; and of zowhe is defcendit. So I meane not to forzet my dewtie
to zow, infchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how unkyndlie that ever e
have delt with me, hot will love zow as my awnt, and refpe& zow as my
moder in law. And gif ye pies to knaw farther of my mynd in that and all
uther thingis betwixt us, my ambassador the bishop of Ross fall be ready to
confer with zou. And so far after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me
to my faide ambassador, and ourbetter confideratioun, I commit zou to the
protection of Almighty God, quhom I pray to preserve zou and my brother
Charles, and caus zou to knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chaitfworth
this x of July 1570. - .

To my lady Lennox Your natural gude nice
my moder in law. and Icviuge dochter."

and

3

and ushei infallibil experience. It wull be lange tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak
black quhyte, or innocency to appear qihair the contrary is
fa weill knawin. The maifi indifferent, I trust, doubtis not
of the equite of zour and my cause, and of the just occa-
fioun of our miflyking. Hir richt dewtie to zow and me,
being the parteis interest, were hir trew confeffioun and un-
feyned repentance of that lamentable fa&, odious for hirto
be repo:tit, and forrov-f!u for us to thin4 of. God is julf,
and will no: in the end be abused; but as he has manifested
the trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lennox's Orig.
Rcgit. of L-tters. In their public papers, thequeen's ene-
mies may be fufpeaed of advancing what would be mofi
subservient to their cause, not what was agreeable to truth,
or what flowed from their own inward conviaion. But in a
private letter to his own wife, Lennox had no occasion to
dissemble; and it is plain, that he not only thought the
queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell. 8. In oppofirion to all these reasons of believing
the letters, &c. to be authentic, the conduct of the nobles
confederated against Mary, in not producing them direaly
ns evidence against her, has been represented as an irre-
fragable proof of their being forged. According to the
account of the confederates themselves, the casket contain-
ing the letters was seized by them on the twentieth of June
one thousand five hundred and fixty-feven; but the firfl
time that they were judicially flated as evidence againfl the
queen was in a meeting of the regent's privy council, De-
cember fourth, and they afterwards served as the foundation
of the as made against her in the parliament held on the
fifteen'h of the fame month. If the letters had been genuine,
ir is conended, that the obtaining poffeflion of them mull
have afforded such matter of triumph to the confederates,
that they would inflantly have proclaimed it to the whole
World; and in their negociations with the English and
French ministers, or with such of their fellow-fubjets as
condemned their proceedings, they would have silenced, at
once, every advocate for the queen, by exhibiting this con-
vincine proof of her guilt. But in this reasoning sufficient
attenton is not paid to the delicate and perilous situation of
the confederates at that junure. They had taken arms
against their sovereign, had seized her perron at Carberry-
hill, and had confined her a prifonerat Lochlevin. Acon-
fiderable number, however, of their fellow-fubjeas, headed
by some of the mod powerful noblemen in the kingdom,
was combined againfi them. This combination, they soon

perceived,
5;4

perceived, they could not hope to break or to vanquish with-
out aid either from France or England. In the former
kingdom Mary's uncles, the-duke of Guise and cardinal of
Lorrain, were, at that period, all powerful, and the king
himself was devotedly attached to her. If the confederates
confined their views to the dissolution of the marriage of
the queen with Bothwell, and to the exclusion of him for
ever from her presence, they might hope, perhaps, to be
countenanced by Charles IX. and his ministers, who had
sent an envoy into Scotland of purpore to difnuade Mary
from that ill-fated match; Append. No. XXII.; whereas
the loading her publicly with the imputation of being accef-
fary to the murder of her huiband, would be deemed such
an inexpiable crime by the court of France, as mull cut off
every hope of countenance or aid from that quarter. From
England, with which the principal confederates had been
long and intimately connected, they had many reasons to
expe& more effeaual support; bur, to their aftonifllhment,
Elizabeth condemned their proceedings with asperity, warm-
lv espoused the cause of the captive queen, and was ex-
tremely solicitous to obtain her release and reltoration. Nor
was this the only one of the artifices which Elizabeth often
employed in her tranfadions with Scotland. Though her
molt sagacious miniters confidered it as the wisest policy to
fiipport the confederate lords rather than the queen of Scots,
Elizabeth disregarded their counsel . Her high notions of
royal authority, and of the fubmiifon due by ubjeas, in,
duced her, on this occasion, to exert herself in behalf of
Mary, not only with sincerity but with zeal; he negotiated,
she solicited, he threatened. Finding the confederates in-
flexible, she endeavoured to procure Mary's release by means
of that party in Scotland which continued faithful to her,
and infiru&ed Throkmorton to correspond with the leaders
of it, and to make overtures to that effe&. Keith, 451
App. No. XXIII. She even went so far as to direa her
ambassador at Paris to concert measures with the French
king how they, by theirjoint efforts, might persuade or com-

* This was the opinion of Throkmorton, as appears from an extract of his
letter of July 1 th, published in the Append. No. XXII. The fame were the
entiments of Cecil, in his letter of Aug. 9th, x 567, to Sir Henry Norris,
Elizabeth's ambassador to France, " You flall perceive, "fays he, " by the
9uccn's letter to you, at this present, how carnefly he is bent infavour of the
queen of Scots, and truly since the beginning he hath beengreatly offended with
the lords; and, howocever hermajefty might make her profit by bearing with
the lords in this action, yet nocpunfec canftayhermajecy from manifeftiag her
nilikingof them." Cabala, 140. And in hi letter of Sept. 3d, " The
queen's mjefty, our fovcreig, remaineth till offended with the lords for the
queen) the example moveth her." lb. 41. Digges Comp. Amb, 14.

pel

pel the Scots to " acknowledge the queen her good filer te
be their overeign lady and queen, and renounce their obe,
dience to her son." Keith, 46z, 3, 4. From all there
circumstances, the confederates had every reason to appre.
hend that Mary would soon obtain liberty, and by ome
accommodation be reflored to the whole, or at leaf to a
considerable portion of her authority as overeign. In that
event they torefaw, that if they hould venture to accuse
her publicly of a crime so atrocious as the murder of her
huband, they mutt not only be excluded for ever from
power and favour, but from any hope of personal safety.
On this account they long confined themselves to that which
was originally declared to be the reason of their taking arms;
the avenging the king's death, the dissolving the marriage
with Bothwell, the infliting on him condign punishment,
or banishing him for ever from the queen's presence. It ap-
pears from the letters of Throkmorton, publithed by bishop
Keith, and in my Appendix, that his sagacity early discovered
that this would be the tenor of their condu&. In his letter
from Edinburgh, dated July i4th, heobferves, that " they
do not forget their own peril conjoined with the danger of
the prince, but, as far as I perceive, they intend not to touch
the queen either in surety or in honour; for they speak of
her with refpe& and reverence, and do affirm, as I do learn;
that, thecondition atorelaid accomplished i. e. the separation
from Bothwell], they will both put her to liberty, and re-
torher therter estate." Append. No. XXII. His letterof
August 22d, contains a declaration made to him by Lething-
ton, in name and in presence of his associates, " that they
never meant harm neither to the queen's person nor to her
honour-that they have been contented hitherto to.be con-
demned, as it were, of all princes, fttangers, and, namely,
of the queen of England, being charged of grievous and in-
famous titles, as to be noted rebels, traitors, seditious, ingrate,
and cruel, all which they susser and bear upon their backs,
because they wil Inot jufify themselves, nor proceed in any
thing that may touch their sovereign's honour. But in cafe
they be with these defamations continually oppressed, or
with the force, aid, and pra&ices of other princes, and
namely of the queen of England, put in danger, or to an
extremity, they (hall be compelled to deal otherwise with the
queen than they intend, or than they defice; for, added he,
you may be sure we will not lose our lives, have our lands
forfeited, and be reputed rebels through the world, feeing
we have the means to justify ourselves." Keith, .48. From
this view of the slippery ground on which they stood at t

time
6

time, theircondu& in not producing the letters for several
months, appears not only to have been prudent, but essential
to their own safety.

BUT, at a subsequent period, when the confederates found

it necessary to have the form of government which they had
eflablilhed, confirmed by authority of parliament, a differ,
ent mode of proceeding became requisite. Al! that had hi-
therto been done with refpea to the queen's dilmiflion, the
feating the young king upon the throne, and the appoint-
ment of a regent, was in reality nothing more than the deed
of private men. It required tome exhibition of ome legal
evidence to procure a constitutional a giving the fan&ion
of its approbation to uch violent measures, and to obtain
" a perfec law and security for all them that either by deeds
counsel, or subscription, had entered into that cause since
the beginning." Haynes, 45 3. This prevailed with the re-
gent and his ecret council, after long deliberation, to agree
to produce all the evidence of which they were polfeffed; and
upon that producion parliament pafled the aas which were
required. Such a change had happened in the state of the
kingdom as induced the confederates to venture upon this
change in their condu&. In June, a powerful combination
was forming against them, underthe leading of the Hamil-
tons. In December, that combination was broken; moftof
the members of it had acknowledged the king as their law
ful sovereign, and had submitted to the regent's government.
Huntly, Argyllp Herries, the moRl powerful noblemen of
that party were present in the parliament, and concurred
in all its as. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbarton, and all the
chief firong holds in the kingdom, were now in the hands of
the regent; the arms of France had full occupation in its civil
war with the Hugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's zeal in
behalf of the captive queen seems to have abated. A lep
that would have been followed with ruin to the confederates
in June, was attended with little danger in December. From
this long dedution it appears, that no proof of the letters
being forged can be drawn from the circumlance of their
not having been produced immediately after the twentieth of
June ; but though no public accusation was brought instantly
against the queen, inconfeuences of seizing the casket, hints
were given by the confederates, that they possessed evidence
fafficient to convi& her. This is plainly implied in a letter
of Throkmorton, July 2i t, Keith, Pref. p. xii. and more
clearly in the passage which I have quoted from his letter of
Augulf 22. In his letter of July 25, the papers contained
in the callet are ili more plainly pointed out. " They

!i.c.

17?

[i. e. the confederates] fay, that they have as apparent proof
againRt her as may be, as well by the testimony of hel own
hand-writing, which they have recovered, as also by fuffici.
ent witnesses." Keith, 426.

II. WIT H regard to the internal proofs of the genuinenes

of the queen's letter to Bothwell, we may observe, . That
whenever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the
eagerness of the forger to ellablifh the point in view, his so-
licitude to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any ap-
pearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to use expref-
sions the most explicit and full to his purpose. The pas-
faes foiled into ancient authors by heretics in different
ages; the legendary miracles of the Romilh faints; the sup-
pofititious deeds in their own favour produced by monasteries;
the false charters of homage mentioned, Vol. I. p. to. are so
many proofs of this assertion. No maxim seems to be more
certain than this, that a forger is often apt to prove too
much, but seldom falls into the error of proving too little.
The point which the queen's enemies had to eflablifh was,
" that as the earl of Bothwell was chiefexecutor of the hor-
ribleand unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so was she of the
foreknowledge, counsel, devise, persuader, and commander
of the said murder to be done." Good. ii. 207. But of this
there are only imperfe hints, obscure intimations and dark
expressions in the letters, which, however convincing evi-
dence they might furnish if found in real letters, bear no
resemblance to that glare and superfluity of evidence which
forgeries commonly contain. All the advocates for Mary's
innocence in her own age, contend that there is nothing in
the letters which can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly,
Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with passages to this pur-
pose; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age dif-
ferent. " Yet till it might have been expeced (fays her
latest defender) that some one or other of the points or ar-
ticles of the accusation hould be made out clearly by the
proof. But nothing of that is to be seen in the present cafe.
There is nothing in the letters that could plainly hew the
writer to have been in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device
of any murder, far less to have persuaded or commanded it;
and as little is there about maintaining or juflifying any mur-
derers." Good. i. 76. How ill advised were Mary's adver-
-saries, to contraa so much guilt, and to pra&ise so many
artifices, in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived
for tftablifling the conclusion they had in view Had they
been so base as to have recourse to forgery, is it not natural
to tiiak that they would have produced something more ex-

plicit
52S

iISS RTATiON ON K. HENR;Y MUijRER, &c.

plicit and decisive? It is almost impoflible to invent a long
narration of fi&itidus everit, confifling of various minute
particdlars, and to cbnnei thtefe in such a ariner iittl ireal
facts that Or manrier bs fraud fliall ppear. For this reaoni
fkilftul forgers avoid any long detail of ciredniflances; efpe-
cially of foreign and superfluous ones, well knowing thiatthe
inore there are multiplied; the more ate the chanices of de-
teflion increaed. Now Mary's letters, especially tie firit,
ire filled with a iultiplicity of circirriflances, extreriely na-
tural in a real correspondence, but altogether freigh to the
purpose of the oaeen's enemies, nd 'hich it t*ould have
been extterme foily to have infertedj if they had been alto-
gether imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The ruth
and eality of several circdmlftahtes in the letters, arid these
tod, of no ery public nture, ate confirmned by indoubted
collateral evidence. Lett. . Gdod. ii. p. . The queen is
said to have tet one of Lennox's gentlemetr a'iid to have
had some cbrerfation with him. ThorhaS Crawford, who
uas the perfonj appeared bfore Eliiabeth's cdmtrilidners,
and corffirmied, upon oath, the trtth of this ciierumftance.
He ikewife detlared; that during the queen's fay at Glif-
gow the king repeated rt himn, every fight, *Ftat&vet.had
passed through the diy, fetween her mjety lndhim; and
that the account given6s thtefeconretfalionsin their fir l ite,
is nearty the fime with what the king corifmuditcartetd Hix.
G6od. ii. 245. According so the farhe letter there was
nmuch difcoujte between the' king *nd queen codhtetiig
Mynto, Hiegaiti atd Walcar. Gdod. ii. 8. io, i. Whir
this might be; was altoether tinknowh, until a leter of
Mary's, reserved in the Scottish college at Pitis; ahd Ptb-
li(hed> Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it t6 be at affalr f tso
iruch ipitainc as Mriaitetd all the attedti6n the paid to it
at that titse. It ippea'rs by a letter ftdti the Fredch aitbtiif-
fador, that Mart was fubjeEed to a violent pain id hEr fitde.
Keithi ibid. This circumalnrice is mentioned, Lett. . . 30.
in a mhinef so natural is carn fcrcely belong td aiiy bit i ge-
nuine produOion. If we (hall fill think it probale fb siP-
pose thats s6o' any real circurrltances were artfully ittfirtC d.
into tie letters by the forgers, in order to give-a n aii 61 aii-
thenticit to their podiafion; it will hardly bt pOffibl' to
hold the famie piniion concerning the following parftiiir.
Before the queen began ht first letter to Bothwell; i', as
ufaal amohg those who write long letters containrnga afiety
of subje&s, made notes or memorandums of the partictulrs fie
wilhed t renembir; but as the fit up writing dUrii a great
prt of the sighs, and after her attendants we t;t flp, her

M m paper

paper failed her, and he continued her letter upon the fame
sheet on which he had formerly made her memorandums.
This he herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for it:
"It is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you,
yet now, after the kifling of your hands, I will end my let-
ter. Excuse my evil writing, and read it twice over. Excuse
that thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper zeflerday, quhen
I wraite that of the memorial." Good. ii. 28. These me-
morandums still appear in the middle of the letter; and what
we have said fecms naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be
supposed, however, that any forger would think of placing
memorandums in the middle of a letter, where, at first fight,
they make so absurd and so unnatural an appearance. But if
any fball fill carry their refinement so far, as to suppose that
the forgers, were so artful as to throw in this circumstance, in
order to preserve the appearance of genuineness, they mull
at lead alow that the queen's enemies, who employed these
forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
there short notes and memorandums; but we find them
mitaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit
cf the bearer, i. e. points concerning which the queen had
given him verbal inltruaions. Good. ii. 15a. This they
cannot poflibly be; for the queen herself writes with so
much exaanefs concerning the different points in the me-
niorandums, that there was no need of giving any credit or
inftru&ions to the bearer concerning them. The memoran-
dums are indeed the contents of the letter. . Mary, men-
tioning her conversation with tl e king about the affair of
Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, " 'The morne, [i. e. to-morrow]
I will fpeik to him upon that point;" and then adds, As
to the refi of Wille Hiegait's, he confeflit it ;" but it was the
morne [i. e. the morning] after my coming or be did it."
Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not have been
made till after the conversation happened, seems either to
have been inserted by the queen into the body of the letter,
or, perhaps, she having written it on the margin, it was
taken thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to be a
real one, and written at different times, as it plainly bears,
this circumflance appears to be very natural; but no reason
could have induced a forger to have. ventured upon such an
anachronism, for which there was no neceflity. An addi-
tion perfe&ly similar to this made to a genutie paper, may
be found, Good. ii. 282.

BUT, on thother hand, Mary herself, and the advocates
for her innocence, have contended, that these letters vgre

forged
530

forged by her enemies, on purpose to blaf her reputation,
and to jufify their own rebellion. It is not necessary to
take notice of the arguments which were produced, in her
own age, infupportof this opinion; theobfervations which
we have already made, contain a full reply to them. An
author, who has inquired into the affairs of that period with
great indufry, and who has acquired much knowledge of
them, has published (as he affirms) a demonfiration of the
torgery of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With regard to
the former, he observes, that the French copyof thequeen's
letters is plainly a translation of Buchanan's Latin copy; ·
w hich Latin copy is only a translation of the Scottish copy;
and, by confcquence, the assertion of the queen's enemies,
that the wrote them originally in French, is altogetherground-
less, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. He accounts
for this strange succession of translations, supposing that
when the forgery was projeced, o person could be found
capable of writing originally in the French language letters
which would pass for the queen's; for that reason they were
firfi composed in Scottish; but unluckily the French in-
terpreter, as he conjedures, did not underfand that lan-
guage; and therefore Buchanan translated them into Latin,
and from his Latin they were rendered into French. Good. i.
79, 8o.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that no proof whatever

is produced of any of these suppositions. The manners of
the Scots, in that age, when almofi every man of rank spent
a part of his youth in France, and the intercourse between
the two nations was great, render it altogether improbable
that so many complicated operations should be necessary in
order to procure a few letters to be written in the French
language.

BUT without infiting farther on this, we may observe,

that all this author's premises may be granted, and yet his
conclusion will not follow, unless he likewise prove that the
French letters, as we now have them, are a true copy of
thoTe which were produced by Murray and his party in the
Scottiffi parliament, and at York and Wefiminfler. But
this he has not attempted: and if we attend to the hiflory of
the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, mufl have been
unsuccessful. The letters were first published at the end of
Buchanan's Deiteion. The sirs edition of this treatise was
in Latin, in which language three of the queen's letters were
subjoined to. it, this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571.
Soon after, a Scottish translation of it was published, and at

Mm the

the end of it were printed, likewise in cottifh, the three
letters which had formerly appeared in Latin, and five other
letters i Scottifl, which were not in the Latin edition.
Next appeared a French translation of the Detetion, and
of seven of the letters; this appears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Wiltem, 1572. The name of the
place as well as the printer, is allowed by all parties to be
a manifest impoflure. Our author, frorh observing the day
of the ronth, from which the printing is aid to have been
finished, has asserted that this edition was printed at London;
but no stress can be id tipon a date found in a book, where
every other circnmflance with regard to the printing is al-
bwed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to Lefly) was the
best informed of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that
the French edition of the Detecion was published in France:

II [Buchanan] a depuis adjoufle a cefle declamation un

petit libelle du pretendu marriage du duc de Norfolk, et de
ha faSon de fbo proces, et la tout envoy6 aux freres a la Ro-
chelle, lefquels voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, lFont
rraduit en Franois, et iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg,
c'ef a dire a ha Rochelle, par Thomas Waltern, nom apofti
et fair a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jebb, ii. 26." The
author of the Inmence de Mariegoes farther, and names the
French translator of the Deteaion. "' Eticelui premiere-
ment compos6 (comme i femble) par George Bnchanan
Efcoffoys, et depuis traduit en langue Francois par un Hu-
gonot, Poitetin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, foi difant
gentilhomme, et un de plus remarquez fediteuz. de France.
Jebb. i. 425. 443." The concurring teflimony of two con-
temporary authors, whose residence in France afforded them
sufficient means of information, must outweigh a flight con-
je&tre. This French translator does not pretend to publish
the original French letters as written by the queen herself;
he expressly declares that he translated them from the Latin.
Good. i. o13. Had our arthor attended to all these circum-
fiances, he rhight have saVed himself the labour of so many
criticifris to prove that the present French copy of the et-
ters is a translation from the Latin. The French editor him-
self acknowledges it, and, so far as I know, no prfon ever
denied it.

WE may observe, that the French translator was so igno-

rant, as to affirm that Mary had written there letters, partly
in French, partly in Scottifi. Good. i. o03. Had this
translation been publithed at London by Cecil, or had it been
made by his direction, so gross an error would not have been
admitted into it. This error, however, was owhig to an

odd

odd circumflance. In the Scottish translation of the Detetion,
two or three sentences of the original French were prefixed
to each letter, which breaking off with an &c. the Scottish
translation of the whole letter followed. This method of
printing translations was not uncommon in that age. The
French editor observing this, foolishly concluded that the
letters had been written partly in French, partly in Scottifi.

IF we carefully confider those few French sentences of

each letter, which still remain, and apply to them that species
of criticism, by which our author has examined the whole,
a clear proof will arise, that there was a French copy not
translated from the Latin, but which was itself the original
from which both the Latin and Scottifi have been tranf-
lated. This minute criticism mut neceflarily be disagree-
able to many readers; but luckily a few sentences only are
to be examined, which will render it extremely (hort.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends

with these words, y faifoit ban. It is plain thie expreflion
veu ce quepeut un corpsfans ceur, is by no means a translation
of cum planeperindr esem atque corpus fine corde. The whole
sentence has a fpint and elegance in the French, which
neither the Latin nor Scottish have retained. Jufques a la
dine is not a translation of totoprandii tempore: the Scottish
translation, quhil¢ denner-time, expresses the sense of the
French more properly; for anciently quAile signified untilas
well as during. Je n'ay pas tenu grand propos is not jufily
rendered neene contulerimfermonem cum quoquam; the phrase
used in the French copy is one peculiar to that language,
and gives a more probable account of her behaviour than the
other. Jugeant bien qu'il n'y faifit ban, is not a translation
of ut qui judicarent id non efe ex ufu. The French sentence
prefixed to lett. 2. ends with apprcndre. It is evident that
both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted alto-
gether these words, et toutefois ja ne puis apprendre. The
French sentence prefixed to lett. 3. ends with presenter.
J'aye veillI plus tard la haut is plainly no translation of diutius
illic moratafum; the sense of the French is better expressed
by the Scottish I have walkit later thereup. Again, Pour ex-
cufer voJfre afaire is very different from ad excufandum noflra
negotiat' The five remaining letters never appeared in Latin;
nor is there any proof of their being ever translated into that
language. Four of them, however, are published in French.
This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis concerning
the neceflity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detelaion the wholefonnet
is printed in French as well as in Scottish. It is not pof-

fible

533:

fible to believe that this Scottith copy could be the original
from which the French was translated. The French consists
of verses which have both measure and rhime, and which,
in many places, are far from being inelegant. The Scottish
confils of an equal number of lines, but without measure or
ihime. Now no man could ever think of a thing so absurd
and impraaicable, as to require one to tranfate a certain
given number of lines in prose, into an equal number of
verses, where both measure and rhime were to be observed.
The Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifefily to be a
translation of the French; the phrases, the idioms, and many
of there words are French, and not Scottilh. Besides, the
Scottish tranfDator has, i several initances, mistaken the
sense of the French, and in many more exprefles the sense
imperfetly. Had the sonnet been forged, this could not
have happened. The direcEors of the fraud would have
pnderflood their own work. I shall satisfy myself with one
example, in which there is a proof of both my assertions,
Stanza viii. yer. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fantd et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivrej'ay envie.
For him I attend all good fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottish, but a French

phrase; the two other lines do not express the sense of the
French, and the las is absolute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It

contains much refined myfRicifm about devices, a folly of that
age, of which Mary was very fond, as appears from several
other eircumftances, particularly from a letter concerning
imprefia by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adver-
saries forged her letters, they were certainly employed very
idly when they produced this.

FROM there observations it seems to be evident that there

was a French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin
and Scottish were only translations. Nothing now remains
of this copy but those few sentences which are prefixed to
the Scottish translation. The French editor laid hold of
these sentences, and tacked his own translation to them,
which, so faras it is his work, is a servile and a very wretched
translation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas, in those intro-
du&ory sentences, we have discovered frong marks of their

being

being originals, and certain proofs that they are not tranf-
lated from the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scot-

tifh translations with these sentences, that the Scottish tranf-
lator has more perfealy attained the sense and spirit of the
French than the Latin. And as it appears, that the let-
ters were very early translated into Scottish, Good. ii. 76;
it is probable that Buchanan made his translation, not from
the French but from the Scottilh copy. Were it neceaflry,
several critical proofs of this might be produced. One that
has been already mentioned seems decisive. Diutius illc mo-
ratafum bears not the leat resemblance to j'ay veillR plur
tard la haut; but if, instead of I wvalkit [i. e. watched laiter
there up, we suppose that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. that
mistake, into which he might so easy have fallen, accounts
for the error in his translation.

THESE criticisms, however minute, appear to be well

founded. But whatever opinion may be formed concerning
them, the other arguments, with regard to the internal evi-
dence, remain in full force.

THE external proofs of the forgery of the queen's letters,

which ourauthor has produced, appear at firfl fight to be fpe-
cious, but are not more solid than that which we have al-
ready examined. These proofs may be classed under two
heads. I. The erroneous and contradicory accounts which
are said to be given of the letters, upon the firfi judicial pro-
dution of them. In the secret council held Decem. 4,
1567, they are described " as her private letters written and
fubfcrivit with her awin hand." Haynes, 454. Good. ii. 64.
In the a of parliament pafled on the ISth of the fame
month they are described as " her privie letters writtin
halelie with her awin hand." Good.ib. 67. This diversity
of description has been confidered as a strong presumption
of forgery. The manner in which Mr. Hume accounts for
this is natural and plausible, vol. v. p. 498. And several in-
genious remarks, tending to confirm his observations, are
made in a pamphlet lately published, intitled, Miscellaneous
Remarks on the Enquiry into the evidence againjf Mary yueen
of Scots. To what they have observed it may be added, that
the original a of secret council does not now exist; we
have only a copy of it found amongit Cecil's papers, and the
transcriber has been manifestly so ignorant, or so careless,
that an argument founded entirely upon the supposition of
his accuracy is of little force. Several errors into which he
has fallen, we are enabled to point out, by comparing his
copy of the a& of secret council with the a& of parliament

passed

535

passed in consequence of it. The forrer contains a pe-
tition to parliament; in the latter the real petition is resumed
verbatim, and converted into a law. n the copy, the queen's
marriage with Bothwell is called " a priveit marriage,'"
which it certainly was not; for it was celebrated, after
proclamation of banns,.in St. Giles's church three several
days, nd with public solemnity; but in the as of its deno.
minated " ane pretendit marriage," which is the proper de-
scription of it, according to the ideas of he party. In the
copy, the queen is aid ' to be so thrall and klydy assec-
tionat to the privat appetite of that tyran," which is non,
sense, but in the a& it is " blindly affe&ionat." In the
copy it is said, " all nobill and virtuous men abhQFring their
traine and companpy." In the at, their tyrannie nd
companie," which is evidently the true reading, as the other
has either no meaning, or is a mere tautology. 2. The
other proof of the forgery of the letters, is founded upon
the impoflibility of reconciling the account given of the
time when, an4 he places from which, the letters are sup-
posed to have been written, with what is certainly nowl
concerning the queen's motions. According to the paper
published, Anders. ii. 269. which has been called Murray's
Diary, and which is formed upon the authorityof the let-
ters, Mary set out from Edinburgh to. Glasgow, January
21, 1567; (he arrived there on the 3ad; left that place
on the 27th; he, together with the king, reached Linlith-
gow on the 28th, flayed in that town only one night, and
returned to Edinburgh before the end of the month. But,
according to Mr. Goodal, the queen did not leave Edinburgh
until Friday January 24th; as he flayed night at Callen-
dar, he could not reach Glasgow sooner than the evening
of Saturday the 251h, and the returned to Linlithgow on
Tuesday the 8th. By consequence, the first letter, which
supposes the queen to he been at least four days in Glaf-
gow, as well as the second letter which bears date at Glaf-
gow Saturday morning, whereas f(e did not arive there un-
til the evening, must be forgeries. That the queen did not
set out from Edinburgh sooner than the 24th of January, is
evident (as he contends) from the public records, which
contain a Precept of a coafirmation of a life-ren by James
Boyd to Margaret Chalmers, granted by the queen, on the
74th of January, at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of
the queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing
James Inglis taylor to the prince her son. That the king
and queen had returned to Linlithgow on the 28th, appears
from a deed, in which they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper

of their palae there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good.
i. I18.

THIS has been represented to be not only a convincing, but

a legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written
by Mary; but how far it fallsfhort of this will appear from
the following ppnfiderations:

1. IT is evident, from a declaration or confession made by

the bishop of Rofi, that before the conferences at York,
which were opened in the beginning of Odober 1568, Mary
bad, by an artifice ps Maitland's got into her hands 4 copy
of those letters which her fubjeas accused her of having
written to Bothwell. Brown's Trial of the Duke of Nor-
folk, 31. 36. It is highly probable that the biflop of Ross
had fpen the letters before he wrote the defence of queen
Mary's honour in the year 570. They were published to
all the world, together with Buchanan's Detetion, A. D.
157. Now, if they had contained an errorfo gross, and,
at that time, so obvious to discovery, as the fppofing, the
queen to have pafled several days at Glasgow, while flh
was really at Edinburgh; had they contained a letter dated
at Glasgow, Saturday morning, though he di' not arrive
there till the eyening; is it poflible that he herself, who
knew her own motions, pr the able and zealous advocates
who appeared for her in that age, fhould'not have publifhe4
and eposed this contradiaion, and, by so doing, have blasted
at once the credit of such an imposture? In disquisitions
which are naturally abstruse and intricate, the ingenuity of
the latest author may discover many things which have
escaped the attention or baffled the sagacity of those who
have formerly confidered the fame subjea. But when a
matter of faa lay so obvious to view, this circumfiance of
its being unobserved by the queen herself, or by any of her
adherents, is almost a dermonftration that there is some mil-
take or fallacy in our author's arguments. So far are any,
either of our historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling
in question the common account concerning the time of
the qqeen's setting out to Glasgow, and her returning from
it, that there is not the leaf appearance of any difference
among them with regard to this point. But farther.

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our au-

thor rets the proof of his afTertiop concerning the queen's
motions, are not the originals subscribed by the queen, but
copies only, or translations of copies of those originals. t is
not necessary, nor would it be very easy to render this in-
telligible to persons unacquainted with the forms of law in
Scland; but every Scotsman conversant in business will

undertand

537

runderfrand me when I fay that the precept of confirmation
of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the privy feal, on a warrant
from the fignet-office, proceeding on a signature which bore
date at Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that the deed
in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with
the privy feal, proceeding on a ignature which bore date at
Fdinburgh January 24. From all this we may argue with
some degree of reason, that a proof founded on papers which
are so many removes difant from the originals, cannot but
be very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name

both of the king and queen; by law, the king's subscription
was no less requlfite to any paper than the queen's; and
therefore unless the original signatures be produced, in or-
der to acertain the particular day when each of them signed,
or to prove that it was signed only by one of them, the legal
proof arising from these papers would be, that both the
king and queen signed them at Edinburgh on the 24th of
January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the

foereign, in that age, seem to have been in a great measure
arbitrary, and affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of
consequence, there dates were seldom accurate, are often
false, and can never be retied upon. This abuse became so
frequent, and was found to be so pernicious, that an a of
parliament A. D. 1593, declared the fixing a false date to a
signature to be high treason.

5. THERE still remain, in the pubic records, a great num-

Ser of papers, which prove the neceflity of this law, as well
as the fallacy of our author's arguments. And though itbe
no easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any
particular date to be faife, yet surprising instances of this
kind hall be produced. Nothing is more certain from
hiflory, than that the king was at Glasgow 4th of January

5T67; and vet the recordof signatures from 1565 to 1582,
tol. i6th, contains the copy of a signature to Archibald Ed-
monflon, said to have been subscribed by curfcrereign, i. e.
the king and queen, at Edinburgh, January 24, 1567; so
that if we were to rely implicitly upon the dates in the re-
cords of that age, or to hold ourauthor's argument to be good,
it would prove that not only the queen, but the king too,
was at Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the bishop of Ross,

that on the 2 5th of Oaober 566, Mary lay at the point of
death; Keith, App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in

the

the public records, which bears that it was signed by the
queen that day. Privy feal, lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlony *.

BOTHWELL seized the queen as he returned from Stir-

ling, April 24th, 1567, and (according to her own account)
conduced her to Dunbar with all diligence. And. i. 95.
fut our author, relying on the dates of some papers which
he found in the records, supposes that Bothwell allowed her
to flop at Edinburgh, and to tranfaa business there. Nc-
thing can be more improbable than this supposition. We
may thereof rank the date of the deed to Yright, Privy
feal, lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by our author,
vol. i. 124. among the instances of the false dates of pa-
pers which were issued in the ordinary course of business in
that age. Our author has miflaken the date ofthe other paper
to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 411th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hillory, it

is, that {he remained at Dunbar from the time that BQthwell
carried her thither, till he returned to Edinburgh along with
him in the beginning of May. Our author himself allows
that (he resided twelve days there, vol. i. 367. Now though
there are deeds in the records which bear that they were
signed by the queen at Dunbar during that time, yet there
are others which bear that they were signed at Edinburgh;
e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy feal, lib.
36. fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at Dunbar
on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524. 526. Ib. lib. 32.
No. 154. 157. There are some signed at Dunbar April
28th. Others at Edinburgh April 30th, lib. 32. Chart.
No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. 158.
There different charters suppose the queen to have made so
many unknown, improbable, and inconfiflentjourneys, that
theyafford the clearest demonltration that the dates of these
records ought not to be depended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter

said to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to
be a Sunday, which was not, at that time, a day of business
in Scotland, as appears from the books of federunt, then kept
by the Lords of Session.

FROM this (hort review of our author's proof of the for-

gery of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his argu-
ments are far from amounting to demonstration.

N. B. In some of the early editions of this Dissertation, another inflance of

the fame nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned; but that,
as has since been discovered, was founded ona mistake of the person employed
to search the records, and is therefore omitted in this edition. The reasoning,
khwever, in the dissertation (ands still in force, notwithstanding this omission.

ANOTHER

,9

ANOTHER argument againfl the genuinenes of theft let-

ters is founded on the fRyle and composition, which are said
to be altogether unworthy of the queen, and unlike her real
productions. It is plain, both from the great accuracy of com-
position in mol of Mary's letters, and even from her folici-
tude to write them in a fair hand, that he valued herself on
those accomplishments, and was desirous of being eeemed
an elegant writer. But when he wrote at any time in a
hurry, then mary marks of inaccuracy appear. A remark-
able instance of this may be found in a paper publilhed
Good. ii. 3o0, Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in
the utmof hurry; and vet under all the disadvantages of a
translation, they are not deflitute either of spirit or of energy.
Tihe manner in hich he expresses her love to Bothwell has
been pronounced indecent and even hocking. But Mary's
temper led her to warm expreiions of her regard; those
refinemenrs of delicacy, which now appear in all the com-
merce between the sexes, wcre, in that age, hut little known,
even amongst people of the highest rank. Among the earl
of Hardwicke's papers, there is a series of letters, from
iMarv'to the duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian li-
Frar, p. ,7. b. 9. fol. 88. in which Mary declares her
love to thzt nobleman in language which would now be
reckoned extremely indelicate; Hard. State Papers, i.
189, &c.

SoMsi of Mary's letters to Bothwell were written before

the murder of her husband; some of them after that event,
and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are
prior to the death of her husband abound with the fondest
expreflions of her love to'Bothwell, and excite something
more than a suspicion that their familiarity had been ex-
tremevl criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
pressions, 'which her enemies employed to prove that (he was
ro fIraneer to the fche.-es which were formed againfl her
husband's life. Of this kind are the following passages:
(' Alace! I nevir difTavit ony body; bot I remit me alto-
gidder to zour will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do,
and qu'hatfaever thing come thereof, I fall obey zowv. Ad-
vise to with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony mair secret in-
ventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak medicine and the bath
at Craigmillar." Good. ii. 22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit
teiris fuld not be fa mcikle praifit and eftemit, as the trew
and faithfull travellis quhilk I fullene for to merit hir place.
For obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis
:hare that may impefche me. God forgive me," &c.
l:id. 7. " I have walkit later thairup, than I wald have

done,
54°

done, gif it had not been to draw something out of him,
quhilk this bearer will fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairefi com.
modity that can be offerit toexcufe zour affairis." Ibid. 32.
From the letters pollerior ro the death of her husband, jr is
evident lhat the fclieine of Botlwell's eizing Mary by frce
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert
with herfelt, and with her approbation .

WIT H

TrAT letters of so much importance as thaoe of Mary to Bothwell flould

have been entirely lolt, appears to many altogether unaccountable. After be-
ing produced in Engltnd before Elizabeth'; commilfioners, they were delivered
back by them tthehe earl of Murray. Good. ii. z35. He leems to have kept
them in his polfeflion during life. Afttr his death, they fell into the hanls of
Lennox his successor, wha reRored them to the earl of Morton. Good. ii. 9.
Though it be not necefiarily connected with any of the quellions which gave
occ.aion to this Ijiffertation, it may perhaps Litisfy the curiosity of some of
my readers to inform them, that, after a very diligent liarch, which has lately
been made, no copy of Mary's letters to Bothwell can be found in any of the
public libraries in Great Britain. The odly certain intelligence concerning
them, since the time of their being delivered to Morton, was communicated
by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq. ambalFdor from quee

Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Wal.ingham, fe-
cretary ns 1late, from the original register book of Mr. Bowes's letters, froni
;th of August i 81, to z8th September 1583, in the potllcfioi of ChrilRo
phcr Hunter, M. D. of Durham.

158t, 8th November, fromn Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein iv-e the ori-

ginals of letters between the Scottish queen and the carl of Bothv.'ll, had
been delivered to sundry hands, and thereby was at present wanting, and un-
known where it relied yet I have karned ccrtainly by the prior oi Plulcar-
ytle's means, that both the coTer and alto the writings ar. co:me, and now&
remain with th n earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly intreated to
make deliiery to her majcfty according to her m:tjefty's desire.

THIS time pall I have expended in fea'thi"g where the cffir and writingt

were, wherein, without the help of th- p;rir Ihoul have found rcatdifficul-
ty; now I vill cffay Gowrie, and of my l!ccel- you ihall be fihorly advcrtilid.

iath of November 158z, from Edinbuh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the ca:ket and letters mentioned in my

hft, before these were come to the poffifion of the earl of Gowrie, and allb
found that no mean might pre':ail to win the fame out of hi' hands without
his own consent and privity; in which behalf I had employed fit instruments,
that neverthelel profited nothine; therefore I attempted to effly hirnilf,
letting him kno* that the laid calket and letters Ihould have been brought to
her majclty by the ofter and good means of good friends, promiling to have
dlivered them to her m.jeily betore they came into his hands and cnltody,
and knowing that he did bear the likc affeT.ion, andwas ready to pleafureher
majelly in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far tendered to her
majesty, and which thereby should be well accepted, and with princely thanks
and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentment, I moved him that
they might be a present to be sent to her majesty from hin, and that I might
caule the fame to be conveyed to her majetly, adding hereunto foch words
and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and also best eTffc
the purpol'c. At the first he was loth to agre that they were in his po(flionr;
but I let him plainly know that I was certainly informed that they were de-
livered to him by Sanders Jardin; whereupon he prefe.l to know who dil so
inform me, enquiring whether the sons of the earl of Morton had done it or
no. I did not ohterwi'e in plain fermsdeny or answer thereunto, but that he
might think thit he had told me, as the p.iar is ready to avouch, and well

plea,"

WITH refpea to the sonnets, Sir David Dalrymple has
proved clearly, that they muf have been written after the

murder

leed that (hall ive him to be the author therereof; after he had said
though] all these letters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant
nor deny) yet he might not deliver them toany person without theconfents and
privitie, as well of the king that h. d intcrell therein, as also of the reft of
the noblemen enterprisers of the action agaiDft the king's mother, and that
would have them kept as ah evidence to warrant and make good that action.
And albeit I rcplitd, that their action in that part touching the aflignatio of
the crown to the king by his mother, had received such eftabliflment, confir-
mation, and ftirngth, by adts of parliament and other public authority and in-
Atiuiacnta , a nither should that cf be suffercd to cocm hi debate or quellion,
nor fuclh fcroll'and papers ought tobe fhwed or the trengthening thereof, foas
thefemicht well be kit and be rendered to the hands of her majesty, to whom
they wcre dcllined before they ftll in hiskeieing; yet hewould notbe ren.ov-
ed or fatisfitd; cncluudine, after much ralbonings, that the earlof Morton, nor
an;- other thathad the charge aud keeping thereof, durftat any time makcde-
livery; nd bceaue t was the firlf time that 1 had moved him therein, and
that he would gladly both answer her majelfy's good expectation i him, and
also perform his duty due to his sovereign and afociates intheaaionaforefaid;
therefore hewould feckout the laid casket and letters, athis return to hishoufe,
which hethought should be within a Ihiort time, and upon finding of the fame;
and better adviceand consideration had of thecaufe, he would give further an-
fwer. This rcfolution I have received as to the thing; and for the prelent I
could not better, leaving him to give her majely uch tlimony of his good
wiUtowards her, by hi, frank dealings herein, a fIhe may have cause toconfirn
her highnesses good opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn
to greater goodness towards him. I hall still labour him both by myself and
also by all other means; but I greatly distrust the desired success herein.

24th of November 158z, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the letters in thle coser, come to the hands of the earl

of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnestly therein, letting him know the
purpose of the Scottlh queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeit-
ed by her rebels, and alb seeking thereon tohave them deliveredto her orde-
faced, and that the means which fle will make in this behalf (hall be l great
and eff.ctiual, as thetl writings cannotbe fafcly kept in that realm withoutdan-
gerous offence of him that had the custody thereof, neither hall he that is
once known to have them be fuffcred to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
have at large opened tht peril likely to fail to that ation and the parties
therein, and particularly to himielf that is now openly known to have the po£-
session of these writings, and I have lettin him fee what surety it shall bring to
the aid cause and all the parties therein, and to himself, thatthee writingsmay
be with fecrccv and good order committed to the keeping of her majesty, that
will have them reacy whenioer any use shall be for them, and by her high-
neifes countenance defend them and thepartiesfrom fuchwrongful objedionsas
ihall be laid againti them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully
fati-fied herein, or doubt that the rett of the associates hall not like of the
delivery of them to her majelly in this good manner, and for the intereil re-
hearsed, that I fhal! readily, upon meeting and conferencewith them, procure
theiraffent inthispart (a mattermore easy tooffer than tJperform); audlaftll)
movinghim that (for the fecrecyand benefit of the caufe,.and thathermajelly's
goodopinion towards himielf may be firmly fettledand confirmed byhisaccept-
abie forwardnefe herein) he would, without needlefl scruple, frankly commit
these writings to her majesty's good custody for the good nues received. After
long debate hrefolvcd, and fail, thathe would unfeignedlyfhewanddo to her
majcftv all theplcafurethat hemight without offence to the king his sovereign,
and prejudice to the atTociates in the acion, and therefore he would firfl make
search and view the laid letters, and herein take advice what he mightdo, and
how far he might satisfy and content her majesty; promising thereon to give
more resolute anfwcr; and he concluded flatly, that afterhe had found and fecr
thewritig, thathe might notmake deliveryof themwithouttheprivityof the

king,

murder of the king, and prior to Mary's marriage with Both-
well. But as hardly any part of my narrative is founded upon
what is contained in the sonnets, and as in this dilffrtation I
have been confirained to dwell longer upon minute and ver-
bal criticisms, than may be interesting or agreeable to many
of my readers, 1 hall reftfatisfied with referring, for inform-
ation concerning every particular relative to the sonnets, to
Remarks on the History of Scotland, Chap. XI.

HAVING thus Rated the proof on both fides; having ex-

amined at o great a length the different fyflems with regard
to the fals incontroverly; it may be expeEted that I hould
now pronounce sentence. In my opinion, there are only two
conclusions, which can be drawn from the fadls which have
been enumerated.

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love,

encouraged by the queen's known aversion to her husband,
and presuming on her attachment to himfell, tfruck the
blow without having concerted with her the manner or cir-
cumfiances of perpetrating that crime. That Mary, inllead
of testifying much indignation at the deed, or discovering
any refcntment againfl Bothwell, who was accused of having
committed it, continued to load him with marks of her re-
gard, conduaed his trial in such a manner as rendered it im-
poflible to discover his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to

king. Albeit I flood long with him againfl his resolution in this point, to ac-
quaintthe king with this matter before the letters xserein the handsof her ma-
jelly, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to the
caulc; yet I could not removehim fromit. It may be that he meaneth to put
*ver the matterfrom himfelt to the king, upon ight whereof I fiall travel effec-
tually to obtain the king's consent, that the letters may be committed to her
majeRfy's keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the king, irn
the present love and affection that he beareth to his highnef, than to win any
thing at the hands of the aflociates in the acion, whereof some principal of
them now come and remain at the devotion of ,the king's mother; in this I
(hall fill call on Cowrie, to search out the coffer, according to his promise;
and as I shall find him minded to do therein, so fnall I do my best and whole
endeavour to effe& the fucccfs to her majelty's belt contentment.

2d December 158a, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the earl of

Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I put
him in mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the duke of Lennox had
fought earnefly tohave had those letters, and that the king did not knowwhere
they were, lb as they could not be delivered to her majesty without theking's
privity andconfent, and he pretended to be fillwilling to pleafureher majfeRy
in the fame, so far as be may with his duty to the king and to the ref ot the
aflciates in that action; but I greatly dillruft to effec this to her majetRy's
pleasure, wherein nevertheless I (hall do my utmost endeavours.

WHETHEuR James VI. who put the earl of Gowrie to death, A. D. R4.

and eized all his effets, took care to destroy his mother's letters, for who:-
honour he was at that time extremely zealous; whcther they have perished by
fame unknown accident; or whether they may not still remain unobserved
among the archives of om osos our greatfamilice, itis impoiibleto determine.

all

S43

all the maxims of decency or of'prudence, voluhtirily agreed
to a marriage with him, which every confidertion fhoald
have induced her to deleft. By this verdict Mary is not
pronounced guilty of having contrived the mtrder of her
hufbnd, or even of having previously giveh her conreht to
his death; but (he is not acquitted of having difcoveted her
approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who
was the author of it.

TEi other concltrion is that which fMurrtay and his ad-

herents laboured to etlablifh, " that James, fometymme
earl of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and
unworthy murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile king
Henry of gde memory, fader to our foveraine lord, and
the queenis lauchfull husband; fa was (he of the foreknow-
ledge, counfall, devise, perfwuadar and command of te said
murder to be done." Good. ii. 207.

WH C H of these conclusions is mofl agreeable to the evi-

dence that has been produced, I leave my readers to deter-
mine.

ADDi-
'44

### ADDITION to Page 66, Line 14.

## The Lords of the councill to the Earl of Hertford, lieutenant in Scotland, April 10, 1544.

[ 545 ]

ADDITION to Page 66, Line 4.
T HE violence of national hatred between the Englilh

and Scots in the sixteenth century was such as can

hardly be conceived by their posterity. A proof of the fierce
resentment of the Scots is contained in the note on pages
66 and 67. The inflruaions of the privy council of England
to the earl of Hertford, who commanded the fleet and army
which invaded Scotland A. D. 544, are ditated by a
national animosity no less excessive. I found them in the
colleaion of papers belonging to the duke of Hamilton,
and they merit publication, as they exhibit a flriking pi&ure
ot the spirit of that period.
The Lords of the councill to the Earl of Hertford, lieutenant in

Scotland, April o1, 1544.

THE inltruion begins with observing, that the King had

originally intended to fortify Leith and keep pofleflion of
it, but, after mature deliberation, he had finally determined
not to make any fett!ement in Scotland at present, and
therefore he is direced not to make any fortification at
Leith or any other place:-

" BUT only for that journey to put all to fire and sword,

burn Edinburgh town, so used and defaced that when you
have gotten what you can of it, it may remain for ever a
perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon
it, for their falsehood and disloyalty. Do what you can out
of hand, and without long tarrying to beat down or over-
throw the cafle; ack houses and as many towns and
villages about Edinburgh as ye may conveniently. Sack
Leith, and subvert it, and all the reft, putting man, woman,
and child to fire and sword, without exception, when any
resistance lhall be made against you; and this done, pass
over to the Fifeland, and extend like extremities and de-
firuaion to all towns and villages whereunto you may reach
conveniently; not forgetting, amongst all the reft so to spoil
and turn up fide down the cardinal's town St. Andrew's, as
the upper fort may be the nether, and not one flke fRand
upon another, sparing no creature alive within the fame,
specially such as either in friendlhip or blood be allied unto
the cardinal; and if ye fee any likelyhood to win the cafile
give some flout assay to the fame, and if it be your fortune
to get it, raze and defiroy it piece-meal; and after this
fort, spending one month there, spoiling and destroying as

N n aforeaid,

### ADDITION to page 69, Line 32.

## The Earl of Hertford to the King's Majesty, Newcastle, April 17, 1544.

aforesaid, with the wife foresight that his majefly doubteth
not ye will use that your enemies take no advantage of
you, and that you enterprize nothing but what you shall fee
may be easily atchieved, his majesty thinketh verily, and so
all we, ye shall find thisjourney fucceedeth this way mos to
his majefdy's honour," &c.

TH ESE barbarous orders seem to have been executed with

a rigorous and unfeeling exa&nefs, as appears from a series
of letters from lord Heriford, in the fame collection, giving
a full account of all his operations in Scotland. They con-
.tain several curious particulars, not mentioned by the writers
of that age, and with which both the hiltorians of the city
of Edinburgh were unacquainted; but they are of too great
length to be inserted here.

ADDITION to page 69, Line 32.
IN the first edition of this work, I expressed my suspicion

of a crrefpondence betweeen the murderers of cardinal

Beatoun and Henry VIII. prior to their committing that
crime. In the papers of duke Hamilton is contained the
clearei evidence of this, which I publish not only to eftablilh
that faEt, bt as an additional confirmation of the remarks
which I made upon the frequency ofafaffination in that
age, and the flight opinion which men entertained concern-
ing it.

The Earl of Hertford to the King's Majefly, 2Necafle,

April 17, 1544.

PLEASETH your highiefs to understand; that this day

arrived with me the earl of Hertford, a Scottifhman called
Wifhert, and brought me a letter from the lord of Brin-
aone [i. e. Crichton laird of Brunflane] which I fend your
highness herewith, and according to his request, have taken
order for the repair of the said Wilhert to your majesty by
post, both for the delivery of such letters as he hath to your
majefly from the said Brinftone, and aso for the declaration
of his credence, which as 1 perceive by him confifeth in two
points, one that the lord of Grange late treasurer of Scot-
land, the master of Rothes, the earl of Rothe's eldert son,
and John Charteris, would attempt either to apprehend or
flay the cardinal, at some time when he hall pass through

the

the Fifeland, as he doth sundry times in his way to St. An-
drew's, and in cafe they can so apprehend him will deliver
him unto your majesty, which attemplate, he faith, they
would enterprize, if they knew your majefly's pleasure there-
in, and what fupportation and maintenance your majefiy
would minister unto them, after the execution of the fame,
in care they should be pursued by any of their enemies;
the other is, that in cafe your majefly would grant unto
them a convenient entertainment to keep ooo or I5QO
men in wages for a month or two, they journeying with the
power of the earl marshal, the said Mr of Rothes, the laird
of Calder, and other the lord friends, will take upon
them, at such time as your majesty's army hall be in Scot-
land, to defircy the abbey and town of Arbroath, being the
cardinals, and all the other bishops houses and countries
on that fide of the water thereabout, and to apprehend all
those which they fay be the principal impugnators of amity
between England and Scotland; for which they should
have a good opportunity, as they fay, when the power of
the said bishops and abbots shall resort towards Edinburgh
to refifl your majesty's army. And for the execution of
there things, the said Wifhert faith, that the earl marhal
aforenamed and others will capitulate with your majesty in
writing, under their hands and feals, afore they hall desire
any supply or aid of money at your majefly's hands. This
is the effea of his credence, with other sundry advertisements
of the great division, that is at this present within the realm of
Scotland, which we doubt not he will declare unto your
majefly at good length. Hamilton MSS. vol. iii. p. 38.

N. B. THIS is the letter of which Dr. Mackenzie, vol.

iii. p. i8. and bishop Keith, His. p. 44. published a fragment.
It does not authorize us to conclude that Mr. George
Withart, known by the name of the martyr, was the person
who resorted to the Earl of Hertford. It was more pro-
bably John Wifhart of Pitarrow, the chief of that name, a
man of abilities, zealously attached to the reformed doarine,
and deeply engaged in all the intrigues and operations of
that busy period. Keith, 96. I 7. 9g. 315.

NnMENNtx,

547
N n2

# APPENDIX.

APPENDIX. X

No. I. (page 126.)

Ad 1 E
A M 0 R I A L of certain pints meetfor reforing the realm of

S COTLAND to the atient eale.
[sth Auft 5S9, Cottou. Lib. Cal. b. x. fol. 17. From a copy in fccretary

Ceci's hand.1
TMPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that

Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual peace with

the Kingdom of England, or to be made one monarchy with Eng-
land, as they both make but one island, divided from the reft of the
world.

IF the first is fought, that is, to be in perpetual peace with Eng-

land, then must it necessarily be provided, that Scotland be not so
fabje& to the appointments of France as is presently, which, being
an antient enemy to England, feeketh always to make Scotland an
instrument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a footstool thereof to look over England as they may.

THER EFORE, when Scotland shall come into the hands of a mere

Scottilh man in blood, then may there be hope of such accord; but as
long as it is atthe commandment of the French, there is no hope to
have accord long betwixt these two realms.

TH E. SO KE feeing it is that the French king's commandment by

reafonof his wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that
until he have children, and during her absence out of the realm, the
next heirs to the crown, being the house of the Hamiltons, should have
regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposed nor
wafted; and, on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought
to force that the laws and the old customs of the realm be not altered;
neither that the country be not impoverilhed by taxes epreRf, or
new imposts, after the manner of France: for provision wherein, both
by the law of God and man, the French King and his wife may be
moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AN D for this purpose it were good that the nobility and commons

joined with the next heir of thecrown, to seek due reformation of such
great abuses as tend to the ruin of their country, which mull be done
before the French grow too strong and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the three eltates

of the land, that the land may be free from all idolatry like as Eng-
land is; for justification whereof, if any free general council may be had

where the pope of Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may
offer to few their cause to be moll agreeable to Chrilfs religion.

NEXT, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules
and offices, by the antient love of the realm, without either captains,
lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other princes govern their countries,
and especially that the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottihf
men.

TH I DL , That they might never be occasioned to enterinto

wars againff England, except England hould give the first cause
to Scotland.

FOURTH LY, That no nobleman of Scotland should receive pen-

sion of France, except it were whilst he did serve in France, for
otherwise thereby the French would hortly corrupt many to betray
their own country.

FIFTHLY, Thatno office, abbey, living, or commodity, be

given to any but mere Scottilh men, by the assent of the three
eflates of the realm.

SIXTHLY, That there be acouncil in Scotland appointed in the

queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in those cafes
not to be direed by the French.

SEVE NTH LY, That it be by the said three efates appointed how

the queen's revenue of the realm fhallbe expended, how much the
queen hall have for her portion and estate during herabfence, how
much hall be limited to the governance and defence of the realm,
how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these, and such like points, if the French king and the queen

befound unwilling, and will with sand these provisions for the weale
ofthe laid, then hath the three estates of the realm authority, forth-
with, to intimate to the said kingand queen their humble requeits;
and if the fame be not effe&ually granted, then humbly they may
commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, bind-
ing the fame also to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FIN ALLY, If the queen hall be unwilling to this, as it is likely

she will, in refpet of the greedy and tyrannous affetion of
France, then it is apparent that Almighty God is pleated to transfer
from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of it, and this
time must be used with great circumfpeftion, to avoid the deceipts
and tromperies of the French.

AN D then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made

free, what means may be devised by God's goodness, to accord
the two realms, to endure for time to come at the pleasure of
Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all princes be.

No. I. (p. 32.)

A ltter of Maitlad of Lethington's, thus direeied:

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

[loth Jan. 1559-6o. CotL Lib. Cal. b. ix. From the original in his own hand.]
I UN DE RST AND by the last letter I received from yow, that dif-

coursing with zour countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and
commoditeysmay enfewto that realm hereafter, giff ze presently

afift

549

affslc ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre of the contrary advise,
doubting that we fall not at length be found trusty friends, normean
to contynew inconfRant amerte, albeit we promise, but only for avoyd-
ing the present danger make zou to serve our turne, and after being
delivered, becum enemies as of before. For prose quhareof they
alledge things that have pafled betwixt ws heretofore, and a few pre-
fumptiones tending to the fam end, all grounded upon miftru;
quhilks, at tne firi ficht, have ome liewe of appearance, gif men
wey not the circumRances of the matter; but gif they will confer the
tvme pall with the present, confider the nature of this caus, and eltate
cf our contrye, I doubt not but judgment fal be able to banish aiftrutl.
And firit, I wad wilh ze should examyne the causes off the old inmitve
betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our
anceaours to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks by our floreys
ard regiftres off antiquiteys appear to be these. The princes of Eng-
land, some tyme, alledging a certain kynde of foveraintye over this
realm; some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our
bordourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterprifed the
conquest of ws, and fa far furth preifl it by force off armes, that we
were dryven to great extramiteys, by loss of our princes, our noble.
men, and a good part of our cuntrcy, fa that experience taught ws
that our owne -lrength was fcarfe fuflicient to withfand the force of
England. The Frenche zour auncient enemies, confidering well how
nature had so placed ws in a iland with zow, that na nation was able
fa to nnoye England as we being enemyes, foucht to joine ws to
the: n in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne zour armyes from
the i-afion of France, and occupy zow in the defence of zour country
at hame, offering for that effea to beftowe some charges upon ws,
and for comparing off theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the
matter, quhen the frefche memory of injuris lately receaved at zour
tands, was fa depely prented on our hartes, that all our myndes were
occupied how to be revenged, and arme ourselfes with the power of a
foravne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS was the beginning off our confederacy with France. At

quhilk time, our cronicles maks mention, that some off the wyfeit
foresaw the perril, and small frute hould redound to us thereof at
length: zit had affeiion fa blinded jugement, that the advise of the
maift part overcume the belt. The mail part of all quarrells betwixt
ws i'nce that tyme, at lear quhen the provocation came on our fide,
hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather than any one caus oft
our selfes: and quhenfaever we brack te peace, it come partly by
their intyfements, partly to eschew the conquest intended. by that
realm. But now hes God's providence fa altered the cafe, zea
changed it to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to have zou in
theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we espy how uncareful they
have been of our weile at all tymes, how they made us ever to serve
theyr turne, drew us in mait dangerous weys for theyre commodite,
and nevertheless wad rot ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour of the
ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fae that thetr
support, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affetion they bare to

ws,
f50

ws, for pytie they had off our eflate, for recompense of the lyke
friendlhip fcawin to theym in tyme off theyr affiitiones, but for am-
bition, and infaciable cupiditie to reygne, and to mak Scotland ane
accessary to the crown of France. Thjs was na friendly office, but
mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding. the proportion of theyr de-
serving; a hale realm for the defence of a part. We fee theym ma-
nifefily attempt the thing we fufpe&ed off zow; we feared zementthe
conquest of Scotland, and they are planely fallen to that work; we
hated zow for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we love
theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about to bring ws in
mailt vile servitude? Gif by zour friendly support at this tyme, ze
fall declare that not only seek ze not the ruyne of our country, but,
will preserve the libertie thereof from conquest by rangeares, fall not
the occasion off all inimite with zow, and ligue with theym, be taken
away ? The causes being removed, how fall the effe&es remane ?
The fear of conquest made u to hate zou and love theym, the cais
Changed, quhen we fee theym planely attempt conquest, and zou
fchaw ws friendship, fall we not hate theym, and favour zcw ? Gif
we have fchawne fa great constance, continuing za r.ony zeares in
amity with theym, oft quhome we had fa small commqdite, quhat fall
move us to breake with zow, that off all nations may do ws greatest
pleafour ?

BUT ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled and then frends as

off before. I think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off this ze
may be assured, we will never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we
will be content to forgo the ametye of England, nor do any thing may
bring ws in suspicion with zow. Gift we wold, at any time to please
theym, break with zow, hould we not, befydes the lofie off eflima-
tion and discrediting off ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maif manifeR danger, and becum a prey to theyr tyranny ?
Quhais aid could we implore, being destitute of zour friendship, gif
they off new wald attempt theyr formar enterprise? Quhat nation
myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff they myght? And it is
like eneuch, thay will not flick hereafter to tak theyr time off ws,
quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, fee-
ing ambition has fa inpyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had
ever done any thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary pleased
them by right and wrang, theye did not flick to attempte the fubver-
sion of our hale ate. I wald ze hould not efleeme ws fa barayne of
jugement, that we cannot foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche,
that we will not study by all gode means to entertayne that thing may
be our fafetye; quhilk consistes in all the releying of zour friendships.
I pray zow confider in like cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off
maift noble memory king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI.
meanes were opened off amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all
tymes the difference of religion the onley stay they were not em-
braced? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of theyr adhe-
rents subvert the devises of the better fort? But now has God off
his mercy removed that block furth off the way; now is not theyr
practice lyke to tak place any mare, when we ar comme to a con-
formity of doctrine, and profes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I

take

55

take to be the ftrayteft knot of amytve can be devised. Giff it may
be alledged that some of our countrymen at one tyme, violated theyr
promis giff ze liss to way the circumflance, ze hall find the promis
is rather brought on by neceffite; after a great overthrow of our men,
then comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite
and decay off our haill fate, at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall
the preservation of our libertie be inseparably joined with the keeping
off promefie, and the violation off our fayth cast ws in maiR miserable
servitude. So that giff neyther the fear off God, reverence of man,
religon, othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes sufficient to bynd
ws, yet fall the zeale of our native countrey, the maintenance off our
own estate, the safety of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, com-
pell ws to kepe promise. 1 am assured, it is trewly and sincerely
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with zow; it fall be
uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be as defyrous of it as we ar,
assurances may be devyfed, quharby all partyes will be out of doubte.
There be gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for the purpos, tyme
serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realmes wilh it, Godhes wrought
in the peoples hearts on bayth parties a certaine Itill agreement upon
it, never did, any tyme, so mony things concurre at ones to knyt
it up, the disposition of a few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may
mak up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun his work, and main-
teyned it quhile now, by the expectation of man, fallperfyte it.

I PRAY zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confulation, quhe-

ther ze fall support ws or no. Seying the mater fpeaketh for itself,
that ze mon take upon zow the defence of our caus, giff ze have any
refpet for zour awne weill. Their preparatives in France, and levy-
ing of men in Germany (quheyroff I am lately advertised), ar not
altogidder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they hote at; they feke
our realme, but for ane entrey to zours. Giff they hould dire&ly
fchaw hoftilitie to zow, they knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme,
therefor they do, by indirect meanes, to blind zow, the thing, they
dare not as zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to th' end
thathaving assembled theyr hayle forces fa nere zour bordours, they
may unlok i: to attack zow! It is ane of their aid fetches, making a
fchew to one place, to lyght on ane other. Remember how covertly
zour places about Boulougne were affaizeit, and carried away, ze be-
ing in peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was fynely dif-
fembled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third,
prevent theyr policy by prudence. Giff ze not the lyke disposition
prefentley in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grosse ignorance to mif-
knaw what all nations planely fpeks of. Tak hede ze zay not
hereafter, " Had I wil ;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
wyfe mar.'s :outh. That is onwares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow
commonly wined, that this countrey myght be divorfed from the
Frenfche, and is fa comme to pass as was maift expedient for zow.
For giff by your intyfement we had taken the mater in hand, ze myght
have fufpeaed we would have been untrusted frends, and na langer
continued ftedfafte, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen off
our self, wehave conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries,
and that theyr evil dealing with ws hes deserved oer inimityte, let no

man
S55

man dobte but they fall fynde ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa urgently
hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands we can look for na-
thing but all extremitye, giff ever they may get the upper hand.
Let not this occasion, so happely offered, escape zow: giff ze do, ne-
glecing the present opportunitie, and hoping to have ever gode Ink
comme feaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe o
great, and fa firang, that afterwards quhen ze wald, ze fall not be
able to put him down; and then, to zour smart, after the tyme ze
will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt. by experienoe, quhat
harme cometh of oversight, and trulling to zour enemyes promelTe.
We offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour former losses may be re-
payred. Qhilk giff ze let over flyde, sufferings ws to be overrun,
quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frenfche, that they fall not in-
vade zow in zowr own boundes, sick it is their lull to reygne, that
they can neither be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and
be satisfied when they have gode luck. but will fill follow on, having
in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of fa great a conquet,
quhat think ye fall be the end ? Is ther any of fa small jugement,
that he doth not forsee already, that theyr hail force fall then be bent
against zow?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be pre-

fently. Theyr elate is not always fa calm at hame as every man
thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr great redines for weyr made
theym to take this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayce
trust in their awne policy, thinking to have found na refintance, their
opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes them now amafed. The
eRlates off the empire (as I heare) has futed restitution off th' imperial
towns Metz, Toull, and Verdum, quhilk may grow to some befynes;
and all thing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey, the less fit
they be presently for weyr, the mare opportune efeme ye the time
for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were offered'to the Frenfche against
zow, wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed
of zour sleuth, to spare theym that hes already compassed zour de-
ftrudion, giff theym were able? Confider with zour self quhilks is
to be choyfed ? To weyr against them out with zour realme or with-
in ? Giff quhill ze feape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fayle to fute zou in zour awne countrey, aud use ws as a fote Role to
overloke zow. But ome wil fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It
is foly to think they wald not giff they were able, quhen before hand
they flick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe the style of zour crown.
Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr awne bounds or
without, it is manifest. Giff twa armyes should camp with in zowr
country, but a moneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit hould
zowr loffe be greater, nor all the charge ze will nede to befow on our
support will draw to, befydes the dilhonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for particu-

lar refpecs weill affected to the caus, move zow to fubtrad zour help-
ing hand, by alleging things not apparent, for that they be possible.
It is not, I grant, unpoflible that we may receave conditiones of peace;
but I fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fik at will
remove all mistrust, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater

had

$53

had bene irg or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for
that they terme ws rebelles, and diffames our just quarrell with the
name of conspiracy against our foverayne. It is hir hyenes right we
manetayne. It is the liberty of hir realm we fludy to preserve with
the hazard of our lyres. e are not (God knaweth) comme to this
poynt for wantones, a man impatient of rewll, or willing to fchake
of the zoke of government, but r drawne to it by neceffite, to
avoe-de the tyranne of firangeares, feaking to defraude ws of lawful
.goverrnnent. Giff we should susser itrangeares to plait themfelffes
peacea' iy in all tie ilrengthes of our realme, fortify the feyportes, and
mai! i;::portant places, as ane entre to a plain conquest, now in the
minyai:iC o ur foverane, beyng furth of the realme, hould we not
be thcught oncareful off the common weill, betrayres of our native
countcev, and evill fubjecds to hir majelte? Quhat other opinion
could fche have of us? Might she not justly hereafter call ws to
accompt, as negligent miniteres ? Ciit firangeares should be thus
ifffered to broke the chefe ofices, beare the hail rewll, alter and per-
vert our lawes and liberty at theyr pleafour; myght not the peonle
efeem our nobiemcn unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean
na wvie to iebtrak our obedience from our foveranc, to defraud hir
hyenes off her dew reverence, rents and revenues off hir crown. We
feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of before a fre
realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir miniftlres borne men of the fam;
and that the fuccellion of the crown may remane with the lawful
biod-e.

I V.AL D not ze fou d not falvttil efteme the friendihip of Scotland,

that ze juSed it nnct orthv to be embraced. It fall be na small
commodite for zow to he delivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyght-
bour, quh.is inimitvc may more trouble zow, than off any other na.
:ion albeit twvfs as puifrant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. Be-
i£des that e fail not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackyng
the cormmadite to irvade zow by land, on our land. Confider quhat
fuperniuous charge ze bei!owve en the fortification and keping of Bar-
wick; cuhilk ze mav reduce to a mean fowme, having ws to frendes.
The realr,- of Ireland being of natour a gode and fertill countrey, by
reaion of the continewall unquietness and lak of policey, ze knaw to
be rather a burden unto zos then great advantage; and giff it
werc peaccable may be very commodious. For pacification quhayr-
ozs, it is not u-kncnr.e to zow quhat service we are abill to do'. Re-
fuse not the;yr commoditevs, belides mony ma quhen the are offred.
Qhiis albeit I study not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other
countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be em-
braced for that zour aunceltors, by all meanes, maift erneftly futed
our mitrv, and vet it was not heyr hap to come by it. The mater
hes a -nai!t carried me beyond the boundes of alattre, quharfor I will
ieave to trouble zow afier I have given you this note. I wald wiss
that zc, and they that arlearned, fould rede the twa former orations
of Demosthenes, called Olynthvace, and confidere quhat counfall that
wvye oratour gave to the Atnenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe;
quhilk hes so great affnite with this cause of ours, that every word
thereof myght be applyed to our purpos. There may ze learne of

him

him quhat advise is to be followed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on
fyre. Thus I bid zow heartily fareweill. From Saint Andrews,
the zoth of January 1559.

No. III. (p. 137)
)'art of a letterfrom Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the camp

before Leith, zth of April i56o.

[An original in the Paper-office.]
I WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to

the earl of Huntly, who so defyreth to be recommended to you

as one, who, with all his heart, favoureth this cause, to the uttermolt
of his power. Half the words that come out of his mouth were able
to persuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his behalf, than
I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge of him,
as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself always measure my
thoughts, as fie fhalldeferve to be spoken of. With much difficulty,
and great persuasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to
join with him in this acion; whatfomever he can invent to the fur-
therance of this cause, he hath promised to do with solemn protefta-
tion and many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to this cause; and
faith surely that no man hall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith,
that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (p. 145.)
Randolph to Cecil, oth Augut 1560. From Edinburgh.

[An original in the Paper-office]
SINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote las to your honour,

J have heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this present it

may please you to know, that the most part of the nobles are here
arrived as your honour hall receive their names in writing. hc
earl of Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the Lord of Lidington, chosen speaker of
the parliament, or harangue-maker as these men term it. The first
day of their fitting in parliament will be on Thursday next. Hitherto
as many as have been present of the lords have communed and de-
vised of certain heads then to be propounded, as, who shall be sent
into France, who into England. It is much easier to find them than
the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon that for England the
mailer of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington. For France Pittarow
and the justice clerk. Also they have consulted whom they think
meeteft to name for the XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors
mull be chofn. They intend very hortly to fend away Dingwall
the herald into France, with the names of thole they hall chufe;
and also to require the King and queen's consent unto this parlia-
ment. They have devised how to have the contract with England
confirmed by authority of parliament; how also to have the articles

of

55S;

of the agreement between them and their king and queen ratified.
These things yet have only been had in communication. For the con-
firmation of the contract with England I have no doubt; for that I
hear many men very much like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the
earl of Sutherland, the 1. Glamis, who dined yellerday with 1. James.
The lord James requeled me this present day to bring the contra&
unto him;. I intend, also, this day, to speak unto the 1. Gray, in
our 1. Gray's name, for that he promised in my hearing to subscribe,
and then presently would have done it, if the contract could have
been had. For the more assurance against all inconvenients, I would,
beides that, that I trufl it Ihall be ratified in parliament, that every
nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and set his eal, which may
always remain as a notable monument, tho' the a& of parliament be
hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, and with your ad-
vice, that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here
present, to that effed, or that I might receive from your honr. fume
earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it would serve to good
purpose. If it might be also known with what substantial and effec-
tious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, I think no
great difficulty would be made. The earl marlhal has often been
moved to subscribe, he used more delays than men judged he would.
His son told me eflterday, that he would speak with me at leisure, so
did also Drumlar.rick; I know not to what purpose: I have caused
I. James to be the earnefler with the I. mar/hal, for his authority's
fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between there two realms might be perpe-
tual; and among diverse men's opinion, one aid that he knew of no
other, but by making them both one, and that in hope of that mo
things were done, than would otherwise have ever been granted;
the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto that, that he
had promised, that it should pass his power and all the crafty knaves
of his counsel (I am bold to use unto your h. his own words), to
break so godly a purpose. This talk liked well the affifers, how-
fomever it pleased him to whom it was spoken unto. The barens,
who in time pa/t have been of the parliament, had yesterday a con-
vention among themselves in the church, in very honefl and quiet
fort; they thought it good to require to be reflored unto their an-
cient liberty, to have voice in parliament. They presented that day
a bill unto the lords to that effe&, a copy whereof Ihall be ent as
soon as i: can be had. It was answered unto gently, and taken in
good part. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they
are chosen, to resolve thereupon.-- Herefollows a long pagrgaph
conrcrning the fort fatics of Da,6ar, &c.--- This present morning,
r,;:. the 9th, I understood, that the lords intended to be at the par-
,iament, which caused me somewhat to flay my letter, to fee what I
could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your honr. The lords,
a: ten of the clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where the
duke lieth; from whence they departed towards the Tolbooth, as
they were in dignity. Each one being set in his feat, in such order as
'Qur h. fihal receive them in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the
.ord, were laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the

1. of
5,

l. of Lidington began his oration. He excused his infuifficiey to
occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of things past, and of
what necessity men were forced unto for the defence of theircountry,
what remedy and support it pleased God to fend them in the time of
their necessity, how much he were bound heartily to acknowledge it,
and to requite it. He took away the persuasion that was in many
men's mind that lay back, that misdeemed other things to be meant
than was attempted. He advised all eates to lay all particulars
apart, and to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and
of their country. He willed them to remember in what fate it had
been of long time for lack of government, and exercise of justice.
In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and hearty friendfhir,
and to live with one another as members all of one body.- He prayed
God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially
betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and
so ended. The clerk of regilter immediately flood up and aked
them to what matter they would proceed: It was thought necessary,
that the articles of the peace hould be confirmed with the common
consent, for that it was thought necessary to fend them away with speed
into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might
be. The articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day
was appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and
to put their feal to be ent away by a herald, who hall also bring
the ratification again with him. The barons, of whom I have above
written, required an answer to their request; somewhat was said unto
the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom and authority. It
was in the end resolved, that there hould be chosen fix to join with
the lords of the articles, and that if they, after good advertisement,
hould find it right and necessary for the commonwealth, it Ihould be
ratified at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceeded
immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the articles.
The order is, that the lords spiritual chufe the temporal, and the
temporal the spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There were
chosen as in this other paper I have written. This being done, the
lords departed and accompanied the duke, all as far as the Bow
(which is the gate going out of the high reet), and many down
into the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets
founding, and other music such as they have. Thus much I report
unto your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Other folemni-
ties have not been used, saving in times long paRt the lords have had
parliament robes, which are now with them wholly out of use.

THr names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporals as
are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spirituals.

Arran. Erlkine; St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Softerville. The bilhop of the Ies.
Caffils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors I know
Marshall. Hume. not how many.

Morton.

33.

Morton. Livingflon.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Caithness. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Monteith. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons ele&ed to be of the

Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
isles. Argyll. Tillibardine.
Lord James: Mar/hall. Cunninghamhead.
Arbroath. Athole. Lochenvar.
Newbottle. Morion. Pitarow.
Lindoris. Glencairn. Lundy.
Cowper. Ruthven. Ten provosts of the chief
Kinross. Erskine. towns, which also are of
Kilwinning. Boyd. the Articles.
So that with the Subpiior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

Ir were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and

chiefly the affetions of these men, that are at this time chosen lords
of the articles. May it satisfy your hon'.for this time to know that,
by the common opinion ot men, there was not a fubflantialler or more
sufficient number of all forts of men chosen in Scotland these many
years, and of whom men had greater hope of good to ensue. This
present morning, viz. the loth, the 1. of Lidington made me privy
unto your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your
advice. Some hard points there are. He himself is determined not
to go into France. He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh leaf of
that, that moveth him most, which is the example of the last, that
went on a more grateful meflage than he hall carry, and stood on
other terms with theirprince than he doth, and yet your honourknow-
eth what the whole world judgeth.

Petition of the Ljebr Barons to the Parliament, eld Aug. 560.

[Inclosed ia Randolph's letter to Cecil, i 5th Aug. 1 560.

Y
Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and hows, we the

barons and freeholders of this realm, your brethren in Chrilf,

That whereas the causes of true religion, and common well of this
realm, are, in this present parliament, to be treated, ordered, and
established, to the glory of God, and maintenance of the common-
wealth: and we being the greatest number in proportion, where the
laid causes concern, and has been, and yet are ready to bear the
greatelt part of the charges thereuntil, as- well in peace as in war,
both with our bodies and with our goods; and feeing there is no
place where we may do better service now than in general councils

and
s"

and parliaments, in giving our best advice and reason, vote and coun-
cell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue and
punishment of vice, as use and cullom had been of old by ancient ads
of parliament observed in this realm; and whereby we understand that
we ought to be heard to reason and vote in all causes concernin&
the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parliaments; otherwise
we think that whatfomever ordinances and statutes be made concern-
ing us and our ellate, we not being required and uftfrced to reason
and vote at the making thereof, that the fame hould not oblige us to
Hand thereto. Therefore it will plcafe your lordlhips to take con-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born by us,
since we are willing to serve truly to the common well of this realm,
after our eltate, that ye will, in this prefcnt parliament, and all coun-
fells, where the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our
advice, counfcll, and vote, o that, without the fame, your lordships
would susser nothing to be passed and concluded in parliament or
councils aforelaid; and that all ads of parliament made, in times
patl, concerning us for our place and etlate, and in our favour, be
at this present parliament confirmed, approved, and ratified, and ad
of parliament made thereupon. And your iordlhips answer humbly
beseeches.

Of thefuccer s of this petition, thefollovuin.g account isgivev by Ramdolpb ;

Lett. to Cecill, 19 Aug. 1560. The matters concluded and palt by
common consent on Saturday last, in such blemn fort as the first day,
that they afembled, are these: First, that the barons according to an
old a of parliament, made in the time of James I. in the year of
God 1427, hall have.free voice in parliament, this ad passed without
any contradiction.

No. V. (p. ISI.)
A letter of Thomas Randclph, the Engli resident, to the right 'worjhipful

Sir William Cecil, knt. principalfecretaky to the queen's uajeJfy.

L9 Aug. 1561. Cott. Lib. B. o. so. 32.]

HAVE received your honour's letters of the firfl of this month,
written at Ofyes in Effex; and also a letter unto the lord James,.

from his kinsman St. Come out of France, in this they agree both
that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed of her purpose in home
coming. I assure your honour that it will be a flout adventure for a
sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may happen
unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily he may be received
when (he cometh to land of a great number, who are utterly persuaded
that he intendeth their utter ruin, come when he will; the pre-
parence is very small whensoever that he arrive, scarcely any man
can be persuaded that she had any such thought in her head. I have
shown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord
Lidington; they wish, as your honour doth, that he might be flayed
yet for a space, and if it were not for their obedience fake, some of
them care not tho' they never saw her face. They travel what they
can to prevent the-wicked devices of these mischievous purpofrs of

her

t59

her minifiers, but I fear that that will always be found that fiiij hujut
feculi, they do what they can to hand with the religion, and to main-
tain amity with their neighbours; and have also need to look unto
themselves, for their hazard is great, and that they fee there is no
remedy nor safety for themselves, but to repofet hemfelves upon the
queen's majefRy, our fovereigr.'s favour and support. Friends abroad
they have none, or many in whom they may trufi at home. There
are in mind hortly to try what they may be aflured at of the queen's
majetfy, and what they may assuredly perform of that they intend to
offer for their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
things doubteth; this Ihe feeketh by all means to prevent; and hath
caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to charge him that
no such things be attempted before her coming home; for that it is
said, that they too already arrived here outof England for the purpose,
what femblant fomever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved
with their queen's refusal, that cometh far from their, hearts. They
intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I have my answer ready
enough for them. If he trull all Englishmen out of this country,
I doubt not but there will be some of her own that will bear us Come
kindness. Of me {he hall be quit, o soon as it pleafeth the queen's
maiefty my mistress no longer to ue my service in this place. Byfuch
talk, as I have of late had with the lord James and lord of Lidington,
I perceive that they are-of mind that immediately of the next con-
vention, I hall repair towards you with their determinations, and
resolutions, in all purposes, wherein yourhonour's advice is earnerfly
required, and shortly looked for. Whatfomever I desire myself, I
know my will ought to be subjet unto the queen my sovereign's
pleasure, but to contentmyfelf, would God I were so happy as to serve
her majesty in as mean a state as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of her majesty's
service, but because my time and years require some place of more
repose and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also my
insufficience when other troubles in this country arise, or ought hall
be required of me to the advancement of her majeffy's service, that
either my will is not able to compass, or my credit sufficient to work
to that effet, as perchance hall be looked for at my hands. As your
honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, o I trust
that I shall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it
hall Rand with the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this place
unto ome far worthier than I am myself, and in the mean season,
have my course direced by your good advice how I may by my con-
trivance do ome such service, as may be agreeable to her majeffy's
will and pleasure.

TH ESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself.

For the reft, where that is wished that the lords will floutly continue
yet for one month, 1 assure your honour that there is yet nothing
omitted of their old and accuflomed manner of doing, and feeing that
they have brought that unto this point, and should now prevail, they
were unworthy of their lives.

I P s ND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I doubt
more her money than I do her fair words; and yet can I not con-

ceive
36e

teive what great things can be wrought with forty thousand crowns,
and treasure of herown here I know there is no fureor ready means
to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this time un-
written, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy your desire, in know-
ledge of the present ltate of things here. Whatfomever comtb'of
that, he findeth it ever bell, that she come not; but if he ddiOtne,
to let her know, at the first, what ihe Thall find, which is due obe-
dience, and willing service, if (he embrace Christ, and defireto live in
peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you have last received
your honour somewhat underltandeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also
of others, what is determined, he himself to abide their uttermolt, and
other never to leave him unto God have taken his life, and thus to-
gether with what comfort fomever it will please you to give him by
your letters, that the queen's majesty doth not utterly condemn him,
or at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged with by his
own queen, that her mrajefty will not allow her doing. I doubt not
but it will be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others;
his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with England, and
that God will never susser men to be so ungrate, as by any persuasion
to run headlong unto the deftru&iori of them, that have saved their
lives, and reflored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at this
time, to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity
between these two realms that God may be glorified to them of this
world.-At Edenburgh the 9th of August 1561.

No. VI. (p. 157.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to ueesi Mary.

[f6th of Aug. 1561. Paper-office, from a copy.]
To the right excellent, right high, and mighty princesse, our right

dear and well-beloved filter and cousin the queen of Scotland.

IGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princefle, our right dear

Rand right well-beloved filler and cousin, we greet you well. The
Lord of St. Cofme brought to us your letters dated the 8th of. this
present at Abbevile, whereby ye signify, that although by the answer
brought to you by monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had occasion to
have entered into ome doubt of our amity, yet after certain purposes
passed betwixt you and our ambassador, you would assure us of your
good meaning to live with us in amity and for your purpose therein
ye require us to give credit to the said St. Cofme. We have there-
unto thought good to answer as followeth: The fame St Cofme hath
made like declaration unto us on your part, for your excuse in not
ratifying the treaty, as yourself made to our ambassador, and we have
briefly answered to every the fame points, as he can Ihew you: and if
he shall not so do, yet lealf in the mean season you might be induced
to think that your reasons has satisfied us, fomerally we assure you,

* This is the complete paper of which that industrious and impartial collector,

bishop Keith, has pubifhed a fragment, from what he calls his lhattered MS.
154. note (a) 181.

561
U o

tmat

that to our requefis your answer cannot be reputed for a fatisfa&ion,
For we require no benefit of you, but that you will perform your
promise whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the
reffal whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet
*e any thing, but that which is in your own power as queen of Scot-
land, that which yourself in words and speech doth confess, that which
your late hulband's cur good brother's ambassadors and you con-
eluded, that which your own ,nobility and people were made privy
unto, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea that
without which no perfec amity can continue betwixt us, as if it
be indifferently weighed, we doubt not but ye will perceive, allow,
and accomplish. Nevertheless; perceiving by the report of the bringer,
that you mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advice of yourcouncil in Scotland, we arc content to suspend our
conceipt of all unkindn-fs, and do assure y6u that we be fully resolved,
upon this being performed, to unite a sure band of amity, and to live
in neighbourhood with you as quietly, friendly, yea assuredly in
the knot of frindfhip, as we bein the knot of nature and blood. And
herein we be so earnefllv determined, that the world flould fee if the
contrary hould follow (which God forbid), the very occaiion to be
in you and not in us; as the flory witneffeth the like of the king
your father, our uncle, with whom our father fought to have knit a
perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think with you sundry,
wvitneffes of our father's earnell good meaning, and of the error
whereunto divers evil councillors induced, your father; or finally
where it feemeth that report had been made unto you, that we had
sent our admiral to the seas with our navy to impeche your paflge,
both your servants do well underfiand how false that is, knowing for
a truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the seas to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and
almost compelled, by the earnest complaint of the ambassador of our
good brother the king of Spain, made of certain Scottilhmen haunt-
ing our seas as pirates, under pretence of letters of marque, of which
matter also we earnestly require you, at your coming to your realme.
to have some good consideration, and the rather for refpe&t that ought
to be betwixt your realme and'the countries of us, of France, of Spain,
and of the house of Burgundy. And so,. right excellent, right high
and mighty princess, we recommend us to you with most earners re-
quef, not to neglect these our friendly and sisterly offers of friend-

ip, which, before God, we mean and intend to accomplih. Given
under our signet at Heyningham the 6th of August, in the third
year of our reign.

No. V1I. (p. 177.
X letter of RandoliB to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knigkts,

principal ecretary to the queen's majoety.

1 15h of May 1563 Paper-office, from the original.]
O F late, until the arrival ofmonfieur Le Croc, I had nothing wortl

the writing unto your honour.-Before his coming we had' so little
to think upon that we did nothing but pas our time in feasts, banquet-

ting,
3s

ting> making, and running at the ring, and such like. He brought with
him fucia number of letters, and such abundance of news, that, for
the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but to
reading of writings, and of hearing of tales, many so truly reported, that
they might be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the molf assured, I fend
this to your honour as an undoubtful truth, which is, that the
cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a marriage
between his youngest son, the duke of Altruche, and this queen;
wherein he hath so far travelled, that it hath already come unto this
point, that if he find it good, the fame duke will out of hand fend
hither his ambassador, and farther proceed to the consummation
hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, Le Croc is ent unto her with this
,neffage from the cardinal, who hath promised unto the emperor, to
have word again before the end of May; and for this cause Le Croc
is ready for his departure, and his letters writting both day and night.
This queen being beforeadvertifed of his towardnefs, by many means
hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but
would never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her
meaning is, or how lhe is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but
only this man that last arrived, and assuredly until the . of Liding-
ton's return, he will do what he can to keep that secret; and be-
cause resolution in his absence cannot be taken, he will, for this
time, return Le Croc with requelt, to have longer time to devize;
and after, with the molt speed she can, he fully purpofeth to adver-
tize him, I mean, her uncle the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter
the 1. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by some
intelligence that he had before his departure, or since his arrival in
France, divers letters have passed between her grace and him, whereof
as much as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communi-
cated to some, as much as was written in sypher is kept unto them-
selves. Whether also the 1. of Lidington hath had conference with
the Spanilh ambassador in England of this matter, or any like, I leave
it unto your honour's good means, to get true knowledge thereof.
Guesses or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loath to write for
verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor
hath offeped with his son, for this queen's dower, the county of
Tyroll, which is said to be worth 300,000 franks by year. Of this
matter also the rhingrave wrote a letter unto this queen, out of
France not long since. This is all that presently I can write unto
your honour hereof; as I can come by farther knowledge, your
honour (hall be informed.

I H AVE received your honour's writings by the Scottifi man that

last came into these parts' he brought also letters unto this queen
from the 1. of Lidington; their date was old, and contained only the
news of France. I perceive divers ways, that Newhaven is forre
closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know they
will fay as mnch as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth,

canis timidtis fortius latrat.' From hence i do allure them, what
means forever they make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be they

O'o a re

563

are like to receive but small comfort for all their long allie. We flanc
daily in doubt what friendIhip we shall need ourself, except we put
better order unto our misruled papists, than yet we do, or know how
to bring to pass that we may be void of their comber.

To-.Moo ow, the lgth of this inltant, the queen departeth of this

town, towards Edenburgh. If my hap be good, you (hall thoroughly
hear some merry tidings of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednef-
day next he hall be arraigned, and five other priefRs, for their mailing
at Easter las. Thus most humbly I take my leave; at St. Andrews
the sth of May, 1 63.

No. VIII. (p. 183.)
Letter of Randolpb to the right honcurable Sir 'illiam Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's hnajejfy.

[roth of April 1563. Paper-office, from the original in his own hand.]

M AY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, Rowlet, this

MV queen's secretary, arrived here; he reporteth very honetlly of
lhis good usage, he brought with him many letters unto the queen
that came out of France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She re-
ceived from the queen mother two letters, the one contained only the
rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the state of France as then
it was, as in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was
intended or the appealing. of the discords there, not millrufting but
that if reason could not be had at the queen of England's hands, but
that the realm of France should find her ready and willing to support
and defend the right thereof, as by friendship and old alliance between
the two realms he is bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings your honour can

well confider, and by her writings in this fort unto this queen (which
I aftfre your honour is true), you may afluredly know, that nothing
(hall be left undone of her part, that may move debate or controverfie
between this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much mused by the queen herself, how this new kindness

came about, that at this time he received two long letters written all
with her own hand, faying, all the time since her return he never
received half so many lines as were in one of the letters, which I can
myfeIf testify by the Queen's own faying, and other good assurance,
where hitherte I have not been deceived. I can also farther assure
your honour, hat this queen hath fayed that he knoweth now, that
the friendihip of the queen's majesty my sovereign may stand her
more in stead, than that of her good mother in France, and as he is
desirous of them both, to will mhe not lose the one for the other.
I may also farther aure your honour, that whatfomever the occasion
is,' this queen hath somewhat in her heart that will burf out in time,
which will manifest that some unkindness hath palled between them,
that will not be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, she
faith that the queen mother might have used the matter otherwise
than he hath done, and doth much doubt what Ihall be the success of
her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have ler will. Seeing
thea that presently they land in such terms one with the other, I tho't

it
56s

't better to confirm her in that mind (this queen I mean), than to
speak any word that might cause her to conceive better of the other.
And yet I am assured he hall receive as friendly letters, and as
many good words from this queen, as the other did write unto, her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the 1. of Lid-
ington of that purpose he did write unto this queen of, I know not;
but if she do, I think it hard if your honour can get no favour there-
of, at his return, or I perchance by some means here. It may per-
chance be written only by that queen, to try what anfver this queen
will give, or understand what mind he beareth unto the queen's ma-
jefly our fevereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothwell
is ent for to London. She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the
cause; I answered that I knew none other, but that his takers were
in controversy who took him, and that it should be judged tlhre. I
know that he thinketh much that he is not ent into Scotland. It is
yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an
evil instrument. If the lord of Lidington have not been plain with
your honour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his friends
here, but most of all to himself. There comes a vulture in this realm,
if ever that man come again into credit

No. IX. (p. 88.)

The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger fcretaty

for the time, in the parliament olden y ourfovereign the king's mother,
quee,, of this realm for the time, the time of the re/fitution of Umrfuile
-lMatthew earl of Lenox.

Y lords, and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has pleased

V her majefly moll graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth,
ye may have sufficiently conceived the cause of tfiis your present as-
fembly: yet having her majesty's commandment to supply my lord
chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee deceased, I am willed to
express the fame somewhat more at large.

NOTOUR it is, how in her highness's minority, a process of for-

faultour was decreed against my lord of Lennox, for certain offences
alledged committed by him; specified in the dome and cenfement of
parliament given thereupon; by reason whereof he has this long time
been exiled, and absent forth of his native country; how grievous
the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared by divers his suites,
sundry ways brought unto her majesty's knowledge, not only contain-
ing moll humble and due fabmiffion, but always bearing witness of
his good devotion to her majetfy, his natural princess, and earneRs
affection he had to her highnef most humble service, if it hould please
her majelty of her clemency to make him able to enjoy the benefit of
a fubje&; many refpeds might have moved her highness favourably
to incline to his request, as the anciency of his house, and the firname
he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her majelty by affinity, by
reason of my lady Margaret, her highness's aunt, and divers other
his good considerations, as also the affecuous request of her good
filter the queen's majesty of England, whose earnest commendation

was

565

was not of least moment, besides that of her own natural, her majeity
has a certain inclination to pity the dccav of noble houses, and as we
heard, by her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be the
instrument of the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the an-
cient blood, than to have matter ministered of the decay or overthrow
of any good race. Upon this occasion, her majelly the more tenderly
looked upon his reqnefl, and her good filler the queen of England's
favourable letter, written for recommendation of his cause, in confi-
deration whereof not only has Ihe granted unto him her letter of re-
flitution, by way of grace, but also licensed him to pursue, by way
of reduction, the remedies provided by the law for such as think
themselves grieved by any judgment, norderly led, and to have the
process reverted; for examination whereof, it has pleased her majesty
presently to assemble you the three estates of this her realme, by whose
advice, deliberation, and decision at her majelly's mind, to proceed
forward upon his complaints, as the merits of the cause, laws of the
realme, and practice observed in such cafes, will bear out. The fum
of all your proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard,
thus as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have
in hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far differ-
ent from the fame subjet, wherein I would extend the circumifances
more largely. If I feared not to offend her highness, whose presence
and modest nature abhors long speaking and adulation, and so will
compel me to speak such things, as may seem to tend to any good
and perfec point; and left it hould be compted to me, as that I were
oblivious, if I should omit to put you in remembrance, in what part
we may accept this, and the like demonrlrations of her gentill nature;
whose gracious behaviour towards all her fubjedts, in general, may
serve for a good proof of that felicity, we may look for under her happy
government so long as it hall please God to grant her unto us; for a
good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices between the
prince and the fubjecs must be reciproque; as by her majesty's pru-
dence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign nations, and quiet-
ness among yourselves, in such fort, that I think jutily it may be as-
firmed Scotland, in no man's age, that presently lives, was in greater
tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubje.& to acknow-
ledge the fame as a mol high benefit, proceeding from the good go-
vernment of her ma.eltv, declaring ourselves thankful for the fame,
and rendering to her majesty such due obedience, as a jult prince
may ;3ok so a the hands of faithful and obedient fubjets. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her nature does do-
test, but fuc as proceeds from the contemplation of her model kind
of regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof.
A good proof have we all in general had of her majelty's benignity
these three years, that she has lived in the government over you, and
many of you have largely talted of her large liberality and frank
dealing; on the other part her highness has had large appearance of
your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continue, as we have
begun, in consideration of the many notable examples of her cle-
mency above others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest all
false bruies and rumours, which are the most pestilent evils that can

be
S66

be in any common weill, and the sowers and inventors thereof. Then
may we be well assured to have of her an molt gracious princesse, and
fne most faithful and loving subje&s; and so both the head and the
members, being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
the politic bodies, whereof I made mention before, as the glory there-
of hall partly appertain to her majefly, so hall no small praise and
unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all universally
her fubjeCs,

No. X. (p. 9+.)
sher perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to comw fol-

low, to the queen's majesty of England, and fate of this realm, upon
the marriage of the queen of Scots to the lord Darley.

IR S T, the minds of such as be affeced to the queen of Scots,
either for herself or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown,

or for the desire to have change of the forme of religion in this realm,
or for the difcontentation they have of the queen's majesty, or her
fucceflion, or of the succession of any other beside the queen of Scots,
fiall be, by this marriage, ereted, comforted, and induced to de-
vise and labour how to bring their desires to pass; and to make some
estimate what persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the dan-
ger may be weighed; the fame may be compassed in those forts either
within the realme or without.

TH first are such as are specially devoted to the queen of Scotts,

or to the lord Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as grit, all the
house of Lorrain and Guise for her part, and the earl of Lennox and
his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their blood, and have received
displeasures by the duke of Chatelherault and the Hamiltons. The
second are all manner of persons, both in this realme and other
countries that are devoted to the authority of Rome, and millike of
the religion now received; and in these two forts are the substance of
them comprehended, that hall take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles these kind
of men shall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires is, and al-

ways lhall be, to bring the queen of Scotts to have the royal crown of
this realm: and therefore, though the devisers may vary amongst
themselves for the compassing hereof, according to the accidents of
the times, and according to the impediments which they hall find by
means of the queen's majesty's actions and governments, yet all their
purpoles, drifts, devises, and practices, hall wholly and only tend to
make the queen of Scotts queen of this realm, and to deprive our so-
vereign lady thereof; and in their proceedings, there are two man-
ners to be confidered, whereof the one is far worse than the other;
the one is intended by them, that either from malicious blindness in
religion, or for natural affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord
Darley, do persuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts hath
presently more right to the crown than our sovereign lady the queen,
of which fort be all their kindred on both fides, and all such as are
4evoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-

where;

S67

uhere; the other is meant by them, which, with less malice are per-
feaded that the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the next heir to
succeed the queen's majeffy and her issue, of which fort few are with-
out the realm, but here within, and yet of them, not so many as are
of the contrary, and from these two forts flall the peril, devises, and
practices proceed. From the fireI, which imagine the queen of Scotts
to have perpetually right are to be looked for these perils. First, is
it to be doubted the devil will infect ome of them to imagine the
hart of the life of our dear sovereign lady, by such means as the devil
hall fuggeff to them, although it is to be assuredly hoped, that Al-
mighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously protet and preserve
her from such dangers? Secondly, there will be attempted, by per-
suasions, by bruits, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds
of good subje&s from the queen's majesty, and to conciliate them to
the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers and the north will
be much solicited and labored. Thirdly, there will be attempted causes
of some tumults and rebellions, especially in the north towards Scot-
land, so as thereupon may follow some open enterprise set by violence.
Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's council and friends, a
new league made with France, or Spain, that hall be offenive to
this realm, and a furtherance to their title. And as it is also very
likely, that they will set a foot as many praEtices as they can, both
upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majefly to
increase and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being
nighty or potent, and for the attempting of all these things, many
devies will be imagined from time to time, and no negligence will
therein appear.

FiOM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen

of Scotts, but that he iCould succeed in title to the queen's majesty,
is not much to be feared, but that they will content themselves to fee
not only the queen's majefly not to marry, and so to impeach it, but
to hepe, that the queen of Scotts hall have issue, which they will
think to be more pleafable to all men, because thereby the crowns of
England and Scotland hall be united in one, and thereby the occa-
sion of war fiall cease; with which persuasion many people may be
f-duced, and abused to incline themselves to the part of the queen of
Scotts.

THE remedies againit there perils.

A Duplicat.

'l J.iary of the eonfiatation and ad-vice gi-en Ay the lords and others of

.·ie pri'y cuncil, clleed cut of the sundry andjveralfpeeches of the
liad counj;lIcrs.

[4th of june 1565. Cott. Lib. Cal. b to. fol. g9o.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Ea of Bedford, Cave,

Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason,
Lord Chamberlain,

Quelfions
.6S

Questions propounded were these two.

I. TIRST, what perils might ensue to the queen's majesty, or this

F realm, of the marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts, and the

lord Darnley.
2. WHAT were meet.to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the First.

THE perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some
counsellors into only one.

1. F RST, That by this marriage, the queen of Scotts (being not
married), a great number in this realm not of the worlt subjects
might be alienated in their minds from their natural duties to her ma-
jefly, to depend upon the success of this marriage of Scotland, as a
mean to establish the (uccefilon of both the crowns in the issue of the
fame marriage, and lo favour all devises and pracices, that hould
tend to the advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. SECONDLY, That confidering the chief foundation of them
wlhich furthered the marriagc of lord Darnley, was laid upon the trust
of such as were papists, as the only means left to restore the religion
of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scot-
land, the papills would most favour, maintain, and fortify this mar-
riage of the lord Darnley, and would, for furtherance of faction in
religion, devise all means and practices that could be within this realm,
to disturb the eflate of the queen's majesty, and the peace of the
realm, and consequently to atchieve thefc purposes by force rather
than fail. By some other, there perils having indeed many branches,
were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, into two forts, and these
were in nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one front
the other, but were knit and linked together, naturally for maintain-
ing the one with the other. The first of these fort of perils was, that,
by this marriage with the lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to
further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not only to fcceed
the queen's majesty, as in her best amity she had profefled, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when she was in power, lhe did ma-
nifelly declare.

TH E second was, that hereby the Romish religion hould be erected,

and increased daily in this realm, and these two were just knit toge-
ther, that the furtherance and maintenance of the title staid, in fur-
thering of the religion of Rdme within the realm; and in like manner
the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title, for otherwise
the title had no foundation.

PROOFS of the firfl.) And to prove that the intention to advance

the title to disturb the queen's majesty, must needs ensue, was confi-
dered that always the intention and will of any person is molt ma-
nifeft, when their power is greatest, and contrary when power is small,
then the intention and will of every person is covered and less seen.
So as when the queen of Scotts ower was greatest, by her marriage
with the dauphin of France, being afterwards French king, it ma-
nifeftly appeared of what minds he and all her riends were, using

then

569

then n'ar.ife:'ly .ll the rreans that could be devised to impeach and
dispossess the qucen', mane cyv, firl by writing and publilhing herself
in all countries qneen of England ; by granting charters, patents, and
cornmillons, wi:th th:t !vle, and with the arms of England, both
the French and Scott, vwhich charters remain still undefaced; and to
prosecute it with eecr, it is known what preparations of war were
made, and sent into Scota!nd; and what oher forces were afrembled
in foreign countries; yea, in whit manner a hameful peace was
made by the French with king Philip to employ all the forces of
France to pursue all the matters by force which God's providence
and the queen's majesty contrary power, were repelled; and after.
wards, by her husband's death, her fortune and power being changed,
the intention began to hide itself, and although by the Scottih queen's
commiffaries an accord was made at Edenbrough, to reform all those
titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this dav, by delays and ca-
viliations, the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
so now, as oon as she hall feel her power, he will set the fame again
abroad, and by corfidering of such errors as were committed in the
firl, her friends and allies will amend the fame, and proceed fubltan-
tially to herpurpoie. By ome it was thought plainly, that the peril
was greater of this marriage with the lord Darnlev, being a fubjett
of this realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for by this,
he being of this realm, and having for the cause of religion, and
other refpecs, made a party here, should encreafe by force with di-
minution of the power of the realm; in that whatsoever power he
could make by the faction of the papist, and other discontented per-
sons here, hould be as it were deduaed out of the power of this
realm; and by the marriage of a 1iranger, lhe could not be assured of
any part here; so as by this marriage he should have a portion of
her own power to serve her turn, and a frall portion of adversaries
a home in our own bowels, always seem more dangerous than treble
the like abroad, whereof the examples are in our own flories many,
that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm, but with the help
of some at home. It was a!so remembered, that feeing how before
this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifetly seen, that in
every corner of the realm, the fastion that molt favoureth the Scot-
tifh title, is grown stout ad bold, yea seen manifestly in this court,
both in ha!l and chamber, it could not be but (except good heed
were fpeediiy given to it) by this marriage, and by the practice of
the fautors thereof, the fame faction would shortly encreafe, and grow
so great and dangerous, as the redress thereof would be almost def-
prae. And to this prpofe it was remembered, how of late in pe-
r- -g of tne fubflSrlce of the jftice of the peace, in all the countries
.i t.e realm, icantiv a thi-d was found fully alfured to be trufled in
r-e matter of religion, upon which only firing the queen of Scotts
.:i:e dr:h hang, and some doubt might be, that the friends of the
*arl of Lennox, and his had rord knowledge hereof than was
*hought, and thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their party
.-as so great in England as the queen's majelty durt not attempt to

nrirary his marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of the perils
:.. --rzd, being rotwithltnding more largely and plainly set out, and

made
,.j
o-0

made so apparent by any sure arguments, as no one of the council
could deny them to be but many and very dangerous.

Second QeRfion.

THE queflion of this consultation was what were meet to be done
to avoid these perils, or else to divert the force thereof from hurting
the realm ? wherein there were a great number of particular devises
propounded; ad yet the more part of them was reduced by ome
into three heads.

I. THE firfl thought peceffary by allperfons, as the only thing of

the mol moment and deficacy, to remedy all these perils, and many
others, and such as without it no other remedy could be found fuffi-
cient, and that was to obtain that the queen's majesty would marry,
and make therein no long delay.

z. THE second was to advance, eftablifl, and fortify indeed the

profession of religion, both in Scotland and in England, and to di-
minifh, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

3. T aE third was, to proceed on sundry things, either to difappoine
and break this intended marriage, or, at the leaf, thereby to procure
the fame not to be so hurtful to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE firit of these three hath no particular rights in it, but an

earnet and unfeigned desire and suite, with all humbleness, by prayer
to Almighty God, and advice and. council to the queen's majefly,
that she would defer no more time from marriage, whereby the good
fubjets of the realm might fay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jelly, and the issue of her body, without which no surety can be de-
vised to ascertain any person of continuance of their families or pote-
rities, to enjoy that which otherwie hould come to them.

SEcoND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both truth

and policy were joined together, had these particulars.

FIiST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, in the realm,

have taken occasion to comfort and increase their facion, both in
England, Scotland, and abroad with a rumour and expecation that
the religion shall be shortly changed in this realm, by means that the
bishops, by the queen's majesty commandment, have of late dealt
ftreightly with some persons of good religion, because they had for-
born to wear certain apparel, and such like things; being more of
form and accidents, than of any fahfbance, for that it is well known that
her majesty had no meaning to comfort the adversaries, but only to
maintain an uniformity as well in this external as in the fubctance,
nor yet hath any intention to make any change of the religion as it
is established by laws. It was thought by all men very necessary for
the suppressing of the pride and arrogancv of the adversaries, indi-
re&ly hereby to notify, by her special letters to the two archbishops,
that her former commandment was only to retain an uniformity, and
not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her majesty,
in the change of any part of religion, but that she did determine
firmly to maintain the form of her religion, as it was eftabliihed, and to
punish such as did therein violate her laws. And in these points,
some also wished that it might please her archbishops, that if they
should fee that the adveifaries continued in taking occasion to fortify

their

571

their factinn, that in that cafe they should use a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which time, some good, uniform, and
decent order might be devised, and established, for such ceremonies, so
as both uniformity and gravity might be retained amongst the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondam bilhops, and others,

which had refused to acknowledge the queen's majeltv's power over
them, according to the law, and were of late dispersed in the plague
time to sundry places abroad, where it is known they cease not to ad.
,ance their fation, might be returned to the Tower, or ome other
prison, where they might not have fach liberty to seduce and inveigle
the queen's majesty fubjeds, as they daily do.

TH E third means was, that vhere the bishops do complain that they

dare nor execute the ecclefialtical laws, to the furtherance of reli-
gion, for fear of the premunire wherewith the judges and lawyers
of the realm, being not best asseted in religion, do threaten them,
and in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
cafes opened, some inconvenient authority might be given them, from
the queen's majelty, to continue during herpleafure.

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and un-

lawful books in English brought from beyond seas, apd are boldly
received, read, and kept, and especially in the North, seducing of
great numbers of good fubjeAs, the like boldness whereof was never
suffered in any other princess's time, that some ftreight order might
be given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the
judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to maintain such books,
made direftly againit her majefy's authority, and maintaining a so-
reign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryars, and

such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in Eng-
land, especially in the North, as curates.of churches, and all such
of them as are not found hones and conformable, may be banished
out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in tht
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings, are on the

other fide the ea, and from thence maintain sedition in the realm;
that livings may be better bellowed, to the commodity of the realm,
upon good fubjeos.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no small au-

thority in this realm, in governance of all property of the realm,
might be sworn to the queen's majesty, according to the laws of the
realm, and so thereby they hould for conscience fake maintain the
queen's majesty's authority.

T E particulars of the third intention to break and avoid this mar-
riage, or to divert the perils.

Si RST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do

it, but force, or fear of force, it i thought by some that these means
tollowing might occasion the breach of the marriage.

i. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
5. THAT the garrison be there increased.

4. THAT

4. THAT all-the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed,
to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl

of Salop, or such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieutenant-ge-
neral in the North.

6. TH AT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness, to
serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

7. THAr presently lady Lennox be committed to some place,
where he may be kept from giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. 'HAT the earl of Lennox and his on may be sent for, and re-
cuired to be sent home by the queen of Scots, according to the
treaty; and if they (hall not come, then to denounce to the queen of
Scots the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter wrih hotility ;
by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in
deeds and not in' flews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the
least that it may be qualified fiom many perils; and whatsoever i to
be done herein, is to be executed with speed, whilt fl:; has a party in
Scotland that favoureth not the marriage, and before any league made
by the queen of'Scots with France or Spain.

SOME other allows well of all these proceedings, saving of proceed-
ing to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and also to these particu-
hrities following.

to. THAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's refusing,
Ihould be seized, and bellowed in gift or cuflody, as hall please her
majelty, upon good fubjeds.

t1. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or

elsewhere, be inquired for, and that they be, by sundry means, well-
looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have the iteward-

fIip of the queen's majetly's lands there, and that no person, deferv-
ing millruft, be suffered to have governance or rule of any of her sub-
jess or lands in the North, but only to retain their fees, and more
trusty persons have rule of the fame people's lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scot-

land, be restrained to all Scottish men, saving such as have safe con-
du&, or be especially recommended from Mr. Randolph, as fa-
vourers of this realm.

14. THAT some intelligence be nsed with such in Scotland, as fa-
vour not the marriage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majesty's houhold, chamber, and pen-
fioners be better een Onto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used
by sundry against the state of the realm.

16. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lennoy, Mr. Charles.
be remembered to some place where he may be forthcoming.

17. THAT confidering the fa&ion and title of the queen of Scotts

hath now of long time received great favour, and continued, by the
queen's majesty's favour herein to the queen of Scotts and her ministers,
and the lady Catharine, whom the said queen of Scotts accompted
as a competitor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
queen's majesty, by some exterior a, to hew some remifion of her
displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford,' that the queen of

Scotts

Scotts thereby may find ome change, and her friends put in doubt ot
further proceeding therein.

-i8. THAT whosoever hall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph
Sadler may accompany him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to
a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that these advices being confidered by her ma.

jelly, it may please her to choose which of them he liketh, and to pur
them in execution in deeds, and not to pass them over in consultations
and speeches.

FOR it is to be asured, that her adversaries will ue allmeans to put

their intention in execution. Some by practice, some by force, when
time fiall serve, and no time can serve so well the queen's majelly to
interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before the queen of Scott
purposes be fully fettied.

No. XI. (p. 2zo.)
Randelpb to bte earlof Lei efier,from Edinburgb the 3 ift. of Jly 1565.

[Cot!. Lib. Cal. b. ix. fol. 16. An original ]

AY it please your lordlhip, I have received your lordship's letter
by my servant, fuficient testimony of your lordlhip's favour to-

wards me, whereof I think myself always so aiared, that what other
miihap soever befal me, I have enough to comfort myself with;
though I have not at this time received neither according to the need
I stand, nor the neceflity of the service that I am employed in, I will
rather pats it, as I may with patience, than trouble your loidship to
be further futer for me, when there is so little hone that any good will
be done for me. I doubt not but your lordfllip hath heard by such
information as I have given from hence, what the present ltate of this
country is, how this queen is now become a married wife, and her
hulband, the self-same day of his marriage, made a king. In their
desires, hitherto, they have found o much to their contentment, that
if the reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think them-
selves much happier, than there is appearance that they (hall be; so
many discontented minds, so much mifliking of the fubjets to have
these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be brought to pats I
never heard of any marriage; so little hope, so little comfort as men
do talk, was never seen, at any time, when men lhould moll have
ihewed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her own honour
and well of her country had been had as appertained in so weighty
acafe. This is now their fear, the overthrow of religion, thebreach
of amitie with the queen's majesty, and the deftruaion of as many
of the nobility as he hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
quarrel unto. To fee all these inconveniencys approaching, there are
a good number that may sooner lament with temfelves, and complain
to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them, ome
attempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any
ood, what is required otherways, or what means there is made your
rdthip knoweth; what will be answered, or what will be done
therein, we are in great doubt, and though your intent be never so

good

good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our ruin hall
prevent your support when council is once taken. Nothing so need-
ul, as speedy execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly
depend; in her majesty's hands it standeth to save our lives, or to susser
us to perish; greater honour her majelty cannot have, than in that
which lieth in her majeily's power to do for us; the ums are not great,
the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will dayly
be found, tho' this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though,
at this time, I think her majelly hali lose but few; her friends here
being once taken away, where will her majesty find the like; I speak
leat of that which I think is molt earnefily intended by this queen,
and her huffand, when by him it was lately said, that he cared more
for the papists in England, than he did for the protestants in Scotland;
if therefore, his hopes be so great in the papilts of England what
may your lordflip believe that he thinketh of the protestants there;
for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to
tie queen my mitrcis, if in preferring those that are the queen's
majeflies worst fubjeds to those that are her bell, he declareth what
mind he beareth to the queen's majesty's self, any man may fay it
is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten; he would now
seem to be indifferent to both the religions, he to use her mass, and
he to come sometimes to the preaching; they were married with all
the folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mass;
his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to
the world that he were of some religion; his words to all men, againit
whom he conceiveth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud
and fpitefull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the world, than he
that, not long since, we have seen and known the lord Darnley; he
looketh now for reverence of many that have little will to give it
him; and ome there are that do give it, that think him little worth
of it. All honour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife,
he hath it wholly and fully; all praises that may be spoken of him,
he lacketh not from herself; all dignities that he can indue him
with, which are already given and granted; no man pleafeth her
that contenteth not him; and what may I fay more, he hath given
over to him her whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself best
liketh; she can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is againfi
his will, as your lordship may with me to persuade that I (hould hang
myself; this last dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king,
Lhe would have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or
he had been himself z years of age, that things done in his name
might have the better authority. He would, in no cafe, have it de-
ferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt is
risen amongst our men of law, whether he being clad with a huband,
and her husband not twenty-one years, any thing without parliament
can be of firength, that is done between them; upon Saturday at
afternoon, there matters were long in debating. And before they
were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three heralds, at
found of the trumpet he was proclaimed king. This was the night
before the marriage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the
lords, all that were in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of

him

575

him again, where no man said so much as Amen, saving, his father
that cried out aloud God save his queen. The manner of the mar.
riage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and
fix, {he was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell; he had
upon her back the great mourning gown of black, with the great
wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that, which she wore the doul-
full day of the burial of her husband: he was led into the chapell,
by the earle of Lennox and Athol, and there was Ihe left until her
hulband came. ho allo was conveyed by the fame lords, the minifier
p-iefts, tt o, do there receive them, the bands are asked the third
rime, ard an initrument taken by a notour that no man said againfr
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not proceed.
The words were spoken. the rings which were three, the middle a
ricb diamond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and
r.anv pravers said over them, she tarried out the mass, and he taketh
a kifs, and eaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whither
within a space he followeth; and being required, according to the
-blemnit, to cast off her cares and leave aside those sorrowful gar-
ments, and give herlelf to a more pleasant life, after ome pretty
refufall, more I believe for manner fake than grief of heart, she suffered
them that flood by, every man that could approach, to take out a pin,
and so being committed to her ladies, changed her garments, but went
to bed, to fignifie to the world, that it was not lust that moved them
to marry, but only the necessity of her country, not, if God will, long
to leave it defitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given
of all things to make the worlf, wonld that it Ihould be believed, that
they k.ew each other before that they came there: I would not your
lordship hould so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to the contrary
that if it were pofiible to fee such an a& done, I would not believe it.
After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and dancing: to
their dinner they were conveyed by the whole nobility: the trumpet
sonnd; alargefs cried: monv thrown about the house in great abun-
dance, to fich as were happy to get any part; they dine both at
one table, e upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Athole
fewer, Morton carver, Craufoord cup-bearer; these serve him in like
offices, earls Eglington, Caffelb, and Glencairn; after dinner they
danced a while, and then retired themselves till the hour of supper;
and as they dined so do they sup, some dancing there was, and so they
go. to bed: of all this I have written to your lordship I am not
oculatus teflis, to this, but of the verity your lordship hall riot need to
doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was sent for to have been at the
supper, but like a currish or uncourtly carl I refused to be there;
and vet that which your lordlhip may think might move me much,
to have had the fight of my mifEreft, of whom these eighteen daysby
just account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by all that fort as
a very evil person, which in my heart I do well allow, and like of
mvielf the better, for vet can I not find either honell or good that
liketh their doings. I leave at this time further to trouble your lord-
snip, craving pardon for my long silence. I have more ado than I am
able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night than by day, and
the day too little to discharge myself of that which I conceive, or

receive

receive In the night. As your lordship, I am sure, is partaker of
such letters as I write to Mr. Secretary, so that I truR that he hall
be to this, to save me of a little labour, to write the fame again,
mot humbly I take my leave at Edinburghi the las day of Jult
1565,

No. XII. (p. 2o3.)

Letter of the earl f Bedford to the honourabl Sir Wlliam Cecil nt,

her majefy's principal ecretary, nd one of her highnesss' privy
. council.

- [ad of Sept. I S65. Paper-office, from the origial.]
AFTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon captain

Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the queen's

majesty's letters, containing her full refolutidn and pleasure for all
things he had in charge to give information of, favirig that or the
aid of the lords of the congregation there is nothing determined,
or at the least expressed in the fame letters, and for that purpose
received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the
earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to be holpen with
300 harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better defence,
And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and the
queen's majesty our fovereigh's good will, and care towards them;
and do also underhand that it were very requisite to have them
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner decided,
and that it now Rfandeth upon their utter overthrow and undoing,
since the queen's party is at the least 5ooo, and they not much above

0oo0; besides, that the queen hath harquebufyers, and they havd

none, and do yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle should
bring to them. who is not yet joined with theirs; I have thereupon
thought good to pray you to be a means to learn her majesty's
pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I liall anfwver them, or
otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their extreme necefity.
For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
and the miserable subversion of religion there; and, on the other
fide, to adventure so great and weighty a matter as this is (albeit
it be but of a few soldiers, for a fall time), without good war-
raunte, and thereby to bring, peradventure, upon our heads some
wilful warrs, and in the mean time to leave the place unfurnihed,
(having in the whole but 8oo,) without any grant of new supply
for the fame; and by what means also, to leave the marches here
the more subjef to invasion, while in the mean season new helps
are preparing; to this know not I whatto fay or how to do. And
so much more I marvel thereof, as that having so many timed
written touching this matter no resolute determination comethj
And so between the writing, and looking for answer, 'the occasion
cannbtpafs, but mut needs proceed and havefuccefs. God turn
it to his glory, but surely all mens reason hath great cause to fear
it. Such a pulh it is now come unto, as this little supply would
do much good toadvance God's honour, to continue hermajeRly'
great and careful memory of them, and to preserve a great many

Pp noblemen

s7

noblemen and gentlemen. If it be not now holpen, it s gone
for ever. Your good will and affedtion that way I do nothing
miftruff, and herein shall take such good advice as by any means I
can. I received from these lords two papers inclosed, the effeft
whereof f.all appear unto you. For those matters that captain
Brickwellbrought, I hall anfver you by my next, and herewith
fend vou two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day.
By him you shall hear that the proteflants are retired from Eden-
borough, further off. So I hope your resolution for their aid
lhall come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now
so presently need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you
to God. From Berwick, this ad of Sept. 565.

No. XIII. (p. 20o3.)
Tbe quren to the earl of Bedfird.

[l Sept. 5 6;. Paper-office.]

PON the advertisements lately received from you, with such
U things as came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Ran-

dolph, and upon the whole matter well confidered, we have thus
determined. We will, with all the speed that we can, fend to you
3ooo . to be thus used. If you stall certainly underhand that the
earl of Murrav hath such want of money, as the imprefling to him
of Icco1. might sand him in fead for the help to defend himself,
you hall presently let him secretly to undertand, that you will,
as of yourself, let him have so much, and so we will that you let
him have, in the most secret fort that you can, when the said fum
shall come to you, or if yon can, by any good means, advance
him some part thereof beforehand.

TH P other 2oco 1. you shall caafe to be kept whole, unspent,

if it be not that you shall fee necefary cause to imprest some part
thereof to the now numbers of the 600 footmenand Toohorfemen;
or to the casting out of wages of such workmen, as by sickness,
or otherwise, ought to be discharged. And where we perceive,
by your sundry letters, the earner request of the said earl of Murray
and his aflociates, that they might have, at the lea, 3oo00 of our
soldiers, to aid them. And that you also write, that tho' we would
not command you to give them aid, yet if we would but wink at
your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such
things, as you with the help of others Ihould bring about, you
doubt not but things would do well; you shall underfand for a truth,
that we have no intention, for many refpecs, to maintain any
other princes subje&s, to take arms againfi their sovereign; neither
would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make wars
betwixt us and that prince, which has caused us to forbear, hitherto.
to give you any power to let them be aided with any men. But
now, confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwithstand-
ing their humble fubmiflion, and offer to be ordered and tried by
law and justice, which being refused to them, they are retired
to Dumfrefe, a place near our weft marches, as it feemeth there
to defend themselves, and adding thereunto the good intention that
presently the French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to

join

jdin with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen,
and to induce her to forbear - this manner of violent and rigorous
proceeding against her fubjees, for which purpose the French am-
baflador here with us has lately written to that queen, whereof
anfver is daily looked for; to the intent in the mean time the said
lords should not be oppressed and ruined for lack of fonme help to
defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you mall feeit
necessary for their defence, to let them (as of your own adventure,
and without notifying that you have any direcion therein from
us) to have the number of three hundred soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out. of all your bands, as
you shall fee cause. And to cover the matter thebetter, you mhall
fend there numbers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to
defend that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you
shall fee cause to direct of, the fame numbers; or any of them,
may mod covertly repair to the (aid lords, when you shall expressly
advertize, that you fend them that aid only for their defence, and
not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any thing
that may offend her person, wherein you lhall o precisely deal
with them, that they may perceive your care to be such as if it
should otherwise appear, your danger mhould be so great, as all the
friends you have could not be able to save you towards us. And so
we assure you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to pro-
ceed with them; for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin,
we do not yield to give them aid of money or men: And yet we
would not that either of there were known to be our ats but ra-
ther to be covered with your own desire' and attempt,

No. XIV. (p. 209.
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7tb Feb. 1565-6.

[An original]

MY humbly duty confidered; what to write of the present Rate
lI of the country I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily altera-
tions of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower than other-
wife I would. Within these few days there was ome good hope,
that this qeeen would have hewed ome favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin moiuld have returned unto them with com-
fort upon some conditions. Since that time, there are come out
of France Clernau by land, and Thorneton by sea; the one from
the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glaigow. Since whose
arrival neither can there be word gotten nor appearance of any
good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majesty our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the
croun of England. I write of this nothing less than I know,
that lhe hath spoken. And by all means that she thinketh the belt
doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately devised
in which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the
duke of Savoy, with divers princes of Italy, and the queen mo-
ther fufpeaed to be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry

P p a throughout

throughout Chriltiandom; this band was sent out of France by
Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof re-
maining with her, and the,principal to be returned very hortlie,
as I hear, by Mr. Stephen Wilson, a fit minister for such a de-
viliih devise; if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that hall be
lent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun
upon Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and her hulband,
but not long; the next day he held long conferences with them
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof they in-
treated. I cannot fpcak with any that hath any hope that there
will be any good done fr the lords by him, thoughit is said that
he hath very good will to do so to the uttermost of his power.
He is lodged-near to the court, and liveth upon the queen's charges.
Upon Sunday, the order is given, whereat means made to many
to be present that day at the mas.. Upon Candlemas day there
carried their candles, with the queen, her hulband, the earl of
Lennox, and earl Athol; divers otherlords have been called to-
gether and requiredto be at the mass that day, fome-have promised,
as Caffefs, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs. Qthershave refused,
as Fleming, Levingfton, Lindsay, Hundy and Bothel; and of
them all Bothelis the stoutest, but worst thought of; itwas moved
in council that mats hould have been in St. Giles church which
I believe was rather to tempt men's minds, than intended indeed:
She was of late mined again to fend Robert Melvin to negotiate
with such as fme trufeth in amongR the queen's majesty's subje&s,
of whose good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than
the truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not in time
to be ware, and provide for the worst; some in that country are
thought to be privie unmo the bands and confederacie of which
have written, where of I am sure there is some things, tho' per-
chance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers
quarles, contentions, and debates, nothing so much fought as to
maintain mischief and disorder. David yet retaineth ill his
place, not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to
io any good o rmy lord of Argyll, and. it is said that hall be the
Srit voyage that ihe will make after e is delivered of being with
child; the bruit is common that (he is, but hardly believed of
many, and of this, I can assure you, that there have of late ap-
peared some tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (p. za4z.
Part of a etter from te earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph to

tie lrds of the eouscil of Englandfrom Barwict, 7th of March
s565. it riginal ixtbt CottonLibrary, Caligula b. o.fol. 372.

E[lth March 566.]

May it please your Honours,
EARING of so mayniematters as we do, and fyndinge such
varietie in the reports, we have myche ado to decerne the

veritie: which maketh us the lower and loother to put any thing
in wryting, to the encnte we wold nt that your honours, and

br

by you the queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, hould not be adver.
tifed but of the verie tfothe as we can possibly. To this end we
thought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edenbourgh
at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke there with diverse,
and after that with the queen's self and her hulband conforme to
that, which we have learned by others, and know by this reporte,
we fend the fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there
present and affyRers unto these that were executors of the ate.

THIS we fynde for certain, that the queen's hufban4 being en-

tered into a vehement suspicion of David, that by him some thynge
was committed which was moRl agayaft the queen's honour, and
not to be borne of his perte, fyrft communicated his mynde to
George Duglas, who fynding his sorrows so great fought all the
means he coulde to put some remedie to his greff; and communi-
cating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's command-
ment, no other waye coulde be found then that David should be
taken out of the waye. Wherein he was so earnef and daylye
pressed the fame, that no refte coulde be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton,
and Lorde Lindfaye hould be made privie to th' intente that theie
might have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to afemble so mayny, as theie thought (ufficient
againt the tyme, that this determination of theirs hould be put
in executione whichwas determined the ixth of this inftante 3 daies
afore the parliament hould begyne, at which tyme the fayde lords
were assured that the erles Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and their
complyces fholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not be
persuaded through this means to be their ftiends; who for the de-
fyre he had that this intent should take effet th' one waye, was
content to yielde, without all difficultie to t'other, with this con-
dition, that theie mhould give their consents, that he might have
the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee these things
he saw, and were daylye brought to his eares, that he daylye
prefled the said lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer delay:
and to the intent that myght manifefte unto the world, that he ap-
proved the ate was content to be at the doing of that himself.

UPON Saturday at night neire unto v of the clock the king

conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglas, and two
others, throwe his own chamber by the'privy stayers up to the
queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about xl
foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at
the which theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Argile,
and David with his capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there'
cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who willed David to come
forth, faying, that was no place for him. The queen taid, that
it was her will. Her howfband anfwerede, that yt was againftl
her honoure. The lord Ruthen said, that he ihould lerne better
his deutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm, David
took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put himself behind
the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him: But the king having
his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was thrut out of

the

8 '

the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of prefens,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, wha intending that
night to have reserved hym, and the next day to hang him, so
mane being about him, that bore him evil will, one thrust him
into the boddie with a dagger, and aftar hym a great many others,
so that he had in his bodie above wounds. It is told for cer-
tain that the king's own dagger was left flicking in him. Whea-
therhe Ituck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He was not
flayne in the queen's prefens, as was said, but going down the
flayres out of the chamber of prefens.

TH E RE remayned a long tyme with the queen her howfband and

the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great interceflion, that
he lhold have no harm. She blamed greatlee her howfband that
was the a&or of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did answer,
that David had more companie of her boddie than he for the space
of two months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his consent that he Ihould be taken away. " It
is not" (faythe fne) " the woman's part to seek the hulband,"
and therefore in that the fault was his own. He said that when he
came, Ihe either wold not or made herself ick. " Well," faythe
the, " you have taken your last of me and your farewell.' Then
were pity, faith the lord Ruthen, he is your majesty's hulband
and must yield dutie to each other. " Why may I not,' faythe
she, leave him as well as your wife did her huband ?" Other
have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that the was lawfully
divorced fom her hulband, and for no such cause as the king
found himself greve. Befydes this man was mean, baffe, enemie
to the nobility, hame to her, and deftru&ion to herself and coun-
try. " We'l," faythe hBe, " that hall be dear blude to some of
c' you, yf his he fpyl." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen:
for the more your grace ho.w yourself offended, the world will
judge the worse.

HE husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weep-

eth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and weak calleth for a
drink, and faythe, " This I must do with your majesties pardon,"
and perfuadeth her in the bell fort he could, that Ihe would pacify
herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacify

which there went down the lord Ruthen, who went itrayt to the
erles Huntdy, Bothweli! and Atholl, to quiet them, and to assure
them from the king that nothing was intend against them. These
notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lordMur-
ray wo!d be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly
and Bothweli both get out of a window and so depart. Atholl
had leave of the king with Flyfl and Glandores (who was lately
called Deyfley the person of Owne), to go where they wold, and
bringe concorde out of the court by the Lord of Lidington. Theie
went that night to such places where they thought themselves in
most fauftie.

BE FORE theking least talk with the queen, in the hering ofthe
lord Ruthen The was content that he hould lie with her that night.

.... ' '

- · W e
382

We know not how he * himself, but came not at her, and excu-
fed hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie, that he could not
wake in due bfefon.

Tn E R were in this companie two that came in with the king;
the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would
have ftroken her with a dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, bro-
ther to the julice clerk, who also her grace fayth, offered a dag-
ger against her belly with the cock down. We have been earnefflyv
in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the veritie; but he affureth
us of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord
Robert, Arthur Arlkin, one or vo others. They at the first of-
fering to make defence, the lord Ruthen drawd his dagger and
4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen in her prefens,
as we are by this lord assured.

[THE letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dun-

bar castle, whither resorted the lords Huntly, and Bothwell:
That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find themselves left
by the king for all his fair promises, bonds, and fub'criptions.
That he had protested before the council, tha: he was never con-
senting to the death of David, and that it is fore against his will:
- That of the great fubltance David had there is much spoken,

ome fay in gold to the value of £. His apparelwas very

' good, as it is laid, 28 pair of velvet hole. His chamber well
' furnihed, armour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebuses, 2 swords.
"Of all this nothing fpoyld or lacked saving a or 3 daggers.
" He had the cuflody of all the queen's letters, which all were
, delivered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that he had
· hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be heard'of.
" He had upon his back, when he was flayn, a night gown of da-
' malk furred, with a fattindoublet, ahofe of ruffet velvet."]

No. XVI. (p. 21g.)
Part of a letterfrom Randolph :o Cecil, Jan. 16, 1565-6.

T CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been
J between her grace and her husband, he preffeth ear-

neftly for the matrimonial crown, which he is loth hastily to
grant; but willing to keep somewhat in itore, until he
know how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and
therefore it is thought that the parliament for a time hall be de-
ferred, buthereof I can write-no certainty.

From Mr. Randolpb's letter toJecretary Cecil.
[4 April ir66. Paper office, from the original.]
r HE justice clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause

than any desert, and as far as r can hear the king of all other

in worf, for neither hath the queen good opinion of him for at-
tempting of any thing that was against her will, nor the people
that he hath denied so manifest a matter, being proved to be done
by his commandment, 'and now himself to be the accuser and
pursuer of them that did as he willed them This Scott, that was

executed

executed, and Murray that was yeRerday arraigned, were
both accused by him. It is written to me, for certain, by one,
that upon Monday last spoke with the queen, that he is deter.
mined that the house of Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as
ever it was. The earl continueth sick, fore troubled in mind;
he ftaith in the abby, his on hath been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since he came to the cafle. The queen
hath now seen all the covenants and bands that pafeth between the
king and the lords, and now findeth that his declaration, before
her and council, of his innocency of the death of David was false;
and grievously offended that, by their means, he flould seek to
come to the crown matrimonial.
Partaf a letterfro Rudoalb to Cecilfrom Berwick, 25 IApril 1566.

I--.rj ERE is continuallyvery much speech of the discord be-
1 tween the queen and her hulband, so for that, that is

commonly said and believed of himself, that Mr. James Thornton
is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce between them. It is very
certain that Malevalier had not'fpoken with him within there
three days. He is neither accomnpanied nor looked upon of any
nobleman: attended upqn by certain of his' own servants, and fix
or seven of the guard; at liberty to do, and go 'where and what
'hc will, they have no hope yet among themselves of guietnefs.

-- DAv D'S brother named Jofept, who came this way with

Malevafier, unknown'to any ma here, is become secretary in his
brother's place. .

No. XVII. (p. zz2.)

Tie earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Augft I 564.
PTPE queen and her hulband agree after 'the old manner, ol

rather worse. She eateth but very seldom with him, lieth

not, nor keepeth company with him, nor loveth any such as love
him. He is so far out of her books, and her going out of the
caftie of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing there-
of. It cannot for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, e
reported what the said of him. One Hickman, an English mer-
chant there, having a water spaniel which was very good, gave
him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the plealure,
which'he saw the king have in such kind of dogs, gave him to
ihe king. The queen thereupon fell marvelously out with Mel-
vill, and called him difembler and flatterer, and said he could not
trut one, who would give any thing to such one as Ihe loved not.

r'e earl f Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8.
THE disagreement between the queen and her husband contina-

eth, or rather increafeth. Robert Melrill drawing home.

wards within twelve miles of Edinburgh, could not tell where to
find the queen; sith which time he is come to Edinburgh, and
had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then,
nor that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman
in her company. The king her huband is gone to Dafermnling,

and

parfeth his time as well as he may; having at his farewell, such
countenance as would make a husband heavy at the heart;

Sir ohn Forster to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

THE queen hath her hulband in small eltimation, and the earl of
1 Lennox came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir Jobn Forfier to Cecil, th Dec.
THE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambafadors,

and all things for thechriflening are at his lordihip's appoint-

ment, and the fame is scarcely well liked of the nobility, as is raid.
The king and queen is presently at Craig-millar, but in little great-
er familiarity than he was all the while past.

Addvertiement ot of Scotland by te earl of Bedford.

[Augft 1566. Paper-office, from the original.]

THAT the king and queen agreed well together two days, after
i her coming from - , and after my lord of Murray's
coming to Edinburgh, ome new discord has happened. The
queen had declared to my Lord of Murray that the king bears
him evil will, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him,
finding fault that he doth bear him so much company: and in like
manner hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere the king, which
he did a few nights since in the queen's presence, and in the
bearing of divere. The king confessed, that reports were made
to him, that my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made
him speak the thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, thatthe
king had spoken such words unto her, and confessed before the
whole house, that he could not be content that either he or any
other hould be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of
Murray enquired the fame stoutly, and used his speech very mo-
defly, in the mean time the king departed very grieved; he can-
not bear that the queen hould use familiarity either with man or
woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Mar-
re, who keep molt company with her. My lord of Murray and
Bothwell have been at evil words for the 1. of Ledington, before
the queen, for he and Sir James Balfoure had new come from
Ledington with his answer upon such heads of articles as Bothwell
and he ihould agree upon, which being reported to the said earl
in the queen's pretence, made answer, that ere he parted with
such lands as was desired, he should part with his life. My lord
of Murray said fRoutly to him, that twenty as hones men as he
lhould lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The queen
spake nothing, but heard both; in these terms they parted, and
since, that I hear of, have not met. The queen after her hunting
came to Edinburgh, and carrieth the prince thence to Stirling
with her. This las Saturday was executed a servant of the lord
Ruthven's, who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not of
council of the fat, The queen hath also opened to my lord of
Murray, that money was sent from the pope, how much it was,
nd by whom, and for what purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII.

Ne. XVIII. (p. 231.)
Part of a letter from Eli=zaet to Mary, Feb. 20, 1569. A copy

irterlined by Cecil. It contains an awer to a complaining letter
of Mary's upon the imprisonment of the bijbop f Ross.
A FTER this [i. e. Mary's landingin Scotland] how patiently

did I bear with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty

accorded by your own commissioners, whereby I received no small
unkindness, betides the manifold causes of suspicion that I might
not hereafter tru.t to any writings. Then followed a hard manner
of dealing with me, to entice my ufbjea and near kinsman, the
lord Darn!y, under colour of private suits for land, to come into
the realm, to proceed in treaty of marriage with him without my
knowledge, yea to conclude the fame without my assent or liking.
,And how. many unkind parts accompanied that fats, by receiving
of my subjes that were base runnegates and offenders at home,
and enhancing them to places of credit against my will, with
many such like, I will leave for that the remembrance of the fame
cannott but be noyfome to you. And yet all these did I as it
were suppress and overcome with my natural inclination of love
towards you; and did afterwards gladly, as you know, christen
your son, the child of my said kinsman, that had before so n-
loyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other un-
dutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly alo
dealt I by meflages to reconcile him, being your husband, to you,
when others nourished discord betwixt you, who as it seemed had
more power to work their purposes, being evil to you both, than
I had to do you good, in refpe&t of the evil I had received.
Well I will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of
following my council. And then in your molt extremity, when
you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from your
notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remembrance
of any unkindness you had hewed me. Nay how void was I of
refpet to the designs which the world had seen attempted by you
to my crown, and the security that might have ensued to my
state by your death, when I finding your calamity to be great,
that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your life,
did not only intreat for your life, but so threatened some as were
irritated against you, that I only may fay it, even 1 was the prin-
cipal cause to save your life.

No. XIX, (p. 242.)
Letter of Z Elizaetb t . of Scotts. Thus marked oe the at

with Ceci's hand.-Copia Literarum Regiae Majeltatis ad Re.
ginam Scotorum. VIII. Aprilis.

[Paper-office.]

ADAME, vous ayant trop molefle par M. de Crocq, je
n'euffe eu si peu de consideration de vous fafcher de cette

lettre, si les liens de charite vers les ruinez, et. les prieres des mil
ferables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je entens que un edit a ete di-

vulgue
st

vulgue de par vous, madame que ung chafcun, que veultjuftifier
que ons elte les meurtriers de votre fein mari, et mon feu cousin,
viennent a le faire le xiime de ce mois. La quelle chose, comme
c'eft plus honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, ne
y eftant cache quelque miflere ou finesse, ainfi le pere et amis d4
gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de
prolongue le jour, pour ce rlu'ilz cognoiffent que les iniquies fe
font combines par force de faire ceque par droi& ils ne pourront
pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour 'amour de vous
Ieme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens,
de vous exhorter le leur conceder cette requefte, laquelle, si elle
lesferoit nie, vous tourneroit grandement en foupcon, de plus que
j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volontiers ouyr. Pour
I'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle fincerit6 & prudence en
ce cas qui vos touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de
vous livrer comme innocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que
fine filles, feriez dignement elbloye hors de rancz de princesses,
& non fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela
vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois ue sepulture honorable, qu'une.
vie maculee: vous voiez, madame, que je vous traite comme ma
fille, et vous promets, que si j'en, cuffe ne luy fouhaiterois mie
mieulz, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me porte tef-
moignage, a qui je prie de bon cceur de vous inspirer a faire fe qui
vous sera plus a honneur, et a vos amis plus de coufolation, avec
mes tres cordialles recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fou-
iaite le plus de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De
Weft. ce 8 jour de Janvier * en halle.

No. XX. (p. 250.)

Accuant cf thefentence of Divorce between the earl of Bothwell and

lady ean Gordon his 'wife. Fron a nmanijcript belonging to Mr.
David Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.
T POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt hon. Mr.
U Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson
dotor in the laws, two of the senators of the college of Jullice,
Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alexanler Syme advocattis, com-
miffers of Edinr; ompeered Mr. He;lry Kinrofle, procurator
for Jean Gourdoune countes of Botiwell, conilitute be her for
purfewing of ane proces of divorcement intendit by her contra
James erie Bothwel her husband for adultry, committed be him
with Bessie Crawfurde the pursuers servant for the tyme; and sick-
lyke, for the said erle, compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter
he had purfiled and craved the pursuer's procurators oath de ca-
lumnia, if he had jui caus to purfew the said ation, and obtained
it, denyed the libell, and the said Mr. Harrie took the morne,
the last day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhilk
day, having produced some witnesses, he took the next day, being
the of Mav, to do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk of
May, he produced some more witnesses, and renounced farther

* A mistake in the date correded with Cecil't hand VIII. Aprilis.

probatioune.

587

probatioune. After quhilk, he desired a term to be afligned to
pronounce sentence. To whom the said commissars assigned Sat-
terdav next, the 3 of May, to pronounce sentence therein, fe-
cundum allegata et probata, quilk accordingly was given that day
in favour of the purfewar.

At the fame time there was another proces in-tendit be the erl of

Bothwell contra his lady, for to have their marriage declared nul,
as being cpntracted against the canons without a dispensation, and
he and his lady being within degrees defendand, viz. ferdis a kin,
and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a commis-
fioune to the archbilhop of St. Androis to cognofce and deter-
mine it, and Rot bishop of Dunkeld, William bishop of D.n-
blane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and parson of
Egetfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cooke
chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. John ManderfRoune chanon
in Dunbr and prebendar of Beltoune, or any ane of them.
This commnifione is datit 27 Aprile 1567, was presented to two
of the said commissioners, viz. Mr. Andr Crawfurd and Mr. John
Manderfloune on Satterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne
parson of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the erie of Bothwell,
who accepted the delegatioune, and gave out their citation by
precept, dire&ed, Decano Chriftianitatis de Hadintone, nee non
vicario feu curato eccle. parochias de Creichtoune, feu cuicunq;
hIteri cappellano debite requifi.is, for ummoning at the said erle's
inllance, both of the ladv personally if fie cou!d be had, or
.therways at the parofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of ser-
vice, or at her dwelling place before witnesses, prime, fecundo,
tertio et peremptarie, unico tamen contextu protuplice edido.
And likeways to be witnesses in the said matter, Alex. bishop of
ialloway, who did marry the said erle and his lady, in Halerud,
Eouse kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Bunnatyne of
Auchnoule jultice clerk, Mr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliok the
queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers provofl of Creichtoun
and chancellor of Ross, Michael abbot of Melrofs, and to
compear before the said judges or any one of them in St. Geils
kirk in Ed. on Monday the 5th of May, be thamfelves, or their
procurators. Upon the said 5 day, Mr. John Manderftoun, one
bs the judges delegat only being present, compeared the fame
procurators for both the parties that were in the former proces,
Mr. Edmund Hay ( articulatlie ) and some of the
witnesses summoned produced, and received for proving of the
farme.' The said procurator renounced farder probatioune, and
the judge afligned the morne, the 6th of May, ad publicandum
produda, nempe depoiitiones ipfortm teltium. The quhilk day,
polf publicatas depositiones praditas, Mr. Hen. Kinrossee, pro-
curator for the lady instanter objecit objefiones juris generaliter,
contra produeta, infuper rennnciavit ulteriori defenfioni; proinde
conclufa de eonfenfu procuratorum linc inde caufa, judex pre-
diius ftatuit craffinum diem pro termina, ad-pronunciadtdam fuam
.. 1. . .

* Two words in tec parenthesis illegihle.

fententiarn
58S

fententiam definitivam, ex deduAis coram eo, in prf(enti caufi
ctpro cefu. Conform hereunto, onWednefday the 7th of May,
the said judge gave out his sentence in favour of the erle, de-
daring the marriage to be, and to have been null from the be-
ginning, in refpeft of their contingence in blood, which hinder-
ed their lawful marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXI. (p. z3.)
letter from England concerning tLe murder of king Henry Darnley.

[Earl of Morton's Arciiivcs. Bu.dle B. No. z5.]
TAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't

good to write a few words unto you. I have reed some writs

from you; and some 1 have seen lately sent to others from you,
as namely to the earl of Bedford of the 16 of May. I haye par-
ticipat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle'
I can assure you; the intelligence given hither by the French was
untrue, for there was not one papilt nor proteltant which did not
consent that j utice Ihould be done, be the queen my fovns. aid and
support, against such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack and coldness did not
rife from such as were called to council, but from such as should
give life and execution thereunto. And further, I assure you, I
never knew no matter of estate proponed which had so many fa-
vourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto
you, no man promoted the matter with greater affecion than the
Spanish ambassador. And sure I am that no man dare openly be
of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever is guilty of this
murder handfaited with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I fiall
not need to tell you, which be our letts, and flayes from all good
things here. You are acquainted with them as well as I. Needs
I must confess, that howsoever we omit eccafions of benefit, ho-
nour, and surety: it behoveth your whole nobility and namely
such as before and after the murder were deemed to allow of Bod-
well, to prosecute with sword and jufice the punishment of those
abominable as, though we lend you but a cold aid, and albeit
you, and divers others, both honourable and honest, be well
known to me, nd sundry others here, to be jutiifiable in all their
afions and doings; yet think notthe contrary your whole nation
is bIemifhed and infamit by these doings which lately passed among
you. What we hall do I know not, neither do I write unto yout
assuredly, for we be subjeA unto many mutations, and yet I think
we hall either aid you, or continue in the defence and safeguard
indeed, and not to run the fortune of France, which will be your
own deltruftion if you be unadvised. know not one, no not
one of any quality or eate in this country, which does allow of
the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the world were rid of
her, so as the fame were done without farther slander, that is to
fay by ordinary justice. This I fend the z3d of May.

No. XXII.

No. XXII. (p. 258.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nricolas Trokmortn to Cecil, I I th of J#l

1567, from Ber'wick.

[An original. Paper office.]
-- IR, your letter of the 6th of July, I received the loth at

.Berwick. I am sorry to fee that the queen's majesty's dif

position altereth not towards thelords, for when all is done, it is
they which must Rtand her more in flead, that thequeen her cousin,
and will be better instruments, to work some benefite and quiet,
ness to her majelly and her realm, than the queen of Scotland
which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas 7brokmorton to Cecil, from Fa.fcajfll, iaib

of 71yv 1567.
[Paper-odrice.]
SIR, as you might perceive by my letter of the th July, I

lodged at Faftcaftle that night, accompanyed with the lord

Hume, the lord of Ledington, and James Melvin, where I was
intreated very well, according to the slate of that place, which
is fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little,
so it i very frong. By the conference I had with the lord of
Ledington I find the lord his aociates and he hath left nothing
unthought of, which may be either to thir danger, or work them
surety, wherein they do not forget what good and harme France
may do them, and likewise they confider the fame of England;
but as frr as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find
more perril to grow unto them through the queen's majelty's
dealing than either they do by the French, or by any contrary
faaion amongeff themselves, for they assure themselves the queen
will leave them in the hryers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, as to the realm
of England by her majesty's doings at Leith, whereof they fay
mutually her majesty and both the realms have received great
fruit: yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they
have observed such things in her majelly's doings, as have ended
to the danger of such as she hath dealt withal, to the overthrow
of your own designments, and little to the surety of any party:
and upon these considerations and discourses at length, methinketh
I find a disposition in them, that either they mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither with France nor yow,
but to do what they shall think meet for their fiate and surety, and
to use their remedy as occasions shall move them; meaning nei-
ther to irritate France nor England, until such time as they have
made their bargain affuiedly with one of yow; for they think
it convenient to proceed with yow both for a while pari paffu,
for that was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the matter very unkindly, that no better answer is made to
the letter, which the lords did fend to her majesty, and likewise

that
59

that they hear nothing from yow to their fatisfation, I have an-
fwered as well as I can, and have alledged their own proceedings so
obscurely with the queen, and their uncertainty hath occasioned this
that is yet happened, and therefore her majesty hath sent me to the
end I may inform her throughly of the slate of the matters, and
upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such purposes
as Ihall be by me proposed on her majefly's behalf unto them,
they hall be reasonably and resolutely answered. At these things
the lord of Ledington smiled and hook his head, and said it were
better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do us nor
yourselves good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if
there be any truth in Ledington, le Crocq is gone to procure
Ramboilet his coming hither or a man of like quality, and to de-
liver them of their queen for ever, who hall lead 'her life in
France, in a abbey reclufed, the prince at the French devotion,
the realm governed by a council of their election of the Scottilh
nation, the forts committed to the cultody of such as hall be cho-
fen amonglt themselves, as yet 1 find no great likelihood that I
shall have access to the queen, it is objected they may not fodif-
please the French King, unless they were sure to find the queen
of England a good friend; and when they once by my access to
the queen have offended the French, then they fay you will make
the profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queen's liberty,
which was the firt head that I proposed, they said that thereby
they did perceive that the queen wants their undoing, for as for
the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of them, the liber-
ty going before; but said they if you will do us no good, do us
no harm, and we will provide for our selves. In the end they
laid, we should refuae our own commodity, before they concluded
with any other, which I should hear of at my coming toEdinr;
by my next I hope to fend you the band concluded by Hamiltons,
Argyll, Huntly, and that faction, not so much to the prejudice of
the lords of Edinr, as that which was sent into France: thus
having no more leisure, but compelled to leap on horseback with
the lords to go to,Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from FaftcalUe
the 2thof July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas FT'rokmortn being in cotland. By the queen, the

14th July 567.
TRUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think

that the causes will often change upon variety of accidents,

yet we think for sundry refpe&s, not amiss, that as you shall deal
with the lords having charge of the young prince for the
committing of him into our realm, so shall yow do well in treaty
with the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be
subjef to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it
is manifest) her son cannot be free, if Ihe shall be contented that
her son may enjoy surety and quietness, within this our realm,
being so near as he knows it is; we hall not faill to yield her
as good surety therein for her child, as can be devised for any
that might be our child born of our own body, and hall be
glad to 1hew to her therein the true effet of nature; and herein

the

iAe may be by yow remembered how much good may enle tohet
ton to be nourished and acquainted with our country; and there-
fore all things confidered, this occasion for her child, were rather
to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by us;
and to this end, we mean that yow hall so deal with her, both to
flay her indeed from inclining to the French pratice, which is to
us notorious, to convey her and fee the prince into France, and
also to avoid any juit offence, that fie might hereafter conceive if
ihe aihold hear that we Ihould deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir £Xicclas rlnroinrrton to fuee# Elizabtb, I4th July 1567, from

Edinburgh.

[An original. Paper-office.]

T may please your majelty to be advertied, I did tfgnifie unto
1 Mr. Secretary by my letters of the i th and I th of July, the
day of mine entry into Scotland, the causes of my flay, my
lodging at Faftcallle, a place of the lord Hume's, where I was
met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had
passed in conference betwixt us, whileft I was at the aid FaRfcale.
Since which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and with
4oo horses by their appointment for my better condut, I came
to Edinr the 12th of this present. The 3th being Sunday ap-
pointed for a folemne communion in this town, and also a solemn
fat being publilhed, I could not have conference with the lords
which he assembled within this town as I desired, that is to fay,
the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Lidington, Sir James Balfour captain of the cafle, Mr. James
M'Gill, and the president of the fefion.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that

they would use no protra&e of time in mine audience, To did I like-
wife to the earle of Morton, whom I met by chance; I was an-
fwered by them both, that albeit the day were defined to sacred
exercises, fnch as were there of the council would consult upon
any moyen touching my access unto them and my conference with
them, and said also, that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I Ihould hear from them. About 4 of the clock in the
afternoon, the said 13th day, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto meon the behalfofthelords and others,
that they required me to have patience, tiough they had defferred
my conference with them, which was grounded principally upon
the absence of the earles of Mar and Glencairn, the lords Semple,
Crighton, and others of the council, faying also that they did
confider the matters which I was on your behalf to treate
with them of, were of great importance, as they could not satisfy
nor conveniently treate with me, nor giveme answer without the
advice of the lords, and others ,their afrociates; the lord of Li-
dington also said unto me, that where he perceived, by his pri-
vate conference with me in my journey hitherwards, that I pref-
fed greatly to have speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he
perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in, that
matter there was great difficulty for many refpcts, bat f~

tecxat.

because they had refused to the French ambassador the like aceefs,
which being granted unto me, might greatly offend the french,
a matter which they desired and intended to eschew; for they did
not find by your majesty's dealings with them hitherto, that it
behoved them to irritate the French king and to lose his favour
and good intelligence with him: I answered, that as to their re-
fufal made unto the French ambaflador, monsieur de Ville Roye
was dispatched forth of France before there accidents here hap-
pened, and his special errand was to impeach the queen's marri-
age with the earle of Bothel (for To indeed since my coming hi-
ther I learned his commiflon tended to that end, and to make of-
ser to the queen of another marriage), and as to monsieur de
Crocq, he could have no order forth of France concerning these
matters, since they happened: and therefore they might very well
hold them suspected to have conference with the queen, least they
might treate of matters in this time without inflru&ions, and so
rather do harm than good; but your majesty being advertized of
all things vhich had chanced, had ent him hither to treat with
them, for the well of the realm, for the conservation of their ho-
nours and credit, and for their filrety; and I might boldly fay
unto him, that your majesty had better deserved than the French
had. He said, for his own part, he was much bound unto your
majesty, and had always found great favour and courtesy in Eng-
land; but to be plain with you, fir, fayed he, there is not many
of this assembly that have found so great obligation at the queen
your sovereign's hands, as at the French kings, for the earles of
Morton, and Glencairn be the only persons which took benefit
by the queen's majesty's aid at Leith, the reft of the noblemen
were not in the ation; and we think, said he, the queen's ma-
jefty your sovereign, by the opinion of her own council, and all
the world, took as great benefit by that charge as the realm of
Scotland, or any particular person; and not to talk with vow as
anambaffador, but with fir Nicolas Throkmorton, mylord Mor-
ton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie, found but
cold favour of the queen's majesty's hands, when they were ba-
nilhed forth of their own country; but I would all our whole
company were as well willing to accomplih the queen your fove-
reign intents and desires as I ami for mine own part, I am but
one, and'that of the meanest fort, and they be many noblemen
and such as have great interest in the matter, mary yow shall be
aflured I will imploy myself to imploy my credit, and all that I
may do, to fatisfie the queen your milfrefl, as much as lyeth in
me, and for your own part you have a great many friends in this
assembly, with many other good wordsi But for conclusion I
mutt take this for an answer to flay until the other lords were
come, and thereupon I thought meet to advertize your majesty
what hath passed, and how far forth I have proceeded; your ex-
peftation being great to hear from hence.

AR n now to advertise your majefy of the state of all things,
as have learned since my coming hither, it may please your
majesty to understand as followeth.

Qq TR

593

TB queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in thecaftle

of Lochleven, guarded by the Lord Lindsay and Lochleven the
owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is employed in another
commiTfion, because he began to how great favour to the queen,
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys,
4 or 5 gentlewomen, and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French
woman. The earl of Buchan, the earle of Murray's brother,
hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very Araitly, and as far as
I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order from these
men, because that the queen will not by any means be induced to
lend her authority to prosecute the murder, nor will not consent
by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her husband,
but avolyeth conffantly that he will live and die with him; and
faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquih their crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, (he would leave her kingdom
and dignity, to go as a imple damfell with him, and that he
will never content that he shall fare worse or have more harm than

erfelf.

A D as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her deten-

tion is, for that these lords do fee the queen being of so fervent
affection towards the earle Bothell as he is, and being put at, as
they hould be compelled to be in continuall arms, and to have
occasion of many battles, he being with manifest evidence noto.
rioufly deteEted to be the principal murderer, and the lords mean-
ing prosecution of jufrice against him according to his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as

i marriage not to be suffered for many refpecas, which separation
cannot take place if the queen be at liberty, and have power in
ler hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoined with the

danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave, they intend
not either to touch the queen in surety or in honor, for they do
speak of her with refpec and reverence, and do affirm, as I do
learn, that the conditions aforesaid accompli{hed, they will both
put her to liberty, and restore her to her estate.

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 harqubulhers

which be in every good order, for the entertainment of which
companys, until all matters be compounded, they did ue unto
your majesty, to aid them with fuchfum of money as hath been
mentioned to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lydington's writing,
Amounting as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand crowns.

TH EY were lately advertized that the French king doth mind to

fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des Ursine, a knight of the
French order, and always well affectionate to the house of Guyfe,
and howfoeverla Forest, Villaroyi and du Crocq have use
language in the queen's favour and to these lords difad-
tantage there, to your majesty; la Crocq doth carry with him
such matter as hall be little td the queen's advantage; fu as it i
thought the French king, upon his coming to his presence, will

rath
SY4

aither fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have
their party so well made, as the French will rather make their
profit by them, than any other way.

HER EWITH I fend your majefly the last bond agreed on, and

signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and sundry
others at Dumbarton.

NEV E T H EL Ess , since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons

have ent unto me a gentleman of their surname named Robert
Hamilton, with a letter from the bilhop of St. Andrews and the
abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your majesty and mine
answer unto them; referring to the bearer the declaration of some
things, as these did by him unto me.

THE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, ent another unto
ime with a letter and credit, I have used him as I did the others,
the copy of both which letters I fend your majesty also. The lord
Harrys hath also sent unto me but not written, and I have returned
unto him in like fort.

AGAINST the zoth day of this morth there is a generall assem-

bly of all the churches, Ihires, and boroughs towns of this realm,
namely of such as be contented to repair to there lords to this
town, where it is thought the whole slate of this matter will be
handeled, and I fear me much to the queen's disadvantage and
danger; unless the lord of Lidington and ome others which be
bell asset&ed unto her do provide ome remedy; for I perceave the
great number, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,
which have aflifted in these doings, do greatly dishonour the queen,
and mind seriously either her deprivation, or her deltruEtion; I
used the belt means I can (confidering the furie of the world
here) to prorogue this aenbly, for that appeareth to me to be
the bell remedy; I may not peak of dissolution of it, for that
may not be abiden, and I Ihould thereby bring mvfclf into great
hatred and peril. The chiefelt of the lords which be here present
at this time dare not show so much lenity to the queen as I think
they could be contented, fr fear of the rage of the people.
The women be moit furious and impudent against the queen, and
yet the men be mad enouga so as a stranger over bufie may soon
be made a sacrifice amongst tilem.

THERE was a great bruit t.at the Hamiltons with their adhe-

rents would put their force into the ields against the z4th of this
month, but I d6 not find that intent so true, as the common bruit
goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the Highlands, where there is trou-
ble among his own countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and
I do believe your majesty may so use him, and dire&t him, as he
lhall be able to promote your purpose with these men.

THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.
-I do find amorigf the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two
strange and sundry humours.

HAMILToNS do make how of the liberty of the queen, and
prosecute that with great earnestness, because they would have

Q a theC

595

these lords defroy her, rather then (he hould be recovered from
them by violence; another time they seem to desire her liberty
and Bothwell's deftru&ion, becanfe they would compaes amarri-
age betwixt the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

THE earle of Argyll doth assec her liberty, and Bothwell's
deftrution, because he would marry the queen to his brother.

AND yet neither of them, notwithtanding their open concur-

rence (as appeareth by their bond), doth discover their minds to
each other, nor mind one end; Knox is not here, but in the weft
parts, he and the redi of the minifers will be here atthe great as-
fembly, whos austerity againf the queen I fear as much as any man's,

BY some conference which I had with some of his councill, me

tbinketh that they have intelligence that there is a disposition in
the queen of Scotland to leave this realm, and to retire herself
into either England or into France, but most willingly into Eng-
land, for such--- and miflikeings as lhe knoweth hath been,
and is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to
a number of persons deleagued, and athorized by her, or to
some one or more.

AN D it please your majesty, I think it not atiifs to put yow in

remembrance, that in cafe the said queen come into England by
your allowance, without the French king's content, he alll loose
her dowery in France, and have little or nothing from hence to
entertain her; and in cafe he do go into France with the king's
contentment, he may be an inffrument (if he can recover fa-
vour, as a time will help to cancell her disgrace) either by match-
ing with ofme husband of good quality, or by some other devise,
to work new unquietness to her own contry, and so consequently
to your majesty's.

TH E E FOx i it may please your majesty to confider of this mat-

ter and to let me know your pleasure with convenient speed, how
I (hall answer the fame, if it be propounded unto me, either by
the queen or by the councill, as a piece of the end and compofi-
tion. For I am fare, of late, he hath seemed very desirous to
have the matter brought to pass that (he might go into England,
retaining her estate and jurifdition in herself, though he do not
exercise it; and likewise I understand that some of this council
which be leaf affe&ed to her safety do think there is no other way
to five her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majey in health,
honour, and all felicity; atEdinr the 4th July 567.
Sir Nicolas 7',rchnorton to quetn Eliszaeth, the I 8gt of Jrul 1567,

from Edinburgh.

[An origial. Paper-ofice.]

IT may please your majelty, you might perceave by my letters
I of the 16th, how far I had proceeded with these lords, and
what was their answer; since which time I have spoken particu-
larly with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and Sir
James Balfour captain of this calUe, at whole hands I cannot per-
ceave that as yet access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted

me.
59s6

me, flaying themselves still by the absence of the lords and others
their aflbciates, which (they fay) they look for within two days,
and for that I find, by likelihood any apparent presumptions,
that mine access to the queen willhardly be granted, I have thought
good not to defer this dispatch until I have a resolute answer in
that matter.

MAY it therefore please your majesty, to nnderltad Robert

Melvin returned from the queen in Lochlevin, to this tows the
6th of July, and brought a letter from her written of he-ow
hand to there lords, which doth contain, as I underand, matter
as followeth-A request unto them to have consideration of her
health, and If they will not put her to liberty, to change the
place of restraint to the cafle of Stirling, to the end the might
have the comfort and company of her son, and if they will not
change her from Lochleven, he required to have some other gen-
tlewoman about her, naming none.

To have her apothecary, to have some modes miniter.-To

have an embroiderer to draw forth such work as she would be oc-
cupied about, and to have a varlet of the chamber.---Touching
the government of the realm he maketh two offers, which are
but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not fpe-
cified, but referred to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to com-
mit it.only and wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the
lords whose names ensue, afifted with such others as they may call
unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the caries of
Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glendairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I might have access unt6 her.

-- She reqnireth further, that if they-will not treat her and re-
gard her as their queen, yet to use her as the king their fove-
reign's daughter (whom many of them knew) and as their prince's
mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her
hulband, nor relinquish him; which matter will do him moll harm
of all, and hardeneth these lords to great severity against her.

SHE yieldeth in words to the prefecution of the murder.
I HAVE the means to let her know that your majesty hath sent
me hither for her relief.

I H AVE also persuaded her to conform herself to renounce Both-

ell for her hulband, and to be contented to susser a divorce to pass
betwixt them; he hath sent me word that {he will in no ways con-
sent Unto that, but rather die s grounding herself upon this reason
taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child; by renouncing
Bothell, he flould acknowledge herself to be with child of a
bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, which Ihe will not do
to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her own life and her
child, to choose the leat hard condition.

MR. KNOg arrived here in this town the 6th of this month, with

whom I have had some conference, and with Mr. Creig also, the
Other minifRer of this town.

I HAVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I

find them both very austere in this conference, what they hall do
hereafter I know not, they are furnished with many arguments,

some

19.7

some forth of the scripture, some forth of hiflories, some ground-
ed (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, ome upon praaices
used in this realrr, a:d ome upon the cnditions and oath made
by their prince at her coronation.

Taz bithop of Galloway, uncle to the earle of Huntley, hath

sent hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle and some others
of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at Stirling, have some commu-
nicationwith some appointed on this fide, assuring them that there
is a od disposition in the lords of the party to concurre with
these, assuring further that they will not dissent for trifles or unne-
ceffary things, and (as I am given to underhand) they can be
pleased the queen's reitraint be continued until the murder be
pursued in all persons, whereby the separation of the queen and
Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the security
for all men, and a good order taken for the governance of the
realm in tranquility.

CAPTAIN Clerk, which had so long served in Denmark and

served at Newhaven, did the 6th of this month (accompanied
with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier as the greater fame
goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and such one as had great efti-
mation with these lords both for his kill, his hardynefs, honesty,
and willingness in this aftion; whereupon Clerk hath retired
himself; their quarrel was about the hip which took Blacketer,
which ship was appointed by these lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the passage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he
went either to the isles, or to any other place; by the death of
this man this enterprize was dalhed.

THE bifhopof Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth
desire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

Ti abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for fir James Balfotr, cap-
tain of the caffle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my last, the Hamiltons now

find no matter, to difever there lords and them affunder, but would
concur in all things (yea in any extremity against the queen) so
as that they might be asured the prince of Scotland were crouned
king, and houid die without issue, that the earle of Lennox's
son living ihould not inherit the croun of this realm, as ne.xt heir
to his nephew.

A D although the lords and councelors speak reverently, mild-

ly, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their
speech any intention to cruelty or violence, yet 1 do find by in-
telligence, that the queen is in very 'great peril of her life, by
reason that the people assembled at this convention do mind vehe-
r, entlv the deltrucion of her.

IT is a public speech amongit all the people, and amongst all

estates (saving of the counsellors) that their queen hath no more
liberty nor privilege to commit murder nor adultery, than any
other private person, neither by God's laws, nor by the laws of
the realm.

THE earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and associates, be
put to the horn by the ordinary justice of this town, named the

lords
598

lords of the session; and commandment given to all hirriffs, and
all other officers, to apprehend him, ad all other his followers
and receiptors.-The earl of Bothell's porter, and one of his
other servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have consef-
fed such sundry circumflances, as it appeareth evidently, that he
the aid earl was one of the principal executors of the murder,
that is to fay, two of the Ormifons of Tivotdall, and one Hay-
born of Bolton; the lords would be glad that none of the murder-
ers hould have any favour or receipt in England, and hereof their
desire is, that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell
doth still remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fle-
ming, which have been there, have utterly abandoned him, and
do repair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth grow daily betwixt
these lords, and those which held of; and notwithstanding these
lords have sent an hundred and fifty harqubufhers to Stirling, to
keep the town and passage from furprize; and so have they done
in like manner to St. Johnston, which be the two passages from
the north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain of
Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do mervile the
carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.

OF late this queen-hath written a letter to the captain of the

said cartle, which hath been furprized; and thereby matter is dif-
covered which maketh little to.,the queen's advantage.

TH US, having none othet mtitter worthy your majesty's know-

ledge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty with long life, per-
set health, and prosperous felicity. At Edinburgh the i8th of
July 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas 'Throkmorton to the right honourable te tarl of

Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her majesty's
mos honourable privy council.

[24th of July 1567. Paper-office, from the original.]

Y my former dispatches sent to her majefy, and Mr. Secre-
tary, since the iath of July, your lordlhip might have.per-

ceived the fate of this country, and to what end these matters be
like to come: so as not to trouble your lord hip with many words;
this queen is like very hortly to be deprived of her royal eitate,
her son to be crowned king, and he detained in prison within
this realm; and the fame to be governed, in the young king's
name, by a councel, confiding of certain of the nobility, and
other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's
majeRty, and the realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner
wholly, ref in the hands of these lords, and others their associates,
aflembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majeSty will till
persist in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland (unto
whom he ihall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that
these lords and all their accomplices will become as good French.
as the French king can wish, to all intents and purposes. And as
for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that faction,
they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little

devie

599

devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the
state of things so come to pass of this country, that France has
Scotland now as much conjoined unto them, to all purposes, as
ever it was and what an'inftrument the young prince will prove,
to unquiet England, I report me to your lordchips wisdoms, and
therefore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the cir-
cumftances. trust your lordships will well bethink you in time
(for it is high time), how to advise her majelty, to leave nothing
that may bringthe prince of Scotland to be in her poffef8ion, or
at the leaf, to be at her devotion, And amongst other things,
that I can imagine, for the first degree nothing is more meet to
bring this to effect, than to allure this company here assembled, to
bear her majesty their favour. Some talk hath passed between
the lord of I<iddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty hall have won these
men to her devotion, the principal point that will make them
conformable to deliver their prince into England, will ref upon
the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fucceflion of the
crown of England, for fault of issue of the queen's majelfy's body,
some other things will also be required, as the charge of the said
prince and his train to be at the charge of England, do well
perceive that there men will never be brought to deliver their
prince into England. without the former condition, for the fuccef-
sion of England; for (faith Lid ngton) that taking place, the
prince fialf be as dear to the people of England as to the people
of Scotland and the one will be as careful of his preservation as
the other. Otherwise, he faith, all things confidered, it will be
reported that the Scottilhmen have put their prince to be kept in
safety, as those which commit the sheep to he kept by the wolves,
So as for conclusion, your lordships may perceive here will be the

ope of this matter. As unto the delivering of him upon hosta-
ges, he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of the fuc-
celion not being accomplished, the nobility and the gentry will
never content to leave themselves destitute of their sovereign,
upon any hoages, neither upon any promises, nor likelihood
of good to issue in time to come, It were not good for yourselves
(faith he) that the platter were so handled; for then you should ad-
venture all your goods in one ship, which might have a dangerous
effet, eonfidering the unwillingness of the queen your sovereign to
consent to etablifsing any successor to the crown. And then, how
unmete were it, that her majesty having in her pofeffion already
all such persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown,
to have our prince aifo in her culody, For so there might follow,
without good capitulations, a firange and dangerous ifue, tho'
the queen your mistress do think that such imaginations could not
proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on her
behalf. What is come to pas since my lat dispatch, and how far
forth things are proceeded, I refer your lordihip to be informed
by my letters sent unto her majelly at this time. And fol pray
Almighty God, pferve your lordship in much honour and felici-
ty. At Edinburgh this z4th of July 1567.

IT

IT may please your good lordship to make ny lord Stuard
partner of this letter.

The udten tofir Nicholas Throkmorton.

By the queen.
[6th Auguf 1567.]
TRUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as

much as we do confider, that you have now a long time re-

mained in those parts without expedition in the charge committed
unto you, we think it not meet, feeing there hath not followed the
good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that state,
which good reason would have required, that you should continue
there any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, that you shall, im-
mediately upon the receipt hereof, fend your servant Middlemore
unto the lords and estates of that realm, that are assembled toge-
ther, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but eem
very firange unto us, that you having been sent from us, of such
good intent, to deal with them, in matters tending o much to
their own quiet, and to the benefit of the whole estate of their
country, they have so far forgotten themselves and so ightly re-
garded us and our good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you,
and deferring your access to the queen their sovereign, but also,
which is strangest of all, in not vouchsafing to make any answer
unto us. And altho' these dealings be such, indeed, as were not
to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and pro-
ceeding towards their foveraign and queen, to over pass all the
reft in so strange a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose
the whole world besides, cannot but think them to have therein
gone so far beyond the duty of subje&s, as muff needs remain to
their perpetual tauche for ever. And therefore ye hall fay, that
we have tho't good, without consuming any longer time in vain,
to revoke you to our presence, requiring them to grant your li-
cence, and pafport so to do, which when you hall have obtained,
we will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as con-
venient specd as you may. Given, &c,

Indorfd 6th August 1567.
Tlramesrtow to te rigbh hiourable Sir William Cecil knight, one of

her majfj'sJ rivy council and principal ecretary, give the/e..

E[lth Aug. 1567. Paper-office. From the original.]

SIR,

W HAT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord Murray,
WV and Mons. de Linnerol, you shall undertand by my letter
to her majelty, at this time. The French do, in their negotiati-
ons, as they do in their drink, put water to their wine. As I am
able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart
how the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether he be at li-
berty or in prizon. The mark they hoot at, is, to renew their
old league; and ca be as well contented to take it of this little
king (howsoever his title be), and the fame by the order of there

lords,

lords, as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yellerday, and methink-
eth he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will
seek to displease these lords when they changed the coming of la
Chapelle des Ourfins for this man, beaufe they doubted that dela
Chapelle mhould not be grateful to them, being a papifi. Sir, to
speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me thinketh the
earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly againlt
the tragedy, and the players therein, than he, so little like he
hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Ledington is to go
into France, which I do as much millike, as any thing, for our
purpose. I can aflure you the whole protestants of France will
live ard die in these men's quarrels; and, where there is bruit
amongfi you, that aid should be lent to the adverse party, and that
Martigues should come hither with some force; Mons. Boudelot
hath aured me of his honour, that inltead of Martrigues coming
againit them, he will come with as good a force to succour them:
and if that be ent under meaner condua, Robert Stuart hall
come with as many to fortify them. But the constable hath as-
fured these lords, that the king meaneth no way to offend them.
Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed you to
further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle
these lords more againlt us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of
you, from Edinburgh the izth of August 1567.

Yours to use and command.

" be ;ueen to Nirbolas Tbrokorton.

TRUSTY .and well-beloved, we greet you well. We have,
I within these two days, received three sundry letters of yours,
of the zoth, 2d, and 23d, of this month, having norbefore those
received any seven days before; and do find, by there your letters,
that you have very diligently and largely advertised us of all the
hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which ias we nothing
like, so we trust in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive
some reformation. For we cannot perceive, that they with whom
they have dealt can answer the doubts moved by.the Hamiltons,
who howsoever they may be carried for their private refpes,
yet those things which they move, will be allowed by all reason-
able persons. For if they may not, being noblemen of the realm,
be suffered to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind
concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep
her in captivity, how hould they believe the reports, or obey
them, which do report it? and therefore our meaning is, you
/hall let the Hamiltons plainly underfhand, that we do well allow
of their proceedings (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief), and in such things as hall
appear reasonable for us therein to do, for the queen our sifter,
we will be ready to perform the fame. And where it is o re-
quired, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope hould
neal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings to us, and ours
to them, we are well pleated therewith, and we require you to ad-

vertize
60z

vertize the lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him
to Ihew himself favourable to them in their actions, that may ap-
pear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance
of her authority. And as we willed our secretary to write unto
you, that upon your message done to the earl of Murray, you
might return, so our meaning is you hall. And if there our letters
flall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both
the lord Scroope and the Hamiltons of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 567.

No. XXIII. (p. 261.)
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the archb;hop of St. Andrewu' and t&e

abbot of Arbrothe.
[13th Aug. 1567. Paper-office, from a copy which fir Nicholas sent to the

queen.]

A FTER my good commendations to your good lordships, this
,shall be to advertize you, that the queen's majeftv my fove.
reign having sent me hither her ambassador to the queen her sifter
your sovereign, to communicate unto her so much matter as he
thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence be-
twixt them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordships
know) contrary to the duty of all good subjects, for the enlarge-
ment of whose person, and the refiitution of her to her dignity,
her majesty gave me in charge to treat with these lords assembled
at Edinburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means
as might be, for the safeguard of the young prince, the punish-
ment of the late horrible murder, the dissolution of the marriage
betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and lafily for their
own sureties. In the negociation of which matters I have (as
your lordships well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not
being able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the queen
my sovereign's fatisfation. Of which strange proceedings to-
wards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards their fove-
reign, I have advertised the queen's majesty, fie (not being
minded to bear this indignity) hath given me in charge to declare
her further pleasure unto them, in such fort as they may well per-
ceive her majesty doth disallow of their proceedings, and there-
upon hath revoked me. And further hath given mr in charge to
communicate the fame unto your lordships, requiring you :o let
me know, before my departure hence (which fliall be, God wil-
ling, as oon as I have received answer from you) what
you and your confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen your
sovereign at liberty, and to reflore her to her former dignity by
force or otherwise; feeing these lords have refused other mediation,
to the end the queen's majesty my sovereign may concur with your
lordlhips in this honourable enterprize.

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your associates, your

lordships can neither communicate this matter amongst you, nor
receive resolution of them all by that time, it may please you to
fend me the opinions of so many of you as may confer together,
within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in

this

603

this town by Monday or Tuesday next at the sarthes, being the
igth of this August; for I intend (God willing) to depart to-
wards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I most hum-
bly take my lcaye of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 3th of
Aug. 567.

Indorfed the i;thof Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Tromoris i the Lord Herrys.
!z4th Ag. 1567. Paper-office, from a copy which fir Nicholas ent to fecre.

tory Cecil.]
Y OUR good lordflip's letter of the x3th of Augull I have re-

ceived the 9th of the fame. For answer whereunto it may

like your lordihip to underhand, that I will signify unto you plain-
ly, how far forth I am already thoroughly inltru.edof the queen's
majesty my sovereign's pleasure concerning the detention of the
queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief,

To the firfi her majelly hath given in charge, to use all kinds

of persuasion in her name, to move these lords aembled at Eden-
burgh to dcfilf from this violent and undutiful behaviour, which
they used toward their sovereign. And in this part, besides the
ihew of many reafoils and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty
with them her majefly hath willed me to use ome plain and fe-
vere speech unto them, tending so far forth, as if they would not
be better advised, and reform there their outrageous proceedings
exercised againt their sovereign, that they may be assured her
majesty neither wduld nor could indure such an indignity to be
done to the queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

A.D notwithilanding these my proceedings with them, they

have made proof to be little moved thereby; for as yet neither
will they content to the enlargement, neither susser me to speak
with her. So as it eemeth to me, it is superfluous to treat any
more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have adver-
tifed the queen's majefly my sovereign, expecting daily her ma-
;irty's further order; and as I hall be advertised thereqf, so will
not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship; and in the
mnean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordihip
hath written unto me. Thus with my due commendations to
your good lord(hip, I commit the fame to almighty God, reft-
ing always to do you the pleasure and service that I can lawfully,
At Edinbnrgh.

Indorfed z4th August 567.

No. XXI. (p. 268.)
,ccsan: of lard Herreis's behaviour in the parliament eldd DeemAtr

15, 1567.
[Paper-oFlce.]
THE lord Herrys made a notable harangue in the name of the

duke and himsef, their friends and adherents (the duke

himself, the earl of Caflilles, and the abbot of Kilwinning being
alo present) to persuade the union of the whole realm in one

mind,
604.

mind. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the great
praise that part of this nobility did deserve, which in the begin-
ning took meanes for punifment of the earl Bothwell, as also
feeing the queen's inordinat affetion tb that wicked man, and that
ihe could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
sequestering her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of no-
blemcn. That their honourable doings, which had not spared to
hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their native country
from the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among other
nations, had well deserved that all their brethren should join with
them in so good a cause. That he and they, in whose name he
did speak, would willingly, and without any compulsion, enter
themselves in the fame yoke, and put their lives and lands in the
like hazard, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen
herself were in Scotland, accompanied with 20,000 men, they
will be of the fame mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the
remainder noblemen of their party, Huntly, Arguile, and others,
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come to the
fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly move them.
And if they will remain obstinate, to refuse to qualify themselves,
then will the duke, he and their friends, join with us to correct
them; that otherwise will not reform themselves. So plausible an
oration, and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by
the name of regent, (there was no mention at all of the earl of
Murray), and to call him grace at every word, when his speeches
were direced to him, accompanying all his words with low cour-
tefies after this manner.

No. XXV. (p. 281.)

Sueen Mary to ueen Elizabeth,

[Cott. Lib. Cal. i. A copy, and probably a translation.
MADAM,

LTHOUGH the necessity of my cause (which maketh me

- to be importune to you) do make you to judge that [ am
out of the way; yet such as have not my passion, nor the refpets
whereof you are persuaded, will think that I do as my cause doth
require- Madam, I have not accused you, neither in words, nor
in thought, to have used yourself evil towards me. And I'be-
lieve, that you have no wantof good understanding, to keep you
from perfwaflon against your natural good inclination. But in
the mean time I can't chufe (having my senses) but perceive very
evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hither. I
thought that I had sufficiently discoursed unto you the difcommo-
dities, which this delay bringeth unto me. And efpeciallv that
they think in this next month of August, to hold a parliament
against me and all my servants. And in the mean time I am flayed
here, and yet will you, that I should put myself further into your
country (withoutfeeingyou), and remoye me further from mine;
and there do me this diihonour at the request of my rebels, as to
fend commifloners to hear them against me, as you wold do to a

mere

6oS

mere subjet, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have
promised you to come to you, and having there made my moan
and complaint of these rebels, and they coming thither, not as
possessors, but as subje&s, to answer, I would have besought
you to hear my justification of that which they have falsely set
furth againit me, and if I could not purge myself thereof, you
might then discharge your hands of my causes, and let me go for
such as I am. But to do as you fay, if I were culpable I would
be better advised; but being not so, I can't accept this dishonour
at their hands, that being in poffielion they will come and accuse
me before your commiflloners, whereof 1 can't like: And feeing
you think it to be againit your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy, untill you
may fee how I can discharge myself every way, and to susser me
to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me; or at
least to go into Scotland, with aflurance that if there come any
strangers thither, I will bind myself for their return without any
prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protelf that
I will not impute it to falsehood, if I receive strangers in my
country, without making you any other discharge for it. Do
with my body as you will, the honour or blame lhall be yours,
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants may be
succoured (tho' you would not so) by Rrangers, than to susser
them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in time to
come, particular commodity. There be many things to move me
to fear that I Ihall have to do, in this country, with others than
with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath followed upon my last
moan, I hold my peace happen what may hap. I have as lees
to aidre my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further,
it pleated you to give license to my fubjets to go and come. This
has been refused by my lord Scroop and Mr. Knolls (as they fay)
by your commandment, because 1 would not depart hence to your
charge, untill I had answer of this letter, tho' I shewed thent that you
required my answer, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

THE one is to let you briefly underhand, I am come to you to

make my moan to you, the which being heard, I would declare
unto you mine innocency, and then require your aid, and for lack
thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to God, that
I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal to other princes
to have refpec thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you,
madam, firRf of all, when you Ihall have examined your conscience
before him, and have him for witness.-- nd the other, which
is to come further into your country, and not to come to your pre-
fence, 1 will eeem that as no favour, but will take it for the
contrary, obeying it as a thing forced. In mean time, I beseech
you, to return tome my lord Herries, for I can't be without him,
having none of my counfal here, and also to susser me, if it
please you, without further delay, to depart hence whithersoever
it be out of this country. I am fare you will not deny me this
simple request for your honour's fake, feeing it doth not please you

to
sc6

to use your natural goodness towards me otherwise, and feeing
that of mine own accord, I am come hither, let me depart again
with yours. And if God permit my causes to succeed well, I
shall be bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet I oan't
blame you. As for my lord Fleeming, feeing that upon my cre-
dit you have suffered him to go home to his house, I warrant you
he thall pass no further, but thall return when it hall please you.
In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. Butfrom*
Dumbarton I answer not, when my 1. Fleeming hall be in the
Tower. For they which are within it will not forbear to receive
succour, if I don't afure them of yours; no, tho' you would
charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to have more
refpe& to my servants, and to my eflate, than to my life. Good
filser, be of another mind, win the heart, and all shall be yours,
and at your commandment. I thought to satisfy you wholly, if
I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the serpent, that Itop-
peth his hearing, for I am no enchanter, but your filter, and na-
tural cousin. If Caesar had not disdained to hear or read the com-
plaint of an advertiser, he had not so died; why hould princes
ears be stopped, feeing that they are painted so long? meaning
that they hould hear all and be well advised, before they answer.
I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and less of the chamelion,
to turn you to my likeness, and tho' I should be so dangerous
and curs'd as men fay, you are sufficiently arm'd with constancy
and with justice, which I require of God, who give you grace
to use it well with long and happy life. From Carlisle, the 5th
of July 1568.

No. XXVI. (p. 282.)
Part of a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, tb Aug. 1568,

from Bolton.

[An original. Paper-office.]
--D UT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to fa-

ID vour the form, but also the chief article of the religion

of the gospel, namely justification by faith only: and he heareth
the faults of papifiry revealed, by preaching or otherwise, with
contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and the doth not
seem to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letterfrom Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 Sept. 1568,

from Bolton.
-TT came to this queen's ears of late than she was bruited to

I be lately turned to the religion of the gofpell, to the

great disliking of the papists hereabouts, which thing she herself
confessed unto me, and yesterday, openly in the great chamber,
when the assembly was full, and some papists present, she took oc-
cafion to speak of religion, and then openly he professed herself
to be of the papist religion, and took her to patronize the fame,
more earneltly than Ihe had done a great while afore,'altho' her

Perhapsfor.

defences

óC7

defences and arguments were so weak, that the effec of her fpee'h
was only to hew her eal; and afterwards to me alone, when I
mifliked to fee her become so confidently backward in religion,
Why, aid {he, would you have me to lose France and Spain,
and all my friends in other places by seeming to change my reli-
gion, and yet I am not assured the queen my good sifter will be
my assured friend, to the fatisfacion of my honour and expeltation,

No. XXVII. (p. 283.)
A letterfrom ny lord Herries to miy lord Scroop and fr i Knolls,

Septembtr 3d, 568.

[Cott. Lib. Ca!. C. An original in his own hand.]

Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordlhips, I am informed by
James Borthwick, lately come from the queen's majefly,

your Ibverane, that is fchawin to her highness, I huld have ridden
in Crafurdmure, fen ty last coming into this realm, upon the
earl of Murray's dependants. And that I fold have caufit, or
been of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden inIngland, to flay
or fpuizie her majesty's subje&s.

MY lords, I thought it right needful because your lordships is,

by your forerane, commanded to attend on the queen's majesty
my millrefs, so have daily access in thir matters, to declare upon
the truth; humbly desiring that your dlrdfhips will, for God's
cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife had know-

ledge of any Scottifman's riding in England to do the subje&s
thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the siege of Leith; and as I
underfand it shall be fund true, that giff ony sic open hurt be
done, it is by the queen my sovereign's difobients, and that I
have not ridden or hurt no Scottilhman, nor commanded no hurt
to be done to them, fen my coming from the queen's majefly of
England, it is will kend, for that never ane will complain of me,

1 HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the earl of

Murray has done, and will be loather to do them any harm than
he wilL Except the queen's majesty your foereign command
fie faUe reports to be tryit, whereof this is altogidder an inventit
leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men
here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that baith would serve hifi
and may, better than they unworthy liars.

MY iords, I underhand the queen's majesty your sovereign is

not contented of this bruite, that there hould ony Frenchman
come in this realm with the duke of Chatelherault. Truth it is,
I am no manner of way the coonfall of their cuming, nor has no
sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the
queen's majefly your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it,
as it is true indeed, her grace's self is all the wyitt, and the coun-
fall that will never let her take order with my maitress cause.
For that our sovereign havand her majesty's promise, be writing,
of luff, friendship and aifrance gif need had so requirit, enterit
that realm upon the 16 day of May, fen that time the queen's ma-
jelly has commanded me divers times to declare he would accept

her
60S

her caure, and do for her, and to put her in peaceable poffefion
of this realme, and when I required of her majelly, in my maif-
trefs name, that her lighnefs would either do for her (as her fpe-
cial trust was ihe wold) according to her former promises, or other-
wife give her counfal, wold not content (as I (how her grace I sand
diverse repugnant) than that she would permit her to pass in France,
or to some other prince to seek support, or failing hereof (quhilk
was agains all reason) that (he woild permit her to return in her
avin countrie, in sic fempil manner as fhie came out of it, and said
to her niajefty ane of thir, for the honour would not be refufit,
feeand that he was coned in her realm upon her writings and pro-
mises of riendfhip. And ficklike, I said to her highness, gif my
mailtrefs had the like promise of her nobility and efates, as he
had of herself, I hould ave reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefcendit to onl' of hir three, and so I fay, and so I write,
that in the warld it hall be mai/ reprehendable, gif this promise
taketh not other good effeft, nor yet it does. Notwithstanding I
get gud answer of thir promises of friendship made to my fove-
reign, and to put her grace in this her awin countrie peaceably,
we have fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlemore, dire&it
from her highness to Ray the army that cuift down our houses.
And alfua, in the proceeding of this late pretendit parliament;
promised twenty days before the time to myself to have caused it
been difchargit. And yet contrary to this, promise, have they
made their prendit manner of forfaulture of 31 men of guid re-
putation, bishops, abbottis, and barroni, obedientfubje&s to our
sovereign, only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause was taken

upon hand be the queen's majety of that realms an hundred thou-
sand pound Scots worth of her awin true fubjeds geir, under the
color of the law, groundit upon their false treasonable ftowin, au-
thority.

THe murders, the oppressions, the burningsi the ravilhing of

women, the deftrution of policy, both ecclesiastical and temporal,
in this mean time, as in my former writings I said it was lament-
able to any Christian man to hear of, except God gifgrace, the
profession of the evangile of Jesus Christ profefiit be your prince,
counfall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inarity that'
has fland betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen will doubt
in this article, and their proceedings puttis myself in Sana Tho-
mas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majedty of that realm, upon

quhais promise and honour my mailtrefs came there, as I have
said, will leave all the French writings and French .phrases of
writings, quhilks amongis them is over meikle on baith fides un-
fit, and plainly, according to the auld true custom of Iglaid and
Scotland, quherein be a word promit truth was obferv'd, promise,
in the name of the eternal God, and upon the hig .honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland, quhereof
ihe is defcendit, and presently wears the diadem, that she will put
my maiftrefs in her awin country, and cause her as queen thereof

Rr X

609

in her authority and strength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will
appoint an certain day within two months at the farthest, as we
understand this to be our weill, fua will we, or the maift part of
us all, follow upon it leaving the Frenchmen and their evil French
phrases togidder. And therefore, and for the true perpetual
friendhip of that realm, will condition, and for our part, with
the grace of Ahnighty God, keep sic heads and conditions of
agreement, as noble and wife men can condescend upon, for the
weill of this hail iild. As 1 have been partlings declaring to
the queen your sovereign, quhik I hew to your lordships felfis
both in religion, in the puniflsment of the earl Bothwile, for the
queen's raff huband's slaughter; and for a mutual band of amity
perpetually to remain amaingis us.

DO6BTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and

friendly working, as may gif us occasion baith to forgette Mid-
dlemore and his late pretendit parliament, we will turn the leaf,
leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where she is, under the
promise of friendip. As I have baith said, and will ever affirm,
made by your forereign, quhilk was only cause of her grace's
coming in that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French
or Spanilh till exptlfe this treasonable and false pretendit authori-
ty, quhiln means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire your lordftips confider, that it is he, that

maill desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to continue,
and of a poor man bell cause has, that writ this.

Mr brother, the hird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lord-

ship's communing with him, it appearit to him, your mind was we
lhould susser the earl of Murray to work, altho' it were agains
reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's majesty, and
her highness wald fee it reformit. My lords, her majesty will be
over meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftanit al-
ready. For I am sure, gif reason and jultice may have place, our
maiflrefs, and we her subjes, have received express wrang, far
above two hundred thousand pounds tferling, in the time of this
unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes,
comes, now a days, so flowlie and the ungodly law of oblivion in
sic matters so tneikle pradis'd, I think, nowther for the queen's
honour, nor our weill, your lord hip's would fua mean, nor that
it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
sic advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms hall find in this
canfe meet. It will be true and frindfdl working for us, indeed,
and nowther French phrases, nor boasting, and finding little effet,
that will caiife us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly
written, and I desire your lordihip's plain answer; for in truth
and plainness langeft continues gd friendship, quhilk in this mat-
ter I pray God may lang continue and have your lordships in
his keeping. Off Dumfreis, the third day of September 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully E RR I S

ueen Mary to queen Elizabetb.

[1568. Cott. Lib. Cal. . An original.]

ADAME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, d'hne

mlV efme dete; l'une, ou vous faites mention de l'excufe de

Monr. de Murra pour tenir son pretendu parlement, qui me fem-
ble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que jem'eltois per-
fuadee n'avoir par voftre promefe, quant a n'offer donner com-
miflion de venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de
noblefte alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatr
d'avantage, qui euffent auffi bien dit leur opinion hors de parle-
ment, qui n'a eft tenu tant pour cette effett, mais pour faire ce
qu'expreflement nous avions requis eftre empefches, qui eft la for-
falturc de mes subje&s pour m'avoir eftes fidelles, ce queje m'affu-
rois, jufques a heir, avoir eu en promefle de vous, par la lettre
ecrite a mi lord Scrup e Maiftre Knoleis vous induire a ire contre
eulx, voire, a les enfayre refentir; toutetois je vois que je l'ay
mal pr;s, j'en uis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il
me montrerent, et leur parole, je l'ay si divulgement affuray que
pour vengeance que j'n defiraffe, si non mettre difference entre
leur faux deportemens, et les miens sinceres. Dans voftre lettre
aufl] datee du lome d'AouRl, metties ces mots, " I think'your
· adverse party, upon my sundry former advices, will hold no
' parliament at all; and if they do, it Ihall be only in form of

an aembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm, and in
what fort; for otherwise, if they hall proceed in manner of a
parliament, with any a& of judgment against any person, I
I hall not, in any wife, allow thereof; and if they fiall be so
· overseen, then you may think the fame to be of no other mo-

ment, than the former procedures; and by such their rash man-
ner of proceeding, they hall moR prejudice themselves; and
be aflured to find me ready to condemn them, in their doings."

Sur quoy j'ay contremande mes ferviteurs, les faiffant retirer,
fouffrant felon voftre commandement d'etre ,fauffement nommes
traitres, par ceulx, qui le font de vray; et encore d'etre provoques
par efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de mes gens et lettres, et au
contraire vous etes informee que mes subje&s ont evahis les vof-
tres, Madame, qui a fait ce rapport n'est pas homme de bien, car
laird de Sesford et bn fils font et ont eRes mes rebelles depuis le
commencement; enquires vous, s'ils n'efoient a Donfris aveques
eulx, j'avois oiFri refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me fut refuse,
ce qui m'en devroit asses defcharger, neanmoins, pour vou s faire
preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur falfite, s'il vous me fayte donner
le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier, je commanderay mes fubjets
les pour fuivre, ou si vous voules que ce foit les voftres, les miens
lear ayderont; j e vons prie m'en mander vofire volonte, au refte mes
fubjets fidelles feront refponfables a tout ce que leur sera mis fu les
contre vous, ni les vofRres, ni les rebelles, defpuis que me confeil.
lates les faire retirer. Qant aux Francois, j'efcrivis que l'on m'en
fit nulle pourfuite, car j'efperois tant en vous, queje n'en aurois be-
loign,-je ne fceu si le di& aura en mes lettres, mais je vous jure
davamt Dieu queje ne fcay chose du mande de leur venuc, que ce

Rr z quc

que m'en aves manday, n'en ai oui de France mot du monde, et
ne le puis croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils si font, c'efl fans mon
fceu ni confentement, Pourquoy je vous fupplie ne me condamner
fans m'ouire, car je fuis prest de tener tout ce que j'ay offert a
Mester Knoleis, et vons affnre que voffre amitie, qu'il vous pleft
m'offrir, sera refcu avant toutes les choses du monde, quant
France fervit la pour presser leur retour a cefte condition, que
prenies mes affaires en mein, en foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma
France eften vons; mais une chose feule'me rende confuse, j'ay
tant d'enemis qu'ont votre oreille, la quelle ne ponvant avoir par
pabfle, toutes mes aions vous font defguifees, et falfement ra-
portees, par quoi il m'eft impoifible de m'aflurer de vous, pour les
manteries qu'on vous a fait, pour deltruire voftre bonne volontC
de mov; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous faire en-
tendre ma sincere et bonne affecion, laquelle je ne puis si bien de-
fcrire, que mes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur,
gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir, n'entrs en jalousie pour faulx
raports de celke que ce desire que votre bonne grace; je me re-
mettray fur Mefer Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte,
et apres vous avoir baifee les mains, je prierai Dieu vous donner
en fante, longue et heureufe vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets,
Je n'efpere pertir, qu'aveques voltre bonne grace, quoyque les
menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d'Aouf.-

No. XXVIII. (p. z8.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

[Paper office, from a copy correted by secretary Cecil.],

IGHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, we greet you
well, where we hear fay, that certain reports are made in,

lindry parts of Scotland, that whatsoever should fall out now upon
the hearing of'the queen of Scots cause, in any proof to convince
or to acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her
late hudband our cousin we are determined to restore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereof, as we
cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and therefore we have
thought good to assure you, that the fame is untruly devised by
the authors to our diihonour. For as we have been always certi-
sied from oar said ifter, both by her letters and metages, that he
is by no means guilty or participant of that murder, which we
wish to be true, so surely if she lihould be found jufly to be guilty
thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would be very
sorry, then, indeed, it flould behove us to confider otherwise of
her cause than to satisfy her desire in reltitution of her to the go-
vernment of that kingdom. And so we would have you and all
others think, that Ihould be disposed to conceive honourably of us
and our ations.

Indorfed go Sept. 1568.

No. XXIX.

No. XXIX. (p. 87.)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, the 9th of Oiober 1568, from York.

[An original. Paper office.]
--' ,fY lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me toBolton, to

IVJ. attend upon him here Thursday last, I made my re-

pair hither accordingly, meaning to stay here until Monday next;
as touching the matters of the commission, that his grace and the
reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me
of all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto pas-
fed, and altho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capacity,
to presume to utter any opinion of mine own thereof, yet I fee
that my lord Herries, for his parte laboureth a reconciliation, to
be had without the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of
Ledington also faith to me, that he could with these matters to be
ended in dulce manner, so that it might be done with safety; of
the rell you can conceive, by the advertisements and writings,
lent up by our commissioners.
A letter from the bi/hop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

Ofiober 568.

{Cot. Lib. Calig. C. . A copy.]

PLEIS your majelty I conferred at length with A. ane great
rpart of a night, who affurit me that he had reasoned with B. this
Saturday C. on the field, who determinate to him that it was the
D. determinit purpose not to end your cause at this time, but to
hold the fame in fufpence, and did what was in her power, to make
the E. pursue the extremity, to the effe& S.and his adherents
might utter all they could to your dilhonour to the effeet to cause
you come in disdain with the hail fubjeds of this realm, that ye
mav be the mair unable to attempt any thing to her disadvantage.
And to this effeet is all her intention, and when they have pro-
duced all they can againff you, D. will not appint the matter in-
flantly, but transport you up in the country, and retain you
there till the think time to fnew you favour, which is not likely
to be hastily, because of your uncles in France, and the fear he
has of yourfelfto be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is,
that ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are ihformit
that your fubjets which has offendit you.-This is in effect that
your majelty hearing the state of your affairs as they proceed
in York, was informed that her majesty was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubjets in such fort as they
might credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay
of this controversy to be ended. And therefore persuading her
D. effectually not to trufi any who-had made any such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most tender to
you of any living, so prayit her take na opinion of you, but that
ye wauld use her counfell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her.
friendship to all others as well uncles as others, and assure her to
keep that thing ye wald promise to your subje&s by her advice.

And

613

And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that
point be removing within her realm in secret and quiet manner,
where her G. pleased, until the time her G. were fully satisfied,
and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that in the
mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true
subje&s restored and maintained in their own efate, and sic other
things tendingto this effec And affirms that they believe that
this may be occasion to cause her credit you that ye offer so far;
and it may come that within two or three months she may become
better minded to your grace, for now she is not well-minded, and
will not hew you any pleasure for the cause aforesaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following
key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXX. (p. z95.)
Deieratin of rfcretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2 , 68.

[Paper-office.]
T HE best way for England, but not the easiest, that the queen

of Scots might remain deprived of her crown, and the state
continue as it is.

THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard.-

That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by rome perfwafions.
to agree that her son might continue king, because he is crowned,
and herself to remain also queen; and that the government of the
realm might be committed to such person as the queen of England
lhould name, so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered,
that a convenient number of persons of Scotland hould be first
named to the queen of England, indifferently for the queen of
Scots, and for her son, that is to fay, the one half by the queen of
Scots, and the other by the earle of Lennox and lady Lennox,
parents to the child: and out of those the queen's majesty of
England to make choice for all the officers of the realm, that are,
by the law of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of the land.
, TH AT until this may be done by the queen's majeRy, the go-
vernment remain in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is,
providing he hall not depose of any offices or perpetuals to con-
tinue any longer but to these offered of the premises.

TH AT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by several com-
mandments, both of the queen of Scots and of the yotug king.

- THAT hoRfages be delivered unto England on the young

king's behalf, to the number of twelve persons of the earle of
Murray's part as the queen of Scots shall name; and likewise on
the queen's behalf to the like number as the earle of Murray shall

nane;

name; the fame not to be any that have by inheritance or offic
cause to be in this parliament, to remain from the beginning of
the summons of that parliament, until three months after that
parliament; which hostages hall be pledges, that the friends of
either part hall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this parliament
it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England
lhall devise for the government of the realm (being not to the
hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to the laws of Scot-
land for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the parlia-
ment at Edinr the Decemr 1567) hall be eablilhed to be kept
and obeyed, under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

- TH AT by the fame parliament also be eftablilhed al execu-

tions and judgments given against any person for the death of the
late king.

THAT by the fame parliament, a remitlion be made uni-

verfally from the queen of Scots to any her contrarys, and also
from every one subjet to another, saving that reflitution be made
of lands and houses, and all other things heritable, that have
been by either fide taken from them which were the owners thereof
at the committing of the queen of Scotts to Lochlevin.

TH AT by the fame parliament it be declared who hall be fti-

ceffors to the crown next after the q. of Scots and herlTue; or
else, that such right of the d. of Chatelherault had, at the mar-
riage of the q of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be conserved
and not prejudiced.

THAT the q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's majesty

of England, twelve months after the said parliament, and that she
hall not depart out of England, without special licence of the
queen's majety.

THAT the young king lhall be nourished and brought up in

England, till he be years of age.

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition between

the queen and her fubje&ts may be made with certain articles, out-
wardly to be seen to the world for her honour, as though all the
parts should come of her, and yet for the surety of contrarys, that
certain betwixt her and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXXI. (p. z96.)
he fuern to Sir Francis knolleys, 22 Jan. 1568-9.

tPaper-office.]

TE greet you well, we mean not, at this point, by any
WV writing to renew that which it hath pleased God to make
grievous to us and forryful to yow; but forbearing the fame as
unmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow in our
fence, and yow also whiled yow are to serve us. We require yow
to cdnfider of this that followeth with like consideration and dili-
gence, as hitherto accuftumate in our service: at the time of our
last letters written to yow the fourteenth of this month for re-
moving of the queen of Scots, we had understanding out of Scot-
land of certain writings sent by her from thence into Scotland,
amongst the which one is found to contain great and manifest un-

truths

6i1

truths touching us and others also, as hall and may plainly ap-
pear unto yow by te copy of the fame, which likewise we fend
vow, and because at the fame time we were advertised, that it
hould be shortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not,
we thought good first to remove the queen, before we would dif-
close the fame, and then expe&t the iflue thereof; and now, this
day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writings,
are published in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have
thought it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, and to con-
found the falsehood contained in that writing, not only to have
the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the
copy whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient
fort to charge that queen therewith, so as fle may be moved to
declare the authors thereof, and persuaders of her to write in
such slanderous fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season,
we have here slaved her commifiioners, knowing no other whom
we more probably presume to be parties hereunto, than they,
uril the queen shall name ome other, and acquit them; who
being generally charged, without exprefing to them any particu-
larity, do use all manner of speeches to discharge themselves:
whereof our pleasure is, that ye hall, after ye have well perused
the cot of this writing ent to yow, speedily declare unto her,
that we have good underflanding given us of diverse letters and
writings sent by her into Scot'lnd, signed by herown hand amongfr
which one such writing is sent with her commandment expressly
as now it is already published, as we are much troubled in mind
that a princess as the is having a cause in our own hands implica-
ted with dificultys and calamitys, flould either conceave in her
own mind, or allow of them that should devise such false, untrue,
and improbable matters againit us, and our honour, and specially
to have the aventure to have the fame being known so untrue to
be published; and you lhall also fay, because we will not think o
ill of her, as that it should proceed of her self, but rather he
hath been counselled thereunto, or by abuse made to think ome
part thereof to be true, we require her, even as he may Ibok
/or any favour at our hands, that Ihe will disburden herself as much
as truly fle may herein, and name them which have been the au-
thors and perfwaders thereof, and so flte hall make as great
amends to us as the cafe may require; after you have thus far pro-
ceeded, and some answer of her, whether ihe hall deny the writ-
ing absolutely, or name any that have been the advisers thereof,
you hall fay unto her.that we have flayed her commiflioners here
until by her answer the authors may be known; and as fqon as
you can have direc answers from her, we pray you to return us
the fame; for as the cafe standeth, we cannot but be much dif-
quieted with it, having our honour so deeply touched contr{ to
any intention in us, and for any thing we know in our judgment
the earl of Murray and others named in the fame writing void of
thought for the matters, to them therein imputed; you may im-
part to the queen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous

letter,

6
6i6

letter, or he w her the copy to read it, and you may also impart
this matter to the lord Scroop, to join with you there as you liall
think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Fetherb, the 28th

January 1568.

[An original. Paper-office.]
-e WILL suppress my own griefs, and pass them over with

J fi!ence, for the present learning of your majefty-and for

this queen's answer to the coppie of her supposed letter ent unto
Scotland, I muff add this unto my brother's letter, sent unto Mr.
Secretary yefternight late; in process of time he did not deny
but that the first lines contained in the said coppie was agreeable to
a letter that he had ent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of
Murray's promise to deliver her son into your majefly's hands,
and to avoid that the fame hould not be done without her con-
sent made her, he faith, to write in that behalf; he faith also
that they wrote that they hould cause a proclamation to be made
to flir her people to defend my lord of Murray's intent and pur-
pose, for delivering of her said son, and impunge his rebellious
government, as he termed it, but Ihe utterly denyeth to have
written any of the other slanderous part of the said letter touch-
ing your majesty; she said also, that she fufpeted that a Frenchman,
now in Scotland, might be the author of ome Scotch letters de.
vised in her name, but he would not allow me to write this for
any part of her answer.

No. XXXII. (p. 3o.)
Sir Nicholas 7hrokmorton to the right honourable the Iorf of Ledington.

[zoth July 1569. From the original.l

T OUR letter of the third of July, I have received the 1i th of
y the fame. For answer whereunto you flall underfand, that
friends here to my lord regent and you do wish such a concurrence
in all doings, as in matterand circumrsances there arise no dissension,
or at the least, no more nor other than the difference of countries
doth necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consummation of the matter
in hand, which principally to advance, your allowance, prose-
cution, and speedy promotion in Scotland, is mott requisite, for
you are so wife, and so well acquainted with the ate of the world,
and with all our humours, as you know that ome do allow and
disallow for reason, some for refpec of multitude, tome for refpeA
of persons, and so the cause is to go forward as men do like to et
forward. You are not to eek that ome will use cautions, some
neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly impunge it. And
yet all and every of there forts will alter their doings, when they
lhall fee the regent and his favourers accord with the het and
greatest part there, and agree with the wisest and strongef part
here. Tho' the matter has taken its beginning here upon deep
and weighty considerations, for the weill of both the princes and
their realms, as well presently, as in time to come, yet it is thought

Pons

617

most expedient, that the regent and realm of Scotland, by you,
Ihould propose the matter to the queen our sovereign, if you like
to use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a
fear, and no wounds of the hurts pall. I would be glad that this
my letter should come to your hands before the convention,
whereat it seems your queen's restoration and marriage to the
duke of Norfolk hould be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, because
you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus, me thinketh
vou use a prepoferous order, to demand the content of such per-
sons, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath rather
been felt or prepared, and therefore there mufl needs follow either
a universal refusal, or fa&tious division amongst you, whereby a
blouftering intelligence must needs come to queen Elizabeth of
the intended marriage from thence, which ought to have been
secretly and advisedly propounded unto her highness; hereby you
fee then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majefly thall be made
inexorable, and so bring the matter to such passe, as this which
should have wrought surety, quietness, and a kay to both queens
and their realms, Ihall augment your calamity, and throw us your
best friends into divorfe with you, and into happy divisions amongi
ourselves; for you may not conjecture that the matter is now in
deliberation, but expeteth good occasion for executing; Lure I
am you do not judge so slenderly of the managing this matter, as
to think we have not cal the worfl, or to enter therein so far with-
out the aflifance of the nobility, the ablest, the wisest, and the
mightiest of this realm, except queen Elizabeth: from whom it
hath been concealed until you, as the fitter minister, might pro
pound it to her, on the behalf of the regent and the nobility of
Scotland. How far maner WQddes defamations do carry them of
queen Elizabeth's affections, and malter secretary's, to affifl the
regent and to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it
not material; but I do assuredly think, that her majesty will pre
ser her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and the conservation
of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vain
discourse, or imperfecions of paflions, and inconsiderate affections.
And as for Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh
not to go too fail afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind,
and specially when the reliques be of no great value or power.
If I could as well afure you of his magnanimity, and constancy,
us of his present conformity, I would fay confidently you may
repose as well of him in this matter, as of the duke of Norfolk,
the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury,
and the reft of the nobility; and which do embrace and proteRe
the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to your ad-
vice, written to my lord regent, with the fame zeal and care of
his well doing that I owe to him, whom I love and honour. Mr.
Secretary hath asured unto him the queen of Scotland's favour
and good opinion, wherewith he feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If
your credit be, as I trust, haften your coming hither, for it is
very eceffary that you were here presently. Q. Elizabeth both

doth
61S

doth write to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may perceive Mr.
Wood's discourses of her majesty's affeRion to be vain, and Mr.
Secretary otherwise bent than he conjetureth of him, the effect
of which her majety's letter you hall underltand, by my lord
Leicester's letter unto you at this dispatch. At the court, o
July 1569.

No. XXIII. (p. 30z.)
Part of a letter from tIe' ar of Murray to L. B. (probaly lord

Burleigh.)

[1569. Harl. Lib. 3. B. 9. so. 43.]
-T ECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small

J occasions, and that the mention of the marriage betwixt

the queen my sovereign's mother and the d. of Norfolk hath this
while pall been very frequent in both the realms, and then I my-
self to be spoken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the laRs
come to her majesty's ears; I will for fatisfaftion of her highness,
and the discharge of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto
you my interelf, and meddling in that matter, from the very be-
ginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudicial to her highness
cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm,
and me. What conferences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk,
and any of them that were with me within the realm of Eng-
land, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of
any thing that pafred betwixt him and me, either at that time
or since. And to the end her majefRy may underRand how
have been dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
some circumstances, before there was any mention of her mar-
riage. In York, at the meeting of all the commiflioners, I
found very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and other her
highness's commiflioners in the beginning of the cause, as in the
making of the others to proceed sincerely, and so furth. During
which time I entered into general speech, flicking at our jus de-
fence in the matters that were obje&ed againf us by the said
queen's commissioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but
summary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a final decla-
ration to have followed. Upon a certain day the lord of Lithing-
ton secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they
had Ican not fay, but that night Lithington returning, and enter-
ing in conference with me upon the Rate of our aftion, I was
advised by him to pass to the duke, and require familiar confe-
rence, by the which I might have some feeling to what iue our
matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten
time and place convenient in the gallery of the house where tha
duke was lodged, after renewing of our first acquaintance made
at Berwick, the time before the assize of Leith, and some speeches
passed betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he in England
had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendlhip
of many, it was to be thought there could be none more fit inftru-
ments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt the
realms than we two. And so that discourse upon the present fate
of both, and how I was entered in that aion tending so far to

the

61

queen's dishonour, I was willed, by him to confider how matters
flood in this, what honour I had received of the-queen, and what
inconveniencies her defamation in the matters laid to her charge
might breed to her pollerity. Her re(pet was not little to the
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hlamiltons mr
unfriends had the next respect, and that I should e!ceem the issue
of her body would be the more afferionateto me and mine, than
any other that could attain to that crown. And so it hould be
meeteft, that the affirmed her difmifiion rade in Lochlevin, and
a.e do abart- the lettes of her hand write, that he should
ot be def-.rned in Eng!and. MI- reply to that was, how the
mrnl::e had paiFed in pSlinam-nt, and the letters seen of many, so
that the abfractin, of the fame could not then secure her to any
purpose, and et ihocld we, in that doing bring the ignominy
upon ui. Arming it vwoald be fair for us that way to proceed,
ecing? the queen's majeftv of England was not made privy to the
matter as he rught to be, in refpeet we were purposely come in
England for that end, and for the-of the grants of our cause.
The duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle matters
well enough at the court. After this, on the occasion of certain
articles, that were required to be resolved on, before we entered
on the declaration of the very ground of our action, we came up
to the court; where some new commissioners were adjoined to the
former, and the hearing of the matterordained to be in the par-
iament house at Weftminfler inprefence of which commiflioners
of the said queen, and- - through the--ebuking of the queen
cf England's on commi-3ioners, we uttered the whole of the ac-
tion, and produced such evidences, letters and probations, as
we had, which might move the queen's majesty to think well of
our cause. Whereupon expecing her highnes declaration, and
seeing no great likelihood of the fame to be fqddenlv given, but
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said queen,
our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, tanding in
hazard and danger, we were put to the uttermolt point off our
wit to imagine whereunto the matters would tend, tho' albeit we
had left nothing undone forjuftification of our causes, yet appear-
ed no end, but continual motions made to come to some accord
with the queen and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other answer to give them, but that I should neither do against
conscience or honour in tha: matter. Notwithlanding feeing this
mv plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I
was informed that the duke began to mislike of me, and to speak
of me, as that I had reporte of the said queen irreverently, calling
her--- and murderer; I was advised t pass to him, and give
im good words, and to purge myself of the things objected to
me, that I hould not open the sudden entry of his evil grace,
nor have him to our enenmv-- confidering his greatness. It being
therewithal whispered, and thewed to me, that if I departed, he
standing discontented and not satisfied, I might peradventure find

Probably adultrrer.

such
629

fich trouble in my way, as my throat might be cut before f
came to Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough ap-
pear to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair, that
my good will could-not be had therein. So few days before my
departing I came to the park in Hampton Court, where the duke
and I met together, and there I declared unto him that it was come
to my ears, how ome misreport hould be made of me to him,
a that I should speak irreverently and ralhly of the said queen my
sovereign's mother, such words as before expref'ed that he might
_* thereby my affection to be so alienate from her, as that I
could not love her, nor be content of her preferment, howbeit
he might perfwade himfelfof the contrary, for as (he once was the
person in the world that I loved belt, having th :t honour to be so
near unto her, and having received such advancement and honour
by her, I'was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wish her body
harm, and to speak of her as was untruly reported of me (howfo-
ever the truth was in the felf),and as to the preservation of her son,
now my sovereign, had moved me to enter into this cause, and that
her own prefling was the occasion of that was uttered to her
-t whensoever God hould move her heart to repent of her
by pal behaviour and life, and after her own repentance, that she
Ihould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that
he was entered in, and then after were joined with such a godly
and honourable a personage, as were affetioned to the true reli-
gion, and whom we might trulf, I could find in my heart to love
her, and to hew her as great pleasure, favour, and good will, as
erer I did in my life; and in cafe he should be that personage,
there was none whom I could better like of, the queen-in-
of England being made privy to the matter, and he allowing
thereof, which being done, I hould labour in all things that I
could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
king my sovereign's estate, and prayed him not to think other-
wife of me, for my affection was rather buried and hidden within
me, awaiting until God should direet her to know herself, than
utterly alienated and abliraded from her; which he seemed to ac-
cept in very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of
me that thing, whereunto I will make none in England or Scot-
land privy, and thou halt Norfolk's life in thy hands. So depart-
ing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and allnight, I was
in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave my-
self in that weighty matter, first, imagining whereunto this Should
tend, if it were attempted wtthout the queen's majelly of Eng-
land's knowledge and good will, this realm, and I myself in par-
ticular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness, since God
possessed her majelly with the crown. And on the other part,
feeing the duke had disclosed him to me, protelting, none other
were or Ihould be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not find in
ay heart to utter any thing that might endanger him; moved to

* Probablyfifpe.

+ Probably /li'cr.ar.

the

the nttermolt with these cogitations, and all desire of leep then
removed, I prayed God to end me some good relief and outgate
to my discharge, and fatisfafion of my troubled mind, which I
found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of LeiceRfer, in his
chamber at the court, where he began to find frange with me,
that in the matter I made so difficult to him, anding so precisely
on conference, and how when I had in my communicaton with
the duke, come so far---and there he made some discourse with
me, about that which was talke betwixt us, I perceiving that the
duke had-* the matter to my lord of LeiceRer, and thinking
me thereby discharged at the duke's hands, therefore I repeated
the fame communication in every point to my lord of Leicefler,
who desired me to hew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
refused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highnefi
any thing, that he as one-by her majeRfy, and for many benefits
received at her highness's hands is obliged to with her well, hould
make declaration of the fame to her majesty, as I undertand by
some speech of her highness to me, he did. This my declaration
to the duke was the only cause, that staid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways underflood.
The fame declaration I was obliged to renew since in writings of

-- ent to my servant John Wood. The fum whereof, I trul,

he hewed the duke, and something also I wrote to himself, forit
was tho't this should redeem some time, that the duke houldnot
suddenly declare him our enemy, for his greatness was often laid
before me, and what friendship he had of the chief of the nobili-
ty in England-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly
that might seem favourable for us, we had ofme cause to fufped
that her highness should not be contrarious to the marriage when
it hould bepropofed to her. The sharp message sent by her ma-
jefy wjth the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion of the duke
tending so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that her
highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that Ihe might
be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised in Eng-
land, that the lord of Lethington fmould come as from me, and
break the matter to her highness, as her majesty in a letter declared
that (he looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never
of me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife accord
to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether
mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies to the
surety and quietness of this whole isle; for our proceedings have
declared our mifliking and disallowance of the purpose from the
beginning, and if we had pleased he was ready for the journey.
And in likewise it was devised to give consent, that the-t be-
tween the said queen and Bothwell, should be suffered to proceed
in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd, by reason
we could not underfand what was the queen's majesty's pleasure,

* Probably JIfclofi. Probably Jivortc.

ano
6Z2

1

and allowance in that behalf-And whereas ye mean, that her
highness was not made privy of any such intention, the fault
was not in me. The first motion being declared, as I have written
to my lord of Leicester, and by him imparted to her majesty, so
far as I could perceive by some speech of her highness's to me,
before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have
been dealt withal for this marriage, and how jut neceflity moved
me not to require dire&ly that which the duke appeared so-
unto. And for my threatenings, to assent to the fame, I have
expressed the manner; the persons that laid the matter before me,
were of my own company. But the duke since hath spoken, that
it was his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion
1 pray you persuade her majesty, that fie let no speeches nor
any other thing passed and objeced to my prejudice, move her
majesty to alter her favour-towards me, or any ways to doubt
of my assured constancy towards her highness: for in any thing
which may tend to her honour and surety, I will, while I live be-
flow myself, and all that will do for me, notwithstanding my ha-
zard or danger, as proof ihould declare, when her majesty finds
time to employ me.
[Here began the Appendixes to the Second Volume

of the former Editions.

No. I. (p. 310.)
'illliam Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicejter, March

0oth, 1570, from Ledington

[An original.]

rHE great defolatiorr threatened to this whole realm, be the
, divlfions thereof in dangerous factions, doth press me to
frame my letters to your lordship in other forts, then were be-
hovefuill for me, if I had no other refpet, but only to maintain
my private credit; therefore I am driven to furnilh them with
matter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by mifcon-
truingmy meaning, some there may take occasion of offence,
thinking that rather utter my own paflions, than go about to
inform your lordlhip truly of the fate; but I rult my plain deal-
ing lhall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the
fame' sensible, I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of
this country; which firt is divided into two fa&ions, the one pre-
tending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other alledging
the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly depriv-
ed of her tate; the former is composed of a good number of no-
bility,' gentlemen, and principal burroughs of the realme, who
Ihall haveils Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's ma-
jeRly your sovereign's allowance and protection; the other hath in
it some most principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good
numbers of the inferior fort throughout the whole realm, which

also

6<3

also look afluredly that all kings do allow their quarrel and will
aid them accordingly. What consequence this division will draw
after it, I leave it to your lordlhips consideration, there is fallen
out another division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death,
which is like to change the fate of the other two factions, to en-
crease the one, and diminilh the other, which is grounded upon
the regiment of the realm. Some number of noblemen afpireto
the government, pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's
demifion of the croun, and her commiflion granted at that time
for the regiment during the king's minority; another faction doth
altogether repine against that division, thinking it neither fit nor
tolerable, that three or four of the meanelt fort amongst the earls
ihall presume to challenge to themselves a rule over the whole
realme, the next of the blood, the first in rank, the greateRl al-
way both for the antientry of their houses, degree, and forces,
being negleckted; this order they think preposterous, that the
meaner fort mall be placed in public function tocommand, and the
greater hall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commifion had in the beginning been valewable (which
the mofR part will not grant) yet it cannot be extended to the pre-
sent, for that the conditions thereunto annexed are ceased, and so
the effect of the whole void; the latter part of this division hath
many pretences, for hefides the queen's faction, which is wholly
on that fide, a great number of these that have heretofore pro-
sessed the king's obedience do favour the fame; and will not yield
to the government of the other, whose preferment for refpeds
they miilike, when the queen's faction lhall be increased, with a
part of the king's, and these not of least substance, and yow may
judge what is like to ensue; an other incident is like to move
men to enter in further discourses, it is given out here in Scotland
that the queen's majesty is setting forth ome forces towards the
border, which shall enter this realm, to countenance there, that
aspire to the regiment, and suppress their contrary faction, and
bruits are spread, that the fame hall be here out of hand; these
that think themselves of equal force with their contrary faction
at home, are rather an overmatch to them, yet not able to en-
counter with the forces of another prince, rather than yield to
their inferiors, will, I fear, take advice of necessity, and evil
counselors, and seek also the maintenance of rome foreign prince,
whereby her majesty (altho' no further inconvenient were to be
feared) mull be driven to excessive charges, and it would appear
there was a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to set us
together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame
time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon with a messenger sent
expressly from the king of France, to that part of the nobility
that favours the queen, to learn the state of the countryj and what
support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs,
or for their own safety; assuredly this message will be well received
and suffered accordingly, this is the present state of Scotland.
lJow if your lordship would also know my opinion, how to choice
the bet, as the cafe ftandetb; I will in that also fatisfieyour lord.

fihip

nhip, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lordfhipi
Ihall judge whether I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing; -
when I imply utter my judgment, and go not about to disguise
my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a desire to retain at
her devotion the realme of Scotland, which he hath gone about
to purchase, with beflowing great charges, and the loss of some
of her people; this desire is honourable for her highness; profit-
able for both the countrys, and of none to be disallowed; fpeci-
ally if it be (as take it) to have the amity of the whole realm,
for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it
prove commodious for her to suit the friend|ip of a faction of
Scotland, for in so doing, in gaining the bel, he may lose the
more, and the fame would bring all her, actions with us in fufpi-
cion, if Ibe hould go about to nourish facions amongfl us, which
meaning I am fare never entered into her majesty's heart;, then if
it be the friend'hip of the whole he doth demand, let her not ·
for pleasure of one part, go about to overthrow the remnant,
which will'not be so faifable, as some may give her to underhand;
but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
whole slate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by
good means to an uniformity, so hall he give us all occasion
to think well of her doings, that she tendeth our wealth, and pro-
vokes us univerfallyto wish unto her majelly a most prosperous
continuance; by the contrary, if, for the pleaure of a few, he
will fend forces to suppress these whom they milike, and so con-
fequently offend many; men be not so faint hearted, but they have
courage to provide for their own safety, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further, at the
hand of other princes. This for mine own part, I do abhor, and
protest I desire never to fee forces of ltrangers to set foot within
this land, yet I know not what point necessity may drive men into,
as if men in the middle of the tea were in a hip, which suddenly
should be set on fire, the fear of burning would make them leap
into the tea, and oon after the fear of the water would drive them
to cleive again to the fired hip, so for avoiding prefeic evil, men
will-many times be inforced to have recourse to another no lets
dangerous. Truil me forces will not bring forth any good fruit
to her majelty's behove, it must be ofme way of treaty hall serve
the turn, wherein by my former letters your lordship doth know
already what is my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write,
without consideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet
my hope is that such as will favourably interpret them, shall think
that I mean as well to her majelty, and that realme, as these that
will utter other language. I wish the continuance of the amity
betwixt the two countrys, without other refpe&, and will not con-
ceal from her majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to
the prejudice thereof; if I hall perceave her majesty taking frank
dealings in evil part, I hall from thenceforth forbear; in the
mean season I will not cease to trowble your lordihip, as I hall have
occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your lordship.

,6Zs
S f

No. U,

No. II. (p. 313.)
Letter of gueen Elizabeth to the earle of Sulks, July d, 1570.

[Caldcrw. MS. Hilfory, vol. t. p. 189.]

IGHT truty and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this
day we have received your letters of 28th last month, with

all other letters, sent from Scotland, and mentioned in your letters,
whereunto answer is desired to be given before the tenth of this
month; which is avery short time, the weightiness of the mat-
ters, and the distance of the places confidered; nevertheless we
have, as the shortness could susser it, resolved to give this answer
following, which we will that yow, by warrant hereof hall cause
to be given in our name to the earle of Lennox and the reRf of
the noblemen conveened with him. Where it is by them, in
their letters and writings alledged, that for lack of our resolute
answer, concerning the establishing of the regiment of the realm,
under the young king, great inconveniencies have happened, and
therefore they have deferred now at their last convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who lhall have the place of governour, until
the 2 ft this month, before which time they require to have our
advise, in what person or persons the government of that realm
{hall be established, we accept very thankfully the good will and
reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly to require and
follow our advise in a matter that toucheth the ate of their king,
theirfelves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have taken
more discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to
their fate and surety, so on the other part, they of their wisdoms
ought to think, that it might be by the whole world evil inter-
preted in us to appoint them a form of government, or governour
by name, for that howsoever we hould mean well if we ihould
do so, yet it could not be without some jealousy in the heads of
the estate, nobility, and community of that realm, that the govern-
ment thereof Ihould be by me specially named, and ordained; so
as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking most that they
ihould tale any discomfort by our forbearing to how our mind
therein, we have thought this fort for to proceed, confidering
with ourselves how now that realm had been a good space of time
ruled in the name of their king, and by reason of his bate age,
governed heretofore by a very careful and honourable person, the
earle of Murray, untill that by a mischievous person (an evil
example), he was murdered, whereby great disorder and confu-
sion of necessity had, and will more follow, if determination be
not made of some other special person, or persons, to take the
charge of governor, or foperior ruler, fpeciall for administration
of law and justice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of
these lords to have some fpeciall governor to be chosen; and
therefore being well alfured, that their own underlanding of all
others is best to confider the fate of that realm, and to discern the
abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a
charge, we hall better fatisfie ourselves, whom they by their

common

common content shall first choose, and appoint to that purpose,
then of many to be by us aforehand uncertainly named, and that
because they hall perceave that we have care of the person of
their king, who by nearness of blood, aid in refpe& of his so
young years, ought to be very tender and dear to us, we hall
not hide our opinon from them, but if they -hall all accord to
name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox to be go-
vernor alone, or jointly with others (whom we hear'to be in the
mean time by their comfnon content appointed lieutenant-gene-
ral) reason moveth us to think that hone can be chosen in that
whole realm, that hall more desire the preservation of the king,
and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being
next to him in blood of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere;
and yet hereby, we do not mean to prescribe to them this choice
except they shall of themselves fully and 'freely allow thereof,
furthermore we would have them well assured, that whatsoever
reports of devises, are, or hall be spread or invented, that we
have already yielded our mind to alter the state of the king or
government of that realm, the fame are without just cause or
ground by us given, for as we have already advertized them,
that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could
not refuse what the queen of Scots on her part hall fay and offer,
not only for her own assurance, but for the wealth of that realm,
yet not knowing what the fame will be, that hall be offered, we
mean not to break the order of law and jdftice, by advancing
her cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we hall deliberate-
ly and assuredly fee 'upon haring of the whole, some place ne-
celfary, and jull cadfe to do; and therefore finding that realme
ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm, and
therefore invested by coronation add other folemnities uted and
requisite and generally so received by the whole efates, we mean
not by yielding to hear the complaints or'informations of the queen
againff her on, to do any a whereby to make conclusion of
governments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to con-
tinue, yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we may
impelhe, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your late tions
hath manifestly appeared, untill by some justice, and clear cause,
we hal1 be direflly induced otherwise to declare our opinion; and
this we would' have them to know to be our determination and
course that we mean to hold/ whereon we traft they for their king
may fee how plainly and honourably we mean to proceed, and how
little cause they have to doubt of us, whatsoever to the contrary
they have or shall hear; and on the other part, we pray them of
their wisdoms to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all human
order it were sor.us, when the queen of Scotland doth so many
ways require to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered by
us in the fame, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as
betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm, against
which offers no reason could move us to refuse to give ear, that we
Ihould aforehand openly and directly before the cafes be heard and
confidejed, as it were, give ajudgment or sentence either for our-

Ss z felvei

selves or for them whom She maketh to be her contraries. Finally
ye Ihall admonih them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
good meaning towards them, or by indire& assertions of their
adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own
cause, in such fort, that our good meaning towards them hall not
take such effet towards them, as they hall desire, or themselves
have need of. Allthis our answer ye hall cause be given them,
and let them know, that for the hortnefs of time, this being the
end of the second of this month, we neither could make any longer
declaration of our mind, nor vet write any several letters, as if
time might have served we would have done. ad July 1570.

No. II. (p. 314.)
Tbef bibop o R/s tojecrrtary Lidinglonfrom Chattifworih.

E 5th June 1 57.]

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at
Chattifwbrth, the loth of January, but on the receipt thereof

i had written to you at length, like as the queen did with my lord
Levingfon, by the which you will be resolved of many points
contained in your said letter. I writ to you that 1 received your
letter and credit from Thomas Cowy at London, and ent to
Leicefer to know the queen of England's mind whether you
tLould come here or not. He ent me word, that (he will no ways
have you come as one of the commifiioners, because she is yet
offended with you; and therefore it appears good that ye come not
hither, but remain where you are, to use your wisdom and dili-
gence, as may bell advance the queen's affairs, for perceive your
weill and. safety depends thereon, in refpe& of the great feid and
ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the great
heirflip taken of your father's landis; both were sure demonftra-
tions of their malice. Yet I am encouraged by your flout and de-
liberate mind. Adre yourself no diligence hall be omitted to
procure supports forth off all parts where it may be had. We will
not refuse the aid neither of Papill, Jew, nor Gentil, after my
advice; and to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well
prepared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
Slanders, the queen thinks it very neceflary that he so do, for the
duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain
to give support, and am sure that he fallihave aid both of Flan-
ders and the pope, for it abides only on the coming of ome men
of countenance, to procure and receive the fame. He mull needs
'tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during the treaty,
which will be a greater furtherance to the fame here. The queen
has already written to the duke D'Alva for this effe&, advertizing
of his coming; there is certain ums of money coming for fupp6rt
of the Engliflmen as I wrote,to you before from the pope.
-Whereupon I would he had a general commifilon to deal for them,
and receive such fums as lhall be given. The means hall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be difpoifit
upon the frnihing of the castle of Edinburgh, so being some
hopeft and true man were febt to Slanders to receive it, as said

is,

is, which I would you prepared and sent. Orders hall be taken
for the metals as you writ of. We have proponit your avyce
in entering to treat with the queen of England, for retiring of
her forces puntvoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the En-
gliflhmen are tho't very good, but above all keep you weill out of
their hands, in that cafe, eote prudentes ficut serpentes. You
may take experience with the hard dealing with-me, how ye would
be used if ye were here, and yet, I am not forth of danger, be-
ing in medio nationis prave; always no fear, with God's grace,
{hall make me shrink from her majesty's service. Since the queen
of England has refused that you come here, it appears to me quod
nondum eft fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol
or Cathenes might by any means be procured to come, they were
the molt fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet, if he and I
were not both of one firname; so the treaty would get the less
credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend the
best may serve the turn, and fil not Robert Melvil come with
them, whoever comes, for so i the queen's pleasure; in my last
packet, with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I
sent a letter of the queen's own handwriting to him, which I trust
ye received. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped
to have had by your presence, for you could well have handled
the queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do.
The relf I refer to your good wisdom, praying God to fend you
health. From Chattifworth the 5thof January.

No. IV. (p. 37.)
Tbe declaration of obn Cai to the lords of Grange and Lethington

xoungare upaon the Sgh day of 03. 1571.

HEREAS you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure,

W what he will do for appeasing of these controversies, and
therewith has offered yourselves to be at her commandment,
touching the common tranquility of the whole isle, and the amity
of both realms; her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye hould
leave off the maintenance of this civil discord, and., give your
obedience to the king, whom she will maintain to the utmost of
her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and the king's

party to receive you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for
security of life and livings.

ALSO he fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she has prac-

tifed with the pope and other princes, and alfq with her own fb-
jeCts in England, great and dangerous treasons against the state of
her own country, and also to the deftrution of her own person, that
she hall never bear authority, nor have liberty while she lives.

IF ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you, he will

presently aid the king's party, with men, ammunition, and all
neceflary things to be had against you.

WHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with speed,
without any delay.

No. V.

629

No. V. (p. 334.)
ArticlesJcnt by Knox to te General Affienly, Aggufi th, 57z.

[Calderw. MS. Hiltory, vol. . 356]

IRST, desiring a new at to be made ratifying all things con-

F cerning the king and his obedience that were enacted of before
without any change, and that the miniRfers who have contraveened
the former as be corre&ed as accordeth.

TH AT fate be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintain-

ing the king's cause, that whatsoever proceedeth in this treaty of
peace they be mindful the kirk be not prejudg'd thereby, in any
fort, and they especially of the ministers, that have been robbed
of their poffeflions within the kirk during the time of the troubles,
or otherwise dung and injured, may be restored.

To fate at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other

benefice be given to any person, contrary to the tenor of the Ats
made in the time of the firlR regent of good memory, and they
that are given contrar the said afts, or to any unqualified person,
may be revoked and made null be an a of secret council, and
that all bifliopricks, so vacand may be presented, and qualified
persons nominat thereunto, within a year after the vaking hereof,
according to the order taken in Leith be the ccmmiflioners of
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January last, and in
special to complain upon the giving of bithoprick in Ross to the
lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or small, be given be

simple donation of my lord regent without consent of the posses-
for of the said benefices having title thereto, and the admiflion of
the superintendent or commifioners of the province where this
benefice lyeth, or of the bilhops lawfully elected according to the
said order taken at Leith; and desire an a& of council to be made
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine may be
specially inafted, with inhibition to the lords of fellion to give any
letters or decreets, upon such fumple gifts of benefices or penti-
ons not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk
presently assembled declare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in
their power.

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which were

in the first and second regent's time, be not changed as now it is
commonly; but that this clause be contained in the presentation,
that if the person presented make not refidance, or be slanderous
or found unworthy either in life or doctrine be the judgment of
the kirk (to which alwife he mhall be subjet) or meet to be tranf-
ported to another room at the fight of the kirk, the said prefen-
tation and 'all that hall fall thereupon Ihall be null and of no
force nor effect; and this to have place also in the nomination of
the biflops.

THAT an a be made in this assembly that all things done in

prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third, either by papists
or others, by giving of fews, life-rents, or taks, or s.ny otherwise

difponing

difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null with a solemn
protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereunto.

THAT an at be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, ad-

mitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account of
their whole rents, and intromiflions therewith once in the year, as
the kirk hall appoint, forfuch causes as the kirk may easily con-
fider the fame to be most expedient and neceffar.

AN E N T the jurifdi&ion of the kirk, that the fame be determin-

ed in this assembly, because this article hathlong been poltponed
to make suit to the regent and council for remedy againRf messen-
gers and excommunicate persons,

LAST, That orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk,

who procure againt ministers andminiftry, and for futting of jus-
tice of the kirk's actions in the session.

No. VI. (p. 337.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

23d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Kil-
ligrewe, Efq; ambassador for the queen's majesty of Eng-

land, Forasmuch as, at the earnest motion and solicitation being
made to me, on her highness's behalf there is accord and pacifica-
tion of the public trouble and civil war within this realm of
Scotland agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably extend-
ed towards the right honourable George earl of Huntly, lord Gor-
don and Baidzenuch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the
duke's grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby
of Abirbrothock, for the surety of theirlives, livings, honours,
and goods of them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and par-
takers, now properly depending on them; in treating of the
which said pacification, the murders of the late earl of Murray
uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the
king's majesty of Scotland his realm and lieges, as also an article
touching the discharge for the frufis or moveable goods, which
the said persons have taken fra persons professing the king's obe-
dience, before the damages done -'r committed by them, since
the th day of Junij 1567, and before the penult day of July
last by passed, by reason of the common cause or any thing de-
pending thereupon, being thought by the king's commifraies
matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's present re-
gent could not conveniently, of himself, remit or discharge the
fame. Yet in refpe& of the neceility of the present pacification,
and for the weill of the king, and common quietness, of this realm
and lieg s, it is accorded, that the matters of remifion of the
said murderers, and of the discharge of the said frutis, moveable
goods, and other damages, be moved by the persons desiring the
said remiflion and dlfcharge to the queen's majesty my sovereign,
as o the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the king
of Scots. And whatsoever her majelty hall advise and counsel
touching the said remiflion and discharge, the said lord regent,
for the weill of the king and universal quietness of the realm of

Scotland,

63t

Scotland, hall perform, observe, and fulfil the fame. And in
likewise, the said earl Huntlv, and coinmendatour of Abirbro-
thock, being urged to have delivered pledges and hofRages for ob-
servation of the conditions of the said accord and pacification,
hath required me in place thereof, in her majefly's name, by vir-
tue of my commifion, to promise for them, that they hall truly
and faithfully observe and keep the said pacification, and all ar-
ticles and conditions thereof, for their parts, and that it would
please her majesty to interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for
them to that effeA, to the king's majefy of Scotland their fove-
reign and his said regent, which I have done and promise to do,
by virtue of her majesty's commifion, as by the honourable and
plain dealing of the said earl and lord, their intention to peace
well appears, the fame being molt agreeable to the mind of the
queen's majesty my sovereign, which so long by her ministers hath
travelled for the said pacification, and in the end, at her motion
and solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majesty's de.
fire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that the noblemen
and others now returning to the king's obedience hall have fuffi-
cient surety for their lives, livings, honours, and goods. There-
fore in her majesty's name, and by virtue of my commission, I
promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly and ;ommendator of Abir-
brothock, that by her majesty's good means, the said remission
and discharge hall be purchased and obtained to them, their kins-
folks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending
upon them (the perobns specified in the first abstinence always ex-
cepted), as also that the said pacification hall be truly observed
to them, and that her majefsy shall interpose herself as conferva-
trix thereof, and endeavour herself to cause the fame to Be truly
and fincerelv kept in all points and articles thereof accordingly.
In witness whereof, have to thiS present subscribed with my hand,
and feaied the fame with mine own feal the 3th day of Feb. Anno
Domini 157?. Ar,d this to be performed by me, betwixt the
date hereof, and the parliament which hall be appointed for
their restitution, or at the furthest before the end of the said par-
liament. Sic fubfcribitur.
TIe A;,op of GlafgYv's nlte cncenring-the qyyeen of Sotland'

dowry.

[1577 Co't. Iib. Calig. B. 4.]

HE queen of Scotland, dcwvager of France, had for her
downr, besides other pofleflions, the dukedom of Turene,

which was fo!emnly contraaed and given to her by the king and
elates of parliament; which dukedom he poffefled peacefully
till 1567, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and
MonL. his brother, to augment whose appenage this dutchy was
given, to which the queen of Scotland yielded upon account of
princes, who were her near relations, provided the equivalent
which was promised her should be faithfully performed. So that
year, after a great many solicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, he
had granted her the county of Vermandaife with the lands and

bailiwicks
632

bailiwicks of Seuley andVetry: tho' 'tis known that county and
the other lands were not of equal value with Turene, but was pro-
mifed to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an
equal value. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were
confirmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accounts,
court of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others necessary;
upon which (he entered into pofiefficn of that county, &c. As-
terwards, by a valuation of the commiflioners of the chamber of
accounts, it was found that the revenue of that county, &c. did
not amount to those of Turene, by 3000 livres. But inflead of
making up this deficiency according to juflice, some of the privy
council, viz. M. de Cheverney, the presidents of Believre, Ni.
cocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwitllhand-
ing of her aforesaid losses, did fell and alienate the lands of Senlis,
and the Dutchy of Eftaimpes, to madame de Montpenfier, from
whom the king received money; of which sale the counsellors
aforesaid obliged them to be guarantees, which hath hindered the
aforesaid queen to have jullice done her. So that madam de Mont,
penfier hath been put in possession of these lands of Senlis, con-
trary tothe declaration, proteflation, and assurances of the king
of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the queen of
Scotland is difpoffeffed of her dowry, contrary to all equity, with-
out any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (p. 341.)

A letter from the lord of Lochle-vin to the regent Mortoun.

[3d March 1577. E. of Mortoun's Archives. Bund. B. No. 19.]
TT will please your grace, I received your grace's letter, and

has confidered the fame. The parson of Camsey was here at

me before the receipt thereof, directed fra my lord of Mar, and
the mailer anent my last written, which was the firfl answer of the
writing that the mailer ent to me, which I fend to your grace,
desiring me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had
iven my answer before the receit of your grace's letter, that I
behuiffit to be besyd San& Androis, at ane friends tryll, which I
might not omit: I underhtand by my said cousin, that the king's
majefy is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent
your lordship's trial, and that he had written before his dep. rture
to my lord Monthrois. I underfland likewise, he will write to
your grace to come there for the fame effec, which I tho't good
to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace,
for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the best, and not to
sleep in security, but to turn you with unfeigned heart to God,
and to cnfider with yourself, that when the king's majesty was
very young, God made him the instrument to divert his mother
from her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of
his Divine Majesty, and that there ran no vice in her, but that
the fame is as largely in you, except that your grace condescend-
ed not to the deftru&ion of your wife. For as to harlotry and
ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God, and far
more with avaritioufnefs, with vycis God never left unplagued,

except

633

except speedy repentance, which I pray God grant to your grace,
for otherwise your grace can never have the love of God nor man.
I pray your grace flatter not your self; for if your grace believes
that ye have the good will of them that are kings good willers
ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfedcly that your own pat-
ticulars are not contented, lat be the reft, and that most princi-
pally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace, beir with me
that I am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge,
but from the very affection of my heart towards your grace, which
has continued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
the matter stands in your graces handling with the king's majesty,
for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I fee not
how ye ihall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to God,
and look on the bell, and cast from your grace both your vices,
to wit, ambition and avaritioufnefs. I am riding this day to
Sand Androis. and trust to return on Wednefdav at the farthest.
If your grace will command me in any offices that are hones, that
I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertize of your
grace's mind, and lhall do to my power and knowledge, and this
with my heartlie, &c.

To our trrufy cof/in the lord Lochlevin.

[From the original. E. of Morton's Archives, Bund. B. No. 31.]
T RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, we

received your letter of the 3d of March, and as we take

your plainness therein in good part, as proceeding from a friend
and kinsman, in whose good affection towards us we never doubt-
ed, so ye may not think it firange that we purge ourself so saros
your accusation, as in conscience we find not ourself to have of-
fended in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to ex-
cufe it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition surely we
think none can justly accuse us; for in our private estate wecould,
and can live as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland,
without further aspiring. The bearing too the charge of govern-
ment of the realm, indeed, mon lead us, or any other that Ihall
occupy that place, not imply to our refpe& ourself, but his ma-
jefty's rowme, which we fuppiy, and therein not transcending the
bounds of measure, as, we trust, it hall not be found we have
done, it ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us. For as
soon as ever his majesty fhlall think himself ready and able for his
own government, none hall more willingly agree and advance
the fame nor I, since I think never to set my face againfi him,
whose honour, safety, and preservation has been so dear unto me,
nor I will never believe to find otherwise at his hand than favour,
although all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him,
to persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is not thank-
fully acquit; as we trust yourself confiders; but because the am-
baffadors of England, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, trea-
furer, and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we
pray you heartily address yourself to be there as soon as ye can,

and
63+

and as ye lhall find the likelihood of all things, let us be adver-
tized thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we
have thought good to fend well, feeing my lord of Angus from
Sterling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protec-
tionof God. AtHolyroodhoufe, the 4thof March 1577.

FOR the avaritioufnefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in

us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers,
nor ever hall any sovereign, and native born prince, let be any
officer, eschew the disdains of such, as think them judges to their
own regard; in many causes I doubt not to find the aflillance of
my friends, but where my ations shall appear unhonefl, I will not
crave their afliflance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (p. 257.)
Letter of Waldingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3. 1 580-.

[Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 6.]

SIR,
HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your let-
ter of the zSth of the last direced unto his lordship, contain-

ing a report of your negociation with the king and his council.
in your second audience, wherewith having made her majesty ac-
quainted, he seemed somewhat to miJ/ike, that you should so long
defer to dealfor the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made an-
fwer in your behalf, that I thought you were direted by the ad-
vice of the said Empedoclesfriends, in the soliciting of that cause,
who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal therein,
with most effe&, and bell success, with which answer her majesty
did in the end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

You a putting of us in hope that d'Aubigney might easily be

won at her majesty's devotion, was at first interpreted to have been
ironie spoke by you. But since it feemeth you infiRf upon it, I
could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man, or at lead
kept thatopinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose
of his coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty,- and reception
into that government, to overthrow religion, and to procure a
foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which
you may use to good purpose there, Ihall partly give you some
light; there is no man here can be persuaded that he will change
his purpose, for so small advantage as he is likely to find by it,
and therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp any more
upon that string, as I have already written to you. The prince
of Orange fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do any
good; for besides that these people are in themselves flow in their
resolutions, their own affairs are, at present, so great, their tate
so confused, and the prince's authority so small, that he cannot so
soon take order in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been
negligent or careless in the matter, having, more than three
weeks pals, sent about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
nothing. The letters you desire Ihould be written thither by the
French ministers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrew to pro-

cure,

63)

care, who, I doubt not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope,
1 all have them to fend you by the next. And so I commit
you to God. At Whitehall, te 3d of February I580.

Your very loving cousin and servant.

FRA. WALSINGHAM.

This letter is an original, andin iome parts of it wrote in cphers

and extlain'd a) another and. By Empedocles is u;zderlood
Mcrton. , iyll'uarias the king of Scots, D'Aubigney is marked
lcus 01 0

3. Feb. 5jSo.
Suidry nctes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to e

better mwstaJJisfe, be.; noL v t:hought meet to be in convenient fort
afd, and 'aid agaist D'Aubigny, to prove him abujing the king,
toe nasoiit) and i;bat ifa:e.

[Cot L;b. Ci,;. C. 6. An original ]
F IRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Au-

bigney was privy and acquainted with la Nav6 the king's

mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, and of his errand
there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and eeem
it an evil president for princes, thatfubjeds might have power to
deprive their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was
rot minded, by any mean, to defeat him, either of the present
government of that realm, or vet of the possession of the crown
and inheritance thereof, but rather to afure the fame to him: and
that for the accomplishment of that assurance, the king should
have been advised and drawn to have governed, for ome Ihort
time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule as governor of the
prince, !--; commiflion from the queen his mother, until the king's
enemies Hiere suppressed; after which time D'Aubigny should have
pow-er gi en to ellablih and relign that kingdom to the king, by
?i; rrc:her's voluntary consent, whereby all such, as had before
he:i in action againfl the queen or her authority, might be brought
to stand in the king's mercy. And for that the king might live
i- more furetv, D'Aubigny should be declared both second person
In fucceflion of tat crowvn, and also lieutenant general of Scot-
land, and that D'Aubignv before his departure out of France,
received commission from the king's mother to the effects remem-
hered, or near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference
with the bishops of Gafgow, and Ross, and with fir James Ba-
ford, with which pertons, and with the duke of Guide, he had
and hath frequent intelligence, and by fir James Baford he was
advised to confer with the lord John Hamilton before his repair
into Scotiand, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent
or.e John Hamilton to the said lord John to excuse him in this
pa-t. alledging, that he did forbear to come to him, left thereby
he should marr or hinder greater effecs to be executed by him
ir Scotland.

THAT before his coming into that realm, the nobility and
ccaitry were well acquainted and united in good concord, with

great
636

great love betwixt the king and nobility, and amongfi the noblefle,
but hath both drawn the king agairilt sundry of the chiefeft of his
nobility, that have been most ready, and have expended their
blood and poffeflions to preserve religion, and defend the king's
person, his government and eate, and also hath given ocdefiof
of great suspicions and offence to be engendered betwixt the king
and his nobility, and epecially with such as have been in ation
againl the king's mother, and her authority, who by force and
means of the said commission and practice, flould have been
brought into moll dangerous condition; and who also may find
themfclves in no finall perill while he pofleffes the king's ear,
abufeth his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and
ports of his realm, as he presently enjoyeth.

THAT he he hath drawn the king not only to forget the great

benefits done to him and his realme, by the queen's majesty of
England, but also to requite the ame with sundry signs of great
unthankfulnefs, and wounding therewith the honour of her ma-
jelfy, and thereby hath adventured to hake the happy amity
long time continued betwixt those princes.

AND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters

and good offers, to have pased and been done betwixt them: In
which refpea the king and council having resolved to write'to
her majelty, for her highness better fatisfadion in the late nego-
tiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had given or-
der to the king's secretary to frame that letter. He minding to
break the bond of amity in funder, willed the secretary to be sure
that nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby the king
thould crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut off all
loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the said
secretary may be better learned, and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's
protetion, Alexander King prerumed with that boldness to make
his lewd harangue, and by his means hath hitherto escaped chaf-
tifement and corre&ion, due for his offic.

THAT fir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the

king's father, had been called into the realm by Lennox, without
the privity of the king. And whereas the aid fir James found
in a green velvet desk, late the earl of Bothwell's, and saw and
had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that
murder, and can best declare and witness who were authors, and
executors of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to flpprefs the
truth, and to accuse such as he himself knoweth to be innocent;
and as by order of law, will be b found, if they may have due
trial, which, contrary to alljuftice, is by Lennox means denied.

This is the charge againJf D'Aubigny, mentioned in the forgoing
letter by ialfingham; but by Baford they mean fir Yames Balfour.

No. IX.

637

No. IX. (p. 368.)
QTe copy of the ing of France his direlions sent to Scotland with

Sezner de la Ma1tte Fenelon. ranjiated out of the French.

[Calderw. MS. HiRfory, vol. 31. p. 2oS.]
FIRST, on their most christian majesty's part, he hall make

the molt honourable salutation and visiting to the molt serene

king of Scotland, their good brother and little son, that in him
is poflible.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such like as

they have written to him with their hands, and to hew expressly
the perfea friendship and singular affection, that their majeRys
bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the molt serene

king, to the effec that his person may be in no danger, but that
it may be most surely preserved.

AN D that he be not hindered in the hones liberty that he ought

to have, and that no greater, or flraiter guards be about him than
he had before.

AN D uch like, that he be not impeached in the authority, that

God hath given to him of king and prince sovereign above his
fubjeas, to the ffe& he may as freely ordain and command in his
affairs, and in the affairs of his country, with his ordinary coun-
cil, as he was used to do of before.

THAT his nobility, barons, and commonality of his country

may have their free liberty to resort to his serene majesty without
suspicion of greater guards or more armed men about his person
than the use was, that they be not afraid and hindered to resort;
and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and
freely speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re-
eflablilhing of that that may or hath been changed or altered.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and

other men of good behaviour of the towns and commonality of
the country conveens, and are content with the form of govern-
ment presently with the said serene king, to the end that if there
be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and
that he return not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may underitand that there be any who have not used

them so reverently towards the said serene king their sovereign
lord, as the duty of their obedience required, that he may pray
on this behalf of his majefly molt christian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame,
and exhorting them to do their duty towards his majefly, in time
coming, in all refpeas with the obedience and true fubjeaion they
aught him.

AND if the said seigneur de la Motte perceives the said serene

king to be in any manner conllrained of his person, authority,
liberty and disposition of his affairs, than he used to be, and not
convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty of a prince
-does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honerf to place
him in the famine, and that he imploy as much as the credit of

his
638

his moRi christian majesty may do toward the nobility, and sub-
jets of that contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottkh nation, the which he loves and
confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he witness to the said serene king, and his etates,

of his consent, and to all the nobility and principall personages
of the contry, that his most christian majeftie will continue on his
part in the most ancient alliance and confederacy, which he hath
had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobi-
lity and contry, with his principall fubjets, to preserve in the fa-
mine, in all good understanding and friendship with him; the -
which, on his part, he fliall do, observing the famine most invi-
olable.

FU THER his most christian majesty underitanding that the
serene king his good brother was contented with the duke of Le-
nox, and his fervie the said fignieur de la Motte had charge to
pray his serene majesty that he might remaine beside him to his
contentment, believing that he should more willingly intertain
the points of love and confederacie, betwixt their majeltys and
their contrys, because he was a good subjet to them both; and
if he might not remain, without some alteration of the tranquil-
lity of his estate, that he might retire him to his own house in the
said country, in sureness, or if he pleased to return to France
that he might surely-- and if it pleases his serene majesty, to
cause cease and flay the impeachments, that are made of new upon
the Frontiers, to the effect that the natural Frenchmen may enter
as freely into the country, as they were wont to do of before.

AN D that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor no speech

but honourable of the moll chriflian king, in that contry, but
such like as is spoken most honourably of the serene king of Scot-
land in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed till a

little before his departure, to wit, that the queen, the king's
mother, was content to receive her son in association of the
kingdom.

No. X. (p. 387.)
LordHunfdon to Sir Francis Walsingham, the 4th of august 1584,

from Beruwiik.

[Calderw. MS. History, vol. 3. p. 374.]

SIR,
A CCORDING to my former letters, touching my meeting

vith the earle of Arran upon Wednesday last, there came

hither to me from the earle, the justice clerk, and fir William
Stuart, captain of Dumbarton; both of the king's privy council,
to treat with me about the order of our meeting, referring wholly
to me to appoint the hour, and the number we hould meet withal;
so as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten
o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be 13 of a fide; and
the reft of our troops to hand each of them a mile from the town;
the one on the one fide, the other on the other fide, so as our

troops

639

troops were two miles asunder; I was not many horsemen, but I
supplied it with footmen, where I had oo shot on horse, but
they were very near oo horse well appointed: According to
which appointment, we met vefterday, and after some congratu-
lations, the erle fell in the like protefiations, of his good will
and readiness to serve the queen's majefly, before any prince in
the world, next his sovereign, as he had done heretofore by his
letters, and rather more; with such earnest vows, as unless he be
worse than a devil, her majelly may dispose of him at her pleasure:
this being ended, I entered with him touching the cause I had to
deal with him, and so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed,
that had to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing to-
ward her majeiv, according to my inftruaions, which without
any delay he answered presently, as ye Ihall perceive by the laid
anivers sent herewith; but I replying unto him, he amplified
them with many moe circumstances, but to this effea. Then
dealt with him touching the point of her majefly's fatisfaion,
for the uttering such pratices as has been lately set on foot for the
disquieting of her majesty and her eflate, who thereof made fun-
dry discourses, what marriages have been offered to his majeltie
by fundrie princes, and by what means the earle has fought to
divert them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage
with Spain or France, he mufR also alter his religion, which as he
is sure the king will never doe, so will he never susser him to hear-
ken unto it, so long'as he has any credit with him; he denys no:
but the king has been dealt withal be pratices to deal against her
majesty, which he has o far denied and refused to enter into, as
they have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or he
knoweth therein, there hall be nothing hidden from her majefly,
as her majesty hall know very shortly; surely it seems by his
speeches, that if the king would have yielded thereunto there
bad been no small company of French in Scotland ere new to dif-
quiet her majesty.- This being ended, 1 dealt with him ear-
neillv for the flav of this parliament, which now approacheth: or
at the leaf that there may be nothing done therein, to the preju-
dice of these noblemen and others now in England, for the for-
fauing of their livings and goods; hereupon he made a long
discourse to me, firit of the earl of Angus dealing about the earl
of Morton, then of his going out, notwithstanding of fundrie
gracious offers the king had made him, then of the road-of Ruth-
ven, how that presently after they had the king's majelly in
their hands, they imprisoned himself, dealt with the king for put-
ting of the duke out of the realme, the king refused so to do,
they told him plainly that if he would not he hould have the
earl of Arran's head in a dih; the king aked what offence the
earl had made ? and they answered it must be so, and should be so;
hereupon, for the safeguard of Arran's life, the king was con-
sent to fend away the duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie
times in danger of his life; I alledged unto him the king's let-
ter to the queen's majeftv, and his as in council, that they
had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good liking
and contentment, who answered me he durst dd no otherwise,

nor
6+9

0tr could not do any thing but that which pleased them,
with such a number of other their dealings with the king whileft
he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad
if they were true; I said the king might have let the queen's ma-
jefly's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and her majesty
would have relieved him; he answered, that the king was not ig-
norant that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded from
Mr. Bow's pracice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him,
and yet the king was content, and did give remission to as many
as would acknowledge their faults, and ak remiflion, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further loyalty,
in which time they conspired the king's second apprehension, and
the killing of the earle, and others, and seduced the ministers to
their facion, arid yet not satisfied with these conspiracies and
treasonable dealings (as he terms them), are entered into a third,
being in England under her majefly's protection, to dishonour her
majellv as far as in them lyeth, or at leaf to cause the king con-
ceave ome nkindnefs in her majesty, for harbouring of them;
I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the taking of the king,
the killing of the earle of Arran, and some others, the taking of
the castle of Edinr. and bringing home the earles, to take the
charge of the king; all which (fays he) is by Drummond con-
sessed, and by the provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and
the constable of the castle thereupon fled; the earl brought Drum-
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have confessed
the conspiracy before me, but having at his lighting received a
blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further,
1 replied that I thought verily they would not work any such
pratices in respeCt of the queen's majesty, abiding within her
realme, and if there be any such praaices, they have proceeded
from others, and they are not privie unto them; and that if it be not
apparently proved against them, that it will be thought to be some
practice to aggravate the fault, nd to make them more odious
to the king. He answered me, that it should be proved so fuffici-
ently, that they should not be able with truth to deny it, for their
own hands is to be howed to part of it, and therefore concluded,
that if her majesty hould so press the king for them at this time,
that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty, nor further it,
and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could not, in any.rea-
son, seek to do them any good; and besides he assured me, that
if he would, he dare not, this last matter being fallen out as it is;
and surely if this matter had not fallen out, I would not have
doubted the restoring of the earl of Mar very shortly, if her ma-
jeily would have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus,
1 perceive the king is perfuded that both he, and the reftof the
Douglasses, have conceived so mortall an hatred against him and
the earl of Arran, about the death of the earl of Morton, as if
they were at home, to-morrow next, they would not leave to
pracice and conspire the death of them both, and therefore a
hard matter to do any thing for him: finally, he concluded and
required me to assure her majesty from the king, that there hall
nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone that may fa-

T t tisfi

641

tisfie her majefy with reason, and that the king Ihall never do
any thing, nor content to have any thing done in her prejudice,
so long as he had any credit with him, or authority under him.
Having this far proceeded, he desired to hew me his commifion,
which is under the great real, to himself only, which is as large as
may be, and yet fundrie of the privie council there with him, but
not one in commission, nor present, nor near us all this time,
having spent almost five hours in these matters; he presented to
me the mailer of Gray, who delivered to me a letter from the king,
in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to
her majesty, and therefore requires a fafe-condua for his passage,
which I pray yow procure, and to fend it as soon you may. let
him underitand of the lord Seaton's negociation with the French
king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and
that it was partly against his will, that he hould be sent thi-
ther. But his commifion and inftrution being of no great im-
portance, he yielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone be-
yond his infiru.9ions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seaton smart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark
Golgan, he protested he never heard of any such; he fays
there was a little poor foul, with a black beard, come thi-
ther a begging, who said he was an enemy to Desmond, to
which he gave a croun, but never heard of him since, and
for any Scotsman going into Ireland, he fays there is no such
matter; if there be, there may be ome few rascals that he knows
not of; and touching the coming of any Jesuits into Scotland,
he fays it is but the flanderons devise. of the king's enemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready to revolt
in religion, who the world fiall well fee will continue as constant
therein, as what prince soever profefled it mok; and the earl him-
self dos protest to me that to'his knowledge, he never saw a Je-
suit in his life, and did assure me if there was any in Scotland,
they should not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers
would do if they preach such doctrine as they did in Scotland;
and touching one Ballenden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard
from Mr. CoIvill, the earle avows. contantly that he knows not,
nor hath not heard of any fach man, but he would inquire at the
justice clerk, and would inform me what he could learn of that;
thus I have made you as hort a discourse as I can of so many mat-
ters, so long discoursed upon, but these are the principal points of
all our talk, so near as I can remember it, and for this time I com-
mit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick the 14th of August, 584,

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Cary to come to him.
I pray you know her majefly's pleasure.
dArra's anjwers f t tbe griTs el-articls proponed ta the lord Hunfdon,

jet down in aotber form.
A S to the Rrait and severe persecution of all such, as have been

noted to have been well affeaed to the queen's majesty, it
cannot appear they were either for that cause punilhed, or hardly

dealt

641
I

dealt with, ince his majesty of late has been so careful and dili-
gent to choice out good instruments to deal betwixt her majesty
and him, as his majesty has done in electing of your lordship and
me; besides that in all their accusations, their good will and as-
fetion born to her majesty was, at no time, laid to their charge,
but capital ations of treason many way tried now be the whole
three etates, and more than manifest to the world.

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation, such as

were banished, not to repair in England; the bruits and whisper-
ings that came to his majesty's ears, of their conspiracies and
treasons, which since fyn they accomplished, so far as in them lay,
moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near
his majelfy's realm, left they hould have attempted these things
which hortly they did attempt, being farther off and more dif-
tant both by sea and land.

As for reception of Jesuits, and others, her majesties fugitives,

and not delivering them according to his promise, as your lordship
propones, his majesty would be most glad that so it might fall out
by your lordship's traviles, that no fugitive of either realme Ihould
be received of either, and when so hall be, it hall not fail on his
majesty's part, albeit in very deed this time bygone his majesty
has been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fu-
gitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majesty hath receipt,
in effect, the whole and greatest rebels and traitors his majelty in
his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his majesty's
mother anent their aflociation, his majesty has commanded me, in
presence of your lordship's servant, to assure her majety and your
lordship, in his majelty's name, that it is altogether false, and an
untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to allure your lordhip,

that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty has, by any means
direA or indirec, sent any meflage to the pope, or received any
from him; or that his majesty has dealt with Spain or any foreign-
ers, to harm her mtajefty or her realm, which his majesty could
have no honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as
hope in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's minis-

ters, sent unto his majesty, his majesty used none of themfo; and
if his majesty had, sufficient cause was given by them as some of
their own writs do yet testify; as I more particularly ihowed
your lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. XI. (p. 390.)
The Scottiy fuen'i offers upon the erse8 of her liberty propo#nded y

er ficretary Naw, November 584.

[Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 8. A copy.]
T H E queen my mistress being once well assured of your mi

jefty's amity,

I. WILL declare openly that he will (as it is sincerely her
meaning) straitly to join unto your majesty, and to the fame to

T t z yield

64?

yield and bear the chief honour and refpeE, before all other kings
and princes in Chrifendom.

2. SHE will fAwar, and protest solemnly, a sincere forgetfulness

of all wrongs which he may pretend to have been done unto her
in this realm, and will never, in any fort or manner whatsoever,
{hew offence for the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own parti-

cular name, as also for her heirs and others descending of her for
ever, your majesty, forjuR, true, and lawful queen of England.

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as

for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which she may claim
to te crown of England, during your majesty's life, and other
prepjusie.

5. S H E will revoke all ads and shews, but her heretofore made,

of pretence to this laid crown to te prejudice of your majesty,
as may be the taking of the arms and file of the queen of Eng-
land, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord and
hulband.

6. S H E will renounce the pope's bull for so much as may be ex-

pounded to turn in her favour, or for her behoof, touching the
deprivation of her majefly, and will declare that he will never
help and serve herself with it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majefly's life, by open

force or otherways, any publick declaration of her right in the
succession of this realm, so as secret assurance be given unto her,
or at the leaf publick promise, that no deciding thereof hall be
made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, during your
majesty's life, nor after your decease, until such time as they have
been heard thereupon, in publick, free and general assembly of
the parliameni of the said realm.

8. SHE will not pratife, directly or indirectly, with any of

your majefy's subjec, neither within nor out of your realm, any
thing tending to war, civil or foreign, against your majesty and
your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for civil and poli-
tick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your subje&s de-
clared rebels, and convited of treason against you.

I0O. SHE will enter into the afociation, which was bhewed her

at Wingfield for the surety of your majefly's life, so as there be
me..aea or right explicated some clauses, which I will hew to your
majeftv, when I fiall have the copy thereof, as I have before
time required.

11. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble againlt this state, and will renounce, from
this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her favour for
that refpeat.

12. F TR HE MORE, this realm being afailed by any civil or so-

reign war, he will take part with vour majesty, and will aflift
you in your defence with all her forces and means, depending of
herself and with all her friends of Chrifiendom.

13. AN D to that effet, for the mutual defence and maintenance
of your majesty, and the two realms of this isle, he will enter

with

with your majesty in a league defensive, as hall be more particu-
larly advised, and will perrwade, as much as in her, the king her
son to do the like.

THE leagues with all parts abroad. remaining firm, and efpe-

cially the antient league between France and Scotland, in that
which hall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good affu-

rance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of her right in
the fucceffiou of this crown, and promise, that happening any
breach betwixt France and this realm (which he prayeth God
never to happen), the jull value of her dowry Ihall be placed for
her in lands of the revenue of the crown.

;5. FOR aflurance of her promises and covenants, he doth of-

fe. o abide herself in tiis realm for a certain time (better hof-
ti ae can fle not give than her own person,) which, so as he b
kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in cafe to escape
secretly out of this country, in the sickly fate he is in, and with
the good order which your majesty can take therein.

ib. AND in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and whole

deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this realm, the said
queen of Scots he will give fuficient hoflage for such time as
will be advised.

17. IF he abide in this realm, he will promise not to deparp

out of it without your licence, so as it be promised unto her that
her fRate, in such liberty as (hall be accorded unto her, hall nor
be in any fort altered, untill after tryall to have attempted against
your life, or other trouble of your estate.

18. IF he go into Scotland, he will promire to alter nothing

there in the religion which is now used there, he being uffered
to ave free exercise of hers, for her and her houfhold, as it wa;
at her return out of France; and further o pull out every root
of new division between the fubjeas, that none of the fubjeAs of
Scotland hall be sifted for his conscience, nor confirained to go
to the service of the contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done

against her in Scotland, and things shall remain there as they are
at this present, for the refpet, saving that .vhich hath been done
against her honour, which he meaneth to have revoked and an-
nulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a fare and general reconciliation

between the nobility of the country, and to cause to be appoi- ed
about the king her son, and in his council, such as hall be fit for
the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the country, and the
amity of the realm.

21. S HE will do her bell to content your majesty, in favour of
the Scots lords bani/hed and refuged hither, upon their due sub-
million to their princes, and your majelty's promise to afiiif the
said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they hanpen to
fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with
ile advice and good council of your majesty.

23. As
1

645

23. As he will pass nothing without the king her son, so doth

she desire that he intervene conjointly with herin this treaty, for
the greater and perfecter assurance thereof; for otherwise any thing
can hardly be eftablilhed to be found and continue.

24. The said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king, her

good brother, according to the good affection which be hath always
chewed her, and hath been afresh testified unto me by Monfr. de
Mannifliere for this said treaty, will very willingly intervene, and
will assist her for the surety of her promises.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following
the will of the said king, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. FOR other kings and princes of Christendom, he will al-

fay to obtain the like of them, if for greater solemnity andap-
probation of the treaty it be found to be necessary.

27. SHE doth desire a speedy answer, and final conclusion of
the premises, to the end to meet in time with all inconveniencies.

28. Az u in the mean time, the more to strengthen the said

treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, the defireth
that demonltration be made of some releafement of her captivity.
Objetiens against the Scotfith queen, lundirecretary Walsinghame's

hand, owember 158+.

HE queen of Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ill affeedto
her majesty, and therefore it cannot be but that her liberty
should bring peril unto her majesty.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papiRls, and other

ill affeated subjes, and greatly advance the opinion had of her
title as successor.

THAT as long as she shall be continued in her majesty's posses-

ion, the may serve as it were a gage of her majelty's surety, for
that her friends, for fear of the danger he may be thrown into,
in cafe any thing should be done in her favour, dare not attempt
any thing in offence of her majesty.
November What course werefit to be taken with the quen of Scts,

1 84 either to be enlarged or not.

[Cot. Lib. Cal. 8.]
THE course to be taken with the said queen may be confidered

of in three degrees; either,

1. To continue her under cultody in that Rate Ihe now is.
2. To restrain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. OP to fetherat liberty upon caution.
i. Tou c H I G the frft, to continue her under custody in that

fate fe now is; it is to be confidered, that the prirces that fai
Y'our that queen, upon the complaint he maketh of hard usage,
are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and prominf
to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose her mi
niflers solicit them daily.

AND
646

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquainted

them with her offers made to her majesty, which appeared to be
no less profitable than reasonable for her majelty, so as the refusal
and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cause to think her
hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground
and reason, attempt somewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding

her cafe desperate, will continue her practice under hand, both at
home and abroad, not only for her delivery, but to attain to the
present poflellion of this crown upon her pretended title, as she
hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is most manifelt by letters
and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scot-
land which hath proceded altogether by her diretion, whereby a
gap is laid open for the malice of all her majesty's enemies, so as
it appeareth that this manner of keeping her, with such number
of persons as she now hath, and with liberty to write and receive
letters (being duly confidered), is offensive to the princes the
said queen's friends; rather chargeable, than profitable to her
majelly; and fubje& to all such pracices as may peril her majesty's
person or state, without any provision for her majesty's safety,
and therefore no way to be liked of.

z. ToucH NG the second, to restrain her in a more firaighter
degree of the liberty he hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may at firfR fight be thought a remedy very apt to flop the

course of the dangerous pracices softered heretofore by her:
For, true it is, that this remedy might prove very profitable, if
the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to her majefly,
as few years par it did; and if the king of that realm were not
likely, as well for the release of his mother, as for the advance-
ment of both their pretended titles, to attempt somewhat against
this realm and her majefly, wherein he hould lack foreign aflift-
ance, nor a party here within this realm: But the king and that
realm flanding affected as they do, this refiraint, inflead of reme-
dying, is likely to breed these inconveniencies followting:

FIRST, It will increase the offence both in him, and in the ret
of the princes her friends that mifliked of her restraint.

SECONDLY, It will give them just cause to take ome way of
redress.

LASTLY, it is to be doubted, that it may provoke tome defpe-

rate i!l-difpofed person, all hope of her liberty removed, to at-
tempt somewhat against her majety's own person (a matter above
all others to be weighed), which inconveniency being duly confi-
dered, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in a firaighter
degree, is likely to prove a remedy subjed to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said queen at

liberty, minifireth some cause of doubt, touching the manner of
the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be performed, whether to
be continued here within the realm, or to be reflored into her
own country.

BUT firR, this proposition, before the particularities be weigh-
ed, is to be confidered in generality.

FOR

647

Fox it is very hard for a well-affeced subje&t, that tendereth

her majelly's surety, and weigheth either the nature of the Scot-
tifh queen, being inclined to ambition and revenge, or her for-
mer aions, what pratices he hath set on foot molf dangerous
for her majelty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not
made acquainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make
it less perilous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may,
in some fort, be devised to prevent her ambition and malice; and
therefore, to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother,

is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title he
doth: Such as do assec her, both at home and abroad, do asset
him (and he is the more dangerous for that he is unmarried,
which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man,
whereby he may enter into acion in his own person); where Ihe
is restrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now altogether at
his devotion, and the party affeced to this crown abased; so as
the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty nor restraint doth
greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her inajelty, unless by such
promises as may be made by way of treaty with her, the danger
likely to grow from the king her son to be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objected, that so long as the mo-

ther remains in her majely's hands, the king will attempt nothing
for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objeaion it may be answered, sirs, That they hope that

her majeftv, being a prince of justice, and inclined to mercy, will
not punilh the mother for the son's offence, unless she hall be
found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily, that men will not
be over-haliy, confidering in what predicament the king standeth
touching his expectation of this crown, to advise any thing that
in time future may be dangerous to the giver of such council as
may reach to his mother's peril.

AND lar !a , the taking away of his mother, hebeing firong in

the sie!d :hrough both foreign afifilance, and a party here within
the realm, will appear so weak a remedy (which may rather ex-
afperate both him, and her party, to proceed with more couragp
and heat to revenge, if any such hard meafire hould be offered
unto her), as they will suppose for the reason above specified, that
no such extremity will be used.

IT may also be objeaed, that the setting of her at liberty will

greatly encourage the papists both at home and abroad; but here-
in, if the rovifion be d!uy confidered, that may be made by par-
liament both here and there, they ihall rather find cause of dif-
comfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in

the mother appearing mol manifestly to be seen in the son accom-
panied with more danger, with due consideration had also of such
remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the dangers,
that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of; there will be
good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit
than perils.

Now
648

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty lhall be performed;

if it hall be thought meet he hall be continued within the realm
with some limitation, especially in that place where he now refid.
eth, the country round about being foinfeced in religion as it is,
it is greatly to be doubted that will very much increase the cor-
ruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides, he fl3ould
have commodity, with much more cafe and speed, to entertain
practices within this realm, than by being in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France,

then hall her majelly lose the gages of her safety, then shall he
be at hand to give advice infurtherance of such pra&ices, as have
been laid for to fir trouble in this realm, wherein he hth been
a principal party.

FoR the frfR, it is answered before, that the refpet of any

perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort restrain her son.
For the other, if it be confidered what harm her advice will work
unto herself, in refpet of the violation of the treaty, and the
provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought
that he will then be well advised, before (he attempt any such
matter, which now she may do without perill. Besides such prin-
ces, as have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot
with honour assist her, wherein the French king will not be found
very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath lately rejeted all
such requefis, propounded either by her or her son's miniflers,
that might any way offend her majefly. And so to conclude,
feeing that cause of her grief shall be taken away; the French
king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike that
by any Spanilh practice, he hould be drawn to violate her faith,
that the ref of the princes hall have no jus cause of offence,
but rather to think honourably of her majesty confi leing the
Scottflh queen's carriage towards her, which hath deserved no
way any such favour; the noblemen of Scotland hall be restored,
who will be a good stay of such counfells as may tend to the
troubling of this realm, especially having so good a round of
warrant as the parliament to and unto; the charges a'! perills
which her pracice might have bred to this realm hall be avoid-
ed; and lafily, the hope of the papists lhall be taken away, by
such good provisions, as in both the realms may be made, where-
by the perills that might fall into her majesty's own person (a
matter of all others to be weighed), hall be avoided, when by
the change that may grow by any such wicked and ungodly prac-
tice, they hall fee their cafe no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majeJfy to proceed in the treaty under/ecretary

Walingham's hand.

[Cott. Lib. Cal. C. 8.]

HAT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending
to the raising of trouble within this realm) have grown from

the Scots queen's ministers, and favourers, not without her allow-
ance and seeking: Or, T

THAT

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes

to give ear to the said plots, is principally grounded upon some
commiseration had of their reiraint.

THAT the Itav, why the said plots have not been put in erecu

tion, hath proceeded, for that the said princes have, for the most
part, been entertained with home and domeflick troubles.

TH AT it is greatly o be doubted, that now their realms begin

to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the
said princes.

TH AT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted

by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the perill of
ber majeitv.

TH AT for the preservation thereof, it shall be convenient for her

majeft-l to proceed to the finifhi'n of the treaty, not long fithence
begun between her and the said queen.

No. XII. (p. 396-)

Letternf . May !t Q: Elizabeth.

[Cott. Lib. Coi. B. VIII. rol. 147. An original.]

Madame ma bonne Seur,
I'Affeurant que vous avez en communication d'une lettrc de

I1 Gray que voftre homme Semer me livra bier foubz le nom
de mon fi'z y recognoiffant quasi de mot a la mot less mesmes rai-
sons que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre eftant dernierement pres
de vous defmontrant la fuffifance & bonne intention du personage
je vous prieray feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant
inftantement importune qte vous me permettiez defclaircir libre-
ment & ouvertement ce point de 1'association d'entre moy & mon
filz & me defler les mains pour proceder avec lui comme je juge-
ra.- t-re requis pour on bien & le mein. Et j'enterprendz quoi
que i'on rous die & puiffe en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit
bruillon qu! -z-fuade par aucuns de vos minifires a enterpris cette
reparation cntr. moy et mon enfant, k pour y conmmencer je vous
fup?!ic m'octroyer qui je puiiTe parler a ce justice clerk qui vons
a efe nouvellement envove pour mander par luy a mon filz m0o
intre:ion fur cela, ce quije me prornis cue ne ma refnferez, quant
ce ne feroit que pour demontre; en effect la bonne intention que
vous m'avez affuerep avoir a l'accord & entretien de naturel de-
voir entre la mere -: 'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes eRre empef-
che pour vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pour-
rez mieurdefmentir & faire paroitre voftre bon defir a notre union
qne me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non m'en retiner &
empeiche comme aucune de vos minifires pretendent a fin de laif-
ser toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiftres pra&iques entre nous.
Lalettre porte que 'association n'est pas pafle, auffi ne luy ai je
jamais dit, bienque mon filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions
convenu ensemble, conmme 'ate signó de fa main, & ces lettres
tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce merne te-
moignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & person-

nes

1
650

nes de credit, s'excufant de ne l'oser faire publier par craint de
vous fculement, demandant forces pour vous resister d'avant de
ce declarer si ouvertement eflant journellement persuade au con-
traire par vos minifires qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire
a Yorck le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame
quand mon enfant feroit si malheureux que de s'opiniaftrer en cette
extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puit penser que
vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la Chretiente le voulif-
siez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma ma-
ledicion ains que plutos introviendrez pour luy faire recognoitre
la raison trop juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommns. Helas
& encores ne luy vouloier j'en osier, mays donner avec droit ce
qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a vous,
& fidelement faites si i vous pleft que je ne en foye pis qu'aupara-
vant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale defvant la verite vers
vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus grande affliction que me
fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie
de me mander en cas qu'il perfite en cette m'efconnoifance de son
devoir, que de luy ou de moy il vous pleift advouer pour legittime
roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre avec
moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoy je vous requi-
ers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouverne enfant vous
en requerrant avec autant d'affecion que je fens mon cceur op.
prefle d'ennuy. rour Dieu fouvenez vous de la promefle que
m'avez faites de me prendre en votre protecion me raportant de
tout a vous, & fur ce prian. Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver
de touts vos ennemys & diffimulez amys, comme je le desire de
me consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel mal-
heur entre la mere & l'enfant. Je cefferay de vous troubler,
mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de
vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de
tout peril. Futhberry xil Mars.

Votre fidelement vouee foeur,

& obeiffant coufine,

Ala reyne d'Angleteree MARIA Q.

madame ma bonne feur
& coufine.

No. XIII. (p. 396.)

A relament by . Mary.

(Cott. Lib. Vcfpaf. L. 16. p. 41.]
N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Mr.

Crawford, late regius professor of church history in the univer-
fity of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, according to him, is
written by Naue, Mary's secretary, the refl with the queen's
own hand. What is mkrked" is in the queen's hand.
(Oniderant par ma condition prefente 'eflat de vie humnaine,

si incertain, qne perfonne ne s'en pueft, ou doibt afleurer,

finnon foubs lagrande et infinie misericorde de Dieu. Et me vou-
lant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et accidens, qui me

pourroient

pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivite, melmes a
cause des grandes et longues maladies ou j'ay ete dercnu6 jufques
a present; j'ay advise tandis que j'ay la commodit6, ou raison en
iugement, de ourvoir apres ma mort fa falut de mon ame, en-
terrement de mon corps et disposition de mon bien, eflat, & as-
faires, par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de mon der-
nier volonte, qui s'enfuyit.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoite St. Esprit. Premi-

erement, me recoignoifant indigne pecherefle avec plus d'offences
envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfacion par toutes les adverfites que
j'ayl uffert; dont je la loue fa bonte. Et m'appuyant fur la croix
de mron Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Chrilt. Je recommende mon
ame a la benoifte et indiridue Trinite, et aux prieres de la glorie-
use Vierge Marie, et de tcus les anges findts & faindtes de pa-
ra 'is, efoerant prir leur merites intercession, eftre aydee a obte-
nir d ie

e faicd participante avec eulx de felicite eternelle. Et

pour mr'y acheirer de cueur plus net et entier defpouillant des a
pre'ut tou refetiment ds injures, calomnies, rebellions, et
aultres offe 'fes, qui me pourroient avoir efie fades durant ma vie,
par me, ubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la venge-
ance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur padonner, de mefme affeftion,
que je luy requiers pardons a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles
que je puis avoir offense de faiss ou de parolles. Je veulx et or-
donne, &c. [ -ke tvo fJs!lwxriv.rg paragrah contain diretioans con-
cerning the place and ircurrfances f her burial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de

'Eglife catho'ique, apoftolique et Romaine, en laquelle je veulx
vivre et mourir, le prince d'Ecoffe mon filz y pueft etre re-
duiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres
grand regret en 'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe
feul et unique heritier de mon royaume d'Efcoffe, de droid que
je pretende juftement en a la couronne d'Angleterre et pays qui
en dependent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles
et immeubles qui refteront apresma mort, et execution de ce pre-
sent teftanent.

Si non, et ue mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dire herefie,

Je cede, tranfporte, et faite don " de doubts et chacuns mes
· droits, que je pretende & puis pretendre a la couronne d'An-
, gleterre, et aultres drdes, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en de-
,, pendantz, au roy catholique, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira,
· avefques advis, confentement de fa faintete; tant pour le voyr
' aujourdhu le feul fears appai de la religion catholique, que
' pour reccnnoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, etles miens
"' recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma plus
· grande neceffite; et refguard aufli au droi& que lay mefme pe-

ut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays, je le fupplie qu'en
· recompence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si

il ce pleat de celle de Guise, pourtnemoire de la race de la-

" quelleje fuis sortie au cofte Mele, n'a ayant de celuy de mon
c pere, que mon feulenfant, lequel eftant Catholiquej'ay tousjours

" voue

r vou6 pour une des fes filles, f ii luy plaifoit de 'accepter, oa
,t faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.

· e layffe mon filz a la proteion du roy, de prince, et dacs

" Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recommende
- et son eftat en Efcofe, et mon droia en Angleterre, si il elt ca-

tholique, et quelle le parlie de celfe royne."
Je faitz don au " compte de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu

par feu son pere, et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et
fucceffeur, d'obeyr en cel en droit a mon volonte.

Jc veulx et ordpnne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe trover-

ont par moys deues, tien mis cause de droi ere faits " a Loh-
liven" etre promptement payee et acquittes, et touc tort et griefs
repares per lefdits executeurs defque!z j'en charge la conscience.
Oultre, &c. [ Follow to or three paragraphs concerning particular
legacies, and then is added] Fait au manior de Sheffeld en Angle-
terre le jour de- Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

Aser a large ldank page folous in the queen's hand.

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au Claude Hamilton
lequel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus constant en

" religion, au jugement de - Dues de Lorraine et de Guyfe,

ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay le charge
"de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx a condition de ce
~' marrier ou ailier en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Followv near two pages of particular Itgacies.

Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droit quelle peut preten-

"dre a la conte d'Angous avant 'acort fair par mon commande-
"ment entre ma dite tante de Lenox et le comte de Morton,

veu quil a este fait & ar le feu roy mon Mary et moy, fur la
promeffe de fa fidelle ailftance, si luy et moy encourions dan-
gier et befoing d'ayde ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretemenc

"au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu'attemtprient contre fa vie, et

pour cell eset pris les armes, et ont porte les bannieres def-
ploiee, contre nous, je revoque auii toute autre don que je
luy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promeffes de fes bons ser-
"vices a advenir, et entends que la dite ContC foit reunie a la

couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes trahifons tant
en la mort de mon feu Mary, que en mon baniflement, et pour-
suit de la mien ne 1'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de ce
"jamays fervire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes
"parents, la quelle je crains ne 'eftende jufques a luy, le con-
" noiffant du tout affeadionne aux ennemis de mon droite en ce
"royaume, du quel il el penconnaire.

" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et
luy commande detenir pres de luy et s'enfervit, et je luy laiffe

"le bien du conte de Boduel son oncle, en refpet qu'il elt de mon
fang, mon filleul, et ma elti laiffe en lutelle parson pere.

at Je

" Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abbe de St. Croix

- n'a en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le ne futjamays
· mon intention, comme il apret par la revocation quej'ay faite

depuys, et6 auffi faite d'avant la nfage de xxv. ans, ce que
j'amois deliberer si il ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de
I defayre aulx eftats je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reune a la

e ouronnecomme une de plus necefaires pour mon fiz, & fans

· mayfon.ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Le filles de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains revient la

" conte a la Couronne, si il luy plef luy donner fa ou
" fille en marriafge, et il nome P'en fienne ligne."

No. XV. (p. 403.)
A letter from Mr. rcbibald Douglas o the queen of Scotr.

[April - Harl. Lib. 37. . 9. so. z 6]

TbLEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the date of
P the 2th of Nov. and in like manner has seen ome part of
the contents of one other bs the fame date, direced to Mons.
de Movifir, and ambassador for his majesty the moR Christian king,
both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one
your highness desires to know the true cause of my banilhment,
and offers unto me all favour if I should be innocent of the hein-
ous fats committed in the person of your hulband of good me-
,mory, so by the other the said ambassador is willed to declare
unto me, if your huiband's murder could be laid justly againi me,
that you could not follicit in my cause, neither yet for any person,
that was participant of that execrable fa& but would seek the re-
venge thereof, when you should have any means to do it; your
majefy's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable,
and your desire to know the truth of the fame is molt equitable;
and therefore that I shoald with all my simplicity, sincerity and
truth answer thereunto is mot reasonable, to the end that your
princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence ihall fuflici.
ently appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in
any matter, except in the knowledge of the evil disposed minds
of the molt part of your nobility against your said hulband, and
not revealing of it; which I am assured was sufficiently known to
himself, and to all that had judgment never so little in that realm;
which also I was contrained to undertand, as he, that was fpe-
cially employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number of
your nobility, that they might with humility intercede at your
majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters as are more specially
contained in the declaration following, which I am confirained
for my own juftiication, by this letter to call to your majesty's
remembrance. Notwithstanding that I am assured, to my grief,
the reading will not finally offend your princely mind. It may
please your majesty to remember, that in the year of God 566,
the said earl of M rton, with divers other nobility and gent.
were declared rebess to your majeRly, and banished your realm
for insolent murder committed in your majesty's own chamber,

which

which they alledged was done by command of your husfand, who
notwithstanding affirmed that he was compelled by them to sub-
scribe the warrant given for that effet, howsoever the truth of
that matter remains amongst them, it appertains not to me at
this time to be curious; true it is that I was of that number, that
heavily offended against your majesty, and passed into France
the time of our banihment, at the desire of the ret, to humbly,
pray your brother the molt Chriltian king to intercede that our
offences might be pardoned, and your majelty's clemency extended
towards us, albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was
of the opinion that the said fast merited neither to be requisite
for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the careful mindcof his
majesty towards the quietness of that realm, that the dealing in
that cause was committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was direted
atthat time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth
of your on, whom Almighty God of his goodness may long
preserve in happy estate and perpetual felicity; the careful travail
of the said de Movifir was so effecual, and'your majelty's mind
so inclined to mercy, that within hort space thereafter, I was
permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Murray,
Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Ledington, in the name
and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Lindsay, and re-
manent complefis, that they might make offer in the names of the
said earl, of any matter that might satisfy your majesty's wrath,
and procure your clemency to be extended in their favours; at
my coming to them, after I had opened the effet of my message,
they declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband had
been the occasion already of great evil in that realm, and if your
husband should be suffered to follow the appetite and mind of such
as was about him, that kind of dealing might produce with time
worse effets; for helping of such inconvenience that might fall
out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it convenient to
join thenmelves in league and band with some other noblemen, re-
solved to obey your majefy as their natural foveraign, and have
nothing to do with your husbands command whatsoever, if the
said earl would for himself enter into that band and confederacy
with them, they could be content to humbly requelt and travel
by all means with your majefly for his pardon, but before they
could any farther proceed, they desired to know the said earl's mind
herein; when 1 had answered, that he nor his friends, at my de-
parture, could not know that any such like matter would be pro-
ponit, and therefore was not inftruted what to answer therein,
they desired that ihould return sufficiently inftu&edin this matter
to Sterling, before the baptism of your son, whom God might
preserve; this meflage was faithfully delivered to me at NewcaRle
in England, where the said earl then remained, in presence of his
friends and company, where they all condescended to have no
farther dealing with your husband, as to enter into the said band.
With this deliberation Ireturned to Sterling, where at the request
of the most Christian king and the queen's majety of England
by their ambassadors present, your majesty's gracious pardon was

granted

65s

krnted unto them all, under condition always that they fIould
remain banilhed forth of the realm, the pace of two years, and
farther during your majesty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble requeRf of your own nobility, so that
immediately after the aid earl of Morton repaired into Scotland
to Q(hittingaime, where the earl of Bodvell and secretary Le-
dington come to him; what peech paired there amongst them,
as God ihall be my judge, I knew nothing at that time, but at
their departure I was requeRed by the raid earl Morton to accom-
pany the earl Bodvell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return
with such answer as they hould obtain of your majesty, which
being given to me by the said persons, as God hall be my judge,
was no other than these words, " Schaw to the earl Morton that

the queen will hear no speech of that matter appointed unto
him:" when I crafit that the anfwermight be made more fenfiblei

secretary Ledington said, that the earl would sufficiently under-
stand what pagfed amongst them. Itis known to all men, als veill
be railling letters palsed betwixt the aid earl and Ledington
when they become in divers fations, as also ane buck set firth it
by the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of Morton has
confessed to them, before his death, that the earl Bodvell came to
Quhittingaime to prepon the calling away off the king your hus-
band, to the which proposition the said earl of Morton affirms
that he could give no answer unto such time he might know your
majesty's mind therein, which henever received. As to the abo-
minable murder, it is known by the depofitionsXof many persons
that was executed to the death for the committing thereof, that
the fame was executed them, and at the command of such of the
nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for that effect; by this unpleasant
declaration, the most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
mainder may be underfood by the aforesaid witnesses that was ex-
amined in torture, and that are extant in the custody of the ordi-
nary judges in Scotland, my innocency, so far as may concern any
sac, does appear sufficiently to your majesty. And as for my
dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as
what would accuse the vessel that preserves the wine from harm,
for the intemperancy of such as immoderately use the fame. As
for the special cause of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ceeded uponane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the
earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have
confessed before he died and would not be induced, for loss of re-
putation, to perform any part thereof. If this be the occasion
of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punishment I hould de-
serve, I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who well
knows how careful every ilk gentleman hould be of his fame, re-
putation and honour, and how far ever ilk man should abhor the
name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would have been to me
to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwith-
flanding all the injuries 1 was constrained to receive at his hand
all the time of his government, and for no other cause, but for
ihewing of particular friendship to particular friends in the time

of
656

ot the las cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and nmore sorry that being on lyff,
be such kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always
for my own part I have been banilhed my native country those
three years and four months, living in anxiety of mind, my holl
guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and deposit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my
lat troubles at the desire of monfr. de Movifir, attended to know
your majeftv's pleasure, and to wait upon what service it mould
pleafeyour majelty to command. Upon the 8th of April infl
your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I hould retire myself
where I pleased, declared unto him I had no means whereby I
might perform that desire, till such time as I hould receive it
from your fnajelly. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to direct tre, until such time as I should have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and partly
by permiflot, I have taken the hardrefs to write this present let-
ter, whereby your majesty may underfand any part of my troubles
pall, and itrait present. As to my intention ftures I will never
deny that I am fully resolved to spend the red of my days in your
majesty's service, and the king your son's, wheresoever I shall be
direted by your niajefty, and for the better performing thereof,
if so thall be her majeffy's pleafdre, to recommend the tryal of
my innocencyj and examination of the verity of the preceding
narration, to the king your son, with requefi that I may be par-
doned for such offences as concerned your majesty's service, and
var common to all nien the time of his les aige and perdonit to all;
except to me, I mhould be the bearer thereof myself, and be di-
reed in whatsoever service it should pease your majesty for to
command. Most humbly I befeeci your majesty to conider here-
of, and to be to gracions as to give order; that I may have means
to serve your majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning.
and so expeaing your majesty's anfweri after the kifing your hand
ivith all humility, I take leave from London.

No. XV. (p. 408.)
A letter from Sir Amias Paulet.

[Origid. CaIl. C. 9.X

SIR,
DID forbear according t your dire&ion signified in your left
ters of the fourth of this prefenit, to proceed to the execttiorn

of the contents of Mr. Waade's letters unto you, for the difperf--
ing of this lady's unnecessary servants, and for the seasing of her
money, wherein I was bold to write to you my simple opinion
(although in vain as it now falleti out), by my letters of the 7th.-
of this infant, whieh I doubt not are with you before this time;
but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5thi which came not
unto my hands untill the 8th in the evening, by reason, as did a-
pear by indorfement, that they had mistaken, ard wee sent badk
to Windfot, after they were entered into the way towards me,

U cornidere&

657

confidered, that being accompanied only by my own servants it
might be thought that they would be intreated to fay as I would
command them, and therefore I thought good, for my better dif.
charge in these money matters, to crave the afliftance of Mr.
Richard Baggot, wvho repairing unto me the next morning, we
had acc'ess to this queen, whom we found in her bed, troubled
after the old marner with a defluxion, which was fallen down into
the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former
praaifes, tdonb:ing les he would persist therein by corrupting
nde-har omme bad members of this state, I was expressly com-
mnr -cd to take her money into my hands, and to ret answerable
for i, when it *h'.! be required; advising her to deliver the said
.ncney unto me wit'. quietness. After many denials, many ex-
cl'na:ions, and many bitter vor&d again you (I fay nothing of
-ailing against myfc!f), with flat affirmation that her majefly might
have her body, bnu her heart fIe should never have, refusing to
deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants, and sent for
barrs to break open the door, whereupon he yielded, and causing
the door, to be opened, I found there in the coffers, men-
tioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five rolls of canvas,
containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather bags,
whereof the one had, in gold, one hundred and four pounds
two Shillings, and the other had three pounds in silver, which
bag of silver was left with her, affirming that ue' had no
more money in this house, and that Ihe was indebted to her

cur:e c servants for their wages. Mr. Waade's note maketh mention
tC! vo- the of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he
tr:ho f this was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies
matter. and oaths of diverse persons, as also by probable conjeCtures;

so as in truth we found only two rolls, every of which con-
taineth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber,
in a cabinet, a chain worth by eimation one hundred pounds,
and in money, in one bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag
twohundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen fIillings. All
the foresaid parcels of money are bestowed in bags and
fealed by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
Naw-'s money, which I reserve in my hands, for the use of this
hoflhold, and may be repayed at London, where her majely
ltall appoint, out of the money, received lately by one of my
servants, out of the Exchequer. feared left the people might
have dispersed this mcney_ in all this time, or have hidden the
fame in ome secret corners; for doubt whereof I had caused all
this queen's family, from the highest to the lowest, to be guarded
in the several places where I found them, so as yff I had not found
the money with quitnefs, I tad been forced to have search sirs
all their lodgings, and then their own persons. I thank God
with all ny heart, as for a singular biefing, that that falleth out
so wefl, fearing left a contrary success might have moved fine
hard conceits in her majefly,

TouCHiKG

TOUCHIANG the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I

have done so much, as may futfice to satisfy her majesty for the time,
wherein I could not take any absolute course, until I heard again
from you, partly because your majelty, by Mr. Waade's letter,
doth refer to your consideration to return such as (hall be difcharg-
ed to their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth,
vou have forgotten to deliver your opinion ; partly, for that as
yet, 1 have received no answer from you, of your resolution,
upon the view of the Scottish -family Cent unto you, what perfops
you will appoint to be difmiit; only this I have done, I have
bellowed all such as are mentioned in this bill inclosed in three or
four several rooms as the fame may suffice to contain them, and
that their meat and drink hall be brought unto them by my ser-
vants. It may please you, to advertie me by your next letters,
in what fort, and for what course, I shall make their passports, as
alio, if they (hall fay that they are unpaid of their wages,
what hall I do therein. Yt is said that they have been ac- Thi lady
cultomed to be paid of their wages at Christmas for the whole al,,t good
year. Her majesty's charge will be somewhat diminished by the for- of mo-
departure of this people, and my charge by this occasion will be ney at pre-
the more easy, But the persons, all save Baftian, are such filly sent in the
and simple fouls, as there was no great cause to fear their pracices, French am-

baffador's

and upon this ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, hands.
that all this dismissed train hould have followed their miltrefs un-
til the next remove, and there t have been discharged upon the
sudden, for doubt that the said remove might be delayed, yf he
did fear, or expea any hard measure.

OTH E a (hall excuse their foolish pity as they may; but for my

part, 1 renounce my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing
that I have aid, written, or done, I have had any other refpe&
than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and o I hall most
earnelfly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the seasing of
money by Mr. Manners, the other commilffoners, and myself.
I truf Mr. Waade hath answered, in all hurhbe duties, for the
whole company, that no one of us did so much as think that our
commission reaching only to the papers, we might be bold to touch
the money, so as there was no speech of that all to my knowledge,
and as you know I was no commissioner in this search, but had
my hands full at Tyxall, discreet servants are not hafily to deal
in great matters, without warrant, and especially where the cause
is such as the delay of it carried no danger.

YOURi advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly

comfortable unto me. I will not ay, in refpe& of myself, be
cause my private interest hath no measure of comparison with her
majesty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God grant a
happy and (peedy yffue to these good and godly councets; and so
I commit you to his merciful protection. From Chartley the loth
of September 1586.

No. XVI,

65.9
U u .

No. XVI. (p. 46.)
Letter from bte ting of Scots to Mr, drchibald Douglas bi ambaJa.

der in ~Egland, Oatoer 1586.

[Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 9. An original in the king's hand.]

ESERVE up yourself na longer in the earnel dealing for my
mother, for ye have done it too long; and think not that

any your traveltis can do goode if hir life be taken, for then
adieu with my dealing with theime that arethe special instruments
thairof; and theirfre, gif ye look for the continouance of my
favour towartis you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but
redde my letter wrettin to William Keith, and conform yourself
quholie to the contentis thairof, and in this reqeift let me reap
the fruiftis of your great credit there, ather now or never. Fair-
well. Oober s586.
Letter tofir Wlliam Keith, ambaf4ador in England, pr.aely from

Jecretary Maitland. N'v. 27, 156 .

[A copy in the Collet. of fir. A. Dick. V61. A. fol. trg.]

Y your letters sent by this bearer (albeit concerning no plea.
sant subjed), his majesty conceives well of your earnelnefs

and fidelity in your negociations, as also of Mr. Archibald's ac-
tivity and dilligence, whom youfo greatly praise and recommend.
I wifithe iflue correspond to his ajelty's opinion, your care and
travell, and his great diligence as yeo write, His majefly takes
this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in heart, as
a matter greatly concerning him both in honour and otherwise.
His highnesses aimns and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of
that process, and of what moment he esteems it. There is an
ambaffade fiordy to be direted, wherein will be employed an earl
and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend the continuance
or difloluiion of the amity and good intelligence between the
prince of this ile. In the mean season, if farther extremity be
used, and his majeRfy's suit and requefR disdained, his highness
will think himself dilhonoured and contemned farbefides his ex-
peaation and deserts. Ye may perceive his majesty's disposition by
his letter to you, which you shall impart to Mr. Archibald, and
both deal according thereto. I need not to recommend to your
care, concerning your master's service both in weill and in honour.
As you and your colleague hall behave yourself in this behalf, so
for my own part, will I interpret your affetion to your matler. I
am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully credit that you
write of Mr. Archibald, whose friends here make great account
of his prfeffed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes
to the king's majesty her son, Farther I am conrftrained to remit
to next occasion, having scarce time to cribble these few lines
(which of themselves may bear witness of my hate). Wilhing
you a Itofperous issue of your negotation, I commit you, &c.
Halyradhoife, Novr. z7tai, 1586.

THE
66

TH people, and all eates here are Co far moved by the rigo-
rous proceedings against the queen, that his majesty, and all that
have credit are importuned, and may not go abroad for exclamati-
ons against them, and imprecations against the queen of England.

No. XVII. (p. 48 .)

T' th king's majefly, from Mr. ArchiAald Douglas.
1J6 O. 1586. From the original in the Collect. of fir A. Dick. Vol. B. fal.

314]

nLEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the date the
r z8th of September, the th of Ocober, which was the fame
day that! directed Wm. Murray towards your highness; by such
letters as he carried, and others of several dates, your majesty
may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might
reach unto, anent the performing of the two chief points con-
tained the said letter befor the receit thereof, which by these pre-
sents I must repeat for answering of the faidis, As to the first,
so far as may concern the interceding for the queen your majety's
mother her life, I have divers times, and in every audience, tra-
velled with this queen in that matter, specially to know what her
full determinatipn must be in that point, and could never bring her
to any further answer, but that this proceeding against her by or-
der of justice was no less against her mind, than against their will
that loved her bet; as towards her life he could give no answer
thereunto, antill such time as the law hath declared whether he
was innocent or guilty. Herewithal it was her pleasure tifus far
to inform me, that it was a number of the affociants that earneily
pressed her that the law might proceed against her, giying reasons
that so long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long would
never this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this Rate in
assurance, and in the end they used this protestation, that if he
would net in this matter follow their advice, that they ihould re-
main without all blame whatsoever should fall out; whereupon Ihe
had granted them liberty to proceed, left such as had made the re-
quest might hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience if
any should happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both

papist and protestant has behaved them, as it hath been her plea-
fare to declare, but upon divers refpe&s, the one to avoid fufpi-
cion that otherwise was conceived againit them, the other upon
zeal and care that they will be known tohave for preservation of
their sovereign's life and state in this perilois time, upon conider-
ation whereof, I have been corifrained to enter into Come dealing
with both, wherewith I made her maefty acquainted; the protef-
tants, and such as in othermatters will be known to bear no finall
favour unto your majesty's service hath prayed that they may be ex-
cufed from any dealivtg In the contrary of that, which by their oath
they have avowed, and by their speech to their sovereign requ'est
ed for, and that before my coming in this country; if they should
now otherwise do, it would produce no better effet but to make
them fubjeft to the accusation of their sovereign, when it hould
please her to do it, of their inconstancy, in giving counceli

whereby

661

whereby they might incur the danger of ill councellors, and be
consequent worthy of punifhnrent. Such of the papills, as I did
deal with, went immediately, and told her majelty had spoken to
them, who albeit she underfood the matter of before, sent for me
and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to them,
willing me for the weill of my mailter's service to abtain from
dealing with such, as were not yet sufficiently moved to think of
my maifer as he did. I craved leave of her majeilv, that I might
inform them of your majefly's late behaviour towards her, and the
state of this realm, whereunto with rome difficulty the gave her
content. At my late departure from court, which was upon the
Sth of this instant, and the day after that the lords.of this grand
jury had taken their leaves of her majefly to go northward to
Fothringham, it was her pleasure to promise to have further
speech in this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to
give full answer according to your majelly's contentment to the
remainder matters, that 1 had proponit in name of your majelly.
As to the d part concerning the association, and desire that the
prcmife made to the mailer of Gray concerning your majesty's
t:':e in doubt, hath not been rightly at the writing of the said let-
ter confidered, which 1 take to have proceeded for lack of read-
ing of the a of parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promise
made by the queen to the aid master, and nothing may now cause
any doubt to arise againll your said title, except that an opinion
flhoad be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are so
vehement at this time against the queen your majelty's mother,
that your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter assenting to her
proceedings, and some that love your majesty's service were of
that opinion that too earnefl request might move a ground, where-
upon suspicions might grow in men so ill affeaed in that matter,
which I tho't might be helped by obtaining of a declaration in
parliament of your majesty's innocence at this time, and by rea-
son -that good nature and public honesty would constrain you to in-
tercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with itself,
without any further, some suspicion that might move ill asseted
men to dcubt. In my former letters I humbly craved of your ma-
jefty that ome learned men in the laws, might be moved to ad-
vise with the words of the association, and the miitigation contain-
ed in the at of parliament, and withall to advise what suspicious
effets your majeRy's requell might work in these choleric men at
this time, and how their minds might be belt moved to receive
reason; and upon all these coniderations they might have ob-
tained in this parliament, and failing thereof the very words of
a protestation for the fame effed that might serve for your majef-
ty's service, and for my better information. Albeit this was my
simple opinion, I hall be contented to follow any direction it
ihall please your majesty to give 1 have already opened the sub-
stance hereof to the queen of this realm, who seems not to be of-
fended herewith, and hath grantedliberty to deal therein with such
of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind. This be-
ing the fun of my proceedings in this matter, besides the remain-

der,
656

der, contained in other letters of several dates, I an conllrained
to lay the whole open before your majesty, and to humbly pray
that full information may be sent unto me what further to do
herein; in this middle time, while I shall receive more ample di-
re&ion I shall proceed and be doing according to such direction
as I have already received. And so, mol gracious sovereign,
wishing unto your majesty all happy success in your affairs, I
humbly take my leave from London, 6th of Octr. this 586.
Your majesty's moll humble fubje& and obedt servant.

A memorialfor his majetly by the malfer of Gray.
[12 Jan. 1586. An original in his own hand in the Collet. of fir A. Dick. Vol.

A. ol. t ]
TT will please your majesty, I have tho't meeter to set down all

things as they occur, and all they advertisements as come to my
ears, then jointly in a lettre.

I CAM to Vare the 24th of Decr, and sent to Wm. Keith and

Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the queen of it, lik as they
did in their audience. She promised the queen your majesty's
mother's life should be spared till we were heard. The z7th they
came to Vare to me, the which day Sir Robt. came to Vare,
where they hewed us how far they had already gone in their ne-
gociation, but for that the discourse of it is set down in our gene-
ral letter I remit me to it, only this far I will testify unto your
majelty that Wm. Keith hath used himself right honeltly and wifely
till our coming, refpefing all circumltances and chiefly his col-
league his dealing, which indeed is not better than your majelty
knows already.

THE 2th day of Deer. we came to London, where we were no

ways friendly received, nor after the honest fort it had pleased
your majefly use her ambassadors; never man sent to welcome or
convey us. The fame day we underltood of Mr. de Bellievre his
leave taking, and for that the cultom permitted not we sent our
excuses by Mr. George Young.

THE i f day of Jan. Wm. Keith and his colleague according

to the custom sent to crave our audience. We received the anfver
contained in the general letter, and could not ha.c anfver till
the 6th day, what was done that day your majityV has it in the
general, yet we was not out of esperance at that time, albeit we
received hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our

conference was, as is set down in the general. I rer.a.,ked this,
that he that day said plainly the detaining of the ue-n of Scot-
land prisoner was for that he pretended a fucce.lion to this crown.
Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majesty, as ye hall hear
a little after.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambaflador, whom we

found very plain in making to us a wife difcoui fe of all his pro-
ceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thanked him in your majetvy's
name, and opened such things as we had to treat with this queen,
save the last point, as more largely set down by our general.

Ir

663

IT is tho't here, and some friends of your majelty's advised me,

that Bellievre his negociation was not effetual, and that the re.
sident was not privy to it, as indeed I think is true, for since Bel-
lievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafteauneuf his servants
taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he was fending
in Prance, for that they charge him with a conspiracy of late
against the queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has
confessed the matter, but whom I Ihall trust I know not, but till I fee
proof I hall account him an honft man, for indeed so he appears,
and one (without doubt) who hath been very instant in this mat-
ter. .1 few hin that the queen and earl of Leicelser had desired
to speak with me in private, and craved his opinion; he gave it
freely that he tho't it meeteft, I hew him the reason why I commu-
nicate that to him. for that I had been fufpeted by ome of her
majety's friends in France to have done evil offices in her service,
that he Ihould be my witness that my earnef dealing in this should
be a sufficient teitimony that all was lyes, and that this knave
Naue who now had betrayed her, had in that done evil offices'
he desired fie, feeing lhe saw only with other folks eyes, that
I should -no ways impute it to her, for the like she had done to
himself by Naue his persuasion. I answered he hould be my
wirnefs in that.

Ta E 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got

the oth day; at the first, she said a thing long looked for should
be welcome when it comes, I would now fee your maiter's offers.
I answered, no man makes offers but for fonre cause; we would.
and like your majefly, first know the cause tbobe extant for which
we offer, and likewise that it be extant till your majety has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promise for an hour,
but you think to hist in that fort. I answered we mind not to
shift, but to offer from our sovereign all things that with reason
may be; and in special, we offered as is set down in our general,
all was refused and tho't nothing, She called on the three that
were in the houfei- the earl of Leiceffer, my lord admiral, and
chamberlain, and very despitefully repeated all our offers in pre-
fence of them all. I opened the last part, and said, Madam, for
what refpe& is it that men deal against your person or estate for
her cause? She answered, because they think The mhall succeed
to me, and for that she is a papist; appearingly said I both the
causes may be removed, he said he would be glad to underfhand
it. If, madam, said I all that she has of right of succession
were in the king our sovereign's person, were not all hope of pa-
pifls removed? She answered, I hope so. ' Then, madam, I think
the queen his mother Ihall 'willingly demir all her 'rights in his
person. She answered he hath no right, for 'he is declared un-
habil. Then I said, if she have no right, appearingly the hope
ceases already, o thatit is notto be feared that any man attempt
for her. The queen answered, but the papists allow not our de-
claration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her as-
fignation. The earl of Leicefler answered he is a prisoner, and
how can he demit? I answered the demifflon is to her on, by

..... :

*
' - the

,,4

the advice of all the friends he has in Europe, and in care, as
God forbid, that any attempt cuttis the queen here away, who
fliallparty with her to prove the demiflion or aflignation to be in-
effeaual, her son being opposite party and having all the princes
her friends for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with his
majety of before. The queen made as he would not comprehend
my meaning, and fir Robt. opened the matter again, Ihe yet made
a3 tho' ihe understood not. So the earl of Leicefler answered
that our meaning was, that the king flould be put in his mother's
place. Is it ft, the queen answered, then I put myself in a worse
care than of before; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own
throat, and for a dutchy or an earldom to yourself you or such as
you would cause some of your desperate knaves kill me. No,
by God, he Ihall never be in that place. I answered, he'craves
nothing of your majesty, but only of his mother. The earl of
Leicester answered that were to make him party to the queen my
mistress. I said, he will be far more party, if he be in her place
thro' her death. She would fay no longer, but said he hould not
have a worse in his mother's place, And said, tll your king
what good I have done for him in holding the crown op his head
since he was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now
hands between us, and if he break it Ihall be a double fault, and
with this minded to have bidden us a farewell; but we achevit
[i. e. finished arguing upon this point]. And I spake craving of
her that her life may be fpred for 15 days; Ihe refused. Sir Robt.
craved for only eight days, the said not for an hour; and so geid
her away. Your majesty fees we have delivered all we had for
offers, but all is for nothing, for lhe and her councel has laid a
determination that they mind to follow forth, and I fee it comes
rather of her councel than herself, which J like the worse; for
without doubt, fir, it lhall cut off all friendship ye had here. Al-
tho' it were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembering themselves, that they have medled with your mo-
ther's blood, good faith they cannot hope great good of yourself,
a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your majesty may per-
ceive by this lad discourse of that I proponit, if they had meaned
well to your majelty, they had used it otherwise than they have
done, for reason has bound them. But I dare not write all. I
mind Something to speak in this manner, because we look fhurly
our letters hall be truffit by the way.

FoR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de-

termination, altho' the queen again and the earl of Leicester has
desired to speak with me in particular; I mind not to speak, nor
shall not; but assuredly shall let all men fee that I in particular
was no ways tyed to Enlgand, but for the refpe& of your ma-
jelly's service. So albeit, at this time, I could not effeduate that
I desired, yet my upright dealing in it shall be manifefled to the
world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience, where
we mind to use Iharply our inltruaions, which hitherto we have
used very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no

less

less for your majesty, than the French ambaflador has aid for
his mailer.

So 1 pray your majefy confider my upright dealing in your

service. and not he effect, for had it been doable [i. e. poflible
to be done] by ar. I ::ight have here had credit, but being I came
only for :hat cause 1 will not my credit hall serve here to any
further purpose. 1 pray God preserve your majesty and fend
you a true and sincere friendlhip. From London this izth of
Jan. 1;b6.

I NDE RST A D the queen is to fend one of her own to your

majeliy.
To ;,e rit haoa. my lord vice-crancellor andfecretary to bis majej.,

from thbe majler of Gray.
[i th Jan. 1586. An original in the Collec. of fir A. Dick. Vol. A. fol. 179]

Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to his ma-
jelly, whereby your lordfhin hall underhtand how matters

goes here. And before all things I pray your lordship move his
majesty to refpec& my diligence, and not the effet in this nego-
ciation, for I fivear if it had been for the crown of England to
myself I could do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage
of me, for the world hall fee that I loved England for his-majefly's
service only. I look shortly to find your lordship friend as ye
made promise, and by God I hall be to you if I can. Win.
Keith and I devyfet, if matters had gone well, to have run a
ccurfe that your lordlhip might have here been in credit and others
disappointed, but now I will do to you as for myself; which is to
care for no credit here, for in conscience they mean not honeflly
to the king our sovereign, and if they may, he will go the get
his mother is gone or (hortly to go, therefore, my lord, without
all kind of scruple I pray you to advise him the bell is not this
way. They fay here, that it has been said by one who heard it
from you, that ye desired not the king and England to agree, be-
cause it would rack the noblemen, and gave an example of it by
king James the fourt, I anfvered in your name that I was assured
you never had spoken it. Mr. A-chibald is the speaker of it,
w ho I aiure your lordship has been a poison in this matter, for
they lean very rmickle to his opinion.' He cares not, he fays, for
at length the king will be fain to deal this way, either by fair
means or necetfity, so that when he deals this course he is fare to
be welcome; to set dozn all that is pall of the like purposes, it
w-oud consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meet-
ing. There is a new conspiracy alledged againdl the queen to have
been intended, for the French ambassador resident three of his
men taken, but I think in the end it hall prove nothing. Mr.
Stafford, who is ambassador for this queen in France, is touched
with it, his brother is taken here; always it has done this harm in
our negociation, that all this council would not move this queen
to meddle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till this invention
was found forth. I remit all other things to the inclosed. We
minded to have ent to his majesty a discourse, which we have set

do vn
666

down of all our proceedings since our hither coming, but we are
surely advertized that the bearer is to be trussed by the way for
our pacquets, so that, we defer it till our own coming; this I have
putin a privy part beside the pacquet. We hall I think take
leave on Fryday the i3th day, where we mind exaftly to follow
the rigour of our inftrutions, for it cannot stand with the king's
honour that we fay less than the French ambafLador, which has,
leroy mon maiftre ne peult moins faire que fe refentir. So thac
about the 24th I think we hall, God willing, be at hame, except
that ome stay come which we look not for. The queen and the
earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me. I refused save in
presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a determination which
particular credit cannot help, and I crave no credit but for that
cause. It will please your lordship retire the inclosed from his
majesty and keep it. So after my service commended to yourself
and bedfellow, I commit you to God. From London the zth
of Jan. 1586.

so the king's majetfy, from fir Robert Melvil.
[zoth Jan. 586. An original in his own hand, in the Colle&. of fr A. Dick.

Vol. A. fol. 181.]
IT may please your majesty, since the direaion of her former

letters, we had audience, and her majesty appeared to take

our overtures in good part in presence of her council; albeit no
offers could take place with them, having taken resolution to pro-
ceed with extremity, not the less pleased her majetly to desire us
to stay for two days on taking our leave, until she dvifed upon
our propositions; since which time, her majesty is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from Scotland,
making some hope to believe that your majefly take not this mat-
ter to heart, as we know the contrary in effet, and had of before
removed the like opinion out of her majelly's mind, which by
finiftcr information was credited, thir reports has hindered our
commifiion, and abuscd this queen, fearing in like manner we
shall be stayed until answer come from Scotland by fuclh. - rfon as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be w' . . ough
known to all men how heavily your majeftl tac; s this proceeding
to heart, the truth is, that they have by this occrfion so perfuad-
ed the queen, that is like to hinder our negotia.ion. As also
Alchinder (i. e. Alexander) Steward is to be dir eaed in their party.
by our knowledge, who has awantyt more of his credit, than I
believe he may perform, and we wreat him to defill from this
dealing, faying it does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose,
remitting to your majefly's good discretion to take order herein
as we shall be answerable to your majesty not to omit any point
we have in charge, as the truth is, the master of Grhaye has be-
haved himself very uprightly and discreetly in this charge, and
evil tayne with bedivers in these parts who were of before his
friends. We have been behalding to the menftrals who has born
us belt company, but has not been troubled with others. Wyl-
zeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he hath in charge. As

for

667

for maser Archibald he has promised at all times to do his
dewoyr, wherein he hall find true report made to your majefy,
craving pardon of your majelty that I have been so tedious, after
I have kissed your majesty's hand I humbly take my leave. Pray-
ing God to grant your majesty many good days and happy, in
whose protetion I commit your majesty at London, the 26th of
Jan. 1586.

SIR,

ALBEIT Manter George has not been in commfliion he is not

irferior in his service to any of us, as well by his good advice
and diligent care he takes for the advancement of your service,
wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the iing's majie/y, from the majfer of Gray and fir Robert MAelvill.

IIft Jan. 1586. An oginal :n the Collet. of fir A Dick. Vol. A. fol. 18o.J
PLEASE it your majeiy in the las audience we had, since our

iaft adverifemnent by Wi. Murray, we find her majefly at

the reurning our offers something mitigated, and inclined to con-
fider more deeply of them, before we got our leave, at our rea-
soning, certain of the council, namely, my lord of Leicester, fir
Chri!opher IJaton, my lord Hunsion, and my lord Hawart be-
ing present in the chamber, gave little how of any great con-
tentment to heare her from her former resolution, now caffin in
perplexitie what she would do. always we left her in that slate,
and since we have daily pressed conference with the council
which to this hour we have not obtained. This day we have ent
down to creave our leave. The greatest hinder which our nego-
ciation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have here that
either your majesty deals fuperfieially in this matter, or that with
time ye may be moved to digefi it, which when with great diffi-
culty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters written to
them of late from Scotland has found ome place of credit with
them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special meflage, they have made choice of fir
Alexander Stewart to try your highness's meaning in it, and to
persuade your majesty to like of their proceedings, where from
no terror we can fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has
given out that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts
not to help this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there
that errand, we think your majetly will not oversee the great
difgr2ce that his attempts lhall give us here, if he be not tane or-
der with before that he be further heard, and if so be that any
other be direted (as our intelligence gives us there lhall) our
humble suit is to your majelty, that it may please your highness
to hear of us what we find here, and at what point we leave this
matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the causes
whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your ma-
jefty for the present to God's eternal proteeion. From London
this zit of Jan. r5S6.

No. XVIII.

No. XVIII. (p. 423.)

Ccy of a l tterfrom the earls f Sbrevj/iury and Kent, fc. touch-

ing their proceeding q with regard 10 tht death of the ScStiijt quemn,
to her inajeyfy's council.
IT may please your honble good lordlhips to be advertised,

that on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Robert Beale came

to the house of me the earl of Kent in the county of-to whom'
your lordlhip's letter and message was delivered, and her majesty's
commifion shewn; whereupon 1 the earl forthwith sent precepts
for the flaying of such hues and crie as had troubled the country,
requiring the officers to make ltay of all uch persons, as should
bring any such warrants without names, as before had ben done,
and to bring them to the next jltice of peace, to the intent that,
upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious
bruits might be bolted outand known. It was also resolved that I
the said earl of Kent should on the Monday following, come to
Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer
with my lord of Shrewlbury. Sunday at night, I Robert Beale came
to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commission,
&c. unto fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir
A. Pawlet was but late recovered, and not able to repair to the
earl of Shrewlbury, being then at Orton, fix miles off; it was
thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go
unto him, which we did on---morning; and together with the
delivery of her majelty's commiflion, and your lordlhip's letter
imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent and we thought
meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordIhip hither the day
following, to confer with me the said earl, concerning the fame
which his lordlhip promised. And for the better colouring of the
matter, I the said earl of Shreibury ent to Mr. Beale, a jufice
of peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to whom
I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under
your lordship's hands, fur the tfaying of the hues and cries, re-
quiring him to give notice thereof to the town of Peterborough,
and especially unto the jultices of peace of Huntingdonflhire,
and to cause the pursuers, and bringers of such warrants to be
flayed, and brought to the next justice of peace; and to bring us
word to Fotheringay castle on Wednesday morning what he had
done, and what he hould in the mean time underltand of the
authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir Amias
Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other
places adjoining. The fame night, the heriff of the county of
Northampton upon the receit of your lordihip's letter came to
Arundel, and lettters were sent to me the earl of Kent, of the
earl of Shrewlbury's intention and meeting here on Tuesday by
noon; and other letters were also ent with their lordlhip's aent
to fir Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brude-
nell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by 8 of the clock in the
morning, at which time it was thought meet that the execution
lhould be. So upon Tuesday, we the earls came hither, where

the

"9

the heriff met us; and upon conference between us it was refolv-
ed, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and other ne-
ceffary provision should be committed unto him against the time.
And we forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the presence of
herself and her folks, to the intent that they might fee and report
hereafter that lhe was not otherwise proceeded with than accord-
ing to law, and the form of the itatute made in the 27th year of
her majesty's reign, it was thought convenient that her majefly's
commission (hould b read unto her, and afterwards he was by
sundry speeches willed to prepare herself against the next morning.
She was alio put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
manner of proceeding with her, and the necessity that was imposed
upon her majeftv to proceed to execution, for that otherwise it
was found that they could not both stand together; and however,
fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracy's were
attempted, and so would be Rill: wherefore since (he had now a
good while since warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to
think upon and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
The was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept this mef-
sage in good part. And to the effe& that no christian duty might
be said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to
the salvation both of her body and foul in the world to come, we
offered unto her that if it would please her to confer with the
bimhop and dean of Peterborough, he might; which dean we had
for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
place. Hereto The replied, crossing herself in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, faying that he was ready
to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her ancestors had pro-
sessed, from which she would not be removed. And albeit we
used many persuasions to the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing;
and therefore, when lhe demanded the admittance of her pries,
we utterly denied that unto her. Hereupon, she demanded to un-
derfiand what answer we had touching her former petition to her
majeftR, concerning her papers of accounts, and the beltowing of
her body. To the firRl we had none other anfver to make, but
that we thought if they were not ent before, the fame might be
in Mr. Waade's cufRody, who was now in France, and feeing her
papers could not any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not
but that the fame (hould be delivered unto such as he hould ap-
point. For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
majesty would not make any profit of her things, and therefore
(in our opinions) fie might set down what she would have done,
and the fame should be imparted unto her majesty, of whom both
the and others might expect all courtesy. Touching her body,
we knew not her majesty's pleasure, and therefore could neither
fay that her petition ihould be denyed or granted. For the prac-
tice of Babington, he utterly denied it, and would have inferred
it, that her death was for her religion; whereunto it was eftsoons
by us replied, that for many years he was not touched for religion,
aor thould have been now, but that this proceeding against her
'was for treason, in that the was culpable of that horrible confpi-

racy

racy for destroying her majefly's person; which he again denied,
adding further, that albeit fle for herself forgave them that were
the procurers of her death, yet the doubted not but that. God
would take vengeance thereof. Ard being charged with the de-
positions of Naue and Curie to prove it against her, Ihe replied,
that the accused none, but that hercatfter when the shall be dead,
and they remain alive, it hall be seen how indifferently he had
been dealt with, and what measure had been used unto her; and
alked whether it had been heard before this, that servants had
been pratifed to accuse their miltrefs, and hereupon also required
what was become of them, and where they remained.

UPoN our departure from her, for that it seemed by the commis-

sion, that the charge of her was in the disposition of us the earls,
we required S. Amias Paulet and S. DruaDrurie, to receive, for
that night, the charge, which they had before, and to cause the
whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and that her folks
Ihould be put up, and take order that only four of them hould
he at the execution, remaining tloof of and guarded with certain
persons so as they should not come near unto her, which were
lelvil her Iteward, the physician, furgcon, and apothecary.
WE D NE AY morning, after that we the earls were repaired

unto the catle, and the sheriss had prepared all things in the hall
for the execution, he was commanded to go into her chamber,
and to bring her down to the place where were present, we which
have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward
Montague, knt. his son and heir apparent, and William Mon-
tague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas
Brudenell, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.
Sorrel, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
rough, and others.

Ar the Itairfold, he paused to fpeal to Melvil in our hearing,

which was to this effec, Melvil, as thou haft been an honetl ser-
vant to me, so I pray thee continue to my son, and commend me
unto him. I have not impugn'd his religion, nor the religion of
others, but with him well. And as I forgive all that have offend-
ed me in Scotland, so I would that ye hould also; and beseech
God, that he would fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him."
Melvil's answer was that he would so do, and at that inltant he
would beseech God to afit him with his spirit. Then she demand-
ed to speak with her priest, which was denied unto her, the rather
for that he came with a fuperltitious pair of beads and a cruci-
fix. She then desired to have her women to help her, and upon
her earnef request, and faying that when other gentlewomen
were executed ihe had read in chronicles, that they had women
allowed unto them, it was permitted that he hould have two
named by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After
Ihe came to the scaffold,' sirs, in presence of them all, her majef-
ty's commifflon was openly read; and afterwards Mr. Dean of
Peterborough, according to a direction which he had reciyed,
the right before, from us the earls, wou'd have made a godly
admonition to her, to repent and dye well in the fear of God

and

6;T

and charity to the world. But at the firt entry, the utterly re-
fused it, faying that she was catholique, and that it were a folly
to move her, being so resolutely minded, and that our prayers
would little avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it might ap.
pear that we, and the whole assembly; had a christian desire to
have her die well, a godly prayer, conceived by Mr. Dean, was
read and pronounced by us all. " That it would please Almighty
God to fend his Holy Spirit and grace, and also if it were his will,
to pardon all her offences, and of his mercy to receive her into
his heavenly and everlasting kingdom; and finally to bless her ma-
jelly, and confound all her enemies," whereof Mr. Dean, mind-
ing to repair up hortly, can thew your lrdfhips a copy.

THls done, Ihe pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this

effe&, " to beseech God to fend her his Holy Spirit, and that Ihe
trufed to receive her salvation in his blood, and of his grace to
be received into his kingdom, besought God to forgive her ene-
mies, as he forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this land,
to bless the queen's majeftie, that The might serve him. Likewise
to be merciful to her son, to have compaflion of his church, and
altho' he was not worthy to be heard, yet she had a confidence in
his mercy, and prayed all the faints to pray unto her Saviour to
receive her," After this (turning towards her servants) he de-
fired them to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her.
Then upon petition made by the executioners, he pardoned themr
and said, he was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near.
Then the disliked the whinning and weeping of her women, fay-
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution, and
killing them, willed them to depart from the scaffold and farewell.
And so resolutely kneeled down and having a kercheff banded
about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon the executioner
proceeded. Her servants were incontinently removed, and order
taken that none hould approach unto her corps, but that it should
be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And further, her crosse,
apparel, and other things are retained here, are not yielded unto
the executioner for inconveniencies that might follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by such as sent him hither.

THIS hath been the mfanner of our dealings in this service,

whereof we have thought good to advertise your lordihips, as
particularly as we could, for the time, and further have thought
good to signify unto your lordships besides, that for avoiding of
all sinister and slanderous reports that may be raised to the contra-
ry, we have caused a note therefore to be conceiv'd to the fame
effec in writing, whica we the said lords have subscribed, with
the hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen above
named that were present at the aion. And so beseeching Al-
mighty God long to bless her majesty with a most prosperous reign,
and to confound all his and her enemies, we take our leaves.
From Fotheringay-caftle, the 8th of February 1586, in hall.

Your lordShips at commandment.

N. B. This
672

N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendi.4

is taken from a collection made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drum-
oy, historiographer to queen Anne, now in the library of the
faculty of advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omit-
ted to mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be
found.

No. XIX. (p. 426.)

her ojeTibns again/ Mr. Davifn, in the cause of the late Scotti*h
queen, minJ concern things done either, . Before her trial at Fa-
tberinya. z. During that ifeion. 3. fter the fame.

[Cot. Lib. Calig. C. .]

1. D EFORE her trial, he neither is, norcan be charged to have

J had any hand at all in the caife of the said queen, or done
an) thing whatsoever concerning the fame, directly or indirely,

2. DURING that feffioni he remained at cotrt, where the only

interest he had therein, was as her majesty's secretary, to receive
the letters from the commiflioners, impart them to her highness,
and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commiflioners, it i§
well known to all her council,

I. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatfo-

ever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause of the said
queen, till the fending down of her majesty's warrant unto the
commifiioners, by the lords and others of her council.

z. TH AT he was no party in signing the sentence passed against

her.

3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation publiflhing

the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any other lettter, or
thing whatsoever concerning the fame. And,

THAT the only thing which can be specially and truly impnted
to him, is the carrying up the said warrant untd her majesty to be
signed. She fending a great codnfellor unto him, with her plea-
lure to that end, and carrying it to the great eal of England,
by her own special direction and commandment.

For the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
i. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was

delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her majesty's own pri-
vity, to be ready for to sign, when ihe thould be pleased to call
for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the lead five or
fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry it up, till he
lent a great counsellor unto him for the fame, and was sharply re-
proved therefor by a great peer in her majesty's own presence.

3. THAT having signed it, she gave him an express command-

ment to carry it to the real, and eing ealed to fend it immedi-
ately away unto the commiflioners, according to the direCtion,
Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringay for the place of exe-
cution, miliking the court-yard, in divers refpeds, and in con-

X x cllfion

673

clufion absolutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
hear any more hereof, till it was done. She, for her part, having
(as she said) performed all that, in law or reason, could be re.
quired of her.

4. WHICH directions notwithstanding, he kept the warrant

fealed all that night, and the greatelf part of the next day in his
hands, brought it back with him to the court, acquainted her ma-
jelly withal, and finding her majesty resolved to proceed therein,
according to her former direcions, and yet desirous to carry the
matter so, as he might throw the burden from herself, he abfo-
lutely resolved to quit his hands thereof

5. A D hereupon went over unto the lord treafurer'chamber,

together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence
refored the fame into the hands of the said lord treasurer, of
whom he had before received it, who from henceforth kept it, till
himself and the reft of the council sent it away.

WH I H, in substance and truth, is all the part and interefl the

said Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretend.
ed to the contrary.

To c IN o the fending down thereof unto the commissioners,

that it was the general a of her majesty's council, (as is before
mentioned) and not any private a of his, may appear by,

i. Their own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent down there-

with to the commifioners. 3. The tetlimonies of the lords and
others to whom they were direEted. As also, 4. Mr. Beale, by
whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majesty's rfl corn-
million for their calling to the flar-chamber for the fame, and pri-
vate appearance and submission afterward instead thereof, before
the lord chancellor Bromley. 6. The confefion of Mr. Attorney-
general in open court confirmed. 7. By the sentence itself upon
record. 8. Besides a common a of council, containing an
answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottish ambassador
then remaining here, avowing and juflifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given ome extraordinary
furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evidently appear by,

i. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of association,
being earnestly pressed thereunto by her majesty's self

a. His excnfing of himself from Being used as a commifiioner,

in the examination of Babington and his complices, and avoiding
the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to fay the commifiloners from pronounc-

ing the sentence of Fotheringay, and deferring it till they ihotld
return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefented,

without once offering to carry it up, till her majeRfy sent expressly.
for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring.,to fend it away after it was fealed unto the

commissioners, as he was pecially commanded, faying it all that
night, and the greatest part of the next day in his hands.

6. AN

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the lord

treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

WH c H are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison did
nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the
place he then held in her majesty's service. ·

Cal. C. 9.
THIS seems to bean original. On the back of this title,
TH E innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scot-
tilh queen.

No. XX. (p. 487.)

Letterfrom ®, to his mnajey king 7ames '.

[From the original. Bibl. Sac. Jur. Edin. A. I. 34. No. 4.]

MOST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your as-
ll fetionates have been such as hath inforced silence in him,
who is faithfully devoted to your person, and in due time of trial
will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the maintenance of the
just legal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of na-
tions, is inverted in your royal person. Fall not then, most noble
and renowned prince, from him whose providence hath in many
dangers preserved you, no doubt, to be an instrument of his glory,
and the good of his people. Some secrets, rfind, have been re-
vealed in his prejudice, which muR proceed from some ambitious
violent fpirlted person 'near your majesty in council and favour ;
no man in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath no foun-
dation from any, with whom, for your service, have held cor-
refpondence; otherwife,-I had, long since, been disabled from
performance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endear
voureth; being only known to this worthy nobleman, bearer hereof,
one noted in all parts of Chriltendom for his fidelity to yourper-
son and state, and to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal servant,
my first and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone,
whom I have found in all things that concern you, most secret and
alfured. It may, therefore, please your majesty, at the humble
motion of ®, which jargon I desire to be the indorfement of your
commands unto me, that, by some token of your favour, he may
understand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and
service. My pallionate affetion to your person (not as you are
a king, but as you are a good king, and have jus title, after my
sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me to presumption,
Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
altho' mixed with defe&s in judgment. -

. I, THEREFORE, first beseech yourmajefty, that for the good

of those whom God by divine Providence, hath destined to your
charge, that you will be pleated to have an extraordinary care of
all prafticers or pracices, against your person i for it is not to be
doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition,

* In the former editions, I printed this as a letter from Bir Robert Cecil, but

amn now satisfied, that I was mistaken in forming this opinion. See Sir ). Dal-
trmple's Rem. on the Hilt. of Scot. p. 233. As the letter is curious I will re-
publith it, though I cannot pretend to fay to hich of the king's numerous cor-
etfpondcnts in England it hould be ascribed.

X x 2 facion,

faftiot, or feat, there are many that desire to have their sovereign
in minority, whereby the sovereignty and slate may be swayed by
partiality of subalternate persons, rather than by true rule of
power and justice. Preserve your person, and fear not the-prac-
tices of man upon the point of your right, which will be pre-
served and maintained against all assaults of competition what-
ever. Thus I leave the prote&ion of your person, and royal
posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bless and pre-
serve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to his glory.

z. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the-conferva-

tion and secret keeping of your councells, which, as I have said,
are often betrayed and discovered, either oat of pretended zeal in
religion, turbulent faction, or bale conception, that which your
majesty is to regard with all circnmfpe&ion as a matter most
dangerous to your person and slate and the only means to ruin
and detroy all thole that stand faithfully devoted to your majef-
ty's ferice. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I make
no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this nature,
I make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this
nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majefy may be fur-
ther informed.

3. TH g 3d point considerable is that your majesty, by all means

poiible, fectre yourself of the good affection of the French king
and ates, by the negotiation of some faithful secret confident;
the French naturally diftafting the union of the Britilh islands
under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have
many allies and friends, but by reason of their remote state, they
do not so much importe this affair, which mnrf be guided by a
quick and sudden motion.

4. Wa z N God, by whose Providence, the period of all per-

sons and times is determined, hall call to his kingdom of glory
her majesty (although I do assuredly hope that there will not be any
question in competition, yet for that I hold it not itting to give
any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature), I do hum-
bly beseech your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and expe-
rienced confident servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity
andjudgment, continually to be here resident, whose negociation,
it were convenient your majesty hould fortifie, with such secret
trust and powers, as there may not need 14 days respite to pof
for authority, in a cause, that cannot endure to hours respite,
without arities of danger. In the which it is to be confidered,
that all fach as pretend least good to your establishment, will not
in public oppugn your title, but out of their cunninge ambition
will seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of common
good to the state, in propounding of good conditions fordifbur-
thening the common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy impofiti-
ons, corruptions, oppreflions, &c. which is a main point to lead
the popular, who are much difgfted with many particulars of this
nature. It were therefore convenient, that there motives, out of
your majefiy's providence, hould be prevented, by your free of-
ser in these points following, viz.

I. THAI
66

i. THAT your majesty would be pleated to abolilh purveyors

and purveyance, being a matter infinitely offensive to the com-
mon people and the whole kingdom, and not profitable to the
prince.

z. THAT your majelty would be pleased to dissolve the court of

wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this
realm, by base matches, and evil education of their children, by
which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally

repined against by the fubjeEt, in regard of their uncertainty,
being many times altered from their true meaning, by variety of
interpretations.

4. THAT your majefly will be pleased to admit free outport of
the native commodities of this kingdom, now often relsrained by
fabalternate persons for private profit, being mol prejudicial to
the commerce of all merchants, and a plain dellruaion to the true
industry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the profit
of the crown.

THESE, being by your majesty's confidents, in the point of
time propounded, will afluredly confirm unto your majeflie the
hearts and affecions of the whole kingdom, and absolutely pre-
vent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of
pretext of common good, would seek to patronize themselves in
popular opinion and power, and thereby to derogate from your
majesty's bounty and free favour, by princely merit and mode-
ration, judgment, and justice.

You a majesty's favour thus granted to the subjet, will no way

impeach the profits of the crown but advance them. The difpro-
portionable gain of some chequer officers, with the base and mer-
cenary profits of the idle and unnecessary clerks and attendants, will
only susser ome detriment; but infinite will be the good unto
the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majesty the universal
love and affecion of the people, and eftablilh your renown in the
highest eteem to all posterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you triumphant
over all your enemies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and
will die before he leave to be yours, hali be no less than of mine
own life, and in like esteem I will hold all your faithful cnfidents,
notwithstanding I will hold myself reserved from being known
unto any of them, in my particular devoted affecions unto your
majeRy, only this extraordinary worthy man, whose aflociate I
am in his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will pray
for you, and if we live you hall find us together.

I BESEECH your majesty, burn this letter, and the others: for
altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's molt devoted,

and humble servant,

INDE X.

677

# INDEX.

I N

A
A DAMSON, Archbishop of St. An-

drews, is excommunicated by the

fynod of Fife, page 401. is restored
by the general assembly upon con-
ditions, ib. his mean submission to the
general assembly - 441

Albany, Alexander Duke of, cabals with

his nobles against his brother K. James
III. 34. is made prisoner, but escapes
to France, ib. concludes a treaty, with
Edward IV. of England, ib. procures
aflltance to invade Scotland on mean
conditions, 35. returns to,Scotland,
and is restored to favour, ib cabals
again, but is forced to fly to France 36

- Duke of, made Regent during

the minority of K James V. z1. 38.
is forced to retire to France - ib.

Allefos, Duke of, Q Elizabeth long

amuses the court of France by carry-
ing on a treaty of marriage with
him - - 351

Alien, cardinal, publilhed a book pro-

ing the lawfulness of killing excom-
municated princes - 393

Alva, Duke of, his intrigues in favour

of Q Mary, 315. 317. 335. is recalled
from his government of the Nether-
lands - - 340

Ambafador, their office - 51
A.drwwI, St. the Archbiflhap of, re-

markably cured of a dangerous dif-
temper, 8z. 134. persecutes the Re.
formers, oo. is imprisoned for cele-
brating mass, 18i. ruins Q Mary's
affairs by his imprudent conduct, 172.
is taken prisoner in Dumbarton Cattle,
and hanged. - - 319

Andrews, the castle of, demolilhed by

the French - - 70

--- the prior of, promotes a treaty

between the Q Regent and the Re-
formers, o8. is one of the chief pro-
moters of the reformation. 1 18. artful
endeavours used to undermine him,
1 9. is sent by the convention to invite
the Queen to Scotland, 51. reltraint
the turbulent fpiritof the people againf
popery, i 6i. is sent to refirain the li-
centious pratices of the borderers, 164
a conspiracy against him discovered;

170. is created Earl of Mar, 171. See
Mar and Murray.

Axgai, Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of,

was the only man who asserted the in-
dependency of his country - 7

-- Douglas, Earl of, afames the

Regency during the minority of K.
James V. 2i. 38. is attainted and flies
into England, 39. obtains leave to re-
turn into Scotland, 365. surrenders him-
self to K. James V. 371. he with fe-
veral others seize the castle of Stirling
to oppose Arran, 374. they are forced
to fly into England at the approach of
the King with an army, ib. he is at-
tainted and hiseftate forfeited, 387. is
concerned in a plot in favour of Spain,
444. is seized and committed prisoner
to the catle of Edinburgh, 445. es-
capes and flies to the mountains, ib.
offers to submit to a trial, 448. fen-
tencc is pronounced again(t'him, ib.
he refuses to submit - 449

.deja, Duke of a marriage proposed be-

tween him and Q Elizabeth 323

Anan, a Princess of Denmark, married

to K. James VI. 439. her arrival in ,
Scotland and coronation, 441. heads a
party that opposes the chancellor 447

Jrchbijobpr, Bipjbpi, Deajs, and Chapters

revived in Scotland during the King's
minority, 333. an a of aembly
against these offices, 361, 361. Bifiops
made subjea to prelbyteries and alsem-
blies - - 401

Argyll, Earl of, is appointed to carry the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of
France, 99. uses his interetl with the
Reformers to make a treaty with the
Queen Regent, 107. leaves her court
in resentment of her treachery, oo.
refuses to accede to a treaty with
Murray the Regent, 297. is loon after
forced to submit, ib. ads as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's
murder, 311. is prevailed on to join
the King's party, 321. quarrels with
Athole, 343. confederates with him
againift Morton, the Regent, for their
t mutual defence, ibid, they remonstrate

against him to the King, 345. they
raise forces against him, 348. negoci-
, ate a treatywith him by the mediation

of
D

E

X.

of Queen Elizabeth, 349- is promoted
to the office of chancellor, 350. the
King's authority delegated to him and
Lord Sorbes against the Popilh Lords,
45 . his forces are defeated in an en-
gagement with them - ibid.

Ariicraty, predominant in Scotland 59
Armada, Spanifl, preparations for it,

431, 41. it isdefeated - 435

drra,, Earl, is appointed Regent during

the minority of Q Mary, 58. becomes
fofpicious of the Earl of Lcnnox, 6.
is forced to renounce the friendlhip
with England and declare for France,
ib. and to persecute the Reformers 64.
publicly abjures the dotrines of the
Reformers, ibid. attempts in vain to
seize the murderers of cardinal Bea-
toun, 69. is forced to make a truce
with the conlpirators, ib. his eldell
son is conditionally excluded all right
of fuccefiion, 70. his mean conetfion
to the court of France, 75. gets the
title of Chattlherault, ib. is under-
mined by the Q Dowager, 80. pro-
pofals and arguments for his retig-
nation - -- 81.

Arran, cldcfl son of the Duke of Cha-

telherault, joins in an affociatioo with
the Reformers, 117. narrowly escapes
intended ruin at the court of France,
i 18. the congregation solicit Q Eliza-
beth to marry him, 146. his great im-
prudence with regard to Q Mary, 65.
dilcovers a conspiracy against the
Queen's favourite, 7o. loses his reason,
35o, 35 . is imprisontd by Morton ib.

late Captain Stewart, get, that

title and estate, 358. is appointed to
condud Morton from Dumbarton to
Edinburgh, ib. his infamous marriage
with the Countess of March, 360. his
variance with Lennox, ib. i fruflrat-
cd in an attempt to rescue the King
at Ruthven, 365. is confined prisoner
to the castle of Stirling, ib. regains his
liberty and the King's regard, 379.
resumes his power and arrogance, ib.
gets the Ruthven conspirators declared
guilty of high treason, 372. is detcfted
as author of a perflcution agiinli the
clergy, 375. is gained over to Queen
.lizabeth's interetl, 387. gets several
forfeited estates, ib. is made chancel-
lor and has unlimited power, 391. his
monfrous tyranny and opprefion, 391.
his power undermined by Wotton
the Englifli Envoy, 399. is confined
in the castle of St. Andrews, but soon
recovers favour, 400. is fripped of his
borour? and spoilS, and reduced to his
original tation - 401

Articlet, Lords of, their origin and bufif

r.efs, 49. by whom chosen 50

Arundel, Earl of is appointed a com,

miflioner to the conference at Wetl-
minfler - 191

AJby, ambafldor from Q. Elizabeth to

Scotland, 433. his great promises to
King James, ibid. his promiles are
soon forgot, 435. he is aamed and
withdraws privately from Scotland ib.

Aaffinatij, the frequency of it in Scot-

land, how accounted for, 17. Ifveral
intlances of it in France, 18. a flop
put to it there and in Scotland, ib.
prevailed greatly afterwards - 442

A4flmbly of the church of Scotland. the

firli but feeble and irregular, rgo. ano-
ther afTcmbly, their demands from the
convention, 165, 166, two other al-
femblies in vain solicit an augmenta-
tion of their revenues, 76. they ad-
drels Q Mary in high lirains of com-
plaints, ao0. an alfembly proceeds at
Glasgow notwithstanding the King's
interdicion, 361. two assemblies yield
many of the privileges of the church
to the King, 463. declare it lawful for
ministers to fit in Parliament, 465.
See Clergy.

Af;ciation, formed in defence of Q_ Eli-

zabeth against Q Mary - 389

Atble, Earl of, the occasion of hisquar-

rel with the Earl of Argyll, 343. joins
with him in opposing Morton the Re-
gent, ib. dies soon after an entertain-
ment at Morton's, 350. suspicions of
his being poisoned. - ibid.

A.ig.e, Lord de, second Ion of the Lord

Lennox, arrives in Scotland from
France, 351. becomes soon a great fa-
vourite of King James, ib. high titles
and olfs bellowed on him, ib. nobles
againlt him, Appendix, 634. See

n family, their origin and

Awfirian family, their origin and
power - 3, 54

B

Babingts, Anthony, rome account of

him, 404. the rife of his conspiracy
againll Q Elizabeth, ib. 405. the name
and scheme of operations of his afro-
ciates, 405. they are betrayed, seized,
and executed - - 406

Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of

the commiflioners to the confederates
at Weltminfler - - z I.

Balips, John, his claim to the crown of

Scotland, 6. is preferred by Ed. I. o.
soon forced by him to resign - ib.

Ball, a trafficking prielt, solicits an in-
vafion of England from Spain, 404.

joins

joins in a conspiracy to murder Queen
Elizabeth, 405. is discovered and take?
into custody, 406. and executed ib.

Baront, their jurifdi&ion very extensive,

13. the difference between the greater
and leser, whence 47. three hundred
of them remonfirate against the con-
dua of the Q. Dowager, 9. the lel-
ser admitted by their reprelentatives in
Parliament, 431. petition of the leffcr
Barons to Parliament, Append. 558,
559. See Nobles.

BaJ;licon Dorro, a book publilhed by King

James VI. frengthens his interest in
England - - 467

Beatxou, Cardinal, made use of by King

JamesV. to mortify the nobles, 41.
his pretensions to the Regency on the
death ct that Prince, 57. forges a testa-
ment of the late King, ib. his cha-
ra&er, 8. opposes the Earl of Arran,
Regent, 60. excites molt of the na-
tion against the Englilh, 61. leizes the
young Queen and her mother, 62.
cajols the Earl of Lennox, ib. obliges
the Regent to renounce England and
declare for France, ib. and to persecute
the Reformers, 63 engrosses the chief
diretion of affairs, 64. his double
dealing with the Earl of Lennox re-
sented, ib. is murdered - 68

Bedford, Earl of, comes as ambafnador

from QO Elizabeth to witnefl the bap-
tifm of James VI. 30. his infiruc-
tions, 231. his letters to Sir W. Cecil,
Appendix - 577, 578. 584

Bellendcn, Sir Lewis, jultice clerk, King

James's resident at London, 398. joins
in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interet in
Scotland, ib. is lent with her envoy
into that country - ibid.

Black, Mr. David, minilter at St. An-

drews, his ridiculous and seditious ex-
preflions in the pulpit, 457. is con-
demned by the privy council, 458. is
sentenced by the King to reside beyond
Spey - - ib.

BlackaJder, Captain, and three others,

executed for the murder of Darnly 259

Batthiut, Heaor, his hiltory of Scotland,

some account of - 3

Bclton CaJfle, Q Mary confined a pri-

soner there 281

Bonot, a foreigner, made governor of

Orkney - -- 91

Borderers, an attempt to restrain their li-

centious praaices, 164. Q Mary visits
them, 225. a scuffle there, in which
the English warden, &c. were made
prisoners - - 342

Bortbwick, Lord, assists the Q. Regent in

defending Leith - 128
Ptbtoeill, James Hepburn, Earl of, in-

E X.

tercepts a rum of money from Eugland
to the Congregation, 117. favours the
QO Regent, but resides at his own
house, laS. is by the Earl of Murray
fummgned td a public trial, 196. pr.-
vents it by leaving the kingdom, ib. a
sentence of outlawry againls him, pre-
vented by the Queen, ib is ermitted
to return, o20. efcapeLswith her
after the murder of Mit , '15. fonme
account of his former behgp'l[u 20.
221. commences a favourite of the
Queen, I21. Ihe reconciles him to
several Lords, with whom he was at
variance, ib. he is wounded in attempt-
ing to seize one of the borderers, 225.
the Queen's extraordinary regard for
him on this occalion, ib. to secure ad-
herents he obtains a pardon for Morton
and h afrociates, 232. proposes the
restoration of the popilh ecclefiafical
jurifdiCion, 234. is uipeacd the au-
thor of Darnly's murder, 238. is
charged with it by Lennox, 239. ap-
pointed governor of Edinburgh Cattle,
240. his trial is hurried on, ib. Lennox
accuses him openly, 242. comes to his
trial with a great retinue, ib. is acquit-
ted bya jury, 243. the trial unlver-
sally cenlured, ib. several ads of Par-
liament paired in his favour, 244. he
procures an ad in favour of the refor-
mation, ib. prevails on several of the
nobles to recommend him as a huftand
to the Queen, 247. seizes the Queen
on a journey from Stirling, and carries
her to Dunbar, 249. obtains a pardon
under the great feal, ib. procures a
divorce from his wife, ib. carries the
Queen to the cafle of Ediuburgh, o50.
is created Duke of Orkney, 2t5. and
married to the Queen, ib. is not al-
lowed the title of King, ib. watches
the Queen very clolely, Z52. endea-
vours to get the Prince into his .cul.
tody, ib. is alarmed with an afTociation
of the nobles against the Queen and
him, 253. carries the Queen to the
cafle of Borthwick, 254. raises forces
against the confederate Lords, ib. he
marches againit them, ib. propofesa
single combat, 156. this how prevent-
ed, ib. takes his las farewell of the
Queen, and is forced to fly, ib. fends
for a calket of letters from Q. Mary to
him, z59. they are intercepted by the
Earl of Morton, ib. his miserable fate.
a66, 67. copy of his divorce from
Lady Jane Gordon, Appendix, 587, 588

Bolthuvel, Francis Stewart, created Earl

of Bothwell, 436. is imprilbned for
conlulting witches, 441. elcapes and
attempts to break into the King's

presence,

preence, 44. retires to the north, ib.
te and his adherents are attainted,
44. fails in an attempt to seize the
King, ib. is taken under protection of
Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him,
44;5 leizes the King's person, 446.
forces him to dismiss the chancellor,
and his other favourites, 447. and to
grant him a remission, ib. makes an-
etler attempt to come at the King,
449. is repulscd and obliged to fly to
the north of England, 450. is aban-
doncd by Q_ Elizabeth, and forced to
fly into Spain and Italy, 45j

Bte-:sll, Adam, Eilshop of Orkney, per-

forms the ceremony of -marriage of Q_
Mary to the Earl of Bothwell 251

EsBlscelltsegb. See Hakltx.
Blcge. wrelted by the French out of

the bands of the Englifn, 75. they
cnnlent to restore it and its depcnden-
ces tothe French. 76

Bswes, Envoy from Q Elizabeth, ac-

cufes Lenox of diftcrbing the peace,
354- is refuled an audience, ib. is sent
to encourage the conspirators at Ruth-
yen, 365. to inquire about King
James's correlpondence with the Pope

467

Bad, Lord, his ambitious views in the
time of K. James Ill. frustrated 2z

is prevailed on to join the king's

pa-;r againl Q_ Mary, 321. joins the
Rut!hen conspirators 364

Br'ew.e, Count de, comes an ambassador

from Franze to wirnefs the baptlin of
K. James VI. - 30

,£',., Robert, is ciaim to the crown of

Scot!at:d, 6. his grandson affcrts his
:ight, and vindicates the honour of his
cos-=rv, S. he attempts to reduce the
power o- tine nob!rs - '_8

- a p:el, employed by the King of
Spain to educe the Scotch nobles 436

M. Robert, a Predbyterian mini-

ser, performs the ceremony of the co-
roation of K. James's Queen 441

Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits

himrne!f with addre's and reputation as
anrbafador at the court of England

466

- M. Robert, a miniler, his refo-

!otion in refusing to pblifh the King's
accou:r of Gowrie's conspiracy, 480.
is deprived and banitsed on that ac-
cout -- ibid.

Bacrca~J, George, his history of Scot-

land, ome account of, 3. remarks on
hi- dialogue De Jure Regis, a lo.alone

cic Q' Marv of a criminal corre-

:o.dence with Rizio, 212, approved
of affa:nation, z21. attends the Re-
gcr' 'I.t England when called on to

accuse Q- Mary, 84. was one of the
preceptors of K. James VI. 34A. corn
mended for hi, great genius 500

Burleigh. See Cecil
Brasuhri, when firls represented in par-
lianent 43

C

Ca, J"nhn, a delaration of his in name

o Q Elizabeth to the Lords of Gunge
at Lthington, Appendix 628

Caithres. arl of his prottft at the trill
of Batliwell for the murder of Darnly

'43

Caivi, the patron and reftorerof prcby-

tclian church government 149

Cdmdes, Iob;n miltakes of his 131. 247
C.az.gute, near Edinburgh, 'Parliamneit

held there - 319

Cardc., tome account of him, 8z. his

rcmarkable cure of the Bilhop of St
Andrews -- ibid.

Car,!, Sir George, sent ambassador from

Q Elizabeth to encourage the confpi-
rator at Ruthven -- 3
-- Robert, sent by Q. Elizabeth to
footl K. James after the death of his
mother, 46. is not permitted to enter
Scotland, ib. was the first that brought
K. lames intelligence of the death of
Q Elizabeth - 493

Cajrie of letters from Q. Mary to Both-

well seized by the Earl of Morton 59

Ca/tia, Earl of, joins the king's party 321
Caftelnat, the French ambassador, is em-

ployed to procure the consent of his
court to Queen Mary's marriage with
Darnly, 191. he endeavours to make
up the differences between the Queeo
and him, iZ2. his interceflion in be-
half of Queen Mary - 395

Ca:herine of Medicis, afrumes the govern-

ment after the death of Francis II. her
son, i48. her harsh treatment of Q
Mary, ib. her views in behaving more
friendly to her, 183. bends her whole
endeavours to dcllroy the Protefants

323
Cetil, his great capacity asa minifler, 139.

; 3. is employed to negotiate a peace
with France, ib. over-reaches the
French ambassador in the treaty of
Edinburgh, ib. a letter of his cited to
shew that Q Elizabeth had no inten-
tion to intercept Q Mary, in her re-
turn to Scotland, 58. is appointed a
commiflioner to the conferenceat Weft-
ainfter, 191. is sent by Q Elizabeth
'with proposals to Q Mary, 314 has
an interview with her, which excites
Q Elizabeth'sjealoufy, 340. is treated
harihly by Q_ Elizabeth for consenting
to Q. Mary's death 426

Cecil,

Cecil, Sir Robert, on to the former,

heads the party against Eex, 483. en-
ters into a private correspondence with
K. James - - 487

Celibacy of the popith clergy, a chief en-

gine of their policy - 87. 104

Charles V. Emperor, his great power, 53.

and unlimited ambition, 53, 54. is
checked by Franci I. 54
- K. of France makes a league
with D. Elizabeth - 318

Chatellbralt, Duke of, that title confer-

red on the Earl of Arran, Regent of
Scotland, 75. his right of fuccfflion to
the crown of Scotland maintained, 95.
enters a proteltation to lave his right,
97, joins the Reformers, in endeavour-
ing to expel the French army, 11 5. his
puillanimity, 16. becomes obnoxious
toQ. Mary, 165. deprived of his French
pension, 183. is alarmed at the Earlof
Ltnnox's return to Scotland, 188. an
accommodation brought about by the
Queen's influence, ib. adheres to Mur-
ray in opposing the Queen's marriage,

ot. is pardoned on his humble appli-
cation, but forced to reside in France,
204. his partizans grumble at Mur-
ray's being advanced to the Regency,
269, 70o. returns from France and
heads the Queen's adherents, 189, is
made her lieutenant-geaeral, ib. his
resolution wavering, the Regent com-
mits him prisoner to the Cafle of E-
dinburgh, 97, is et at liberty by
Kirkaldy, and joins the Qneen's party,
311. is proclaimed traitor by Lennox
the new Regent, 314. is reconciled to
Morton the Regent, 337. articles of a
treaty between them, ib. his death

342

Church of Scotland, revolutions in it

after the union of the crowns, 499.
See ARffinlf, Clergy.

Clrch Lands annexed to the crown by

Parliament - - 439

Clans, the inltitution and nature of 17
Clergy, popi(h, their great riches and

power, 40. 85. were made use of by
K. James V. to suppress the nobles,
41. made a considerable body in Par-
liament, 86. their great influence over
the laity, ib. their power increased by
celibacy, 87. they seized the estates of
the intestate, ib. and tried all matri-
monial and testamentary causes, 88.
become obnoxious to the laity, ib. their
great corruptions, whence, ib. their
weak defence of their tenets, 89. try
in vain to impose faire miracles, ib.
their impolitic condua to the Reform-
re. -, - 0t

Clergy, reformed, try in vain to recover

the revenues of he church, 151, 151.
procure a demolition of ll relics of po-
pery, 53. a new regulation concern-
ing their revenues, 166. 168. their lfi-
pende, what in those days, 169. are ot-
fended at the moderation of their lead-
ers, 181. occasion a tumult among the
people, ibid. 182. more complaints of
their poverty, 188. 32. are jalousof
QMary, 133. the small allowances ap-
pointed to support them all, ib. frefl,
complaints of the deficiency of the
funds for their maintenance- 305. are
put off with fair words and promises,
ib. 306. archbihops, &c. introduced
among them by Morton, 333. their
grievances under his administration,
341. they approve of the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 366 revere laws made against
them, 375. they of Edinburgh fly into
England, 376. as do leveral others that
were most eminent, ib. more vigo-
rous measures against them, 387. they
obtain no redress on the reltoration of
the exiled Lords, 40o. reprelent their
grievances to Parliament, 418. a mai.-
tenance provided for them by Parlia-
ment, 430 they prevail to get Prcfby-
terian government eRtablified by law,
443. their zeal againfl the Popili
Lords, 447, 448. 454. their ralh pro-
ceedings, 454, 455. they erc&a Rand
ing Councilof the Church, 456. vin-
dicate one of their number who declin-
ed the civil jurifdiion, 457. their
standing Council ordered to leave Edin-
burgh, 458. this occasions a violent
tumult there, ib 459. they use their
utmost efforts to spirit the people, 461.
are deserted and fly to England, ibid.
are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, 463. are restored to a
feat in parliament, 464. those entitled
to this privilege are laid under,many
regulations and reftriaioos, 469. th-
revolutions among them since the Uni-
on of the Crowns - 499

Clinton, Lord, appointed a commiflioner

at the conference at Westminster 91

Corktrn, of Ormifton, receives a supply

of money from the Englihi to the con-
gregation, 1 7. is intercepted and rob-
bed of it - ib
Coin in Scotland, some account of 114.

341.

Conmiffaries appointed to try causes in

place of the Spiritual Court, 44. they
are deprived of all authority a33

Confefion of faith by the Reformers, con-

sented to by Parliament 144
Ceongreation, the Protestants distinguished

by

v tr.at tame, oS. their leaders enter
into an aociation, ib. are involved in
dificulties, 6. apply to Q Eliabeth
for affitanee, ib. money feat them by
her, intercepted, 127. makes a ralh and
defpratc attempt on Leith, and are rc-
pullfd, a28. are no leis unfortunate in
a second &-irnil, ib. are quite dif-
spirited and retreat to Stirling, ib. are
joined by the body of the noble', b.
their army dwindles away, 1£9. are
animated by Knox, ib. they apply
again to Q Elizabeth, ib. their parties
harats the French, 133. arc afliltcd by
a fleet from England, 134. conclude a
treaty at Bermick, with the D. of Nor-
folk, ib. negociate a peace with France,
i39. articles of the treaty, ib S-c
Retfr-wattv.
C.;veam, national, framed in defence of

the King and Government 434

C;:retjj of Scotland, what 96
Crvg, a mifilter, boldly testifies againlt

Q_ Mary's marriage with Bothwetl zS2

Crawvcrd, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprilcs

Dumbarton Castle 3 i 8

-- Earl of, one of the heads of the

Spanili faction, 433. 436. offers his
service to the K. of Spain, ib. joins in
rebellion agaift the King, 437. iS
forced to lubmit to him, 438. and im-
prisoned a fiort time - ib.

Crcbtsn, Regent during the minority of
K. James II. his barbarous policy 31

a lefuit, a plot against Q. Eriza-

beth dicovered by his means 38S

Cnriimal, a remarkable inilance of the

difficulty of bringing them tojuRice t
Crc, du, the French ambassador, refuted

to countenance Q Mary's marriage
with Bothwell, 251. attempts in vain
a reconciliation between the Queen and
the confederate Lords, 55. mediates a
iruce between the King and Queen's
party in Scotland 328
Crcvn matrihial of Scotland, rights

conveyed by the grant of, 96. it grant-
ed by Parliament to the Dauphin of
France, 7. deputies appointed to carry
:t, but are prevented, 99. is demanded
by Darly - - 2to

£av.s3am, Robert, appears at the trial

of Bothwell, in the name of the Earl
fc Lennox, 242. demands t delay,
which is refOred - ib.
Cre, one of Q_ Mary's secretaries, is

seized and carried prisoner to London,
408. is produced an evidence against
ter - - 4'3

D
Dars],% Henry Lord, pronned aa a hui-

band to Q. Mary, tl5. his right of
succession confidered, ib. 86. is per-
mit:ed to visit the court of Scotland,
isg. arrives there, and quickly gains
the Queen's heart, 190. his characier,
t19. difgufls several of the nobles,
particularly Murray, ib. cultivates
a familiarity with David Rizio, ib.
is despised on that account, ib. grows
intolerably insolent and haughty,
'97. schemes to atFafrinate Murray,
198. a plot to seize and fend him to
lngiand prevented by the Queen, ib.
his marriage with the Queen cele-
brated, 200o. is honoured with the
title of King of Scotland, zo. is
implacable with refpeet to the ex.
iled nobles, 2o6. Ioles the Queen's
affection by his untoward behaviour,
210o. demands the crown matrimonial,
ib. bcomes fulpicious of Rizio's ill of-
sices with the Queen, ib. his refolu-
ton to beavenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 212. articles agreed on
betwetn them for that purpose, ib.
heads the conspirators who perpetrate
the murder, 213. confines the Queen
after it is committed. 214. prohibits
the meeting of the Parliament, ib.
makes his efcapewith the Queen, 215.
is neglected by her and treated with
little rcfpec by the nobles, 222. re-
celves to leave Scotland, 2z3. his
strange behaviour at the baptism ofthe
Prince, 230. retires to his father at
Glasgow, 232. falls ick there, 234.
is neglected by the Queen, ib. he as
terwards fits and expresses affecion
for him, 135. he is prevailed on by
her to come to Edinburgh, 237. is
lodged in a separate house, ib. he is
murdered there, ib. his charater,
238. a proclamation issued for difce-
vering the murderers, ib. a remift en-
qniry made into it, ib. 243. Capt.
Blackadaer and three others eie-
cutedon that account, 259' the con-
fefion of MOrton the Regent at his
death concerning the murder, 359. a
dissertation concerning his murder,
o54. paper of objecions of the Court
of England against his marriage with
Q Mary, App. - S67

David I. King of Scotland, his profusion
to thechurch - 85

11. troubles during his minority

Dafjia, Cent into Scotland by C. Eliza-
Daviscas sent into Scotland by C. Eliza-

beth, as a spy on the French ambaffa-
dor, 368. is sent to gain Arran's in-
terest to Q Elizabeth, 386. brings the
warrant for Q..Mary's death at Q,

Elizabeth's

Elizabeth's desire, 419. is charged by
her with disobeying her orders, 45.
is imprilbned, tried, and fined, and
loses all favour, 416. objecions againf
him in the eaufe of the late Scottilhi
Queen - App. 673

Def#, Monsieur, is ent with a supply of

forces to afiift the French againit the
English in Scotland, 74. his fuceels
there - - 75

Discipline in the Church, the firi book

of, composed, 51. why objected
againif in a convention of the States,
ib. anotherattempt in favour of Church
dilcipline frustrated - 361

Douglas, the power and property of that

family, a1. they alpire to independ-
ency, ib. Will. Earl of, murdered by
K. James II. 3. his ton endeavours
to relent it, ib. is forced to fiy into
England ib.

-- William, Q. Mary committed a

prisoner to his cattle of Lochlevin 958

- George, brother to the abore,
afilts the Queen in making her escape

270

---- Archibald, one of Darnly's mur-

derers, 403. undergoe a mock trial
for that crime and is acquitted, ib. is
sent ambassador to England, ib. letter
from him to the Q. of Scots, Appendix
361. to the King - 6;1

Drury, Sir William, enters Scotland with

an army to lupport the King's party,
312. they join him and drive off the
Queen's, ib. he procures a truce be-
tween the King and Queen's parties,
318. comes with forces to affilf Mor-
ton in besieging the castle of Edinburgh,
339. which is forced to surrender ib.

- S Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q.

Mary's keepers - 391
Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by

Q. Elizabeth as a usband to Q Marv,
183. why a favouriteof Q Elizabeth's,
ib. is highly promoted by her. 184

Dumbarton Cattle, furpriled and taken in

the Kig's name by the Regent3 17,318

Dury, a minister of Edinburgh, banished

from his charge by K. James for his
free invcfives. against the courtiers,
362. after being reltorcd, is driven
from it a second time for approving the
Raid of Ruthven - 371

E

Edinburgh, is taken and burnt by the

Englilh, 65. a greatfray there between
the French and Scots, 77. is seized by
the Reformers, l l. its inhabitants
are terribly alarmed by the French,
127. a treaty there with the French
and Englilh, 139. a loan demanded of

it by Q Mary, a05. wich i grnter
for the superiority of Leith, ib. the
treaty of, infifed on by Q. Elizabeth,
2131,.23. is possesscd by the QuOen's
party, 310. and fortified by them, 319.
the City and Castle hold out against
the King's forces, 37. arc reduced to
great straits by famine, ib. are relieved
by a truce, 38. the citizens take up
arms to promote the King's marriage,
439. they rife again and insult the
King and his minilters on the murder
ofthe carl'os Murray, 442, 443. afill
the King against Huntley, 450. a vio-
lent tumult there on account of the
clergy, 458, 459. they are severely
punified for it by the King, 460. 461.
their ehinifters return to their charges,
463. divided into parilhes, and number
of ministers increased, ib. they decline
publishing the account of Cowrie's
conspiracy, 480. all except one, who
isbanifhed, are persuaded by the King
to do it - ib.

Edwvard I. of England, destroyed the'

public archives of Scotland, 3. is made
umpire between Bruce and Baliol, 7.
his art to acquire the superiority of
Scotland, ib. his wars with the Scots
under Robert Bruce - 8. 8

Eglinton, Earl of, is prevailed on to join

the King's party. , - -t

Elizabeth, her peaceable accession to the

Crown of England, 99. supports the
congregation in Scotland, 1 7. resolves
to support them on a second application,
30. motives that determined her to
aflift them, ib. 13t, 132. her delibe-
rate and resolute condta, 133, 134.
fends a rong fleet to their assistance,
ibid. concludes a treaty with them, ib.
her right to the Crown of England as-
ferted by Francis and Mary, in France,
140. obtains advantageous terms for
the Scots, ib. is solicited by the Par-
liament of Scotland to marry the earl
of Arran, 146. this he declines, 147.
the feeds of her discontent with Q.
Mary, 153. 154. her jealousy o the
fucceflion, 154. 56, her excessive va-
nity and jealousy of Mary's beauty,
156. her dissimulation to her, 157.
refuses her a safe conduc&, ibid. evi-
dences that Ihe had no intention to
molelt Mary in her paflage to Scotland,
158. fends to congratulate her arrival
in Scotland, 161. refuses a conceflion
made by Q. Mary, 163. a personal in-
terview with Q Mary proposed, 176,
tlhe artfully declines rt, ib. her views
in regard to Q Mary's marriage, 178,
179. assumes a disagreeable authority,
ib. names a hubandforQ Mary, 183.

dileplnbcs

difflebles with Q. Mary about her
marriage, 184. s85. and likewise with
regard to L. Darnly, 186. affronts Q_
Mary by her insinuation concerning
Lcnnox, 187. is perplexed about the
marriage of the Scottifn Qeen, 189.
permits Darnly to visit the court of
Scotland, ib. affects to declare against
QMarry's marriage to him, 193, 194.
her great difimulation in that affair,
198 her harl3 and deceitful behaviour
to Murray and his afociates who had
fid to her, 103. is struck at hearing of
the birth of James VI. i22. consents
to and godmother to him, ib. the
Pariiameut address her to fettle the
ficccfion, 126. this greatly cmbar-
rircs her, ib. 217. he sooths and gains
her Parliament, zl8. endeavours to
accommodate her ifferences with
Mary, 131. writes to her to delay the
trial of Darnly's murderers, 142. in-
terpo5i in her behalf when a prison-
er, 60o. her ambafador is refuted ac-
cess to QL Mary, 261. she offers affif-
ancc to the other nobles, ib. her deli-
berations concernir.g the di.pofal of Q
Mary on her arrival in England. 175.
refolvcs to detain her there, 176. fends
her keter' of condolence, and gives or-
ders to watch her conduct, 277. she
gladly accepts the office of umpire be-
tween her and her fubjeds, 278. re-
ceives a very pressing letter from Q.
Mar', 80o, her precautions against
her, b. appoints commiflioners to hear
Q. Mary and her accuser', 284. re-
ceives the Regent's demands, 288.
removes the conference to Weftmin-
fter, 289. her meanartifices toget the
evidence of Q_ Mary's guilt from the
Regent, 93. treats her with greater
rigour, 194. writes a harlh letter to Q.
Mary, ibid. fne diniTfes the Regent
without aFproving or condemning him
295. but lecrctly supports his party,
ibid. makes proposal to the Regent in
her favour, 198. Norfolk's proictl con-
cealed from her, 300. diicovers and
defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's fa-
rour, 303. relolves to deliver herp
to the Regent, 306. her great concern
at his death, 309. continues to en-
conrage factions in Scotland, -31o. her
political conduct with regard to Len-
nox, 31, 313. is excommunicated,
and deprived of her kingdom, &c. by
the Pope, 313. supports the King's
party in Scotland, and names Lennox
to be Repent, ibid. propoes a treaty of
accommodation between Q Mary and
hei subjes, 314. procures a ee:ioa

ofhofti!ities, ibid. fends proporals to Q
Mary, ibid. appoints commissioners to
frame a treaty, 36. finds a pretence
to render their meeting fruitless, 317.
a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjou, 313. declares openly
against the Quecn's party, 3a6. cou-
cludes a treaty with France, 318. ne-
gotiates a treaty between Morton and
his adversaries, 349. her answer to K.
Jamez', demand of a polTeflion of an
estate in England, 350. a marriage be-
tween her and the D. of Alencon pro-
posed, 3t. interposes in behalf of
Morton, 354. her measures in order to
save him, 356. countenances the
conspirators at Ruthven, 365. is
alarmed at a conspiracy againt her,
385. the designs of Q. Mary's adhe-
rents against her, 386. endeavours to
recover her interest in Scotland, and
gains Arran to her interest, ib. amuses
Q. Mary with a fruitless negotiation,
388. a new conspiracy againlt her, ib,
an association formed for her defence,
389. her suspicions of QOMary, 390.
her life endangered by a conspiracy,
393. this how discovered and prevent-
ed, ib. is in a dangerous situation from
the progress of the holy league, 397.
endeavours to form a confederacy of
the Protestant Princes, ibid. and to pro-
ceed with rigour against QMary, 398.
advances her intereit in Scotland, and
propoes a league with it, ib. 399.
fettles a pension upon K. James, ibid.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 402.
account of Babington's conspiracy
against her, 404-406. her diflimu-
latiol after Q. Mary'e convition, 415.
her answer to K. James's interceflion
for her, 417. her farther diflimulation
and auxiety, 418. signs the warrant for
her execution, 419. her speech to Da-
vilbn on that occalion, ibid. assets to
lament QMary's death,, 45. she en-
deavours to-footh K James, 416. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, 431.
endeavours to secure Scotland, 433.
tries to prevent K. James's marriage,
438. solicits him to treat conptrators
aga;aft him with rigour, 445. evades
the deciion of K. James's right of
succession to the crown of England,
466. is dirgufted at several of his pro-
ceedings, 467. discovers his correspond-
ence with the Pope, 468.frefll grounds
of her lufpicion, 481. her conduc
with regard to the Earl of Effex, 486.
her resolution concerning his death,
and great concern after it, ib. receives
Amrbafadors from K. James with re-

gard

gsrd, and increases his subsidy, 487.her
lat ilinels, 489. her death, 491. and
characer, ib. 491. declared the K of
Scots her ucceflor, 492. some of her
letters, Appendix, 561. 578. 586. 591.
600, 601. 611. 614.

llpbitflcn, fccretary to K. James VI. de-

ceives him into a correcponncnce with
the Pope, 468. tried and if,und guilty
of high treason, and pardoned on the
Queen's intercefion, .b.

England, the English seize and detain

King. James I. of Scotland long a pri-
soner, 1i. the nobles there humbled,
23. had early two houles of Parlia-
ment, 48, they invade Scotland, 65.
their depredations there, 66. a peace
between England, France, and Scot-
land, 67. invade Scotland again, 7 .
gain a great viory, 7.. they force
the Scots into a clofcr union with
France, 74. conclude a peace, 76. an
Englilh fleetarrives in Scotland to afillt
the cougregation, 133. a peace con-
cluded between them, 134. they enter
Scotland and besiege the French in
Leith, 135. are repulsed, 136. articles
of a treaty of peace, 140. they quit
Scotland, 141. refletionson the right
of fucceflion to their Crcwn, 1 55, 56.
theParliamentfavours Q_ Miry's right
of lucccffiun, 2a6. a league between
England and France, 38. between
England and Scotland, 402. the na-
tional covenant adopted in England,

434

Entail, with what view introduced 14
Epifcpal, government in the Church,

some account of it, 148, an attempt
to revive it, 333 it is aboliflsed by the
Assembly, 361. juridiclton established,
443. See Arrchbijops.

Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the

Spanish faction, 433 his offers of ser-
vice to the K- of Spain, 436. appears
in rebellion, 437 i forced to submit
to the King, 438. impriloned for a
(hort time, ibid. joins in another con.
Ipiiacy, 444. is summoned by the King
to surrender, 445. offers to submit to a
trial, 448. entence pronounced against
him - ib.

Erfline of Dun, is employed by the Queen

Regent to deceive the Protcftants,t o5.
his relentment of this usage ib.

Lord, governor -of Edinburgh

CaRtle, as a neutral part between
the Queen Regent and the congrega-
tion, z18. receives the Queen Regent
into the Catle, 135. is created Earl of
Mr, 174. See Mar.

Alexander, his the chief direc-.
tiens of the Educatiotof K. James VI.

344. dmits some of the nobles to
make complaints to him against Mor-
ton the Regent, 345. is turned out. of
Stirling Cattle by his nephew the Earl
of Mar - - 347
Ejnval, the French envoy, endeavourn

to obftru a treaty between England
and Scotland - 40

Ejf7x, Earl of, fct up by the Engifh Pa-

pilF as a candidate for the Crown, 45 2
heads a party in England, 483. his
charaaer, ibid. is greatly diftinguiihed
by the Queen, ib. favours the K. of
Scots, ib. obtains the offices of Lord
Lieutenant and Commander in Chief
in Ireland, ib. is unsuccessful in that
expedition. ib. receives a harsh letter
from the Queen, 484. returns to Eng-
land and is confined, ibid. is tried-and
censured, ibid. endeavours to spirit up
King James, ib. his ralh and frantic
conduct, 485. is again taken into cus-
tody, ibid. his death, 486. his on and
associates are restored to their honours
after the accession of K. James. ib.

Euripe, the Itate of, at the beginning o

the sixteenth century - 51

Exscomruaicatisw, a terrible engine of the
Popish Clergy t - S

F

Felton, an Englishman, fixes the Pope't

excommunication of Q Elizabethoa
the gates of the Bifop of London's
palace - - 313

Feaeln, M. de la Motte, sent by the

French Kingto interpose for K. Jamee
when confined by the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 368. is forced to retura
without success - ibid.

Feudal Gsoernment, its rigin and arifto-

cratical genius, 9, o, II. caufeswhich
limited the power of feudal monarchs,
io. feudal vaftals liable to saw taxes,
Ix . a remarkable inftanceof'thefeeble-
ness of feudal government, , 13. the
most perfea idea of the feudal system,
how attained, 16. slate of it in Eng-
land, 46-48 and in Scodand, 46, 47.

Fife, a populous and powerful country,

much devoted to the congregation, a 33.
is destroyed and plundered by the
French, ibid. the fynod of, excapimu-
nicates the Archbilhop of St. Andrews
for contumacy, 402. they cxcu~auni-
cate the Popish Lords 443

Flodels, the battle of - 36
Sorber, Lord, with the Earl of Atgyle, is

sent against the Popilh Lords, 45 1. arc
defeated by them ibid.

Fordus, John de, his history of' Scotlad

when wrote - - 3
Frfr/lr, Sir John, wardco of the Eanglil

berder,

border, a fcufte beteen him and the (
Scots - - 399
-Frberiray Castle, Q_ Mary's imprilbn-

rent, trial, and death there 408--422

Frarce, the conlequences of the ubver-

sion of the feudal government there, 5 .
a body of French arrive in Scotland to
fnpport the Catholic', 7. they reduce
the catle of St. Andrew, ibid. another
party of them arrive there, 74. con- 4
elude a peace with England, 76. they
leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a (
treaty of marriage between the Dau- i
phin and the Qof Scott, 95. the Pro-
teftants endeavour to expel the French
army out of Scotland, 114. another
party o them arrive there and fortify
Leith, Iy. they exasperate the people
by their iniolence, o. they are ent
againtl the congregation, 132. they
deflroy and plunder Fife, and are much
harafTd by parties of the congregation,
133. are greatly alarmed by the arrival
of the English feet, ibid. they return
to Leith greatly harassed and exhaulted,
134. are bcfieged there by the Engliin
and the congrcgation, 135. they gain
feseral advantage-, 136. their motives
for concluding a peace, 138. negotia-
tions for that purpose, 139. articles of
the treaty, ib. 1 4. they leave Scotland,
141. the French adyife Q Mary to
moderate measures, 5z. their propo-
fai- by an an-baffador rejeced, ibid.
they agree to QMary's marriage with
Lord Darnly, 191. the licentioufnclf
of their morals - 236

Frasce, King of, a copy of his directions

sent to Scotland, Append. 636

Fractir I. givc a check to the ambitious

projeacs of Charlec V. 54. his fidelity
to the Scots, 67. his death 69
----- II. comes to the crown of France,

1 16. his charater, ibid. 147. i guid-
ed by the Duke of Guise and Cardinal
of Lorran, ibid. he treats the Prote-
ftants with great rigour, 138. his death

147

G

GijffrJ, Docor and Gilbert, their notion

concerning the lawfulness of killiog
heretical excommunicated Princes,404.
they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eli-
zabeth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by
Walfiugham betrays his associates, 405,
406. is enployed to carry on a foreign
correspondence with Q. Mary 406

Glails, Ldy, is condemned to be burned

for witchcraft - 41

- Lord, chancellor, intimates the

King's order to Morton to surrender
the Regency, 345. is killed in a ren-
aoanter at Stirling 347

Glamis, the tutor of, joins the confpira

tors of Ruthven, 364. his bold speech
to K. James, ibid. he, with the other
tonfpirators, seize the CaRtle of Stirling,
and eret their ftandand, 374. he is at-
tainted, and his estate forfeited 387
Glafgan, Bilhop of, a note of his con-

erning the queen of Scotland's dowry,
Append. - 63

Gh'rairft, Earl of, joins the Ruthven

conspirators - 364
Glitrvat, the battle of - 451
Gsrdn, Sir John, a cufle in the streets

of Edinburgh between him and Lord
Ogilvy, 172. being confined for it, he
makes his escape, ibid. when ordered
by the Queen to surrender himself, he
takes up arms againti her, ib. 173. is
defeated, and, together with his bro-
ther, made pritoncr, 175. he is behead-
ed and his brother pardoned ibid.

- Lord, set at liberty 201

Sir Adam, exerts limfelf for

the Queen' interest in the north, 317.
hi, charaaer and good cndu& as a
soldier -- 3z8

Gcrrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to

seize the King at Ruthven, 364. is
visited and pardoned by the King after
hisefcape, 370. becomes fufpeed, and
is ordered for France, 374. delays his
voyage, and is taken into custody, ibid.
he is tried and executed ibid.
- John and Alexander, sons of the
above, their character and conspiracy,
470. their dead bodies brought into
Parliament and condemned, 481. their
estates and honours forfeited, and nan;e
abolilhed for ever, ibid. See Rutkven.

Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accused

of a conspiracy with the Popish Lords
in favour of Spain, 44g. is convi.d
and beheaded ibid.

Gray, mailer of, some account of hinm.

390. he becomes a favourite of K.
James Vt. 391. is gained to Q: Eliza-
beth's interest, ibid. betrays Q.Mary,
ibid. persuades K. James to write a
harsh and undutiful letter to her, 395.
joins with others in promoting Q, Eli-
zabeth's interest in Scotland, 398. his
treachery when sent to intercede for Q,
Mary, 418. his baseness discovered, he
is dilgraced, 428. his vain attempt
againf secretary Maitland, ibid. acQs
in Italy as a spy from the court of Eng-
land, 467. a memorial of iis for hi
Majefly, Appendix, 660-663. to the
secretary of slate - 663

GiJfe, Duke of, his violent counsels with

regard to the Scot, 116. is murdered
at the siege of Orleans - 178
- his intriguen agaift QO4Elizabetb,

385

385, 386. is a principal promoter of
the holy league, 397. 432. drives the
French King out of his capital ibid.

H

HaddiJigto, seized and fortified by the
Englilh, 74. is relieved by the French

75

Hamilttn, the rife of that family, zz. ar-

bitrary proceedings of Morton the Re-
gent against it, 350, 35i. See Chatelhe-
ra¥lt.

Hamiltox, of Bothwellhaugh, taken pri-

fonerat the battle of Langfide, 281. is
taied and condemned for rebellion, ibid.
obtains a pardon from Murray the
Regent, by the interceflion of Knox,
ibid. an account of his murdering
Murray, 306, 307. makes his clape,
ibid. is received in triumph at Hamil-
ton - - 309
--- Mr. Patrick, the first who sus-

sered in Scotland for the Protestant re-
ligion 99

Hartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with

an English army, 65. burns Edinburgh
and Leith, ibld. is made Duke of So-
merfet, and protector of England, 71.
See Soaerfet.

Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the

argument by which lie prevailed on Q.
Mary to plead at her trial 410

Hoary II. of France, fends forces to afilft

the Scots, 7o. a marriage proposed be-
tween his son the Dauphin aid the
young Q. of Scots, 74, 75. excites
the Scots to invade England, 92. his
infamous imposition on Q. Mary in the
treaty of marriage, 95. persuades his
son and Q Mary to assume the titles of
King and Queen of England, oz. his
death - - 115

-- III. degenerates greatly on his
acceflion to the crown of France, 396.

enters into a private negotiation with
Q_ Elizabeth, 398. interposes feebly in
behalf of Q.Mary - 415

---- VIII. of England, by his system

of reformation becomes formidable
both to Papists and Protetlants, 4.
proposes an interview with King
James V. ibid. is disappointed by him,
and declares war against Scotland, 43.
invades it, but is forced to retreat,
44. his importance as to the balance
of power in Europe, 54. his influence
in Scotlan how obtained, 55. his
schemes with regard to it on the death
of James V. 59. were ill conduCted by
himself, and odious to the Scot,. ibid.
his treacherous seizure of Scots hips
that took (helter in his ports, 61. at-
tempts to gain, the Regency by great

*

promires, 6. invades Scotland, 65.
receives and rewards the Earl of Len-
nox, 66. encourages the murderers of
Cardinal Beatoun, 69. his death and
charater, ib. his inconfilfent conduct,
lot. excluded the Scotch line by his
tetRament - ibid.

Herries, Lord, joins Chatelherault in op-

poling the Regent, z97. comes to a
treaty with him, ibid. he and the Duke
are committed prisoners to the callle
of Edinburgh, ibid. intimates the king's
order to Morton to resign the Regency,
345. account of his behaviour in Par-
liament, Appendix, 604. a letter from
him to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis

607

Hickford, fecietary to the Duke of Nor-

folk, betrays him by difcovcring his
intrigues with QMary 324, 325

Highlands andl Ilts, an attempt to civilize

them by King James VI. 488. regula-
tions for that purpose, i. three towns
endued with the privileges of royal bo-
roughs ordered to be built there ibid.

Hodlgfrs a priest of Rheims, maintained

the lawfulness of killing heretical ex-
communicated Princes - 404

Home, Alexander Lord, thwarts the mea-
fures of the Duke of Albany, Regent

1.2.

- Lord, sent by King James VS.

with a secret embassy to the Pope 468

Hoeard. See Norflk.
Hmfdon, Lord, governor of.Berwick, his

interview with Arran - 387

Hartley, Earl, though a catholic, joins the

reformers in opposing the French army,
i15. aflils them only with fair pro-
mires, 1z8. his further concurrence
with them, 137. some account of that
family, 7o0, 171. his enmity against
the young queen's ministers, ibid. his
resentment inflamed by an accident,
172. appears in an open rehdlion
against the Queen, 173. his plot
against her miniftersdifappointed, 174.
breaks out into open rebellion, ibid. is
trodden to death in a battle, 175. his
family prosecuted with the utmost ri-
gour, ib. is attainted by parliament,
18o. the attainder repealed, and the
family restored to estate and honours

144

-- his attachment to Bothwell, 141.

z46. refuses to submit to the regent,
297. is forced to do it, ib. ats as lieu-
tenant to the queen after the Regent's
murder, 31 . is proclaimed a traitor by
Lennox the new Regent, 314. receives
some money and promiles ofafiftanue.
from Spain, ibid. agrees to a treaty
with Morton the Regent, 337. is one
Y y of

of the heads of the Spanilh faaion,
433. engages to the Prince of Parma
to serve the king of Spain, 436. is
imprisoned for a short time, 437. crets
a flandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced
to submit to the King, 438. is again
imprisoned, ib. is soon set at liberty,
ibid. receives a commiflion from the
King, 44z. his barbarous murder of
the Earl of Murray, 443. is lummoned
to surrender to justice, ibid. flies to the
mountains, 445. offers to submit to a
trial, 448. lentence pronounced against
him, ibid. reTfies to submit, 449.
makes another defpcrate attempt, but
is forced to fly - 451

I

7amre I. wa detained long a prilbner

in England, at. troubles in Scotland
during tha. time, ibid. was much im-
proved by an English education, 8,
29 his policy on his return to Scotland,
ibid. his charader, ibid. 30. suppresses
the power of the nobles, ibid. they
being exasperated, conpire againt, and
murder him - 31

7ame: 1. troubles in Scotland during his

minority, la. his attempts against the
nobles, 31. murders thc Earl of Dou-
glas, 31. procuresfeveral good laws to
be passed, 3, 33. reduces the power
of the nobles, ib. his death 33
---- 11. the state of Scotland during

his minority, zz. his impolitic condua,
33, 34. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, ib. is greatly i-
tfuted by his nobles, 35. his despicable
minions, ib. was the first that appoint-
ed a tanding guard to his person, 36.
the nobles are provoked to take arms
againf him, ib. is killed in a battle
against them, 37. his characer

ibid.

-- IV. his character, 37. is killed

in a battle againfl the Englifli at Flow-
den - - 38

- V. his minority long and turbu-

lent, 11- tranlakions during that time,
38.assumes the government while very
young, 39. his charater, ibid. his
fcbcme for humbling the nobles, 39.
41. is diverted from it by the clergy,
43. 44. takes arms for the defence of
his kingdom, ibid. his nobles refufrng
to follow him, throws him into a deep
melancholy, 44. 45. which is increased
by a surprising defeat of his forces, ib.
his death, ib. he refated au allince
with Charles V. Emperor. 55.

7a~'rVI. his birth, zz1. his baptism,

13o. the care of him committed to the
Karl of Mar, 140. is by him prervcd

from falling into the hands of Bothwell,
i25. is crowned, z64. the nobles op-
pressed by Morton the Regent, turn
their eyes to him for redress, 343. his
education and dispositions, ibid. he be-
comes suspicious of the Regent's power,
ibid. discovers early a great attachment
to favourites, 351. adopts two of dif-
ferent dispositions, ibid. enters Edin-
burgh with great solemnity, 353. is by
his favourites, engaged in unpopular
measures, 363. is seized by a party of
nobles at Ruthven, 364. and forced
to receive complaints against his fa-
vourite, ibid. dissembles with them,
and banifhesLennox, 365. is brought
to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 366.
his concern for Lennox's death, and
regard for his memory, 367. receives
the French ambaflador with great re-
fpct, 368. makes his escape from the
conspirators, ibid. resolves to treat them
with moderation, 369. visits Cowrie
and grants him a pardon, 370. renews
his fondness for Arran, ibid. is by him
persuaded to violent mcafures againit
the conspirators, ibid. his answer to a
haughty letter from Q. Elizabeth on
their behalf, 371. is by her interpo-
fition rendered more violent against
them, ibid. is provoked by the clergy,
372. his Reps to humble them,
375. his profusion to Arran, 387.
fends a new favourite to England
againfR the banilhed lords, 390. de-
volves tlhe whole regal authority on
Arran, 391. writes an undutiful letter
to his mother, 395. is threatened to
be disinherited by her, 396. receives a
penion from Q. Elizabeth, 399. is re-
conciled to the exiled lords, 400. be-
comes popular by concluding a treaty
with England, 401. his scandalous be-
haviour with regard to Archd. Douglas,
403. his endeavours to save his mo-
ther's life after her condemnation, 416.
is greatly incensed at her death, 426.
arguments used by the English mini-
fters to pacify him, ibid. is forced to
Rifle his resentment, 47. attempts to
unite the nobles, 429. is courted both
by Spain and England, 433. resolves
vigorously to adhere to the latter, ib.
takes several Repswith that view, ibid,
his &till in the popish controversy, 437.
wrote a commentaryon the Revela-
tions, ibid. his maxims with regard to
popery, iid. his excessive lenity to con-
fpirators against him, ibid. resolves to
marry the Princess of Denmark, 438.
arts used to prevent it, ibid. the mar-
riage is conummated in Norway, 439.
passes several moths in Denmark, ib.

kil

his arrival in Scotland with his Queen,
441. indulges the Prelbyterians, ibid.
the ill consequences of his lenity, ibid. K
his zeal against witchcraft, 44a. is so-
licited by Q Elizabeth to treat the con-
fgirators aganlft him with rigour, 445.
is fufpe6ted of conniving with them, K
446. is surprised and seized by Both-
well, ibid. and forced to comply with .
his terms, 447. his lenity to Bothwell
abused, 449. is fufpe&ed of favouring
the popish Lords, ib. is in new danger
from them, ibid. delegates his autho- -
rity to Argyle and Forbesagainfl them,
451. goes in perlon against them, ibid.
waRes their lands, and garrilbns their
caRles, 452. his right of the fucceflion J
to the crown of England opposed by the
papists, ib. hip lenity to them incenses 1
the clergy and people, 455. is much
provoked by the obRfinacy of the clergy,
457. gives orders against them, 458. is
much inlulted, and in great danger at
Edinburgh,458 460. leaves Edinburgh
aid proceeds with severity against the
citizens, 460. 461. acquires absolute
dominion in ecclesiastical affairs, 463,
464. strengthens his interest in parlia-
ment, by restoring the feats of the
ccclcfiaftics 464, 465. endeavours with
success to gain a party in England, 465.
increases his reputation by publishing
his Bafilicon Doron, 466. isaccufed by
Q Elizabeth of correlponding with the
Pope, 467. is at great pains to gain the
Roman Catholics, 468. his regulations
with regard to the church, 469, 470.
the mysterious affair of Gowrie's con-
fpiracy, 470-481 his cautious beha-
viour in regard to the Earl of Effex,
485. fends ambassadors to save him,
ibid. they arrive too late, 486. he re-
stores his son and associates to their
honours after his acceflion, ibid. con-
tinues his intrigues in England, ibid.
487. endeavours to civilize the high-
landsand ies, 488, 489. is proclaim-
ed King in England, after the death
of Q Elizabeth, 492. is proclaimed
likewise in Scotland, 493. prepares for
his journey to England, 494. enters
London and takes polffelion of the
throne, ib. his character how different
from that of Q. Elizabeth, ib. a letter
from him to Mr Archibald Douglas,
Appendix, 657. curious letter to him
from an unknown Englilh corrcfpon-
dent - - 671

Inversefi castle, refues to surrender to Q'

Mary, 173. it is forced, and the go-
vernor punished - 174
Itay, the liberty of, how preserved 51

K

'eitb, Sir William, ent to intercede f:r
Q.Mary, when under sentence, 46.
letter from him to secretary Maitland,
Appendix. - 657
Keut, Earl of, appointed to fee the feo-
tence againft'Q Mary executed 4zo
,er of Ferniherft, ravagesEngland on the
murder of Murray the Regent, 309.
his design, 31 . has a fcuflle with the
Englih - 399
- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is
discovered when ready to fail to pro-
mote a plot tn Spain, 444. hit scheme
opened, 445. ecapes out of prison 446
elligreo, Henry, his declaration on the
peace, Appendix - 619
Kings, feudal, the most limited of all

Princes, 9. their revenues were but
small, to. l i. had no htading armies,
i . and jurifdiaion limited, a . means
used to extend the royal authority, 14.
their jurifdiaion enlarged, 5. the ex-
traordinary influence of the Scottih
Kings in Parliament 46

KirAaldy of Orange, one of the murder-

ers of Beatoun, is recalled by the Q_
Dowager, 93. his attainder reversed in
Parliament, 8o. offers to fight Both-
well in tingle combat, 156. his inter-
view with Q. Mary, in name of the
confederate Lords, ibid. rescues Mait-
land from confinement, 303. labours to
support the King's authority, and to
restore harmony after the murder of
the Regent, 31 o. accedes to the Queen's
party, ibid. provides for a siege by in-
creasing his garrifou and fortifying
Edinburgh, 319. proclaims Lennox's
authority unlawful and usurped, ibid.
attempts in vain to prevent a meeting
of the Parliament, 30. forms a scheme
for surprising the King's parly, 31.
is at firfl successful, but afterwards de-
feated, 31z. comes near to an agree-
ment with Mar the Regent, 331. a
treaty with Morton breaks it off, 336,
337. fires upon Edinburgh from the
castle, 337. is besieged by the Regent,
assisted by the Englilh forces, 338. is
forced by mutiny of the garrison to ca-
pitulate, ibid. surrenders to Drury the
Englilh general, ibid. is by order of Q_
Elizabeth delivered up to the Regeht,
340. he and his brother are executed

ibid.

Knolly, SirFrancis, sent by Q.Elizabeth

with letters of condolence to Q. Mary
on her arrival in England, 177. some
of his letters, Appendix 606, 607. 611.

616
Y y KCawjr,

KAu, John, a famous reformer, his cha-

racer, 78. after being some time
abroad, he is recalled by the persecuted
Protefants, ro6. inflames the multi-
tude at Perth with rage againfl the Pa-
pils, ib. his notion conceruing the go-
vernmentofwomen whence, i l o. his re-
fidence fixed in Edinburgh, 113. ani-
mates and revives the delponding Con-
gregation, 1i9, 130. complains of the
neglet of the reformers in providing
maintenance for their preachers, 45.
recommends the Geneva model of
Church Government, 1o. proposes fu-
perintendants in the church, ibid. com-
poles the firt book of discipline, 15 . re-
nounce friendthipwith theEarl of Mur-
ray for hismoderation, 81. is triedfor
eocouraginga mutiny among thcpeople
and acquitted, a i. is publicly accuscd
by Maitland of preaching seditious doc-
trine concerning resistance, 189. cha-
raaers of the two disputant, ib. ap-
proved of several instances of affaflna-
tion, 2i9. agrees to some regulations
concerning the elecion of Biflops, 334.
his death and characer, ib. 335. fpeci-
men of his eloquence, ibid his eulogi-
um by Morton the Regent, ibid. arti-
cles sent by him to the general Afferr-
bly, Appendix - - 6z8

L

La.gfie, the battle of 172, ^73
Larear, cardinal, is ent as a nuncio

from the Pope with a present to Q.
Mary of Scotland, a18. is flopped at
Paris - 29
Leae, holy, a confederacy of Roman

catholics so called, 397. wa univernally
agreed to by them ailover Europe, ibid.

Learsaig, the revival of, promotes the re-

formatic.n - - 84

Licefier, Earlof,a ppointeda commissioner

to the conference of Weftminfler 191

Leirl, burnt by the English, 66. fortified

by the French, 9. besieged by the
English, 135. Q Mary lands therefrom
France, 159. the superiority of it
granted by her to Edinburgh, 205. is
seized and fortified by Morton the Re-
gent - - 319

Lmex, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from

France, 6. his pretensions to the fuc-
cession, how founded, 64. relents Bea-
toan's deceitfulnes to him, ibid. heads
the reformers and the advocates for the
English alliance, 65. surprises the Re-
gent and cardinal, ibid. is outwitted by
the cardinal, ib. continues alone in the
intredt of England, 66. is forced to fly
to that court, where h: i r:wared, ib.

is married to a niece of K. Henry's, by
which lie became father to a race of
Kings, ib. his claim to the fucceflion,
186. is imprisoned for a secret corre-
fpondence with Q Marys ib. i invited
secretly by her to return to Scotland, ib.
arrives in Scotland, and is received with
great familiarity by her, 87. his for-
feiture is repealed, and he is restored
to his estate and houours by the Par.
liament, 188. his lady sent prisoner to
the Towerof London, 195. and treated
with rigour, 198. he insists on the pro-
fecution of his son Darnly's murderers,
239. charges Bothwell with it, ibid.
the prosecution is hurried, a40. he
craves a delay, which is refused, 141.
solicits Q. Elizabeth's intcreft to obtain
a delay, 4z. infiiRs on it by proxy at
the trial, but is over-ruled, ib. being
apprehensive of danger be flies towards
England, 44. his countess accuses Q.
Mary of the murder to Q_ Elizabeth,
278. he appears at the conference at
Weftminlcer, and'accufes Q Mary of
the murder upon oath, 291. returns to
Scotland prote&ed by an English army,
31 . is ele&ed Regent, 313. his pro-
grefs against the Queen's party, ibid.
appoints commiflioners to frame a
treatywiththofe of the Queen, 316. fur-
prifesDumbartoncaftle, 3 7, 318. joins
the Earl of Morton at Leith, 319.
holds a Parliament in the Canongate,
320. another at Stirling, 311. he is
surprised and killed there 311

Lenex, Lord Aubigny, his chara&er, 351.

joins with the King's other new fa-
vourite to undermine Morton, 353.
renounces Popery, 354. Q Elizabeth
demands him to be removed from the
privy council, ib. is accuf.d by her am-
baffador, 357. Arrantries invainto fop-
plant him, 360. is commanded by K.
James at the request of the nobles to
leave the kingdom, 365. returns un-
willingly to France, where he soon dies
a Protestant - 367

-- Earl of, left as the King's lieu-

tenant in the north after dispersing the
popish Lords - 452
fleJie, Norman, murders Cardinal Bca-
toun, 68. he and his afrociateskeep pof-
fcflion of the castle of St. Andrews, 69.
makes a truce with the Regent, ibid.
are encouraged by Henry VIII. ibid.

---- Bilhop of Ross, is lent by the

Catholics in Scotland to engage Q,
Mary in their interest, t51. his pro-
polals to her reje&ted, ibid. 152. his
negociations in England in favour of Q.
Mary, 34. is confined long in. the

Tower,

Tower, and afterwards isbani(hed Eng-

land. 3- 35

Lindsay, Lord, carries the proporalfrom

the confederates to Q Mary, that (he I
hould resign the government, 63.
joins the Ruthven conspirators 364
Lchltvim castle, Q. Mary committed a

prisoner there, x58. her escape from
thence -- 70
----- Lrld, letters to and from him

Appendix - 631

Lsgan of ReRalrig, an alleged accomplice

in Cowrie's conspiracy, 476, 477. is
tried, and his etate forfeited long as-
ter his death - ibid.

Lerds, confederate, aflociateagainft Both-

well and Q. Mary, 53, raise forces
against them, 154. prevail on the Queen
to surrender to them, 56. assume the
title of Lords of the secret council, and
the royal authority - 58

- popih conspire against K. James,

436. are treated by him with great le-
nity, 437. form a new conspiracy, 444.
the King proceeds against them, 445.
more of his lenity to them, 448. they
receive money from Spain, 450. zeal
of the clergy against them, ib. are
declared guilty of treason and their
eRates forfeited, 451. defeat the
King's army, ib. are difpcrfed on the
King's approach, 451. go abroad and
give security to keep the peace, ibid.
return to Scotland, and petition for
leave to reside in their own houses,
455. this granted by a convention of
estates, ib. recant their errors and are
absolved from excommunication, 463.
relapse, and ate again reconciled to
the church of Rome, ib. are restored to
their estates and honours 464

Lirrain, Cardinal, gets some of the bell

benefices in Scotland - 98
- Princes of, their ambitious views,

o10. instigate the Dauphin and Q
Mary to take the titles of King and
Queen of England, ib. relolve to invade
England, 103. and to check the Refor-
mation of Scotland, ibid. the Cardi-
nal's great influence over the young
King, 116. drives the Queen Regent
of Scotland to violent measures, nxo.
their violences occasion a conlpiracy
against them, 38. are forced to with-
draw their troops from Scotland, 139.
they intult the Scottish ambassador,
146. have great power over the young
King and Queen, 147. are forced to
contract their views on the death of
the King- - - 148

LstAup, a bold and principal promoter of

the Reformation, 84. the rapid pro-
grefr of his doctrine ibid.

M

Major, John, his hiitory of Scotland,

ome account of 3

Waitlandof Lethington, secretary toMary

Queen Regent, leaves her service and
joins the Congregation, 119. his cha-
ra&er, ib. is lentby them ambassador to
QElizabeth, 130. fends therfi aflur-
ancesof her protetion, 1 3. isfent by Q.
Mary to thecourtofEngland, 16.makes
a conceflion to Q.Elizabeth, ib. 63. ac-
companies QMary in a progress to the
north, 172. he is employed by Q
Mary to defirea personal interview with
Q. Elizabeth, 176. publicly accuses
Knox of preaching seditious doctrine
concerning rcfiftancc, 189. intimates
to Q Elizabeth the intention of Q.
Mary to marry Darnly, 193. prudently
conceals her resentment from Q Eliza-
beth, 195. proposes moderate measures
with regard to Q Mary when impri-
soncd, 261. attends the Regent when
called on to accuse her in England,
284. he disapproves of this measure,
ibid. his intrigue with the duke of
Norfolk, 86,298,296. isimprifoned by
the Regent, 303. is relieved by Kirk-
aldy, and secured in the caRle. ibid. pro-
poses a coalition of the two parties after
the murder of the Regent, 310 ac-
cedes to the Queen's party, ibid. is
deprived of his office of secretary, and
proclaimed traitor, 313. is attainted in
a Parliament of theKing's party, 30.
agrees with Mar, 331. his views in re-
fusing a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 336. rejecs overtures of a
treaty with him, ibid. is besieged by
him in the cattle of Edinburgh, 338.
is forced to capitulate and furrendcr to
the Englilh general, ibid. to avoid the
Regent'srefentment he dispatches him-
self, 340. several of his ktters, Ap-
pendix - - 613 657

Maitland, Sir John, is made secretary for

Scotland, 397. concurs with others in
promoting QElizabeth's interest there,
ibid. attempts against him by Capt.
James Stewart, late of Arran, 48.
they prove abortive, and he is advanced
to be chancellor, ibid. an attempt to
remove him from that office, fruitrat-
ed, 437. his death, 453. a copy of
verses in honour of him, wrote by the
King - - ibid

Mar, earl of, that title conferred on the

Prior of St. Andrews, 171. accompa-
nies the Queen in a progress to the
north, 17z, he and his affociatts
narrowly escape affafination, 173.
is creased Earl of Murray, 174. See
Murray.

Mar,

Mar, the ttle is conferred on L. Er-

kine, 174. the person of the young
Prince put into his hands, 4o. his
resolution of prcferring him from
Bo:hwell, ;z:..is chosen Regent,-323.
labours to bring about a general peace,
331. is thwarted by Morton and his aS-
fociates, ib. dies of melancholy, 31.
his chara&er - - ibid.

-the yonng Earl, being imposed on

by Morton, turns out his uncle from
the Castle of Stirling, 347. joins the
Ruthven Conspirators, 364. be with
the others seize Stirling cftle, and
erea their flandard, 374 is attainted,
and his estate forfeited, 387. is par-
doned, and restored to his estate and
honours - - ibid.

MJfrc, counters of, her infamous mar-

riage with the Earl of Arran 360

Marj of Guile, Q Dowager of Scotland,

take a considerable Iare in thegovern-
ment, 74 is much addited to the
French interest, ibid. projtcts a mar-
riage of her daughter to the Dauphin
of France, ib. becomes intrumental in
promoting the Reformation, 79.
a'ires to the office of Regent, 80.
prmnotesdifaffe:tion to the prefentone,
and fa:ours the reformerS, ibid. 81.
visit- the court of France, ibid. returns
to Scotland o take pofleflion of the
Rcg-.cy, 2z. after rome opposition she
ebti.;n it, 83. confers several offices
of trust upo ftrargers, 30. proposes to
lay . tax pon land, 91. is forced to
drop it, 9s tries in vain to exdte a war
with England, ibid. the nobles vigor-
oufly oppose her mcasires, 93. treats
the reformers with great refpec, 94,
obtain, a concession from the Parlia-
ment in favour of the Dauphin, 97 her
artful management of the reformers,
ibid. 98. bellows the vacant benefices
on foreigners, ibid. he alters her con-
dut to the reformers, o. remon-
ftrances againf the violent meafurcs of
the Princes of Lorrain, 1 4. is perfuad-
ed by them to persecote the reformer,
ibid. her rafn answer to their renon-
trance, o15. summons their preachers
to appear before her, ibid. breaks a
promise (he had made them, 106
marches withan army against them,
107. concludes a treaty with them, ib.
this he again breaks, o8. her everity
at Perth, ibid. her- scheme discovered,
ibid. she goes to attack them, o09.
has again recourse to negotiation, ibid.
(he is fartled at theirdemands and gets
time to answer them, 1it. violates
nother treaty, ibjd. loses Perth, and

forced to abandon Stirling and Edin-
burgh, he retires with precipitation to
Dunbar, ibid. marches to attack the
reformers at Edinburgh, 114. makes
another treaty with them, ibid. her
artifices to undermine the Prior of St.
Andrews, 118. get a reinforcement
of French troonp, who fortify Leith,

l 9. fne dfregards a remonstrance of
the reformer, zo, is influenced by
French counf:llors, anl perruaded to
violent measure, ibid. retires to Leith
on the approach of the informersarmy,
121. her prudent and artful conduA
there, ibid. her haughtyand imperious
answer to a fresh remonstrance from
them, 2 is, by a convention of them,
deprived of her office of Regent, 114.
foments differences among them, 116.
is deserted by her principal secretary,
Maitland of Lethington, 128. fends
French troops againlt the reformers,
132. retires into the castle of Edin-
burgh on the approach of the English,
1'3. her death and character, 137.
repented of her violent measures, 138.
listened to the inftru&ions of a reform-
ed preacher - ibid.

MYairy Queen of England, her perfecut-

ing reign, 83. her death 99
Queen of Scots, born, 57. a pro-
pofal to marry her to Ed. VI. 59. she
is demanded by Henry VIII. ib. her
marriage to the Dauphin of France
proposed, 74. a treaty for that purpose
concluded, 7 S. (he is ent to be educated
in France, ibid. is imposed ou by the ar-
tifices of the French in the treaty of
marriage, 95. her marriage celebrated
with great pomp, ib. they take the
title of King and Queen of England,
lot. she makesconceffions to the Con-
gregation, 139. declares Q. Elizabeth's
right to the crown of England, 140.
(he acquires an entire ascendant over
her hulband, 147. (he is overwhelmed
with great affliion on his death, and
retires to Rheims, 148. he is invited
by the convention to return to Scotland
s51. an emifary from the catholicsin
Scotland proposed violent measures to
her, ib. (he is determined to modera-
tion by the.French and the Prior of St.
Andrews, ib.. 152. is prevailed on to
prepare for herreturn t Scotland, 153.
the origin of the discord between her
and Q. Elizabeth, ibid. her pretensions
to the crown of England. 154. is en-
vied on account of her beauty, 156.
demands a safe conduct from Q Eliza-
beth, which is refnfed, 157. leaves
France with great reluctance, ib. 158.

lands

lands at Leith, 59. is much affeced
by the change of her situation, ib.
her accomplishments of body and
mind, 169 the servants of her chapel
insulted, 161. procures the free exer-
cite of her religion, ib. iues a pro-
clamation in favour of the Protestants,
ib. employs them solely in the admi-
nifration, 162. attempts to gain Q.
Elizabeth's favours ib. makes a con-
ceflion to her, ib. which is rejected,
163. he makes her public entry into
Edinburgh, ib. an insult offered to her
religion on that occasion, ib. difcou-
rages the attemptsof the papists to gain
her favours 165. her aversion to the
family of Hamilton, ib. makes a pro-
grels into the north, 171, 173. her
ministers narrowly escape affaflination,
ib. is refuied acces to the castle of In-
vernels, ib. when in the utmost con-
flernation is relieved by the Monros
and other clans, 74. her forces de-
feat Huntley's rebellion, ib. (he de-
fires an interview with Q_ Elizabeth,
176. negotiations concerning her mar-
riage, 77. to please her ubjects, de-
termines against a foreign alliance, i 8o.
determines not to ratify the treaty of
Edinburgh, ib. further negotiations
for her marriage, 18z. discovers the
views of Catherine of Medicis, 183.
Lord Robert Dudley recommended to
her as a husband by Q Elizabeth, ib.
the is highly offended at this, 184. dif-
fembles with Q. Elizabeth, 85. en-
tertains thoughts of marrying Lord
Darnly. ib. ihe recalls Lennox, 186. is
affronted at a letter of Q Elizabeth's,
187. her prejudice againti the reform-
ed, and zeal for the catholic religion,
188. is taken with Darnly at first fight,
19o. is greatly moved at Q Eliza-
beth's inulting craftiness, ib. 191.
negotiates with the court of Rome for
a dispensation to marry Darnly, ib. and
the content of the court of France, ib.
imposes on Randolph, but applies to
Q. Elizabeth for content to her
marriage, 193. which he affecs to
refute, ib. in resentment (he proposes
to fend an angry mecfage to Eliza-
beth, which Maitalnd prevents, 195.
jultifies her condu& to the Englifit
ambassador, ib. endeavours to get Mur-
ray's content, ib. courts the pope's pro-
teaion and receives a subsidy from him.
196, prevents a plot againt Darnly,
198. summons her vasals to take
arms against Murray, 199. and him to
appear before her, 2oo. her marriage
with Darnly celebrated, ib. he con-
sers the title of King of Scots upon
him, o01. this ftep censured, ib. her

E X.

resentment against the malecoutents, ib.
the marches against them, ol2. rejeas
the interceflfon of Q. Elizabeth in
their behalf, ib. continues her march
againit the rebels, ib. drives them ut
of Scotland, 03. her further resent-
mentagainit them, 104. has recourse to
several devices to raise money, ib.
her prosperity promotes her religion,
205. her deliberations concerning the
exiled Lords, 206. determines to treat
them with lenity, 207. is diverted from
this by her religion and French influ-
ence, ib. 08. this the source of her
after-misfortunes, 09. her intention
to restore [popery, ib. is disgusted with
Darnly's insolent behaviour, zio. her
familiarity with Rizio offends the King,

1 vindicated fromanycriminalcorre-

fpondence with Rizio, 11. uses her ut-
most endeavours to prevent his murder,
114. l(e is confined by the conspirators,
ib. he gains the King and escapes
from them, 215. is reconciled to the
exiled nobles, ib. her hatred to Darnly
increases, 19, 0o. and favour for
Bothwell commences, ib. extinguishes
some domestic feuds among the nobles,
221. is delivered of her on James Vl.
in the castle of Edinburgh, ib. in-
vites several foreign princes to his
baptism, zz2. continues to treat Darnly
with negleCt, ib. her attachment toBoth-
well increases, ib. prevents Darnly's in-
tended flight, 214. visits the borders,
115. an instance of her regard for
Bothwell on that occasion, ib. how
she rivalled Q Elizabeth, ,z6. her
right of ucceflion favoured by the
Englith parliament, ib. (he endeavours
to avail herself of that opportunity,
217. (he takes an extraordinary ftep in
favour of popery, zz8. receives a pre-
lent from the pope, but fops his nun-
cio at Paris, 119. endeavours to pro-
cure a betterfubfiftence for the reform-
ed clergy, ib.her aversion to the King
excessive, becomes melancholy, 30.
goes to Stirling to celebrate her on's
baptism, ib. is greatly offended at the
King's behaviour on that occasion, ib.
restores the public ecclefialtical jurilt
diction, 33. her neglect of the King
during his sickness, 34 the breach be-
tween them becomes irreparable, 135.
(he visits him at Glagow, ib. prevails
onhim to come toEdinburgh, 137. her
suspicious behaviour to him there, ib.
issues a proclamation for discovering his
murderers, 138. is supposed to have
been accessary to it, 139. is charged
with it abroad, as well as t home. ib.
goes to visit her f6n at Stirling 248.
is met on her return by Bothwcll,

who

v.ho seizes and carries her to Dunbar,
* ib. this supposed with her consent, ib.

is co!ndueed to Edinburgh, 259. ad
married to Bothwell, z51. fends an
apology to the courts of France
and England, ib. her conduet caues
a generalindignation aainft her abroad,
253. is alarmed at a combination of
the nobles against her, ib. he pub-
lifhes a manifesto to vindicate her con-
duc, ib. is condu&ed to the cattle of
Borthwick, 254. marches with Both-
well's forces against the confederate
Lords, ib. an attempt of an accom-
modation proves vain, 15. is forced
to surrender to the confederates, 256.
is insulted by the foldicrs and mob, ib.
is carried to Edinburgh, where many
abues are offered her, 357. is tent a
prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 258.
Q Elizabeth interposes in her behalf,
160. the Englith ambaTfador is refused
access to her, 261. various proporatl
among the confederate concerning her,
162. they oblige her to resign the go-
vernment, 63. is much moved with
the freedom of the Earl of Murray,
266. her party among the noblis be-
comes difririted, 68. her reignation
of the Crown accepted by the parlia-
ment, and her imprionment declared
lawful, ib. her letters to Bothwell
read, ad he declared accessary to the
King's murder, 269. escapes from
lochlevin, 273. arrives at Hamilton,
ib. is attended by many nobles and
a numerous army, ib. aa association
signed in her defence, a71. her im-
prudence in hazarding a battle, 72.
terarmy defeated by the confederates,
273 her precipitate flight into Gal-
i-way, ib. rashly determines to retire
o England, 274. goes thither againfl
the advice of her attendants, ib. 275.
arrivesatCarlifle, ib. writes to QEliza-
brth, imploring her good offices, ib.
receives letters of condolence from her,
and demands admittance into her pre-
fence, 77 this refused, and why, ib.
offers to submit her cause to Q Eliza-
beth, ib is much deceived in her ex-
pecationfrom this, 179 andoffended
on discovering the artifices of Q; Eliza-
beth, ib. carnefly solicits to be ad-
mitted into her presence, i80 fle is
carried to Bolton Catle, 281. cha-
griued atfinding herfeif a prisoner, ib.
agrees to an inquiry into her condut,
S82. her difimnulation with regard to
religion, ib. commitlioner appointed
to appear in her name, z84. conents
to moving the conference to Weftmin-
Rer, 289. she is carried to Tuthbury
in Staffordhire, 290. is much offended

at the regard shewn the Regent, and
recalls her consent to the conference, ib.
the accusations againfl her produced by
the Regent 291. is accused likewise
by the Earl of Lennox, 292. her com-
miflioners refuse to anfaer, and de-
mand a personal interview, ib. they
protest again future proceedings, ib.
a suspicious circumRance against her,
293. her commifloners withdraw from
the meeting, ib. her resolute anniwer to
a harsh proposal of Q Elizabeth, '94.
avoids any farther progreft in the in.
quiry, 295. i enraged at the proceed-
ings, and proposes delperate measures,
z96. spreads chimerical conjetures
with that view, ib. proposes a divorce
from Bothwell, 298. is influenced by
the D. of Norfolk's schemes, ib. ex-
changes many letters and love-tokens
with him, 299. consents to proposals
from the Englilh nobles, 300. a re-
bellion by her adherents against Q
Elizabeth, 303. is removed to Co-
ventry, 304. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
delivering her up to the Regent. 305.
this projec how disappointed, 306.
acccfliou of several to her party after
the murder of the Regent, 301, 311.
they endeavour to foment a war with
England, ib. her authority proclaimed
at Linlithgow, ib. her parties defeated
by the new Regent, 313. he anfwerg
proposals by Q Elizabeth, 315. at-
tempts in vain to get foreign assistance,
ib. appoints commiflioners to frame a
treaty forher liberation, 3 6. this prov-
ing fruitless, the is more ltrit)y con-
fined, 317. the invalidity of her re-
ignation declared in a parliament held
by her adherents, 320. aa of parlia-
ment in England to curb her and her
party, 33. he looks for protection
from the King of Spain, 34. is de-
nied the privilege of an ambaffadorat
the Court of England, 36. is more
dose confined and watched, ib. pro-
ceedings against her in England, 39.
her interest neglected by the French,
ib. is hurt by the massacre at Paris,
330. her adherents divided into two
fations, 336. one of them joins with
Morton the Regent. 338. review of the
charaaers of her adherents and oppo-
nents, 339. her forlorn situation,
340. is carried to Buxton Wells, ib.
loses several of herfriendsby death, 341.
fend. a letter and presents to her Ion,
3 . her messenger, why dismissed
without feeing him, ib. her uneasiness
athis confinement bythe Ruthven con-
ipirators, 367. complains to O. Eliza-
beth of her hard usage, ib. and begs
her intercession for the King her son,

ib.

ib. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her
favour, 385, 386. a fruitless negoti-
ation with Q. Elizabeth, 388. is
alarmed at an association in defence
of Q. Elizabeth, 389. is committed
to more severe keepers, 390. betrayed
by Lord Gray the Scotch amhaffador,
391. a fRatute for the preservation of
Q Elizabeth proves fatal to her, 394.
is more rigorously treated, ib. her com-
plaints to Q. Elizabeth disregarded,
395. is, by the French ambaflador's
interest, removed to Tuthbury, ib.
is undutifully treated by the King her
son, ib. 396. her passionate complaint
to the French ambassador on that oc-
cafion, ib. threatens to disinherit him,
ib. several discoveries alledged against
her, 406. he is guarded with unusual
vigilance, 408. her domeflics, papers,
&c. are seized, ib. he is conveyed to
Fotheringay Castle, ib. deliberation
concerning the method of proceeding
against her, 409. is suspicious of poi-
son or private murder, ib. vindicates
herself to the D. of Guise, ib. the
commiflioners for trying her arrive at
Fotheringay Castle, 410. her spirited
speech when refuing to plead, ib. is
at length prevailed on, ib. she proteRs
against the authority of the court, 41 1.
the accusation against her, ib. her de-
fence, ib. her sentence, 413, irregu-
larities'in her trial, ib. her sentence is
confirmed by parliament, 414. who
demand the execution of it, ib.
France interpoes feebly in her behalf,
415. thefentence against her published,
417. he is treated with the utmost ri-
gour, ib. her laftrequeft to Q Elizabeth,
ib. refuses the afliftance of a Protestant
Bifliop or Dean, 418. artifices used to
inflame the people against her, 410.
her behaviour at her death, 410, 413.
sentiments of historians concerning her,
413. her charaaer, 424. her person
described, ib. is buried firll at Peter-
borough, and afterwards in Weftmin-
fter-Abbey, 4.5. letters from her, Ap-
pendix, 614, 60i, 648. herwill, App.
649. objecions against her by Wal-
fingham, App. 644. what courle to be
taken with her, ib. a Dilfertation on
the genuineness of her letters to Both-
well. End of the Vol.

Maxwell, Lord, arrives from Spain, and

prepares forces to join the Spaniards,
433. his followers dispersed, he is
taken prisoner - ibid.

Melvil is sent by the French King to

observe the motions of the Queen Re-
gent and her adversaries, 116. sent to
make up a difference between Elizabeth
and Mary, 187. brings about an ap-

E X.

pearance of friendlhip between them,
ibid. is feat to inform Q. Elizabeth of
the birth of K. James VI. aaa. puts a
letter into the Queen's hand against her
marriage with Bothwell, 248. is forced
to fly from court, ib. advises K. James
to moderate measures upon his escape
from the Ruthven conspirators 369

Melvil, Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his

character, 341. zealously opposes epif-
copacy, ibid. declines the civil jurif-
diaion in ecclesiastical matters, 373. is
forced to fly into England to avoid per-
fecution -ibid.

Melville, Mr. James, minister ofAnftru-

ther, his encomium on the eloquence
of Knox the reformer 334

-- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to

intercede with Q; Elizabeth for Q
Mary while under sentence, 418. a
memorial of his to the King, Append.

664

---Master of the houlhold to Q

Mary, takes his last farewel of her,
4z1. her partingfpeech to him ibid.

Mildmay, Sir Walter, sent by Q. Eliza-

beth with proposals to Q Mary 314

Mrnlac, Bilhopof Valence, employedby

the French to conclude a peace with
England and Scotland, 139. terms
agreed to by him 139-141

Montgomery, appointed Archbithop of

Glasgow, 361. is refused and excom-
municated by the General Assembly
for his immoral life ibid.
fMoarmorecy, Conflable of France, en-

deavours to prevent the Dauphin's
marriage with Q Mary, 94. his pru-
dent advice to Henry II. ibid. makes
a lender application in favour of Q.
Mary - - 329

Mcrton, Earl of, his irresolute condu as

to the reformation, 128. accompanies
Q. Mary in a progress to the worth,
17 . instigates Darnly to be avenged of
Rizio, 211. takes the dire&ion of that
enterprise, 113. is admitted into the
Queen's presence, who promises him a
pardon, 14. is forced to fly into Eng-
land, 215. obtains his pardon on Both-
well's interceflion, 132. seizes a casket
with letters from Q Mary to Both-
well, 58. he is, by Q Elizabeth's
interposition, in favour with the King's
party, after the murder of the Regent
30o. appointed one of the commifion-
ers to treat with the Queen's party,
316. his demands frustrate the meeting,
ibid. 317 is entirely influenced by the
court of England, 3 2. commands the
King's forces at Leith, 317. had feve-
ral kirmiihes with the Queen's forces,
ibid. closely besieges Edinburgh, and

commits

ownmilb great crueltie% ibid. a fufpen-
ion procured by the Engli'h and French
ambfaLdor, 38. a coalition of parties
prevented by him, 331. he is chofcn
Regent, 332. his mercenary ingratitude
to the Earl of Northumberland,ibid.
obtains the temporalities of the Arch-
bi!hopric of St. Andrews, 333. labours
to procure a peace between the two
parties, 335. atte:r.pt; in vain to gain
Maitlan- and Kirkaidy, 336. makes a
treaty with Ch.-tciherault and Huntly,
337. gets po!Teffion of the Caille of
Ein.burgh, 338. hi. fceverity to Kirk-
aldy and his brcther, 340. his admi-
niilmation becomes odious, ib. connives
at the dispute of the clergy, 341. he
irritates the nobles, 343. Argyll and
Athol refule to answer his lummon',
ibid. makes a vain attempt againt
Lord Claud Hamilton, ibid. diilover.
the designs of the nobles against him,
and propoles to resign his office, 34S.
his refigoation accepted by the King
gives niverial joy, 346. obtains an
approbation of his conduet, and a
pardon in ample form, 346. continues
to watch the motions of his adverlarics
3.6. is forced to surrender the castle of
l-dioburgh, 347. resumes his authority,
ibid. gains the cafle of Stirling, and a
feat in the Friry Council, 348. pro-
cures a meeting of the parliament at
Stirling, ibid. his security ratified in it,
ib;d. forces are raised for and against
him, 349. he is reconciled to his ad-
veriaries by the interceffioa of Q SEi-
aabeth, ibid. is fufpe&ed of foul play at
ua entertainment at his own houne,
350. his illegal proceeding againf the
family of Hamilten, ib. the King's new
favourites undermine him, 351, 353.
he endeavour; to prevent them, 353.
Q Elizabeth interposes in his favour,
3;4. is charged with being acceflary to
the late kir.g's death, 355. heisconfined
in different prisons, ibid. discourages an
attempt to rescue him, 356. all his
friends are tnrned out of office, 358. he
is tried and condemned, ibid. his refo-
lute calm behaviour and confefllon
bef-e and at his death, 359. his body
ie treated with ignominy 360

Arlarra, Earl of, late prior of St. An-

drews, goes with a handful of men
against Huntly, 174. by his great till
and courage hegains acomplete vitory,
175. his grant is confirmed by parlia-
ment, o8. cabals against him by Len-
nox and Darnly, 191. his aversion to
Darnly and othtrCourt favourites, 195.
calls Bothwell to tland a trial, 196.
he and his afociatce are made the dupes

of QElizabeth's policy, 198. Conert
to seize Darnly and carry him to Eng-
land, ib. this prevented by the Queen,
ibid. avoids assassination intended
him by Darnly, 199. e idence of there
plots, ibid. the queen's vasals are
callcd to arms against him, ibid. he is
luinmoned to appear before her, ibid.
is again summoned and outlawed on hit
non-appearance, o01. is forced to fl
with his associates into Argylefhire, 2oi.
they are interceded for by Q Elizabeth,
ibid. are prlued by the Queen, and
obliged to fly into England, o03. they
meet with unxpected ill-treatment
from Q Elizabeth, ibid. courts Rizio
to intercede ith the Queen for him,
206. many of his old friends solicit
for him, ibid. the Queen's favour how
iutercepted, 207. a parliament is called
to attaint them, .09. this how pre-
vented, ibid. he and his aflociates arrive
at Edinburgh, 14. are gracioully re.
ccived by the King and Queen, ibid.
are alarmed at the Queen's el'cape, but
Joon reconciled to her, 2i . he is ap-
pointed Regent during the minority of
K. James VI. 66. his harsh beha.
viour in a visit to the Qneen, ibid. the
fnccefs of his wife administration, 167.
procures many of the queen's party to
join him, a68. gets the places of
ftrcngth into his hands, ibid. hisoffice
of Regent confirmed by parliament, ib.
his evere and haughty behaviour dif-
gufls several, 169. his adherents in
great consternation at the Queen's
escape from Lochlevin, 71. his pru-
dent conduc on that occasion, ib. de-
feats the Queen'sarmy at Langfide,z 73.
he improves thisvietory, 174. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a par-
liament, 81 is called upon by Q Eli-
iabeth to vindicate his condu&, 83.
he arrives at York, 84. complaints of
the Queen's commiflioners agin shim,
286. he behaves with great reserve on
this occasion, ibid. intrigues with the
Duke of Norfolk, ibid. his demands
from the English commissioners 87,
i88. answers to the complaint of the
Queen's commiflioners without touch-
ing on the murder, 189. agrees to have
the conference moved to Westminster,
ibid. is atTe&ionately received by Q.
Elizabeth, which offends Q Mary,
190. is prevailed on by Elizabeth to
accuse Mary of the murder, g19. pro-
duces his evidence, 193. is dismissed
by Q_ Elizabeth without approving or
condemning his condut, 195. his party
is secretly supported by her, ih. returns
to Scotland, and by his vigorous con-

duct,

duta breaks the Queen's party, 196.
he receives proposals both from Q.
Elizabeth and Q Mary, 298. he dif-
appoints Norfolk, 30o. an account of
his murder, 306, 307. his character,
ibid. his death much lamented by Q.
Elizabeth and the King's party 309.
much anarchy the onlequence of, ib.
his heir murdered by the Earl of Hunt-
ly, 443. part of a letter of his. App.

618

N

,iNa, secretary to Q_ Mary, is sent by

her with a letter and presents to her
son 351. why dismissed without feeing
him, ibid. is sent with offersof humble
resignation to Q, Elizabeth, 389. is
seized and ent prisoner to London,
408. is produced an evidence against
her - - 413

Nevil discovers and prevents Parry's de-

sign to murder Q. Elizabeth 393

Nobles, their extensive power, 13, 14. be-

come turbulent and formidable, 14.
their power greater in Scotland than in
any other kingdom, 5. the causes of
this 15.-2o. their power of long du-
ration, 23. it becomes intolerable to
the princes, 4. they are humbled in
France and England, ibid. but continue
vigorous in Scotland, ibid. discords
among them encouraged, ibid. their
jurifdiltion circumscribed, a5. greatly
mortified by King James V. 39-41.
are difapointed in a scheme to (hew
their resentment, 43. refule to attend
the king into England, 44. they seize
the revenues of the church, 144. refuse
to part with them to the reformed
clergy, 145. 151. dissentions among
them, 169, 7o. a convention of them
approve the Queen's marriage to Darn-
ly, 196. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a husband to her, 247. a
trange combination of them on this
occasion, ib. a body of them associate
against her and Bothwell, 253. a party
of them favours the Queen, 159. they
are much dispirited by the good con-
dut of Murray, a68. they are much
provoked by Morton the Kegent, 343.
think of redress from the King, ibid,
infue suspicion of the Regent's power
into him, 344. a meeting of them by
him, 345 a party of them conspire
against the King's favourites, 363. they
seize his person and drive them off,
364. their neglet of, and ingratitude
to the clergy, 401. the King attempts
to reconcile their feuds and unite them,
429. See Lords.
fetrfold, Duke of, appointed a commis-

loner to hear the cause between Queen
Mary and her accusers, 84. forms a
foheme of mounting the throne of Scot-
land, 286. intrigues with the Regent
and Maitland with -that view, ibid.
287. he represents the demands of' the
Scots to Q_ Elizabeth, 88. his farther
negociations with refpeA to Q Mary,
298, 299. is impoled on by the artifice
of the Regent, 99. gets the consent
of many of the Eglilh nobles, 300.
his project approved at foreign courts,
301. is discovered and defeated by Q.
Elizabeth, 3o0. flies to Norfolk, ib.
he urrenders on a second ummons,
and is sent prilbuer to the Tower, ibid.
is set at liberty, and continues his in-
trigues with Q Mary, 34. is betrayed
by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his
dependents, and accused by them. 325.
is executed - 316

Northumberland, Earl of, attempts a re-

bellion in favowu of Q. Mary, 333. his
scheme defeated, 304. he is eiized by
the Regent, 305. is delivered up to the
governor of Berwick, and put to death
at York - - 331

Notti*gham, Counters of, some account of

the tranlafion concerning the Earl of
Effta's ring 49-

0

OAavianr, their institution and exten-

five power, 453. they undermine the
King's ministers, 454. become odious.
and a combination is formed against
them, ib. being split into facions,
and envied by the courtiers, they refiga
their commifflon - 464

Ogilvie, Lord, has afcufle withSr John
Gordon in the sRreets of Edinburgh

'7T

Olipbant, Master of, joins the Ruthvea

conspirators - - 364

Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into

Scotland, 357. his inftruions, ibid. is
affaflinated - - 397

D'Oifel, commander of theFrench troops

in Scotland endeavours to promote a
war with England, 93. his deign fruf-
trated, ib. instigates the Queen Regent
to violentmeafuresagainft the Reform-
ers, o9. is rent byQ.Mary to demand a
safe condot from Q Elizabeth, during
her voyage to Scotland 1 y

P

Paisley, Abbot of, arrives in Scot-

land, 6. creates a ufpkion of the
Earl of Lennox, in the Earl of Arran,
Regent, ib. s made Archbilhop of St.
Andrewa - 7

Prit,

Pais, the maflaere of, 319, 330. rejoic-

ing* of the popilh party on account of
it, 330. the consternation and horror of
the Protecfans - ibid.

Parliamet, the nature of their original

confitution, 46-48. particularly that
of Scotland, 48. 56.,41. a parliament
held on an extraordinary occaioa, 141.
a difficulty flarted and answered, 141.
their proceedings with regard to re-
ligion, 143. condemn the popilh and
approve the reformed docrines, 144.
several other regulations of the fame
tendency, ibid. their validity called in
question, 145. exceed their power., ib.
their proceedings laid before the King
and Queen, 146. a parliament in favour
ofBothwell, 244. passes anad in tavour
of the Reformation ibid. confirms the
proccedings of the confederates, 268.
parliaments held both by the King's
and Queen's parties, 220. another of
the Queen's adherents, ibid. attaint
upwards of 2oo of their opponents,
31!. a parliament at Stirling by the
King's party, ibid. f-prifed by the
Queen's adherents, ibid. another at
Stirling, 348. one at Edinburgh, 353.
and on the King's being of age, 418,
429. lcveral new laws made there,
4z9, 430. the Icffer barons admitted
into parliament - 431
arrj, Doctor, undertakes to murder Q.
Elizabeth, 395. is encouraged by and
gets abollution from the Pope, ibid.
his design how prevented, ib. is exe-
cuted - - 394

Farfms, a Jefait, poblihes a book in fa-

vour of the infanta of Spain's right of
succession to the crwn of England,

452

Pqauri.ade and Pictures, accusing Both-

wcli Js Darnly's murder, 238, 239.
z44. a law made againfl them, ibid.

r5ptte, WVilliam, his account of the Scot-

rigs anceintmi!itary difciplinc 72, 73.

rcul:r, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q

Mav's keepers, 390. hisrigid severity
to her. 394. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence. 406 his rude treatment
or her, 417. refuses to be concerned in
privately alaiffinating her, ibid. a letter
from him, Appendix - 655

P'LUew, Bilhop of Amies,, is appointed

to support the prolilh interest in Scot-
land, iii. drives the Qyecn Regent
to violent Measures against the Pro-

ftaUnt - - ibid.

Perth, an inflrretion of the Reformers

there againlt the Papifls, o16. its in-
habitants are severely treated by the
Qneen Regent, 138. a French garrison
paced there, ib. is befitged and taken

by the protefants, I . a great tumult
there on account of Gowrie's confpi.
racy - 473

Pilip II. of Spain, married to Mary

Queen of England, 83. reinforces his
army with her troops, 9z. his great
power, 397. joins in the holy league,
ib. resolves to invade and conquer
England, 431. his preparations for it
dilatory, 535. his design frultrated, ib.
meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 436. intrigues with
some Scottilh Lords with that view, ib.
remits money to them - 450

finit, the battle of, - 71
Pins V. Pope, excommunicates Q Eli-

zabeth, deprives her of her kingdom,
and absolves her fubjcat 313

Pollj, on, of Babington's conspirators

against Q_ Elizabeth, 405. difcovern
the plot - - ib.

PclItrt, a frantic zealot, affaflinates the

D. of Guile at the siege of Orleans 78

Peot, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one

of the Lords of Seflion, protests against
laws oppressive to the Church, 375

Popery, where mofl flourishing,84 what

kind prevailed in Scotland, 85. was
partly grafted on Heathenism, in. is
much hurt by the congregation, 143.
their doEtrines condemned by Parlia-
ment, 144. the jurifdiaion of their
courts abolilhed, ib. their worhip pro-
hibited, ib. attempt in vain to gain
Queen Mary's favour, 165. the great
influence of Popery. - to8

Pewer, the balance of, the great con-

sequence of preserving it 5z

Prebjteriar church government eftablifl-

ed in Scotland, 148. is confirmed by
King James VI. - 443

Protto.ts,inFrance, violently persecuted,

117, 118. are moderate on Q_ Mary's
arrival from France, 60. are employed
by her in the administration, 16s. a
scheme for suppressing them all over
Europe, o8. a league formed for that
porpofe, 397. See Reformation.

R

Raiejy, a favourite of K. James llI.

narrowly escaped being hanged with
his associates, 35. is appointed captain
of the King's guard, and created Earl
of Bothwell, 36. See Bothwell.

Rada, Sieur de, employed by the

French to negotiate a peace with Eng-
land and Scotland, 39. terms agreed
on by him - ib.

Rand^lpl, sent to encourage the Congre-

gation, 17. congratulates Q. Mar 's
arrival in Scotland, 16z. urges the ra-
tification of the treaty of Edinburgh,

lb.

ib. is ipofed on by Q Mary in the
affair of her marriage with Darnly,
19. sent into Scotland on the murder
of Murray, 310. interpoles for Mor-
ton, 357. flies from Scotland in the
night, 358. is rent again there, and
concludes a treaty with England, 402.
several of his letters. App. 555. 559.

56z. 564. 574. 579. 580. 583. 584

Ratclif. See Sultex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, 78

account of its firR preachers, ib. is
much influenced by England, 79. two
remarkable instruments of promoting
it, ib. it makes great progrcfs, 83.
causes contributing to promote it, 84.
its advantage over popery, ib. is fa-
voured by the Q. Regent, 93. an in-
stance of regard ror it in Scotland, 94.
the whole party not chargeable with
Cardinal Beatoun'smurder, 99. a prielt
burnt for embracing it, too. the Re-
formers violently persecuted by the
Archbishop of St. Adrews, ib. are
proteced by the Q, Regent, ib. apply
in vain to the popiih clergy, lol. a
persecution against them puthed on by
the French interest, 104. the preachers
summoned before theRegent, 105. they
are deceived and dechred outlaws by
her o16. a riotous infurretion of them
atPerth against thePapills, ib. conclude
a treaty with her, which fie prelently
breaks, 107, o18. they take arms
againfl the Queen, og9. infitt on re-
drecfing civil as well as religious griev-
ances, 11. the influence of the Re-
formation on liberty, ib. they besiege
and take Perth. iI . they seize Stir-
lingand Edinburgh, ib. commit great
violences on churches and nonasteries,
ib. an inltance of their moderation,
11. fix their residence in Edinburgh,
1 3. the Queen prepares to attack them,
114. makes another teaty with her,
ib. are forced to abandon Edinburgh,
&c. but allowed the exercise of their
religion, ib. demand the expulsion of
the French army,'ib. are aware of their
danger from France, 17. their party
strengthened, ib. remontlrate against
the French fortifying Leith, 12o. take
arms in their own defence, ili. re-
monflrate again to the Regent, a.x.
are highly incensed at her imperious
answer, ib. 113. by advice of a conven-
tion deprive the Queen Dowager of the
office of Regent, I14. examination of
the different principles on which it was
conducted in different countries, 149.
the growth of it encouraged by Par-
liament 268, 069. See Congregation.
tegalitiu, the ample jurifdiAion of .i

Repledging, die privilege of, to whom

belonging - - 13

Revenge, encouraged both by custom and

law - - 14

Rrvenuer of the church, proceedings of

Parliament concerning them 144

Ridolphi, an agent for the Pope at Lon-

don, negotiates for Q. Mary, 34. his
arguments with the D. of Norfolk, ib.

315

Rizio, David, some account of him and

his rife, 1 y. Darnly's connction with
him, 193. his good offices courted by
Murray, o6. his great interest and
familiarity with the Queen, ato. incurs
the hatred of Darnly, 2 i. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, ib. a combi-
nation formed to murder him, a12. he
is murdered in the Queen's palace 113,

a14

Romasis invade Britain, . give the ear-

lieR accounts of the Scots ib.

RcJi, Bishop of, zealously promotes Q

Mary's interell at London, 315. is con-
fined to the Tower, and threatened
with capital punishment, 316. is let at
liberty and banilhcd the kingdom, ib.
tome letters of his, Appendix, 61i, 616

Rubay, a foreigner, made keeper of the

great feal of Scotland - Za

Rutrven, Lord, the murder of Rizio pro-

posed to him by Darnly, l . his part
in that tranltaion, 113. 114. isad-
mitted into the Queen's presence, who
promies him a pardon, a 14. did not re-
pent of it at his death - 119

----created E. of Gowrie, he and his

associates teize the King, and remoan
flrate againlt his favouritds, 364. drive
them from him, ib. their condu& ap-
proved in an assembly of the dates,
366. the King escapes from them, 368.
by Arran's influence violent meafres
are determined againt them, 370. Q-
Elizabeth intercedes in their behalf,
ibid. are declared guilty of high trea-
son, 371. take refuge in foreign coun-
tries, ibid. are harfily treated by Q.
Elizabeth, 301. a reconciliation with
her brought about, 399. return toScot-
land, and are reconciled to the King,
400. their moderation on being re-
itored to their cleates and honour,
401. their neglect of their friends the
Clergy - - · ibid.

- that name abolished by Parlia.

ment, 481. See Glwrie.
Rntrbven raid, what - 365

S

.Sadir, Sir Ralph, his representations

of the .refentmcnt of the Scots, for
the seizure of their hips by Henry
VIII. 6. appointed a commifiloner to

hear

bear the cause between Q;Mary and
her accusers - 184
CdiJd//, of Calder, Lord St. John,
ent to lay the proceedings of the con-
gregation parliament before the King
and Queen in France, 146. is coldly
received and dismissed without a rati-
fication by them - ibid.

S&aage. a Spanilh officer, hisdefperate re-

foiution to kill Q_ Elizabeth, 404, 405

&Srrtaa, its ancient history fabulous, .

the origin of the Scots, ib. their history
why remarkably obfcnre, 3. some ac-
coast of the writers of it, ib. 4. is di-
vided into four periods, 4. a review of
the third rra, ib. some account of the
controvery concerning iaindependency
5-17 thi the cause of great animofi-
ties and much bloodfhecd, 8. the state of
Scotland when Bruce began his reign,
9. it begins to have an influence on the
late of ditant nations, 55. influence as
to the balance of power, ib. late of
Scotland at the birth of Q Mary, 57.
is invaded by the English, and everal
places burnt and plundered, 65, 66.
much alienated from the Englifl, 66.
a peace concluded between England,
France and Scotland, 67. a new
breach with England, 70. is invaded by
a great Englifharmy, 7 1. the Scots are
defeated with great aughter, 72. a
marriage agreed of their young Queen
and the Dauphin of France, 75. they
soon repent this ftep, 77. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aver-
son to the French, 71. this inflamed
by another incideFt, 91. they decline a
war with England, 9z. fend reprefen-
tatives to witness Q Mary's marriage,
. 94. their care asto the marriage arti-
cles, ibid. they refuse consent to the
demands of the French, 96. four of
their deputies fufpcted to be poilbned,
ibid. which much increases the aver-
6on, 97. grant the crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin, ib. they apply to the
Eoglifh for afiftance againfl the French,
1a6. I 9. an Englil fleet arrives for
that purpose, 133. conclude a peace
with England and receive an Eaglifh
army, 134. a treaty between England,
France, and Scotland, 138. both Eng-
liib and French armies leave Scotland,
141. they rejoice much at the death of
the young King of France, 148. fend
to invite the Queen to Scotland, 51.
rejea propoils of an ambassador from
France, 152. state of Scotland on Q.
Mary's return from France, 159. great
zeal of the nation againfePopery, 160.
the Scots brought into contempt by Q.
Maiy' condut, 253. in a milerable

condition after the murder of Murray
the Regent, 320. ate of facions at
that time in it, ibid. 321. a league
concluded between Scotland and Eng.
land, 402. a view of the revolutions
of Scotland since the accefllion of James
VI. 495-503. of the policy of the
tate, 495-499. and of the church
499. of the genius and taste as to
learning - 500oo-503

Sc&ttof Buccleugh entersand ravages Eng-

land after the murder of Murray the
Regent, 309. the design of this 311

Scroop, Lord, ent to condole with, and

watch Q_ Mary on her arrival in Eng-
land, 77. he is committed to his cuf-
tody at Bolton castle, 281. why his
fidelity is distrusted, and the Queen re-
moved - - 290

Sesja, Lords, and court of, by whom first

appointed, 25. the Prefidcnt and one
half of their number of the Clergy 8y

Setx, Lord, aflifs the Queen Regent in

defending Leith -- S8

SArevjlry, Earl of, the charge of Mary's

person committed to him, 90o. why re-
moved from that office, 390. is appoint-
ed to fee the sentence against her exe-
cuted, 40. letter from him and the
Earl of Kent concerning her death,
Appendix - 666

Sinclair, Bifhup of Ross, a zealous papist,

concurs, as President of the Session, in
acquitting Knox of a charge of trcafon

t18

Samerfet, Duke of, enters Scotland with

a powerful army, 71. is reduced to a
very critical ituation, 7. defeats the
Scots with great daughter, ibid. cabals
against him at the court of England,
force him to return, 73. is ruined by
his enemies - 76

Spain, great warlike preparations there,

432. See Armada. The Infanta of,
set up as candidate for the crown of
.England - 452
Spai/b ambaflador ordered toleavcEng-

land, for intriguing in favour of Queen
Mary - 326. 386

Sprot, his difcoveriesconcerning Gowrie's

conspiracy, 474, 475. is executed, ib.

Steart. James, Prior of St. Andrews,

is appointed to carry the crown matri-
monial to the Dauphin of France, 9.
See St. Adrews.
--Eime, Lord Aubigne, his arrival
in Scotland, 352. See Aubigney.

- Captain James, his chara&er,

35z. becomes a favourite of King
James, ibid. accuses Morton of the
murder of the late King, 335. is
created Earl of Arran. See Arras.
-CoL William, commander of the

King's

King's guard, contributes to his escape
from the Ruthvcn conlpirators, 369.
Ieizes the Earl of Gowrie 374

Stewart, Franci, created Earl of Both-

well, 436. joins in a trcasonable corref-
pondence with the poplll Lords, ibid.
See Bothzell.

-- all o' that name combine in op-

posing the Chancllor -- 446

Stirling eIized by the Reformer, i . a

parliament there by the King's party,
311. is surprised by the Queen's adhe-
rents, and a great fray ensues, ib. 32

Strorsi, Leon, commands a body of

French lnt into Scotland, 70. reduces
and demolishes the castle of St. An-
drews, ibid. See France.

Succeffin, a remarkable Itatute concern-

ing it - 70

Superintendentr propoied in the Church of

Scotland, 50o. theirbufinef- ib. 51

Sujffx, Earl of, one of the commissioners

to hear the cause between QMary and
her accusers, 84. assembles a power-
ful army on the borders, 310. he and
Scroop cuter and ravage Scotland 31

T
Tax uponland first propoled in Scotland,

9'

Tlrilmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambaffa-

dor extraordinary from Q Elizabeth,
to oppose Q. Mary's marriage with
Darnly, 194, 1y5, his interceflion for
the exiled lords is much regarded,
ao6, 107. his enmity to Cecil, ib. is
sent to negociate Q Mary's liberation,
a6o. is refuled access to her by the
confederates, 61. some letters of his,
Appendix, 589, 590. 596. 59y. 61,

602, 603.

---F Francis, is charged with a

conspiracy againit QElizabeth, 385.
at first he denies, but afterwards con-
fesses it, ib. reflclions on his consef-
sion, ib. 386. is executed - ib.

Ticbbrne designs to affafinate Q Eliza-

beth - - 405
reafmn, persons guilty of it, tried after
their death by the law of Scotland 475

U

rilosrt, a foreigner, made comptroller
of Scotlaad go

Union of Scotland and England, the ad-
vantages of - - 49|

W

Valiace, Sir William, bravely aerted

the liberty of his country - 8

WIalfingham, tecretary to Q Elizabeth,

sent ambassador to King James VI.
371. rcturns without success, ibid.
makes a favourable report to her coln-
cerning James, ibid. interposes in fa-
vour of Q. Mary, 390. discovers Ba-
hington's conpiracy, 405. a letter from
him, Appendix - 633

Warwick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in

the government of England 76
Veflminfier, the conferences concerning

Q Mary there - 289

WVeftmorland, Earlof, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q Mary, 303. his lchemes
discovercd and defeated, 304, 305. he
elcapes to the Netherlands ibid.

Wbithorn, the Prior of, imprisoned for

celebrating mars - 8 r

Willox, a minister, declares for resistance

and deprivation of tyrannical rules,
13. is called to attend the Q Dowager
on her death-bed 138

Wijart, George, his illegal execution

revenged - - 68

Witchcraft, vigoroully prosecuted by K.

James VI. inScotland - 442-

Wotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France 139
- Sir Edward, sent by Q Elizabeth
into Scotland, 398. hischarater, ibid.
soon gets into high favour with K.
James, ibid. procures a league between
the two kingdoms, ibid. 399 under-
mines Arran's power, ib. forms a plot
on King James, and forced to withdraw
without taking leave 400

Y

Tork, the conferencesthereconcerning Q
Mary - 284

Z

Zonece, Lord, sent ambanfador by Qc Eli-

zabeth, to remontrate agaiut K.
Jameek lenity to the popish lords, 449.
his treachery on that occasion ibid.
T H E E N D.

_v
