THE

STORY

OF THE

R E G N

OF THE

EMP ER OR CHARLE S

By WILLIAM I.OBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTO-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. III.

BASIL:

PRINTED BY J. J. TOURNEISEN.

M D CC L.XXXVIII.

HI

V.

I1"

~aN2 'N
4 k%(

! jCl

'Fv7rta~ ~L

Z~I

# BOOK V.

tH EI~

HISTORY

OF THE

REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK i V.

1THE account of the cruel nmarier in which E0tt V.

the Pope had been treated, filled all Europe ^
wi astonishment or horror. To fee a Chriftiari General in
Emperor, who, by poffeffing that dignity, ought dignation
to have been the prote~or and advocate of the ,xcitthe
hoy fee, lay violent hands di him who reptr Emperor.
fented Christ on earth, iani detain his sacred
perfori in a rigorous captivity, was considered
as an impiety that rierited the severest vengeance,
and which called for the inrimediate ititer-
position of every dutiful fdn of the church.
Francis and Henry, alarmied' at the pr6grefs of
the Imperial atrms in Italy, had, evein befote the
taking of Rome, entered into a closer alliance;

VOLk IIL B

BooI V. and, in order to give some check to the Empe.
I527. ror's ambition, had agreed to. make a vigorous

diversion in the Low Countries. The force of
every motive which had influenced' them at that
time, was. now increased; and to these were
added, the desire of rescuing the Pope out of
the Emperor's hands, a measure no less politi-
cal, than it appeared to be pious. This, how-
ever, rendered it necessary to abandon their
designs on the Low. Countries, ,and to make
Italy the feat of wyar, as it was by vigoro.us
operations in .that country, they might promise
anoft certainly upon delivering Rome,* and set-
ting Clement at liberty. Francis being now
sensible, that, in his system with regard to the
affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an excess of
remissness, he had allowed Charles to attain ad-
vantages which he might easily have prevented,
was eager to make reparation for an error of
which he was not often guilty, by an adivity
more suitable to "his temper. Henry thought
his interposition ,necessary, in order to hinder
the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of
power, as would enable him, for the future, to
dictate without controul to the other princes of
Europe. Wolsey, whom: Francis had taken
care to secure by flattery and presents, the cer-
tain methods of gaining his favour, negleced

nothing that could incenife his iiaftet against the BO6#t V
Emperor. Besides all these ublic tonfidera- i17.
tions, Henry Was influenced by one of a more
private nature; having beguri abbutl this time
to forri his great scheme of divorcing Catherine
of Aragon, towards the executioni ds which hi
knew that the -faniotin of papal auithority would

,

be tieceffaty, he was desirous to acquire as much
merit as possible with Clement, by appearing to
be the chief instrument of his deliverance.

THIE negociation, betweeni priinces thiiu dif- cnedecy

posed, was not tedious. Wolsey .liinfelf cobn-again"a him
duaeed it on the part of his fovereignr, witia
unbounded powers. Francis treated with him
in person at Amiens where the Cardinal ap-
peared, and was received with royal maginifi-
cenee;. A marriage between the Diike of Or-
leans and the Princess MarIiy as agreed tO as
the bais of the cotifedeiacy; it was tefolved
that Italy fthould be the the.tre -of war; the
ftrerigth bs the army which fihold take the field,
ais Well as the cortingerit of troops 6r of mnoney
which each pririce should ftirriiih, Were iettled;
atid if the Emperoi did not accept of the prfc
pdfals they Were jOiritly to miake him, they
bonrid themselves immediately to declarde War,
and to begin hostilities. Henry, who took every Aig. Ais
resolution with 'impetuofity, entered fa eagerly
•into this new alliance, that in order to give

Booi. V. Francis the ftron eft proof of' his friendship and

13Z7. refped, he for y renounced the ancient claim

ofL the Englih ,Monarchs to the crown of
France, which, had long been the pride and ruin
of the nation; as a. full compensation for which,
he accepted, a pension of fifty thousand crowns,
to;be paid- annually to. himself and his fuccef-
fors ,

The Froren- THE PIpe, being unable to fulfil the .con-
tines reco. ditions of his capitulation, still remained a
ver their prisoner under the severe custody of Alarcon.
freedom, -

" -

The Florentines no sooner heard of what had
S happened at; Rome, than they. ran to arms in a
tumultuosus .manner; expelled the Cardinal di
Cortona, who governed their city in the Pope's
name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke
in. pieces .the statues of Leo and Clement; and
declaring themselves a free state, re-established
their ancient popular government. iThe Vene-
tians, taking advantage of the calamity of their
ally the Pope, seized Ravenna, and other places
;belonging .to, the church, under pretext of keep-
ing them in depofite. The Dukes of Urbino
and Ferrara laid hold likewise on part of the
* i poils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
considered as irretrievably ruined '.

Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Fed. 14. 203.
SGuic. 1, ,xviii. 45 3.
;

. '

.. '

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to de- Boboi V.

rive some solid benefit from that unforeseen i 27.
event, which gave such splendour and superiority The Impe-

to -arm s. For rial troops

to his mater s arms. For this purpose he inaaive.
marched to Rome, together with MIoncada, and
the marquis del Guafto, at the head of all the
troops which they could assemble in the king-
dom of Naples. The arrival of this reinforce-
ment brought new calamities on the unhappy
citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their
licence, and witht the utmoRt rapacity gathered
the gleanings, which had escaped the avarice of
the Spaniards and Germans. There was 'not
now any army in Italy capable of making head
against the Imperialists; and nothing more was
requisite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns
in the ecclesiastical state, than to have appeared
before them. But the soldiers having been so
long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an entire
relaxation of discipline, and having tasted the
sWeets of living at discretion, in a great city
almnoft without the controul of a superior, were
become so impatient of military fabordination,
and so averse to service, that they refused to
. leave Rome, unless all .their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to be impossible.
At the fame time, they declared, that they
would not obey any other person than the Prince
of Orange, whom the army had .choferi general.

B

BOOK V, Lannoy, finding that it was no longer safe 'for

s527, him to remain ampng licentious troops, who

despised his dignity, and hated his person, re-
turned to Naples; soon after the marquis del
Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to
quit Rome for the fame reason. The Prince of
Orange, a general only in name, and by the
most precarious of all tenures, the good-will of
soldiers whom success and licence had rendered
capricious, was'obliged to pay more attention to
their humours, than they did to his commands.
Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping any of
the advantages which he might have expeded
frdom the reducion of Rome, had the mortifi-
cation to fee the most formidable body of troops
that he had ever brought into the field, conti-
nue in a state of inadivity from which it was
impossible to rouse them '

The French THIS gave the King of France and the Vene-
army tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter
miarches
ito Italy. into new engagements for delivering the Pope,

and preserving the liberties of Italy. The
newly restored republick of Florence very im-
prudently joined with them, and Lautrec, of
whole abilities the Italians. entertained a much
more. favourable opinion than his own master,
was, in order to gratify themn, appointed gene-

l GCic.1T. xviii. 4,c4,-

ralifimo of the league. It was with the utmost BoortV.;
relucance .he undertook that office, being, un- x27.?
willing to expo'fe himself a second time' to the
difficulties and disgraces which the negligence
of the King, or the malice of his favourites
might bring upon him. The best troops in
France marched under his command, and the
King of England, though lhe had not yet de-
clared war against the Emperor, advanced a
considerable fum towards carrying on the expe-
dition. Lautrec's first operations were prudent, His opre
vigorous, and fuccefsful. By the assistance oftions.
Andrew Doria, the ablest fea-officer of that age,
he rendered himself master of Genoa, and re-
eftabllfhed in that republick the fadion of the
Fregofi, together with the dominion of France;
He obliged Alexandria to fuirrender after a shore
siege, and reduced all the country on that fide
of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had so
long resifted the arms of his sovereign, by assault,
and plundered it with that cruelty which the,
memory of the fatal disaster that had befallen
the French nation before its walls naturally in-
spired. All the 1Milanese , which Antonio de
Leyva defended with a small body of troops,
kept together, and supported by his own address
and industry, must have Loon submitted to his
power, if he had. continued to bend the force
of his arms against that country. But Lautrec
durst not complete a concueft which would

B 4

BooK V, have been so honourable to himself, and of such

Sa7z' advantage . to the league. Francis knew his

confederates to be more desirous of circumfcrib,
ing the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquir-
ing new territories for him, and was afraid that
if Sforza were once re-established in Milan, they
would second but coldly the attack which he
intended to make on the kingdom of Naples,
S0o this reason he inAfruded Lautrec not to push
his operations with too much vigour in Lom-
bardy; and happily the importunities of the
Pope, and the folicitations of the Florentines,
the one for relief, and the other for protedlion,
were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext
to march forward without yielding to the in-
treaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who insisted
on his laying siege to Milan '.

The Emipe. WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards
sor sets the ]Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate con-
pe at cerning the disposal of the Pope's person, who

still remained a prisoner in the castle of St. An-
gelo. .Notwithstanding the specious veil of
religion with which he usually endeavoured to
cover his adions, Charles in many instances
appears to have been but little'under the in-
fluence of religious. considerations, and had fre-
quently on this occasio,n expressed an inclina-

* Guic. 1. xviii. 441. Bellay, o7, &c. lMauroc. Hist.

Yenet, lib, iii, 2 3 8.

tion to tranfportethe Pope into Spain, that he
might indulge his ambition with the fpedacle of
the etwo mos illustrious personages in Europe
successively prisoners in his court. But the fear
of giving new offence to all Christendom, and
of filling his own fubjeAs, with horror, obliged
him to forego that fatisfation '. The progress
of the confederates made it ,now necessary either
to set- the Pope, at liberty, or to remove him to
some place of confinement more secure than the
castle of St. Angelo. MIany considerations ing
duced him to prefer the former, particularly his
want of the money requisite as well for recruiting
his army, as for paying off the vast arrears due
to it. In order to obtain this he had assembled
the Cortes of Castile at Valladolid about the
beginning of the year, and having laid before
them the state of his affairs, and represented the
necessity of making great preparations .to relift
the enemies,. whom envy at the success which
had crowned his arms would unite against him,
he demanded a large supply in the most pressing
terms, but the Cortes, as the nation was already
exhausted by extraordinary donatives , refused
to load it with any new burden, and in spite of
all his endeavours to gain or to intimidate the
members, persisted in this resolution .: No re-
source, therefore, remained but the extorting

SSandov. i. p,. 8 4. BOOK V.

Feb. zr.

5 Guis. 3~ x~ii. 45~7·

BooKi V. from Clement, by way of rantom, a fum sus-
1527. ficient for discharging what was due 'to his

troops, without which it was vain to mention
to them their leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inadtive on his part, or

his intrigues unfuccefsful towards hastening such
.a treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of
unbounded confidence, he disarmed the resent-
ment of cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon
his vanity, which made, him desirous of Thew-
ing the world, that as his power had at first
depressed the Pope, it could now raise him to
his former dignity. By favours and promises
he gained Morone, who, by one of those whim-
fical revolutions which occur so often in his life,
and which so strongly display his character, had
no,w recovered his credit and authority with
the Imperialists. The address and influence of
two such men easily removed all the obstacles
which retarded an accommodation, and brought
the treaty for Clement's liberty to a conclusion,
upon conditions hard indeed, but not more in-
tolerable than a prince in his situation had reason
to expea. He was obliged to advance in ready
money an hundred thousand crowns for the use
of the army; to pay the fame fum at the distance
qs a fortnight; and at the end of three months,
an hundred and fifty thousand more. He en-
gaged not to take part in the war against Charles,

either in Lombardy or in Naples'; he granted BooK.Y.
him a cruzado, and the tenth of ecclesiastical 1527.
revenues in Spain; and he not only gave host-
,ages, but iput the Emperor in poffeffion of
several towns, as a security for the performance
of these articles '. Having raised the first
moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and
benefices, and other expedients equally unca-
nonical, a day was fixed for delivering him
from imprisonment. But Clement, impatient Dec.
to be free, after a tedious confinement of fix
months, as well as full of the suspicion and dif-
trust natural to the unfortunate, was so much
afraid that the Imperialists might still throw in
obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he dif-
guised himself the preceding night in the habit
of a merchant, and Alarcon having remitted
somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclusion
of the treaty, he made his escape undiscovered.
He arrived before next morning at Orvieto, with-
out any attendants but a tingle officer.; and
from thence wrote a letter of thanks to Lautrec,
as .the chief instrument of procuring him li-
berty ".

DURING these tranfadtions, the ambassadors overtures of

of France and England repaired to Spain, in the Emprr
* consequence of the treaty which Wolsey had and enry.

7 Guic. 1. xviii. 467, &c. 8 Guic. 1. xviii. 467, &c,

Jov. Vit. Colon, 69, Mauroc. Hist. Venet. lib. iii. 25z

BoOK V. concluded with the French King. The Empe.
x527. ror, unwilling to draw on himself the united

forces of the two Monarchs, discovered an in-
clination to relax somewhat the rigour of the
treaty of Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had
adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept of the
two millions of crowns which Francis had pro-
posed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy of
Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty on con-
dition that he would recall his army out of Italy,
and refftore Genoa together with the other con-
quests which he had made in that country.
WVith regard to Sforza, he insisted that 'his fate
thould be determined by the judges appointed
to inquire into his crimes. These propositions
being made to Henry, he transmitted them to
his ally the French King, whom it more nearly
concerned to examine, and to answer them;
and if Francis had been sincerely solicitous either
to conclude peace, or preserve consistency in his
own conduct, he ought instantly to have closed
with overtures which differed but little from the
propositions which he himself had formerly
made '. But his views were now much changed;
his alliance with Henry, Lautrec's progress in
Italy, and the superiority. of, his army there
above that of the Empefor, hardly left him
room to doubt of the success of his . enterprize.

- Recueil des Traitez, 2. 249..

against Naples. Full of those sanguine hopes, BOOK V.
he was at no loss to find pretexts for rejecting IsZ7.
or evading what the Emperor had proposed.
Under the appearance of sympathy with Sforza,
for whose interests he had not hitherto disco-
vered much solicitude, he again demanded the,
full and unconditional re-.establishment of that
unfortunate prince in his do'minions, Under
colour of its being imprudent to rely on the
Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons
fhozuld be set at liberty before the ,French.troops
left Italy, or surrendered ..Genoa. The unrea-
fonablenefs of these demands, as well as the
reproachful insinuation with which they were
accompanied; irritated Charles to such a degree
that he could hardly listen to them with pa-
tience; and repenting of his moderation, which
had made so little impression on his enemies,
declared that he would not depart in the smallest
article from the conditions which he had now
offered. Upon this the French and English
ambaiTadors, for Henry had been drawn unac-
countably to Concur with Francis in there
strange propositions, demanded and obtained
their audience of leave '*.

NEXT day, two heralds, who had accompa-

nied the ambassadors of purpose, though they January 22.
had hitherto concealed their charader, haying

2. Rym. 14. Z oo. Herbert 85. Guic. 1. xiii. 471.

BlOit- V.

; affUttied the (ensigns of their bffice, appeared iri

i z8. the Emperor's court, and being admitted into
They de- his preferice, they, in the name of their refpedive
Clare war
againf the masters, and with all the folemntities customary
Emperor. on such occasions , denounced war against him,

Charles received both with a dignity suitable to
his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone adapt-
ed to the sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns, He accepted the defiance of
the English Monarch with a firmness 'tempered
by some degree of decency and. refped. His
reply to the French, Kiring abounded with that
acrimony of expression, which personal rivalfhip,
exasperated by the memory of many injuries
i-nflilted as well as fuffered, naturally suggests.
He desired the French herald to acquaint his
sovereign, that he would henceforth confider
him not only as a base violater of publick faith,
but as a stranger to the honour and integrity be-
coming a gentleman. Francis, too high-fpirited
to bear such an imputation-, had recourse to .an
uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his
charader. He infltntly sent back the' herald

Francis with 'a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the
ehalen.ges Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to
the Emperor
to jingle single combat, requiring him to name the time
combat. and place of the enicounter , and the weapons

with which he chose to fight. Charles, as he
was not inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery,
readily accepted the challenge; but after several

messages concerning the arrangement of all the Booi V;
circumffances relative to ,the combat, accpm- iz5.8,
panied with muttal reproaches, bordering on
the most indecent scurrility, all, thoughts of this
duel, more becoming the heroes of romance
than the two greatest IVlonarchs of their age,
were entirely laid aside ".

THE example of two personages so illuffrious The effect

drew such general attention, and carried with it of this i,

' 9 \ promoting

so much authority, that it had considerable in-the cutom
fluence in introducing an important change infr delling.
manners all over Europe. Duels, aS has already
been observed

, had long been permitted by ,the

laws of all the European nations , d forming
a part of their jurisprudence, were authorized
by the magistrate on many occasions as the most
proper method of terminating questions with
regard to property, or of deciding in those
which refpeAced crimes. But single combats
being considered as solemn appeals to the omni-
science and justice of the Supreme Being, they
were allowed only in publick causes, according
to the prescription of law, and carried on in a
judicial form. Men accustomed to this manner
of decision in courts of justice, were naturally
led to apply it to personal and private quarrels.
Duels, which at first could be appointed b'y the

" Recueil des Traitez, z. Mdm. de Bellay, xo0, &c.

Sardov. Hilft. i, 8 37.

BOOrt V. civil judge alone, were fought without the in.

xs528. terpofitiori of his authority, and in cafes to

awhich the laws did not extend. The tranfadtion
between Charles and Francis strongly counte-
nanced this pianice. Upon every affront, or
injury which seemed to touch his honour, a gen-
tleran thought himself entitled to draw his
sword, and to call on his adversary to make re-
paration. Such an opinion introduced among
mnen of fierce courage, of high spirit, and of
rude' manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced most
fatal consequences. Much of the best blood in
Chriftendo :,was shed; many useful lives were
sacrificed ; andr at some periods, war itself hath
Shardly been more deftrudive than these contests
of honour. So powerful, however, is the do-
minion of fashion, that neither the terror of
penal laws, nor reverence for religion, have been
able entirely to abolish a pradice unknown
among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reason; .though at the fame time it
must be admitted, that, to this absurd custom,
we must ascribe in some degree the extraordinary
gentleness and complaisance of modern manners,
*:and that refpedful attention of one man to an-
other, which, at present , render the social inter-
.courses of life far. more agreeable and decent
than among the most civilized nations of anti-
quity.

VWHILE

WHILE the two Monarchs seemed so eager to Boo. Y.

terminate their quarrel by a personal combat, 28.
Lautrec continued his operations which pro- fi'tr[i
amifed to be more decisive. ' His army, which r-i.iiut romn
was now increased to thirty-five thousand -men, R'm>

i

" February,

advanced by great marches towards Naples.
The terror of their approach, as well as the
remonftrances and the entreaties of the Prince
of Orange, prevailed .at last on the imperial
troops, though with difficulty, to quit Rome,
of which they had kept poffeffion during ten
months. But of that flourithing army which
had entered the city. scarcely one half remained;
the reft, cut off by the plague , or wasted by dif-
eases, the effects of their inadivity ,' intemper-
ance, and debauchery, fell vidims to their own
crimes ". Lautrec made the greatest efforts to
,attack them in their retreat towards the Neapo-
litan territories; which would have finished the
,war at one blow. But the prudence of their
leaders disappointed all his measures, and con-
dudced them with little loss to Naples. The
people of that kingd'om , extremely impatient
'to shake off the Spanif yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared
to take poffeffion; and Gaeta and Naples ex-
cepted, hardly any place of importance remained
in the hands of the Imperialists. The prefer~

VO Guic. 1. xviii. 478.
VOL. III. C

BOOK V. vation of the former was owing to.the firengtP
xz28. of its fortifications, that of the latter to the
French be- presence of the Imperial army. Lautrec, how-
faege Naples. ever, fat down before Naples, but finding it

vain to think of reducing a city by force while
defended by so many troops, he was obliged to
employ the flower, but less dangerous method
of blockade; and having taken measures which
appeared to him effedual, he confidently affur-
ed his master, that famine would soon compel
the besieged to capitulate. These hopes were
strongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous
attempt made by the enemy in order to recover
the command of the sea. The gallies of An.
drew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour.
MIVoncada, who had succeeded Lannoy in the
vice-royalty , rigged out a number of gallies
superior to Doria's, manned them with a chosen
body of Spanish veterans, and going ont board
himself, together with the marquis del Guafto,
attacked Philippino before the arrival of the Ve-
netian and French fleets. But he, by his fu-
perior skill in naval operations, easily triumphed
over the valour and number of the Spaniards.
The viceroy was killed, most of his fleet de-
ftroyed, and Guafto, with many officers of
diftinaion, being taken prisoners, were put on
board the captive gallies , and sent by Philippino,
as trophies of his vidtory to his uncle "',

C Guic. 1. xix. 487, P. Heuter. lib. x. c, 2. p. z2i.

NOTWITHSTANDING this flattering profpetd BooKt tV

of success, many circumstances concurred to fruf- I5.28S
trate Lautrec's expeCations. Clement, thdugh Circum-
he always 'acknowledged his being indebted to wiIh re.
Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and often tarn the
complained of the cruel treatment which he had progress of
met with from the Emperor, was not influenced
at this jundure by principles of gratitude, nor,
which is more extraordinary, was he swayed byi
the desire of revenge. His past misfortunes
rendered him more cautious than ever, and his
recolledlion of the errors which he had commit-
ted , increased the natural irresolution of his
mind While he amused Francis with promises,
he secretly negociated with Charles; and being
solicitous, above all things, to re-establish his
family in Florence with their ancient authority,
which he could not expecT from Francis, who
had entered into ftrid alliance with the new
republick, he leaned rather to the fide of his
enemy than to that of his benefador, and gave
Lautrec no alliftance towards carrying on his
operations. The Venetians, viewing with jea-
lousy the. progress of the French arms , were
intent only upon recovering such maritime
towns in the Neapolitan dominions as were to
be poffeffed by their republick, while they were
altogether careless about the reduction of
Naples, on which the success of the common

BOOK V. cause depended, . The King of England, in-
i 28. stead of being able, as had been projeAed, to

embarrass the :Emperor by attacking his terri-
tories in the Low Countries, found his fubjeds
so averse to an unnecessary ,war, which would
have ruined the trade of the nation, that in order
to ,silence their clamours, and put a stop to the
infurredions ready to break out among them,
he was compelled to conclude a truce for eight
- months with the governess of the Netherlands '~.
Francis himself, with the fame unpardonable
inattention of which he had formerly been
guilty, and for which he had fuffered so severe-
ly , negleded to make proper remittances to
Lautrec for the support of his army '.

Revolt of THESE unexpeced events retarded the pro-
Andrew grefs of the Fren.ch , discouraging both the
Doria from
mFan0e. general and his -troops; but the revolt of An-

drew Doria proved a fatal blow to all their
measures. That gallant officer, the citizen of a
republick, and trained up from his infancy in the
fea-fervice, retained the spirit of independence
natural to the former, together with the plain
liberal manners peculiar to the latter. A per-
fed stranger to the arts of submission or flattery
necessary in courts, but conscious at the fame
time of his own merit and importance, he al-

9 " Herbert, 90. Ryrmeri 14. a~5s

"9 suic. P.'xi~. qgr.
"' Gaici i. ~viii. 4%8·

ways offered his advice with freedom, and often
preferred his complaints and remnontrances with
boldness. The Fieneh ministers, unaccuffomed
to such liberties, determined tol firi a a, man who
treated them with so little deference; and.
though Francis himself had a just sense of
Doria's services, as well as an high effteem for
his character, the courtiers, by continually re-
presenting him as. a man haughty, -intractable,
and more solicitous to aggrandize himself, than
to promote .the interest of France, gradually
undermined the foundations of his credit, and
filled the King's' mind with suspicion and dif-
trust. From thence proceeded feveial affront/
and indignities put upon Doria. His appoit-
ments were not regularly paid; his advice, even
in naval affairs, was often slighted; an attempt
was made to seize the prisoners takF' by his
nephew in the fea-fight off Naples," all which
he bore with abundance .of illl-mour. But
an injury offered to his country, tinfported him
beyond all bounds of patience The French
began to fortify Savona, to ,lear its harboir,
and, removing thither some branches of tade
carried on at G enoa, plainly fhewed that hey
intended to render that town , long the )bie1
of jealousy and hatred to the Genoef, their
rival in wealth and commerce. Doria , nimated
with a patriotick zeal for. the honour ?id intereit
of his country, remonfirated against this in the BooK V.

xs28.

13ooi V. highest tone, not without threats, if the measure
i p38, were not instantly abandoned: This bold adtion,

aggravated by the malice of the courtiers, and
placed in thei most odious light, irritated Francis
tqo such a.degree, that he commanded Barbe-
sieux., whom he appointed admiral of the Levant,
to fail direaly to .Genoa with the French fleet,
to arrest Doria, and to seize his gallies. This
rash order, the execution o[ which could have
been secure.d only by the most profound secrecy,
was concealed with so little care, that Doria got
timely intelligence of it, and retired with all
his gallies.. to a place of safety. Guafto, his
.rifoner, who had long observed and fomented
hIn growing discontent, and had often allured
h:im v magnificent promises to enter into the
iEmper's5 service, laid hold on this favourable
opportunvy While his indignation and resent-
ment were t their height, he prevailed on him
to dispatch >ne of his officers to the Imperial
co rt with Ls overtures and demands. The
'ne ociation' wa, not long; Charles, fully. fen-

"oh of the .imprtance of such an acquisition,
grand him whatever terms he required. Doria
sent bck his commission, together with. the
collar St. Michael, to Francis, and hoisting
the Imp kal colours, failed with all his gallies
towards 'ples, not to block up the harbour
ft that a

.rppy city as he had formerly en-

\y

'gaged, but to bring them' prote&ion and deli- Boort V.
verance.. 1528,

His arrival opened the communication with wretched

the se-a, and restored plenty in Naples, which tnation of
was now reduced to the last extremity; and the army before
French having loft their superiority at sea, were Naples.
soon -reduced to great straits for want of provi-
fions. The ,Prince of Orange, who succeeded
the viceroy in the command of the Imperial
army , fhewed himself by his prudent condut
worthy of that honour which his good fortune
and the death of his generals had twice acquired
him. Beloved by the troops, who remembering
the prosperity which they had, enjoyed under his
command, served him with the utmost alacrity,
he let flip no opportunity of harassing the enemy,
and by continual alarms or sallies, fatigued and
weakened them x. As an addition to all these
misfortunes, the diseases common in that coun-
try during the sultry months, began to break
out among the French troops. The prisoners
communicated to them the pestilence which the
Imperial army had brought to Naples from
Rome, and it raged "with such violence, that
few, either officers, or soldiers, escaped the in-
section. Of the whole army, not four thousand
men, a number hardly fufficient to defend the

S,' Jovii Hist. lib. xxxvi. p.

3 I, &c. Sigonii Vita Dorise,

p. 1139. Bellay, I'4, &c.

C4

.BooK V. camp, were capable 6f doing duty."; and being

zs2g, now besieged in their turn, they fil.ffered all the

,iferies from which the Imperialists were de-
livered. lautrec, after struggling long with
so many disappointments and, calamities, which
preyed on his mind at the fame time that the

s-. '. pestilence wasted his body, died, lamenting the

negligence of his sovereign, and the. infidelity
of his allies, to which so many brave men had
fallen victims ". By his death, and the indifpo-
fition of ithe other generals, the command de-
volved on the marquis de Saluces; an officer

Rai;e the altogether unequal to such a trust He, with
ege troops no less dispirited than reduced, retreated

in difoider to Averfa; which town being in-
vested by the Prince of Orange, Saluces was
under the neceffity'of consenting, that he him-
fel f hould remain a prisoner bs war, that his
troops thould lay down their arms and colours,
give up their baggage, and march under a
guard to the frontiers of Fraice. By this igno-
rminious capitulation., the wretched remains of
the French army were saved; and the Emperor,
by his own perseverance and the good conduc
of.his generals, acquired' once more the fupe-
riority in Italy ".

I

" Bellay, II7, &c.
" P. Heuter. Rerum Auftr. lib. x. c. 2. 231,
3" Bellay, 1 17 &c. Jovii Hist. lib. xxv, xxvio

THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon BOOK V.

the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his

x 28.

country from the. dominion of foreigners was Genoa reco-
Doria's highieft ambition, and had been his etsly.
principal inducement to quit the service of
France, and enter into that of the Emperor. A
most favourable opportunity for executing this
honourable enterprize now presented itself. The
city of Genoa, afflided by the pestilence, was
almost deserted by its inhabitants ; the French
garrison- being neither regularly paid nor-re-
cruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable numL
ber; Doria's emissaries found that such of the
citizens as remained, being weary alike of the
French and Imperial yoke, the rigour of which
they had alternately felt, were ready to welcome
him as their deliverer, and to fec6nd all his
measures. Things wearing this promising afped,
he failed towards the coast of Genoa ; on his
approach the French gallies retired; a small
body of men which he landed: furprized one of
the gates of Genoa in the night-time; Trivulci,
the French governor, with his feeble garrison,
shut himself up in the citadel , and Doria took sept. in,
poffeffion of the town without bloodshed or
resistance. Want of provisions quickly obliged
-Trivulci to capitulate; the people, eager to
abolish such an odious monument of their ser-.
vitude, ran together with a tumultuous violence,
and levelled the citadel with the ground.

BooK V. IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered
Ir28. himself the sovereign of his country, which he
Disinterest. had so happily delivered from. oppreflion. The
ed conduafame of his former adions, the success of his
of Doria. present attempt, the attachment of his friends,

the gratitude of his countrymen, together, with
the support of the Emperor, all conspired to
facilitate his attaining the: supreme authority,
and invited 'him to lay hold of it. But with a
magnanimity of which there are few examples,
he sacrificed all thoughts, of aggrandizing him-
self to the virtuous fatisfadion of establishing
liberty in his country, the highest objedt at
which ambition can aim. Having assembled the
whole body of the people in the court before his
palace, he assured them, that the happiness of
feeing them once more in poffeffion of freedom,
was to him a full reward for all his services;
that, more delighted with the name of citizen
than of sovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence
or power above" his equals; but remitted en-
tirely to them the right of fettling what form of
government they would now chufe to be efta-
blifhed among them. The people listened to
hin with tears of admiration , and of joy.
Twelve persons were eledled to new-model the
constitution of the republick. The influence of
Doria's virtue and example communicated itself
to his countrymen; the fadions which had long
torn and ruined the state, seemed to be forgot-

ten; pruident precautions were taken to prevent BooK V.
their reviving; and the fame form of govern- Is28.
rnent which hath subsisted with little variation
since that time in Genoa, was established with
universal applause. Doria lived to a great
age, beloved, refpedted, and honoured by his
countrymen; and adhering uniformly to his
profeflions of moderation, .without arrogating
any thing unbecoming a private citizen, he pre-
served a great ascendant over the councils of the
republick, which owed its being to his generosity.
The authority which he poffeffed was more flat-
tering, as well as more satisfactory, than that
derived from sovereignty; a dominion founded
in love and in gratitude; and upheld by venera-
tion for his virtues, not by the dread of his
power. His memory is still reverenced by the
Genoese, and he is distinguished in their publick
monuments, and celebrated in the works of
their hiflorians, by the most honourable of all
appellations, THE FATHIER OF HIS
COUNTRY, AND THE RESTORER OF
ITS LIBERTY ".

FRANCIS, in order; to recover the reputation 1529.

of his arms, discredited by so many losses, made Operations
new efforts in the Mlilanefe. But the Count ofn the Mi.
St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to

" Guic. 1. xix. p. .498. Sigonii Vita Doria~, p. 1I 44.

'Jovii Hist. lib. xxvi. p. 3 6, &c.

BOOK V. whom he gave the command, was no match for
1929. Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial

generals. He, by his superior fkill' in war,

/ checked, with a handful of men, the brisk but

ill-concerted motions of the French; and though
so infirm himself that he was carried constantly
in a litter, he surpassed them, when .occasion re-
quired, no less in activity than in prudence. By
an unexpected march he furprized , defeated,
and took the Count of St. Pol, ruining the
French army in the Mlilanefe as entirely as the
Prince of Orange had ruined that which besieged
Naples ".

Negocia. AMIDST these vigorous operations in the field,
tions be- each party discovered an impatient desire of
tweenr Charles and peace ,. and continual negociations were carried
'rancis. on for that purpose. The French .King dif-

couraged, and almost exhausted by so many
unfuccefsful enterprizes, was reduced now to
think of obtaining .the release of his sons by con-
ceffions, not by the terror of his arms. The
Pope hoped to recover by a treaty whatever he
had loft in the war. The Emperor, notwith-
standing the advantages which he had gained,
had many reasons to make him wish for an ac-
commodation. Solyman, having over-run Hun-
gary, was ready to break in upon the Austrian

" Guie. 1. xix. te0. P. Heuter. Rer. Au4fr. lib. x. c. 3.

p. 33. Mim. de Bellay, I 1.

territories with the whole force of the East. The Bfoob V.
Reformation gaining ground daily in Germany; *; 9.
the princes who favoured it had entered into,;:,
confederacy, which Charles thought dangeroit5'
to the tranquillity of the Empire, The Spaniards
murmured at a war the weight of which rested
chiefly on them. The variety and extent of the
Emperor's operations far exceeded what his re-
venues could support:. his success hitherto had
been owing chiefly to his own good fortune, and
to the abilities of his generals, nor could he
flatter himself that they, with troops destitute of
every thing necessary, would always triumph
over enemies frill in a condition to renew their
attacks. All parties, however, were at equal
pains to'conceal, or to dissemble their real sens
timents. The Emperor, that his inability to
carry on the war might not be fifpeded, insisted
on high terms in the tone of a conqueror. The
Pope,. solicitous not to lose his present allies,
before he came to any agreement with Charles,
continued to make a thousand protestations of
fidelity to the former, while he privately nego-
ciated with the latter. Francis , afraid that his
confederates might prevent him by treating for
themselves with the E mperor, had recourse to
many dishonourable artifices, in oi der to turni
their attention from the measures which he was "-
taking to adjust all differences with his rival.

BOOK V. IN this situation of affairs, when all the con-

1529. tending powers wished for peace., but durst not

venture too hastily on the steps necessary for at.
taining it, two ladies undertook to procure this
blessing so much desired by all Europe. These

May. were Margaret of Auffria, dowager of Savoy,

the Emnperor's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mo-
ther. They agreed on an interview at Cambray,
arnd being lodged in two adjoining houses, be-
tween wkich a communication was opened, met
together without ceremony or observation, and
held daily conferences, to which no person what-
ever was admitted. As both were profoundly
skilled in business , thoroughly acquainted with
the secrets of their refpedive courts, and pof-
sessed with perfedt confidence in each other,
they soon made great progress towards a final
accommodation; and the ambassadors of all the
confederates waited in anxious suspense to know
their fate, the determination of which vwas en-
tirely in their hands ".

separate BUT whatever diligence they used to haftei
treaty be-forward a general peace, the Pope had the ad-
tween tle dress and industry to get the start of his allies,
Pope and
Charles. by concluding at Barcelona a particular treaty

for himself. The Emperor, impatient to visit

June ao. Italy in his way to Germany; and desirous of

" P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x. c. 3. p. I 33. eMm. de

Bellay, p. I22.

re-establishing tranquillity in the one country,
before he attempted to compose the disorders
which ,abounded in the other, found it necessary
to secure ' at least one alliance among the Italian
states, on which he might depend. That with
Clement, who courted it with unwearied impor-
tunity, seemed more proper than any other.
Charles being extremely solicitous to make some
reparation for the insults which he had offered
to the sacred charaCter of the Pope, and to re-
deem part offences by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, notwithstanding all his misfortunes, terms
more favourable than he could have expeded as-
ter a continued series of success. Among other ar-
ticles, he engaged. to restore all the territories be-
longing to the ecclefiaflical state; to re-establish
the dominion of the Medici iri Florence; to give
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander
the head of that family; and to put it in the
Pope's power to decide concerning the fate of
Sforza, and the poffeffion of the Milanese. In
return for these ample conce1fpons, Clement gave
the Emperor the investiture of Naples without
the reserve of any tribute, but the present of a
white freed in acknowledgment of his sovereign-
ty; absolved all who had been concerned in
assaulting and plundering Rome ; and permit-
ted Charles and his brother Ferdinand to levy
the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues through-
out their dominions '.

3* Guic. 1. xix. 5 ~a BOOK V.

5 Z99

BOOK V. THE account of this :tranfa6ion' quickened

SS-29. the negociations at Cambray, and: brought Mar-
Augult F. garet and Louise to, an immediate agreement.
reace of -he treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that,
Cambray
between, which they concluded ; the latter being intended
Charles an to mitigate the -rigour of the former. The
Franis. chief articles were, that the Emperor should

not , for the present, demand the restitution of
Burgundy, reserving, however , in full force, his
rights and pretensions to that dutchy; That
Francis should pay two millions of crowns as
the ran om of his' sons, and, before they were
set at liberty, should refftore such towns as he
still held- in the IVlanef'e; that he should resign
the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois; That
he should renounce all his pretensions to Naples,
MVilan, Genoa, and every other place beyond
the Alps; that he should immediately confum-
mate the marriage concluded between him and
the Emperor's sifter Eleanora ".

Advantage- THUS Francis, chieflry from his impatience to
ous for the procure liberty to his sons, tlacrificed every thing
Emperor. which had at first prompted him to take arms.,

or which had induced him, by continuing ho{
tilities, during nine successive campaigns, -to
protrat the war to a length hardly known in
Europe before the establishment of standing

" P. Heuter. Rer. Aufftr. lib. x c. 3. p. 4 34. Sand0,

Hist. del. Emper. Carl. V. ii. 28.

armies,

armies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes, BOOK V,
became uniiverfal. The Emperor, by this treaty, s 29.
was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy ;
he delivered his territories in the Netherlands
from an ignominious badge of fubjedion ; and
after having baffled his rival in the field , he
prescribed to him the conditions of peace. The
different conduct and spirit with which -the two
Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
naturally to such an issue of it. Charles, in-
clined by temper, as well as obliged by his
situation, concerted all his schemes with caution,
pursued them with perseverance, and observing
circumstances and events with attention', let
none escape, that could be improved to advanl
tage. . Francis, more enterprizing than steady,
undertook great designs with warmth , but exe-
cuted them with remissness; and diverted by his
pleasures , or deceived by his favourites , he
often loft. the most promising opportunities of
success. Nor had the characer of the two rivals *
themselves greater influerice on the operations
of the war, than the opposite qualities of the
generals whom they employed.' Among the
Imperialists , valour tempered with prudence;
fertility - of invention aided by experience ; dif-
cernment to penetratei the designs of their

enemies,, a provident sagacity in conduCting their

own measures, in a word all the talents which
form great commanders .and ensure vicory, were

VOL. 11I. D

BOOK V.
,129. conspicuous. Among the French, these qualii

ties were either wanting, or the very reverse of
them abounded; nor could they boast of one
man (unless we except Lautrec, who was always
.unfortunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara,
Leyva, Guafto, the Prince of Orange, and other
leaders whom Charles had to set in opposition to
them. Bourbon, iMorone, Doria, who by their
abilities and conduct might have been capable
of balancing the superiority which the Imperial-
ifts had aqquired , were loft through the care-
leffnefs of the King, and the malice or injustice
of his -counsellors; and the most fatal blows
given to France during the prolgrefs of the war,
proceeded. from the despair ahd resentment of
these three persons, who were forced to aban-
don her service.

Dl shnour-. THE hard conditions to which Francis was
able to obliged to submit were not the most affliCing
Franci%., circumstance to him in the treaty of Cambray.

He loft his reputation and tfe confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into th details necelfary for
adjufting' their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them must have been ptrchafedc
by farther concessions on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; and without the least pro-
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians , the
kloreti.nes, the Duke of Ferrara, together with

such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his Boot V.
army, to the mercy of the Emperor.. They 1929.
exclaimed loudly against this base and perfidious
adion, of which Francis .himself was so much
ashamed , that in order to avoid the pain of
hearing from their ambassadors the reproaches
which he justly merited, it was some time before
he would consent to allow them an audience.
Charles ; on the other hand, was attentive to the
interest of every person who had adhered to him;
the rights of some of his Flemish fubjeats, who
had estates or pretensions in France, were fe-
cured ; one article was inserted , obliging Fran-
cis to restore the blood and memory of the
Constable Bourbon; and to grant his heirs the
poffeflion of his lands- which had been forfeited;
another, by which indemnification was stipulated
for those French gentlemen vwho had accom-
panied Bourbon in his exile '. This condud,
laudable, in itself, and placed in the most ftrik-
ing light by a comparison with that of Francis,
gained Charles as much esteem as the success
of his arms had acquired him glory,

.FRANCIS did not" treat the King of England IIen'y a-
'with the fame negle6 as his other allies. He

i ietes in

communicated to him all the steps of his nego-
ciation at Cambray, and luckily found that

s" Guic. 1. xix. p. 52. P. Heuter, Rer. Auitr. lib. x.

c. 4. P* 3- /5

D

"

BooK V. MIVonarch in a situation which left him no choice,
1529. but to approve implicitly of his measures, and
His [cheme to concur with them. Henry had been solicit-
of teing di-.
vorced from ing the Pope for some time, in order 'to obtain
his Queen. a divorce from Catharine of Aragon his Queen.

Several motives combined in prompting the
King to urge his suit. As he was powerfully
influenced at some seasons by religious confider-
ations, he entertained many scruples concern-
ing the legitimacy of his marriage with his bro-
threr's widow ; his affections had long been
estranged from the Queen, who was older than
Shimfeif and had loft all the charms which the
poffeffed in the earlier part of her life; he was
passionately desirous of having male issue ; Wol-
fey artfully fortified his scruples , and encouraged
his hopes , that he might widen the breach be-

. tween him and the Emperor, Catharine's ne-

phew; and, what was more forcible perhaps in
its operation than all these united, the King had
conceived a violent love for the celebrated Anne
Boleyn, a young lady of great beauty, and of

* greater accomplishments, whom, as he found it

impossible to gain her on other terms, he de-
termined to Taife to the throne. The papal
authority had often been interposed to grant
divorces for reasons less specious than those
'which Henry produced. When the matter was
first proposed to Clement, during his imprison-
meut in the castle of St. Angelo, as his hopes

of recovering liberty depended entirely on ,the BOOI V.
King of Englan d, and his ally of France, he 1 29.
expressed the warmest inclination to gratify him.
But no sooner was he set free ,,ithan he discovered
other sentiments. Charles , who:& espoused the
proteaion of his aunt with zeal inflamed by
refentment,' alarmed the Pope on the one hand
with threats., which made' a deep impression on
his timid mind; and allured him on |the other
with those promises in favour of his family,
which he afterwards accomplished. Upon the
profped of these , Clement not only forgot all
his obligations to Henry, but ventured to en-
danger the interest of the Romifth religion in
England, and to run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever from the obedience of the
papal fee. After amusing Henry during two
years, with all the subtleties and chicane which
the court of Rome can so dexterously employ
to protract or defeat any cause; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and deceitful
policy , .the intricacies of which the Engli.i
historians, to whom it properly belongs , have
found it no easy matter to trace and unravel;
he, at last, recalled the powers of the delegates
whom he had appointed to judge in the point-,
avocated the cause to Rome , leaving the King
no other hope of obtaining a divorce but from
the pe-rsonal decision of the Pope himself. As
Clement was now in ftrid alliance with the Em-

D 3

BooR V.

Z;290 peror, who had purchased his friendship by such

exorbitant conceffibns,:Henry despaired of pro,
curing any fentence..from the former -, but what
was didcated by The latter. His ,honour , how-
ever i and passions concurred in preventing him
from relinquihing :his scheme of a- divorce,
which he determined to accomplish by other
means, and at any rate ; and the continuance of
Francis's- friendship being necessary to coun-
terbalance the Emperor's pow~er , he, in order
to secure that, not only offered no remonfirances
against the total negl.ec of their allies, in the
treaty of Cambray, but made Francis the pre-
sent of a large fum, as a brotherly contribution
towards the payment of the ransom for his fons'1.

.An. 3. . EVIANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy
The Empe. wityh a numerous train of the Spanish nobility,
.taryi and a considerable body of troops. He left the

government of Spain during his absence to the
limprefs Isabella. By his long. residence in that
country, he had acquired fach thorough know-
ledge of the charader of the people, that he
could perfedly accommodate the maxims of his
government to their genius. He could even
assume , upon some occasions, such popular
manners, as gained wonderfully upon the Spa-
piards. A striking instance of his disposition
to gratify them had occurred a few days before

' Herbert. AMe, de Bellay, p. Iz2,

tle embarked for Italy : He was to make his
publick entry into the city of Barcelona ; and
*some doubts having arisen among the inhabit-
ants, whether they should receive him as Em-
peror , or as Count of Barcelona; Charles in-
ftantly decided in favour of the latter , declaring
that he was more proud of that ancient title ,
than of his Imperial crown. Soothed with this
flattering expression of his regard , the citizens
welcomed him with acclamations of joy, and
the ffates of the province swore allegiance to his
son Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona.
A similar oath had been taken in all the king-
*doms of Spain , with equal fatisfadion ~.

THE Emperor. appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors
from all the princes and states of that country
attended his court, waiting to receive his decision
with regard to their fate. At Genoa, -where he
first landed, he was received with the acclama-
tions due to the protector of their liberties.
Having honoured Doria with many marks of
diftinaion, and bestowed on the republick several
new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the
place fixed upon for his interview with the
Pope. - He affeaed to unite in his publick entry
into. that city 'the state and majefny that suited
an Emperor , with the humility, becoming an

" Sandov. ri. p. o0.-Ferrer. ix. ix 6.

D4 BoOK V,

N29.

Nov. 4

Bop1x V. obedient son of the church; and while at the
a SP. head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers , able

to give law to all Italy, he kneeled down to kiss
the feet of that very Pope .whom he,.had so
lately detained a prisoner. The Italians, after
fuffering so much from the ferocity: and licen-
tioufnefs of his armies , and after having been
long accustomed .to form in their imagination a
picture of Charles which bore some resemblance
to that oV the barbarous monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly afflicted their
country with like calamities, were furprized to
fee a prince of a graceful appearance , affable
and courteous in his deportment , of regular
manners , and of exemplary attention to all the
offices of religion "", They were still more afto"
nifhed when he fettled all the concerns of the
princes and states which now depended on him,
with a degree of moderation and equity much
beyond what they had expeced.

-His mode- CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain,

r otimoaes far froni intending to give any such extraordi-
of it. < nary proof of his felf-denial, seems to have been

resolved to avail himself to the utmost of the
fupernority which he had acquired in Italy. But
various circumstances concurred in pointing out
t-he neceflity of pursuing a very different \course.
The progress of the Turkish Sultan, who after

" Sandov. I-ift. del Emp. Carl. V. ii. 5 Q. 53, &c.

over - turning 'Hungary , had penetrated into BOOK V.
Austria, and laid siege to Vienna with an army 1s29.
of an hundred and fifty thousand men, loudly sept. 13.
calling on him to colled his whole force to op-
pose that torrent; and though the valour of the
Germans ,. the prucfent conduc of Ferdinand,
together with the treachery of the Vizier, soon oa. i.
obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize with
infamy and loss , the religious disorders ftill'
growing in Germany made the Emperor's- pre-
fence highly necessary there 3": The Florentines,
instead of giving their consent to the re-eftablilh-
ment of the IV edici, which by the treaty of
Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to
procure, were preparing to defend their liberty
by force of arms; the vast preparations for his
journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and on this, as well as many other occasions,
the multiplicity of his affairs, together with the
narrowness of his revenues, obliged him 'to con-
tract his vast schemes of ambition, and to forego
present and certain advantages, that he might
guard against more remote but unavoidable
dangers. Charles., from all these considerations,
finding it necessary to. assume an air of modera-
tion, aded his part with a good grace. He
admitted Sforza into his presence, and' not only
gave him a full pardon of all past offences , but

"° Sleidan. I x. Guic. L xx. 5 0.

BOO.K- V. granted him the investiture of the dutchy, toge.

T529* ther with his niece the King of Denmark's

- daughter in marriage. He allowed the Duke of

Ferrara .to keep poffeffion of all his dominions,
adjuffing the points in dispute between him and
the Pope with an impartialiy, not very agreeable
-.to the latter. He came to a final accommodation
with the Venetians upon, the reasonable condi-
tion of their restoring whatever they had usurped
during the late war, either in the Neapolitan or
papal territories. In return for so many con-
cefflions he exaded considerable sums from each
of the powers with .whom he treated, .which
,they paid without reludance, and which afforded
him the means of proceeding on his journey
towards Germany with a magnificence suitable
'to his dignity ",

r io. THESE treaties., which restored .tranq.uillity to
efenta- Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which
authority ofhad chiefly affeated that country, were published
the Medici at Bologna with great solemnity on the first
in lorence. day of the year one thousand five hundred and

thirty, amidst the universal acclamations of the
people, applauding the Emperor, to whose mo-
deration and generosity they ascribed the blef-
sings of peace,which they had so long.defired.
The ,Florentines alone did not partake of this
general joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty

" Sandov. ii<, 5 . &c..

niore' ludable than prudent, they determined IBooar Vi
to oppose the restoration. of the Medici. The I o0.
Imperial army had already entered their territ-o-
ries , and formed the siege of their capital. But
though deserted by all their allies , and left
without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obstinate va-
lour worthy of better success, and even when
they surrendered, they obtained a capitulation
which gave them hopes of securing. some remains
of their liberty. But the Emperor, from his desire
to gratify the Pope, frufftrated all their expecta-
tions, and abolifling their ancient form of
government, raised Alexander di IVIedici to the
fame absolute dominion over that slate which
his family have retained to the present times.
Philibert de Chalons Prince of Orange, the Im-
perial general, was killed during this siege. His
estate and titles descended to his fifier Claude de
Chalons, who was married to Ren6 Count of
Nassau, and she transmitted to her posterity of the
house of Nassau the title of Princes of Orange,
which they have rendered so illustrious '.

* AFTER the publication of the peace at Bo-state oaf-

logna, and the ceremony of his coronation asfairs, civil

and religi-

King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, ous, inGer-
which the Pope performed with the accuftomed"many..

5" Guic. 1. xx. p. 34r, &c. P. Heuter. Rer, Auffr. lib.

ii. c. 4. p. 236.

BooK V. formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italy ";
x1 3o. and he began to' prepare for his journey to

web. 22. Germany. His presence became every day more
and 24. necessary in that country, and was solicited with

equal importunity by the catholics and by the
favourers of the new do&rines. During that
long interval .of tranquillity which the absence
of the Emperor, the contests between him and
the Pope, and his attention to the war with
France, afforded them, the latter had "gained
much ground. MOst of the -princes who had
embra'ced Luther's opinions, had not only efta.
blifhed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romilh church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their condud. Almost
one half of the Germanick body had revolted
from the papal fee , and its dominion, even in
that part which had not hitherto shaken off the
yoke, was considerably weakened by the examq
ple of the neighbouring fiates, or by the secret
progress of those -dodrines which had undermined
it among them. Whatever fatisfadion the Em-
peror, while he was at open enmity with the fee
of Rome, might have felt in those events that
tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope, he
could not telp perceiving now, that the religious
divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove

• H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Coronatione Car. V.

ap. Scard. ii. 266.6.

extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority. BOOK V.
The weakness of former Emperors had fuffered 530o.
the great vassals of the Empire to make such
faccefsful encroachments upon their power and
prerogative, that during the whole course of a
war, which had often required the exertion of
his utmost strength, Charles hardly drew any
effetual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obsolete pretensions were
almost the only advantages which he had gained
by swaying the Imperial sceptre. He now became
fully sensible that if he did not recover in some
degree the prerogatives which his prededeffors
had loft;, and acquire the authority, as w1ll as
possess the name, of head of the Empir , his
high dignity would contribute more to obftruA
than to promote his ambitious' schemes. Nothing,
he saw, was more essential towards attaining
this, than to suppress opinions which. might form
new bonds of confederacy .among the princes of
the Empire, and ufiite them by ties stronger and
"more sacred than any political connedion. No-
thing seemed to lead more certainly to the accom-
plifhment of his designs, than to employ zeal
for the established religion, of which he was the
natural protedor, as the infirument of extending
his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a profped no sooner opened Proceedings
of coming to an accommodation with the Pope, °fthe i

lEooK V. than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of
xr o. the Empire vias held at-Spires, in order to take
at Spires, into confiderat'ibn the, fate of religion. The
is29, 'decree of the diet alrembled there in the year

one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft, of
Christendom. The greatest delicacy of address,
however, was requisite in proceeding to any
decision more rigorous. The minds of men kept
in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on during twelve years without intermijfiion of
debates or abatement of zeal, were now inflamed
to an high degree. They were accustomed to
innovations, and saw the boldest of them fuc.
cefsful. Having not \only abolished old rites,
but substituted newi forms in their place , they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
system which they had embraced, as by aversion
to that which they had abandoned. Luther
Limfelf, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to be-
come remiss upon success, continued the 'attack
with as much vigour as he had begun it. His
disciples, of whom many equalled him in zeal,
and some furpafted him in learning, were no less
capable than their master to conduft the con-
troverfy in the propereft manner. Many of the
laity,': some even of the princes, trained up
a:midft-thefe incessant difputations, and i'n the

I,*

habit of listening to the arguments of the con- Boon V.
tending parties who alternately appealed to them 1530o
as judges, came to be profoundly Ikilled in all
the questions which were agitated, and, upon
occasion, could shew themselves not inexpert iin
any of the arts with which these theological en-
counters were managed. It was obvious from
all these circumstances, that any violent decision
of the diet must have immediately precipitated
matters into confusion, and have kindled in
Germany the flames of a religious war. All,
therefore , that the Archduke , and the other
commissioners appointed by the Emperor,> de-
manded of the diet, was, to enjoin those states
of the Empire which had hitherto obeyed the
decree- issued against Luther at Worms- in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-
four, to persevere in the observation of it, and
to prohibit the other states from attempting any
farther innovation in religion, particularly from
abolishing the Mass, before the meeting of a
general council. After much dispute, a decree
to that effeat was approved of by a majority of
voices 3.

THE Eledor of Saxony, the Marquis of Bran-The foUow.
denburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Dukes tpoit,
of Lunenburgh, the Prince of An.halt, together againf
,with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or freethp'"

3" Sleid. Iift. 17.

BooK V. cities ", entered a solemn protest against this

1530. decree, as unjufit and impious. On that account

they were distinguished by the name of PRO.
TESTANTS 3", an appellation which hath since
become better known, and more honourable, by
its being applied indiscriminately to all the feds
of whatever denomination which have revolted
from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this
declaratipn of their dissent from the decree of

- the diet, the Protestants sent ambassadors into

Italy to lay their grievances before the Emperor,
from whom they met with the most difcouiraging

Delibera reception. Charles was at that time in close
tions of the union with the Pope, and solicitous to attach
Pope and him inviolably to his interest. During their long
Emperor. residence at Bologna, they held many confulta-

tions concerning the most effedual means of
extirpating the herefies which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and timid
imind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror even beyond what Popes, the con-
ftant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to dissuade the Em-
peror -from consenting to that measure. He
represented general councils as facdious, ungo-

.. The fourteen cities- were Strasburgh, Nurembergh;

Ulm, Constance, Reutlingen, Windfheim, Meinengen,
Lindaw,. Kempten, Hailbron, Ifna, Weiffemburgh, Nord-

- lingen, and St. -Gal.

.

36 Sleid. Hist. x9. F. Paul, Hist. p. 45, Seckend. ii. 127.

vernable,

vernable , presumptuous, formidable to civil BooK V.
authority, and too flow in their operations to Xs 3,o
remedy disorders which required an immediate
cure. Experience, he said, had now taught both
the Emperor and himself, that forbearance and
leni'ty exasperated the spirit of innovation, which'
they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous me·
thods which such a desperate cafe required; Leo's
sentence of excommunication, together with the
decree of the diet at Worms should be carried into
execution, and it was incumbent on the Emperor
to employ his whole power, in order to overawe
those, on whom the reverence due either to eccle-
fiaftical or civil authority had no longer any in-
fluence. Charles, whose views were very dif-
ferent from the Pope's, and who became daily
more sensible how obstinate and deep - rooted the
evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, and considered the con-
vocation of a council as no improper expedient
for that purpose; but promised, if gentler arts
fa'iled of success, that then he would exert him-
self with vigour to reduce those flubborn enes-
nies of the Catholic faith "7.

SUCh were the feritirments with which the Ei- E~iperor

peror set out for Germany having already ap6prreft atf

the Diet of

' F. Paul, 1lvii. Seck. 1. ii. I42. Hilt. de la Confeff. d'AuggC

bourgh par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 572, p. 6.

VoL. III E

BOOK V. pointed a diet, of the Empire to be held at Augf.

530. burgh. .In his journey towards that city, he had

Augsurgh. many opportunities of observing the disposition
IMarch z2,

3o.. ' of the .Germans with regard to the points in

controversy, and found their minds every where
so_ much. irritated and inflamed, as convinced
him that nothing tending to severity or rigour
ought to be attempted, until all other measures
proved ineffeAual. He made his publick entry
into Augfburgh with extraordinary pomp; and

$une us. found there fiuch a full assembly of the members

of the diet as was suitable both to the import-
ance of the affairs which were to come under
their consideration, and to the honour of an
Emperor, who, after a long absence, returned
to them crowned with reputation and success.
His presence seems to have communicated to all
parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire
of peace. The Eledor of Saxony would not
permit Luther to accompany him to the diet,
left he should offend the Emperor by bringing
into his presence a perfoan excommunicated by
the Pope, and the author of all those dissensions
which it now appeared so difficult to compose.
At the Emperor's desire all the Protestant
princes forbad the divines who accompanied
them, to preach in publick during their residence
at Augfburgh. For the fame reason they em-
ploye'd MelanChon, the man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the most pacifick and gentle

spirit among the Reformers, to draw up a con- BooK V.
feflion of their faith expressed in terms as little

i s30.

offenfive to the Roman Catholics, as a regard The col-
for truth would permit. Melandhon , who fel- feffin of

' Augsburght.

domra fuffered the rancour of controversy to en-
venom his style, even in writings purely pole-
mical, executed a talk so agreeable to his natu-
ral disposition with great moderation and success.
The Creed which he composed, known by the
name of the Confeffion of Augtburgh, from the
place where it was presented, was read publickly
in the diet; some Popish divines' were appointed
to. examine it; they brought in their animad-
versions; a dispute ensued between them and
Melanathon, seconded by some of his brethren;
but though Melanthon softened some articles,
made concessions wvith regard to others, and put
the least exceptionable,*fenfe upon all; though
the Emperor himself laboured with great earnest-
ness to .reconcile the contending parties ; so
many ,marks of diftin&ion were now established,
and such insuperable barriers placed between the
two churches, that all hopes of bringing about
a coalition seemed utterly desperate ".

FROM the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been so unfuccefsful,, ,Charles turned

"3 Seckend. lib. ii.

i
1 9, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales Evan-

gelici ap. Herm. Van der Hard. Hilt. Liter. Reform. LipC
i7i7. fol. p. 159.

IBOOR . M

3:'53 o,

Severe de- EViERY scheme in order to gain or disunite-
cree againf the Protestant party proving 'abortive, nothing
the Protein.
ants. nOW remained for the Emperor but to take some

vigorous measures towards. asserting the doc-
trines and authority of the established church.
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find
them, how defir'ous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor , more disposed
than the former to renounce their opinions. At
that tirte, zeal for religion took poffeffion of the
minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely be
conceived by those wholive in an age when the
pafli'ons, excited by the first manifeftatioin of
truth, and the first recovery of liberty, ha've in a
great measure ceased to operate. This zeal 'was
then of such itrength as to overcome attach-
rient to their political interest, which is com-
mnonly the predominant inotive among princes.
The FleAbr of Sax&ny, the Landgrave of Hesse,
and other chiefs. of the. Protestants, though soli-
cited separately by the Emperor, and allured by
the promise or profped of- those advantages
which it was known they Were most solicitous to
attainl, refused, with a fortitude highly wdrthy
of imitation , to abandon what they deeried the
cause of God', for the fake of any earthly ac-
quifition 3.

~a" SZeici, ri~z, Scbltet,· -Annal; ISB·

These, Campeggio, the papal nuncio, had al- BooK V.
ways recommended as the only proper and es- H g o.
feaual course. of dealing with such obRfinate No. 19.
hereticks, In compliance with his opinions and
remonftrances, the diet issued a decree, con-
demning most of the peculiar tenets held by the
Proteffants; forbidding any person to protea or
tolerate such as taught them; enjoining a
firit observance of the established rites; and
prohibiting any. further innovation under severe
penalties, All orders of men were required to
assist with their persons and fortunes in carrying
this decree into execution; and such as refused
to obey it, were declared incapable of a&ing as
judges, or of appearing as parties in the Imperial
chamber, the supreme court of judicature in the
Empire. To all which was fubjoined a promise,
that an application ihould be made to the Pope,
requiring him to call a general council within fixl
months, in order to terminate all controversies
by its sovereign decisions

.

THE severity of this decree, which they con- They enter

fidered as a prelude to the moit violent perfe-into aleague
cution, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced kalad.
them that the Emperor was resolved on their
deftrution. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the

'" Sleid. 139.

IBOOK V. feeble spirit of Melan&hon; and as if the cause

S30o, had already been desperate, he gave up himself

to melancholy and lamentation. But Luther,
who during the meeting- of the diet had -endea,
voured to confirm and animate his party by
several treatises which he addressed to them, was
not disconcerted or dismayed at the, profped' of
this new 'danger. He comforted Melandhon
and his other defponding disciples, and exhorted
the Princes not to abandon those truths which
they had lately asserted with such laudable bold-
ness "'. His exhortations made the deeper im-
pretiion upon them, as they were greatly alarmed
at that time 'by the account of a combination
among the Popish princes of the Empire for the
maintenance of the established religion, to which
Charles himself had acceded 4". This convinced
them that it was necessary to stand on their
guard, and that their own safety , as well as the
success of their cause . depended on union. Filled
with this dread of the adverse party, and with
these sentiments concerning the conduA proper
for themselves , they assembled at Smalkalde.

Decemn. .22 There they concluded a league of mutual de-

fence against all aggressors 4S, by which they
formed the Protestant states of the Empire into
one regular body, and beginning already to con-

Seck ii. ISo. Sleid. 140. 4* Seek. ii. zoo. iii. xx.

3 Sleid. Hist. 14z.

fider themselv.es as such, they resolved to apply BooK V.
to the Kings of France and England, and to

x 30.

implore them to patronize and assist their new
confederacy.

AN affair not conneded with religion furnished The Empe-

them with a pretence for courting the aid ofrOorh propoe

. to have his

foreign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views brother
enlarged in proportion to the increase of his eleped King
power and grandeur, had formed a scheme ofomans.
continuing the Imperial crown in h-is family,
by procuring his brother Ferdinand to be eleAed
King- of the Romans. The present junaure
was favourable -for the execution of that design;
The Emperor's arms had been every, where vic-
torious; he had given law to all Europe at the
late peace; no rival now remained in a condition
to balance or 'to controul him; and the Elec-
tors, dazzled with the fpiendour of his success, or
overawed by the greatness of his power, durst
scarcely dispute the will of a prince, whose soli-
citations carried with them the authority of com-
mands. Nor did he want plausible reasons to
enforce the measure. The affairs of his other
kingdoms, he said, obliged "him to be' often
absent from Germany ; the growing disorders
occasioned by the controversies about religion,
as well as the formidable neighbourhood of the
Turks, who continually threatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the

--E4

BOOK V, Empire, required the constant presence of a

;0o, prince end6wed with prudence capable of com-

posing the former, and with power as well as
valour fufficient to repel the latter. His bro.
ther Ferdinand poffeffed these qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany,
he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their
constitution and manners; having been present
almost from the first rife of their religious dif.
fenfions, he knew what remedies were most pro-
per, what they could bear, and how to apply
them; as his own dominions lay on the Turkish
frontier, he was the natural defender of Germany
against the invasions of the infidels, being
prompted by interest no less than he would be
bound in duty to oppose them,

The Protef>t THESE arguments made little impression on
tntaverf the Protestants. Experience taught them , that

nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions ,' than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence. of
Charles, and the slackness of the reins of go-
vernment which these occasioned; after deriving
such advantages from a state of anarchy, they
were extremely unwilling to give themselves a
new and a fixed master. They perceived clearly
the extent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed
at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary in
his family , and would of course establish in the

Empire an absolute dominion, to which eledive BooK V.
princes could not have aspired with equal faci- a 3o.
lity. They determined therefore to oppose Ser-
dinand's ele&ion with the utmost vigbur, and to
route their countrymen, by their example and
exhortations, to withfland this encroachment on
their liberties. The Eletor of Saxony, accord-
ingly, not only refused to be present at the elec- S r.
toral college, which the Emperor summoned to January <.
meet at Cologne, but inftruded his eldest son to
appear there, and to protest against the eledion
as informal, illegal, contrary to the articles of
the golden bull, and subversive of the liberties
of the Empire. But the other Ele&ors, whom He is chotre
Charles had been at great pains to gain, without
regarding either his absence or protest, chose
Ferdinand King of the Romans; who a few days
after was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle 4+,

WHEN the Protestants, who were assembled a Negocia-

second time at Smalkalde, received an accounttions of ths
of this tranfadion, and heard, at the fame time, with France.
that prosecutions were commenced, in the Im-
perial chamber, againif some of their number,
on account of their religious principles, they
thought it neceifary, not only to renew their
former confederacy, but immediately to dispatch
their ambassadors into France and England.

4* Sleid. "I42. Seek, iii. i. P. Htiiter. Rer. Auftr. liB,

x, c. 6. p, 4o .

: P

·; ' ; ·

'

, ^ '

'

.ooQt V.

Feb. 9. Francis had observed, with, all the jealousy of

a rival, the reputation which the Emperor had
acquired by his seeming disinterestedness and
mode-ration, in fettling the affairs .of Italy; and
beheld with great concern the, fuccefsful step
which lBe had taken towards perpetuating and
extending his authority in Germany by the elec.
tion of a King of the Romans. Nothing, how.
ever, would have been more impolitick thean to
precipitate his kingdom into a new waytwhen ex.
haufted by extraord~inary efforts, and d2iscouraged
'by ill success , before, it had got time to recrtit
its strength, or to. forget pait misfortumnes. As
no provocation had been given, and hardly a
pretext had been afforded him, he.could not
violate atreaty of peace which he himself had to
lately solicited, without forfeiting thq efleem of
all Europe, and being' detested as a prince void
of probity and honour. He observed, with
great joy, powerful

. fations beginning to form

in the Empire; hie lifterred with the utmost eager-
ness to the comiplaints of the Protefiant princes;
and vwithout feetring to countenance their reli-
gious opinions,, determined ^secretly to cherish
those sparks of political discord which might be
afterwards kindled into a flame. For this pur-
pose., he, sent William de Belay., one of the
ablest negicbiators hn France, into Germany,
who visiting the courts of- the malecontent
.princes., and heightening, their ill-hmniour by, va-

V *

rious arts, concluded an alliance between -them BooKt V.
and his master "', which though concealed at that. x 531,
time, and produdive of no immediate effets,
laid the foundation of an union fatal onl mahy
occasions to Charles's ambitious projeds.; and
fhewed the discontented princes of Germany,
where, for the future , they might find a pro-
tedtor no less able than willing to undertake
their defence against the encroachments of the
Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against with Eng.
Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope lana.
had long retarded, and now openly opposed his
divorce., was no less disposed than Francis to
strengthen a league which might be rendered so
forinidable. to the Emperor. JBut his favourite
projec of the divoice led him into such a laby-
rinth of schemes and negocia-~ons,, and he was,
at the fame time, so intenit :'ni bolilhing the
papal jurifdidion in England , th at he had no
leisure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to
reft satisfied with giving general promises, toge-
ther with a small supply in money to the confe-,
derates of Smalkalde 4'"

MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced charles

courts the

Charles that this was not a jundture~when the proteftnts

" Bellay, I29, a. I3o, b. Sec. iii. 14.
* Herbert, 5 2. I ~54.

BooK V. extirpation of berefy was to be attempted by

rSt 3I violence and rigour; that, in compliance with

the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
Withe imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into
one united and vigorous body, than to divide
hrid enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants,
already considerable as well by their numbers
as by their zeal, had acquired additional weiglih
and importance by their joining in that conife
deracy into which the rash steps taken at Augf.
burgh had forced them. Having now discovered
their own strength, they despised the decisions
of the Imperial chamber; and being secure of
foreign protetion, were ready to set the head of
the Empire at defiance. At the fame time the
peace with France was precarious, the friendship
of an irresolute and interested pontiff was not
to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to re-
pair the infamy and loss which his arms had sus-
tained in the former campaign, was preparing to
enter Austria with more numerous forces. On all
these accounts, especially the last, a speedy accom-
mnodation with the malecontent princes, became
necessary, not only for the accomplishment of
his future schemes, but for ascertaining his prefeng
safety. Negociations were, accordingly, carried
on by his direction with the Eledtor of Saxoiy
and his associates; after many delays occasioned
by their jealousy of the Emperor, and of each

ther, after innumerable difficulties arising from BooK V.
he inflexible nature of religious tenets, which

x ~2.

annot admit of being altered, modified, dr re Grants
inquifhed in the fame manner as points of poli-them'hfa"

. vourable

ical interest, terms of pacification were agreed terms.
ipon at Nuremberg, and ratified solemnly in July 23.
he Diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty it was fti-Auguf 3.
pulated, That universal peace be established in
Germany, until the meeting of a general council,
the convocation of which within fix months the
Emperor shall endeavour to procure; That no
person be molested on account of religion; That
a fltop be put to all processes begun by the Im-
perial chamber against Protestants, and the fen-
tences already passed to their detriment be de-
dared void. On their part, the Protestants
engaged to assist the Emperor with all their
forces in resisting the invasion of the Turks *.
Thus by their firmness in adhering to their prin-
ciples, by the unanimity with which they urged
all their claims, and by their dexterity in avail-
ing themselves of the Emperor's situation, the
Protestants obtained terms which amounted al-
most to a toleration of their religion; all the
concessions were made by Charles, none by
them; even the favourite point of their approv-
ing his brother's eledion was not mentioned;
and the Protestants of Germany, who had hi-

"7 Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87. 9.

BOOK V. therto been viewed only as a religious fee, came o

s 32. henceforth to be considered as a political body r

of no small confequenc9 4".

t

Campaign - THE intelligence which Charles received of
in Hungary. Solyman's having entered Hungary at the head {

of -three hundred thousand men, cut short the de.
liberations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin.
gent both of troops and money, which each
prince was to furnish towards the defence of the
Empire, having been already fettled. The Pro.
teftants, as a testimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary
zeal, and brought into the field forces which ex-
ceeded in number the quota imposed on them;
the Catholicks imitating their example, one of
the greatest and best appointed armies that had
ever been levied in Germany, assembled near
Vienna. Being joined by a body of Spanish and
Italian veterans under the marquis del Guafto;
by some heavy-armed cavalry from the Low
Countries; and by the troops which Ferdinand
had raised in Bohemia, Auffria, and his other
territories, it amounted in all to ninety thousand
disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, be-
sides a prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this
vast army, worthy the first prince in Chriffen-
dom, the Emperor took the command in per-,
son; and mankind waited in suspense the issue

4' Sleid. I49, &c. Seek. iii, xg.

F: a decisive battle between the two greatest BooiK V.
Vdlonarchs in' the world. But each of them 153 .
Ireading the other's power and good fortune,
hey both conducded their operations with such
:xceffive caution, that a campaign, for which
uch immense preparations had been made, ended
tithout any memorable event. Solyman, find- September
ng it impossible to gain ground upon an enemy
dways attentive and on his guard , marched
jack to Constantinople towards the end of au-
tumn 4". It is remarkable, that in such a martial
age, when every geritleman was a soldier, and
every prince a general,. this was the firlt time
that Charles, who had already carried on such
extensive wars, and gained so many vij5ories,
appeared at the head of his troops. In this first
essay of his arms, to have opposed such a leader
as Solyman, was no small honour; to have
obliged him to retreat, merited very confider-
able praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Aug- i.
Eledor of Saxony died, and was succeeded by his
son John Frederick. The Reformation rather *
gained than loft by that event; the new Eledtor,
no less attached than his predecessors to the opi-
nions of Luther, occupied the station which they
had held at the head of the Protestant party,

4 Jovii. Hist. lib. xxx. p. Ioo, &c. Barre Hist. de 1'Em-

pire, i. 8. 3 47.

BooK V. and defended, with the boldness and: zeal of
1532. youth, that cause which they had fostered and

reared with the caution of old age.

The Empe. IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks,
ror's inter- Charles, impatient to revisit Spain , set out on
view with *
the Pope inhis way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
his way to desirous of an interview with the Pope, they
spaln. met a second time at Bologna, with the fame

external demonstrations of refpe and friendd.
ship, but with little of that confidence which
had subsisted between them during their late ne-
gociations there. Clement was much diffatisfied,
with the Emperor's proceedings at Augfburgh;
his concessions with regard to the speedy convo-
cation of a council, having more than cancelled
all the merit of the severe decree against the
dotrines of the Reformers. The toleration
granted to the Protestants at Ratisbon, and the.
more explicit promise concerning a council, with
which it was accompanied, had irritated him
still farther. Charles, however, partly from con-
viAion that the meeting of a council would be at-

Megocia- tended with salutary effeAts, and partly from his
tions cnt. desire to please the Germans, having solicited
cerning. a
general him by his ambassadors to call that assembly
council, without delay, and now urging the fame thing

in person, Clement was, greatly embarrassed what
reply he should make to a request, which it was
indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. 'He

endeavoured

ndeavoiured at first to divert Charles from the BOOK V.
ieafure, but finding him inflexible, he had re- x53,.
ourfe to artifices which he knew would delay,
F not entirely defeat, the calling of that affem-
jly. Under the plausible pretext of its being
irevioufly necessary to fettle, with all .parties
0oncerned, the place of the council's meeting;
:he manner of its proceedings; the right of the
)erfons who should be admitted to vote; and
:he authority of their decisions; he dispatched
i nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from-
the .Emperor, to the Eledtor of Saxony as head
of. the Protestants. With regard to each of
these articles, inextricable di.ficulties and con-
tests arose. The Protestants denianded a coun-
cil to be held in Germany ; the Pope insisted
that it ihould meet in Italy : They contended
that all points in dispute should be determined
by- the woids of holy fctipture alone; he con-
fidered not only. the decrees of the church, but
the opinions offathers and dodors as of equal
authority : They required a free council in which
the divines commissioned by different churches
ihould be allowed a voice; he aimed at model-
linig the council in such a manner as would ren-

-

der it entirely dependant on his pleasure. Above
all, the Protestants thought it unreasonable that
they should bind themselves to submit to the de-
crees of a council, before they knew on what
principles the.se decrees were to be founded, by

VoL. III. F

fBoor V. what persons they were to be pronounced, and

I 32. what forms of proceeding they would observe,

The Pope main tained it to be altogether unne-
ceffary to call a council, if those who demanded:
it did not previously declare their resolution to,
acquiesce in its decrees. In order to adjust such
a. variety of points, many expedients were: pro,
posed, and the negociations spun out to such a
length, as effetually answered Clement's pure
pose of putting off the meeting of'a council,-
without drawing on himself the whole infamy.o.f
obltrudling a measure which all Europe deemed
so essential to the good of the church '.

and for pre- TOGETHER with this negociation about call-
serving the ig a council, the Emperor carried on another,,.
tranquillity n g....
f Iai~r. Wvhich he had still more at heart, for securing

the peace eltablilhed in Italy. As Francis had
renounced his pretensions in that country with
great relhidance, Charles made no doubt but
that lie would lay hold on the first pretext as,
forded him, or embrace the first opportunity
which presented itself of recovering what he had
loft. It became,. necessary, on this account, to
take measures for ,assembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long
war., could not supply the sums requisite for
keeping such a body constantly on foot, he ate

1K . P~ui~ Hfill. 6 i. Sec ecid. iii. .7 3,

tempted to throw that burden on his allies, and BooK V.
to provide for the safety of his own domisions 1532.
at their expence, by proposing that the Italian
states should enter into a league of defence
against all invaders; that, on the firft' appear-
aihce of danger, an army should be raised and
maintained, .at-.the common charge; and that
Antonio de Leyva should be appointed the ge-
neraliffimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, though for a reason very different
from that which induced the Emperor to make
it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver xs?3.
*Italy from the German and Spanish veterans
which had so long -filled all the powers in that
country with terror , and frill kept them in sub-
jedion to the Imperial yoke. A league was Feb.4,
accordingly concluded; all the Italian states,
the Venetians excepted, acceded to it; the fum
which each of the contrading parties Thould
furnish towards maintaining the army was fixed;
the Emperor agreed to withdraw the troops
which gave so much umbrage to his allies, and
which he was unable any longer to support.
Having disbanded part of them, and removed
the reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on
board Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona'5,. Apri -.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for Dnef~ and

securing the peace of Germany, and maintain- negociations

* sx Guic. 1. xx. s~I- Ferreras, ix. 149.

F a

Tbot V. ing that fyftein which he had established in Italy;

is53 . the emperor became every day more and more

of the apprehensive that both *would be soon disturbed
aeir, *,eg by the intrigues or arms of the French King.
Emperor; Hfis:appjrehenfions ,were well foun:ded, as nothing

but the desperate situation of his: affairs could
have brought Francis to give his codnfent, to a
tr-eaty so difhoiourable and: disadvantageous as
that of Cambray: :He, at the very time of rati,
fyirg- it, had formed a resolution to observe it
noii longer than necessity compelled him, and took
a -solemn protest, though with the most profound
Sfecrecy, against several articles in the treaty, par-
ticudlaly that whereby he renounced all pretend
fions to the diut thiy:of IMilan, as unjust, injuri-
ous to his heirs, and invalid. One of the croWnv-
lawfyers, by hlis ~ommand,' entered ·a protest to
the fame purpose, and with the likefecrecy,
Xwhen theratificatidri of the treaty. was registered
in the parliameint of Paris. ". 'Francis seems to
have thought that, by employing an artifice un-
Worthy of a King, deftrudive -of publick faith,
and of the mutual dorfidence on which all tranf-
acions between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the most sacred
engagenlents. From the moment he concluded
the peace of Cambrhy, he wished and watched for
an opportunity of violating it with safety. He
endeavoured for that reason to strengthen his

' u)u Mon{ Corps Diploni. torn. iv. part . p. Q.

alliance with the King of England, whose Bod V.
friendship he cultivated with the greatest afli- xs33.,
duity. He put the military force of his own
kingdom on a better and more refpedtable foot-
ing than ever. He artfully fome'nted, the jea-
lousy and discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis laboured to break particularly

with the'

the ftrind confederacy which subsisted between pope.
Charles and Clement; and he had soon the
fatisfadion to observe appearances -of disgust
and' alienation arising in the- mind of that fufpi-
cious and interested ,Pontiff, which gave him
-iopes that their uniion would not be lasting.. As
the Emperor's decision in favour of the Duke of
Ferrara had greatly irritated the Pope, Francis
aggravated the injustice of that proceeding, and
flattered Clement that the papal fee would find in
him a more impartial and no less powerful pro-
tedor. As the importunity with which Charles
demanded a council was extremely offenfive to
the Pope, Francis artfully created obstacles to
prevent it, and attempted to divert the German
princes, his allies, from insisting so obstinately
on that point". As the Emperor had gained
such an ascendant over Clement by contributing.
to aggrandize his family, Francis endeavoured
to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, pro-
posing a marriage be.tween his fecoud- son, Henry

53 Bellay, 141, &c. Seck. iii. 48. F. Paul, 63..

' '

¥ 3

Boor V. Duke of Orleans, and Catharine, the daughter

i5 33. of the Pope's cousin Laurence di Medici. On

the first overtures of this match, the Emperor
could not -persuade himself that Francis really
intended to debase the royal blood of Fr'ance by
an alliance with Catharine. whose ancestors had
been so lately private citizens and merchants in
Florence, and believed that he meant only to
flatter or amuse the ambitious Pontiff. He
th6ught it necessary, however, to efface the im-
pression which such a dazzling offer, might have
made, by promising to break off the marriage
which had been agreed on between his own niece
the King of Denmark's daughter and the Duke
of IMilan, and to substitute Catharine in her
place. But the French ambassadors producing
unexpedtedly full powers to conclude the mar-
riage treaty with the Duke of Orleans, this ex-
pedient had -no effec. Clement was so highly
pleased with an honour which added such luifre
and dignity to the house of -Medici, that he of-
fered to grant Catharine the investiture of con-
fiderable territories in Italy by way of portion;
he seemed ready to support Francis in profecut-
ing his ancient claims in that country. and con-
fented to a personal interview with that Monarch ".

Interview CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent
between th: a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass

'' Guic. 1. xx. S I1. 553. Bellay, I38. '

but what would be of detriment to him; nor 3BOOKt V.
could he bear, after he had twice condefcended s 33.
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Cle- rope and
'ment should bestow such a mark of diftinaion
on his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea,
at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court
to Francis in the French dominions. But the
'Pope's eagerness to accomplish the match over-
came all scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy,
which muff have influenced him on any other
occasion. The interview, notwithstanding feve-o'o0ber.
ral artifices of the Emperor to prevent it, took
place at PMVarfeilles with extraordinary pomp,
and demonstrations of confidence on both tides;
and the marriage, which the ambition and abi-
lities of Catharine rendered in the sequel as fatal
to France, as it was then thought dishonourable,
was consummated. But whatever schemes may
have been secretly concerted by the Pope and
Francis in favour of the Duke of Orleans, to
whom his father proposed to make over all his
rights in Italy, so careful were they to avoid
giving any cause of offence to the Emperor, that
no-treaty was concluded between them S; and
even in

, the marriage-articles , Catharine re-

nounced all claims and pretensions in Italy, ex-
cept to the dutchy of Urbino".

' Guic. 1. xx. s

; .

P Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. io r.

F4

Booi. V. BUT at the very time when he was carrying
I 3 3. on .these negociations, .and forming this connec.
Pope's con- tion with' Francis, which gave so great umbrage
dWLtwith
regard to the to the Emperor, such was the. artifice and dupli.
ing of city of Clement's charader, that he fuffered the
England's
aior,,.d latter to dired all his proceedings with regard

to the King of England, and was no less atte.n
tive to gratify him in that particular, than if the
most cordial union had still subsisted between
them. Henry's suit for a divorce had now con-
tinued near fix years; during all which period
the Pope negociated, promised, retraded, and
concluded nothing. After bearing repeated de-
lays and disappointments, longer than could
have been expected from a prince of such a cho-

" lerick, and impetuous temper, his patience was

at last so much exhauPced, that he applied to
another tribunal for that decree which he had
folicited.in vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbishop
of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the
authority of Universities, Docors, and Rabbies,
who had been consulted with r.efpec to the-
point, annulled ' the King's marriage with Ca-
tharine ; her daughter was declared illegitimate ;
and Anne Boleyn acknowledged as Queen of
England. At the fame time Henry began not
only to neglec and to threaten the Pope whom
he had hitherto courted, but to make innova-
tions in the church, of which he had formerly
been such a zealous defender. Clement, who

had already seen so many provinces and king- BOOK V,
,doms revolt from the Holy See, became appre- 1533.
'henfive at last that England would imitate their
,example, and partly from his solicitude to pre-
vent that fatal blow, partly in compliance with
;the French King's folicitations, determined to
give Henry such fatisfadion as might still retain '
him within the bosom of the church. But the
violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Em-
peror, did not allow the Pope leisure for exe- ja 23.
cuting this prudent resolution, and hurried him,
with a precipitation fatal to the Roman See, to
issue a bull refcinding Cranmer's sentence, con-
firming Henry's marriage with Catharine, and
declaring him excommunicated, if within a
time specified, he did not abandon the wife he
had taken, and return to her whom he had de-
ferted. Enraged at this unexpeded decree,
Henry kept no longer any measures with the Papal a,-
court. of Rome; his fubjeds seconded his resent- thority abo.

' . lished in

ment and indignation; an ad of Parliament was England.
passed, abolishing the papal power and jurifdic-
tion in England; by another, the King was
declared supreme headr of the church, and all
the authority of which the Popes were deprived
was vested in him. That vast fabrick of eccle-
fiiafical dominion which had been raised with
such art, and whose foundations seemed so deep,,
being no longer supported by the veneration of
the people, vwas overturned in a moment. Henry

% BOOK V.
1 534. himself, with the caprice peculiar to his charad:

ter, continued to defend the doctrines of the
Romish church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurifdidion. He alternately persecuted the Pro.
teftants for rejeding the former, and the Catho,
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his fbuB
jeds being once permitted to enter into netv
paths, did not chufe to stop short at the precise
point prescribed by him. Having been encou.
raged by his example to break some of their set.
ters, they were so impatient to thake off what still
remained "l, that in the following reign, with the
general applause of the nation, a total fepara.
tion was made from the church of Rome in arti.
cles of doArine, as well as in matters of discipline
and jurifdition.

IDeath of A SHORT delay might have saved the See of
Cilment Rome from all the unhappy consequences of

Clement's rashness. Soon after his sentence
against Henry, he fell into a languifling diftem,
per, which gradually wasting his constitution,

Sept. 2_. put an end to his Pontificate, the most unfor.

tunate, both during its continuance, and by its
effecds, that the church had known for many

Eleaion orages.. The very day on which the Cardinals
a~.n . entered the conclave, they raised to the papal

throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred
college, and the eldest member of that body,

*7 Herbert. Burn. His. of Reform.

who assumed the name of Paul IIl. The ac-
count 6f his promotion was received with extra-
ordinary acclamations of joy by the people of
Rome, highly pleased, after an interval of more
than an hundred years, to fee the crown of St.
peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Persons more capable of judging, formed a fa-
vourable presage of his administration, from the
experience which he had acquired under four
Pontificates, as well as the charaaer of prudence
and moderation which he had uni-formly main-
tained in a station of great eminence, and during
an adive period that required both talents and
address ".

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continu-
ance of its peace to the death of Clement; for
although no traces remain in history of any
league concluded between him and Francis, it is
fearcely to be doubted but that he would have
seconded the operations of the French arms in
Italy, that .he might have gratified his ambition
by feeing one of his family poffeffed of the fu-
preme power in Florence, and another in Milan.
But upon -the eleaion of Paul IIl. who had hi-
therto adhered uniformly to the Imperial interest,
Francis found it necessary to suspend his opera-
tions for some time, and to put off the com-

G Guic. 1. xx. 56. F. Paul, 64. Bodk V.

i534'.

SBo d V rencement of hostilities against the Emperbi

s 134- on which he was fully determined.

Infurresio°, ' ~jWHILE Francis waited for an opportunity B
of the Ana-o
Baptias inrenew a war which had hitherto proved so fata
Germany. to himself and his fubjeds, a tranfadtion of i

very singular nature was carried on in Germany
Among many beneficial and salutary effeas o
which the Reformation was the immediate causE
it was attended, as muff be the cafe, in all ac
tions and events wherein men are concerned
with some consequences of an opposite nature
When the human mind is roused by grani
objeAs, and agitated by firong passions, it
operations acquire such force, that they are ap
to become irregular and extravagant. Upoi
any great revolution in religion, such irregulari
ties abound most, at that particular period, whei
men, having thrown off the' authority of thei
ancient principles, do not yet fully comprehern
the nature, or feel the obligation of those nev
tenets which they have embraced. The mind
in that situation, pushing forward with the bold
ness which prompted it to rejed established opi
nions, and not guided by a clear knowledge o
the system substituted in their place, difddins al
restraint, and runs into wild notions, which oftei
lead to scandalous or immoral condcud. Thus
in the first ages of the Christian church, many o
the new converts., having: renounced their an

sent Creeds, and being but imperfedly acquaint- BooiK r
ed with: the doCtrines' and .precepts of Chrifti-. is34
ani'ty, broached the most extravagant- opinions,-
equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which
errors difappeared' or were exploded, when the
nowledge of religion increased, and came to.
S'more generally, diffufed. In like manner,
>in after Luther's appearance, the rashness or
ignorance of some of his difeiples led them to
publish tenets no less absurd than pernicious,
vhich being proposed to men extremely illite-
rate, but fond of novelty, and at a time wheri
their minds were turned wholly towards religious
speculations, gained too easy credit and authoi
rity among them. To these causes must be im-
puted the extravagances of VIuncer, in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as
welt as the rapid progress which they made
among the, peasants; but though the infurredion
excited by that Fanatic was soon suppressed, feve-
ral of his followers lurked in different places,
and endeavoured privately to propagate his opi-
nions.

IN those provinces of upper Germany, which origin ana
had already been so cruelly wasted by their en- thaenet.
thufiaffick rage, the magistrates watched their
motions with fucl severe attention, that many
of them found it necessary to retire into other
cointries, some were puriifhed, others driven

;rL5 ~4.' out. But in the Netherlands and Westphalia

where the per,nicious tendency of their opinions
was more unknown, and-guarded against with leVf
care, they got admittance"into several towns, andi
spread the infeaion of their principles. The mnpBI
remarkable of their religious tenets related to th
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contended,
ought to be administered only to persons gro'nl
up to years of understanding, and should be per.
formed not by sprinkling them with water, but
by dipping them in it: For this reason they
condemned the baptism of infants, and rebap
tizing all whom they admitted into their society
the fe& came to be distinguished by the nam
of Anabaptists, To this peculiar notion coh
cerning baptism, which has the appearance o
being founded on the practice of the church in
the apoftolick age, and contains nothing incon.
fiftent with the peace and order of human so.
ciety, they added other principles of a most en.
thufiaftick, as well as dangerous nature. They
maintained that, among Christians who had tbe
precepts of the gospel to dire&, and the spirit
of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecefTary, but an unlawful en
croachment on their fpiritu'al liberty; that the
diftindions -occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
'which considers all men as equal, should be en,

tirely abolished; that all Christians, throwing BOOK y,
iheir poffeffions into one common flock, should x1534.
live together in that state of equality which be-
comes members of the fame family; that as
neither the laws of nature, nor the precepts of
the New Testament had placed any reffraints
upon men with regard to the number -of wives
which they might marry, they should use that
liberty which God himself had granted to the
patriarchs.

SUCH opinions, propagated and miaintained Settle in

with enthufiaftick zeal and boldness, were not Mu"er"
long of producing the violent effeas natural to
them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias,
a baker of Haerlem, and John iBoccold, or

.

Beiikels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden, pof-
JfelTed with the rage of making profelytes, fixed
their residence at IVIunfter, an Imperial city in
NWeftphalia, of the first rank, under the fove-
reignty of its bilhop, but governed by its owa
.senate and consuls. As neither of these Fanatics
wanted the talents requisite in desperate en-
terprizes, great resolution, the appearance of
.landity, bold pretensions to inspiration, and a
confident and plausible manner of discoursing,
they soon gained many converts. Among thefl
were Rothman, who .had first preached. the Pro-
teflant doCrine in IVunfrer, and Cnipperdoling,
a citizen of good birth, and confiderable' emim

bookBV; ience. Embbldeiied by the countenance of fiuch
1a4^ disciples, they* openly taught their opinions :

arid, hot satisfied with that liberty, they madei
several attempts, though without success, to
seize the town, in order to get their tenets efta.

S ecome blifhed by publick authdrity. At last, having
maiters of

_.

that itf.ecretly called in their associates from the neiglh

bouriig country, they suddenly took poffeffion
of the arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night time;
and running through the streets with drawn;
swords, and horrible howlings, cried out al-
ternately, " Repent, and be baptifed," and

rebruaary." Depart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca#

inons, the nobility, together with the more sober
citizens, whether Papifts or Protefrants, terrified
.at their threats and outcries, fled in confifion;
and left .the city under the dominion of a frantick
multitude, consisting chiefly of ftrangers.J No-,
thing now remaining to overawe or cdntroul
them, their set about modelling the government
-according to their own wild ideas; and though
at first they fhewed so much reverence for the
ancient coniitutioni, as to eled senators of their

ERablish a own fedt, and tb appoint Cnipperdoling and an-
new form ofother prOselyte, cnfuls , this was nothing more
governmentthan form; for -all their proceedings were di

redted by Matthias, who, in the style, and with the
authority of a prophet, uttered -his commands,
which it was inftgVt death to disobey. Having
1begun with en.couraging the multitude to pillage

the

the churches, and deface their ornaments; he BooK V,
enjoined them to destroy all books except the is34,
Bible, as useless or impious; he appointed the
estates of such as fled , to be confiscated, and fold
to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he
ordered every man to bring forth his gold, silver,
and precious effets, and to lay them at his feet;
the wealth amassed by these means, he deposited
in a publick treasury, and named deacons to dif-
penfe it for the common use of all. The mem-
bers of this commonwealth being thus brought
to a perfea equality, he commanded all of them
to eat at tables prepared in publick, and even
prescribed the dishes which were to be served up
each day. Having finished his plan of reforma-
tion, his next care was to provide for the, defence
of the city ; and he took measures for that purt
pose with a prudence which favoured. nothing
of fanaticism. He colleded vast magazines of
every kind; he repaired and extended. the forti-
fications, obliging every person without diftinc-
tion to work in his turn ; he formed such as were
capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavoured to add the vigour of discipline to
the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He sent emif-
faries to the Anabaptists in the Low Countries
inviting them to assemble at Munster, which he
dignified with the name of Mount- Sion., that
from thence they might set out to reduce all the
nations of the earth under their dominion. He

VOL. III. G

BOOK V.,himfelf was unwearied in attending to every

$s34. thing necessary for the security or increase of the'

fed; animating his disciples by his own example
to. refuse no labour,- as well as to repine at no
hardship; and their enthusiastic passions being
kept from subsiding by a perpetual succession of,
exhortations, revelations, and prophecies, :they
seemed ready To undertake or to fuffer any thing
in maintenance of their opinions.

The bishop WHILE they were thus employed, the bishop of
of Muunfer Munster having assembled a considerable army,
takes arms
against advanced to besiege the town. On his approach,
them. Matthias sallied out at the head of some chosen

troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced
it, and after great slaughter returned to the city
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this success, he appeared next day brandishing a
spear , and declared , that, in imitation of Gideon,

May. Lhe would go forth with a handful of men and smite

the host of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he
named, followed him without hesitation in this
wild. enterprize, and rushing on the enemy with
a frantick courage, were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first great
consternation among his disciples, but Boc-
cold, by the fame gifts and pretensions which

John of had gained Matthias credit, soon revived their
Leyden ac- h o fc
quires great spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he fuc-
authority ,ceeded him in the fame absolute diredion of all

their affairs. As be did not possess that enter- BooK V.
prizing courage which distinguished his prede- 1i34.
ceffor, he satisfied himfeif with carrying oin a among the
defenrifive war, and without attempting to annoy Aabaptiis
the eiiemy by sallies , he waited for the succours
Je expected from the Low Countries , the arri-
val of which was often foretold and promised by
theirx prophets. But though less daring in ac,
tion than lMatthias, he was a wilder enthusiast,
and of hmore unbounded ambition. Soon after
the death 'of his predecessor, having, by obscure
Visions and prophecies, prepared the multitude
for some extraordinary event, he firipped him-
seif naked, and marching through the streets,
proclainmed with a loud voice, " That the king-
domt of Sion was at hand; that whatever was
highest on earth should be brought low, and
Whatever was lowest thould be exalted'". In
order to fulfil this, he commanded the churches,
as the most lofty buildings in the city, to be
levelled with the ground; he degraded the fe-
nators chosen by Matthias , arid depriving Cnip-
perdolirig of the confulflhip the highest bffice
in the commonwealth, he appointed him to exe-
cute the lowest and most itifamous, that of cobri
mori hangman, to which strange tranfitioni the
other agreed, not only without mirmuring but
with the utmost joy; arid such was the defpotick
rigour of Boccold's administration , that he was
called almost every day to perform some duty or

BOOKI V. other of his wretched funcion. In place of the
1534. deposed senators, he named twelve judges, ac-

cording to the number of tribes in Israel, to pre-
fide in all affairs; retaining ,to himself the fame
authority which Moses anciently poffeffed as
legislator of-that people. -

Eleaed NOT satisfied , however, with power or titles
iming' which were not supreme , a prophet, whom he

had gained and tutored, having called the mul-
titude together, declared it to be the will of
God, that John Boccold should be King of Sion,

June-P4. and fit on the throne of David. John, kneeling

down accepted of the heavenly call, which he
solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
IVlonarch by the deluded. multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the state and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold , and was
clad in the richest and most sumptuous garments.
A Bible was carried on his one hand, a naked
sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when he appeared in publick.
He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his household
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was
nominated governor of the city, as a reward for
his former submission.

Iis licen. HAVING now attained the height of power,

ctious tenetBoccoJd began to discover paflions, which he

and CondIu t.

.

had hitherto restrained or indulged only in fe-
cret. As the excesses of enthusiasm .have been
observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifi-
cations, the fame constitution that is susceptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
l1tter., he inftrudted the prophets and teachers
to harangue the people for several days concern-
ing the lawfulness , and even necessity of taking
more wives than one, which they asserted to be
one of the privileges granted by God to the
faints. When their ears were once accustomed
to this licentious doctrine, and their passions in-
flamed with the profped of such unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of
using what he called their Christian liberty, by
.marrying at once three wives, amoing which the
widow of Matthias, a woman' of singular beauty,
was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the num-
ber of his wives until they amounted to fourteen,
though the widow of Matthias was the only one
dignified with the title of Queen, or who shared
with him the splendour and ornaments of royalty.
After the example of their prophet , the multi-
tude gave themselves up to the most licentious
and uncontrouled gratification of their desires.
No man remained satisfied with a single wife.
Not to use their Christian liberty, was deemed a
crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young women grown up to maturity,

G

3 BooK V.

i, 34.

boK V. whom they instantly compelled to marry.

" To,

S|4" gether with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its

inseparable attendant, was introduced , and be.
came a new source of corruption. Every excels
was committed cf which the passions of men are
capable , when restrained neither by the authority
of laws nor the sense oi decency "; and by a
m'onftrous and almost incredible conjunction,
voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and
dissolute riot accompanied the aufterities of f,
natical devotion,

A confede .MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly
racy agailnt offended at the insult offered to their dignity by
Jptits, Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal ho.

pours; and the profligate manners of his follow-
ers, which were a reproach to the Christian

" Prophetas & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exem.

plo, tota airbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque faminas
difcurfum eft. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum
turba fere ulla reperta eft supra annum decimum quar.
turn que ftuprunm paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p.
30?. Vulg6 viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus fenas, non-
nullis feptenas & oftonas. Puellas supra duodecimum atatis
annum fiatim amare. Id. 0 o. Nemo una contentus suit,
neque cuiquam extra effetas & viris immaturas continenti
esTe licuit. Id. 307, Tacebo hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus,
quanta barbaria et malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis non-
dum aptis matrimonio, id quod mihi neque ex vano,
neque ex vulgi fermonibus hauftum eft, fed ex ea vetula,
cui cura sic vitiatarum demandata suit, auditum. Joh.
Corvinus, 3 16.

name , filled men of all profeffions with horror, BooiK V.
Luther, who had testified against this fanatical IS S-
spirit on its first appearance , now deeply lamented
·its progress , and exposing the delusion with
great strength of argument, as well as acrimony
of style, called loudly on all the states of Ger-
many to put a flop to a phrenzy no less perni-
cious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and pro-
jects, had not leisure to attend to such a distant
object, but the princes of the Empire, affem-
bled by the King of the Romans, voted a supply
of men and money-to the bishop of Vlunfter,
who being unable to keep a fufficient army on
foot, had converted the siege of the town into Benige the
a blockade. The forces raised in confequencetown.
of this resolution, were put under the command
of an officer of experience, who approaching the
town towards the end of spring in the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it,
more closely than formerly, but found the forti-
fications so strong, and so diligently guarded,
that he durst not attempt an assault, It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptists had
established their dominion in Munster; they" had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications , and perform-
ing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent reT. and
attention of their King to provide for their fub.fanaticifnr
fiftence, and his frugal as well as regular oco- fthe be.

G4

Besoor ·V, nomy in their publick meals, they began to. feel

the approach of famine. Several fmall' bodies
of their brethren. who were advancing to their
assistance from the Low Countries, had been,
intercepted, and' cut to pieces; and while all
Germany was re'ady to combine against them,
they had no prospect of succour But such was
the; ascendant which Boccold had acquired over
the multitude, and so powerful the fafcinatioh
of enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine
as ever , and they hearkened with implicit cre-
dulity to the visions and prediations of their pro-
phets , who assured them, that the Almighty
would fpeedilv interpose, in order to deliver the
city. The faith, however, of some few, shaken.
by the violence and length of their fufferings,
began to fail; but being fufpedCed of an in-
clination to surrender to the enemy, they were
punished with immediate de :th, as guilty, of
impiety in diftruffing the power of God. One
of the King's wives, having uttered certain words
which implied some doubt concerning his divine
rniffion, he instantly called the whole number
together, and commanding the blasphemer, as
he called her, to kneel down, cut off her head
with his own hands ; and so far were the reft
from" expressing any horror at this cDruel deed,
that they joined him in dancing w-ith a frantick
joy around the bleeding body of their com-
panion,

BY this time, the besieged endured the utmost BooK V.
rigour of famine ; but they chose rather to fuffer Ig 3.
hardships, the recital of which is flocking toTThe city
humanity , than to listen to the terms of capitu-jue ~'
lation offered them by the bishop. At last, a de-
fercer, whom they had taken into their' service,
being either less intoxicated with the fumes of
enthusiasm, or unable any longer to bear such
distress, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a weak part in the forti-
fications which he had observed, and assuring
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger
.and fatigue, kept wacch there with little care,
he offered to lead a party thither in the night.
The proposal was accepted, and a chosen body
of troops appointed for the.tfervice; who, fcal-
ing the walls unperceived, seized one of the
gates, and admitted the reft of the army. The
Anabaprifts, though surprised-, defended them-June z4
selves in the market-place with valour, height-
ened by despair; but being overpowered by
numbers, and surrounded on every hand, most
of them were slain, and the remainder taken
prisoners. Among the last were the King and
Cnipperdoling. "The King, loaded wi h chains, p'uni'hment
'was carried from city to city as a fpedtacle to ~ th' iJ"J

. andl his affe-

gratify the curiosity of the people, and was ex-ciates.
posed to all their insults. His spirit, however,
was not broken or humbled by this fad reverse
of his condition; and he adhered with unshaken

1300K Vj. firmness? to the distinguishing tenets of his fed.

After this he was brought back to Munfier,
the scene of his royalty and crimes, and put to
death with the most exquisite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with aftoniflhing for.
titude. This extraordinary man, who had been
able to acquire such amazing dominion over the
minds of his followers, and to excite commotions
so dangerous to society, was only twenty-fix
years of age 6".

charaaer TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom

efthea of the Anabaptists came to an end. Their prin.

Period. ciples having taken deep root in the Low Coun.

tries , the party still subsists there , under the
name of Mennonites; but by a very singular
revolution, this set, so mutinous and sanguinary
at its first origin, hath become altogether inno,
cent and pacifick. Holding it unlawful to wage
war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to the duties of private citi,
zens, and by their industry and charity endea.
vour to make reparation to human society for
the violence committed by their founders 6. A

"6 Sleid. 190, &p. Tunmultuum Anabaptiftarum liber

unis. Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio audore ap. Scardium, vol.
ii, p. 298, &c. De Miferabili Monafterienfium obfidione,
&c. libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 3 x 3. Annales
Anabaptiftici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Bafileae, i67z. Cor.
Heersbachius Hist. Anab. Edit. I637. p. 140.

<S Bayle Diction. Art. Anabaptiftes

fmiall number of this fed which is fettled in BooK V,
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning ix5..S-
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
enthusiasm.

THE mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it Proceedings

drew general attention, did not so entirely en-iand autho
gross the princes of Germany , as not to allow league of
leisure for other tranfadions. The arliance be-smalkala'.
tween the French King and the confederates at
Smalkalde, began about this time to produce
great effects. Ulric, Duke of Wurtemberg, having
been expelled his dominions in the year one
thousand five hundred and nineteen, on account
ps his violent and .opprefiIve administration,
the house of Austria had got poffeffion of his
dutchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his conduct, which
were the effect rather of inexperience than of a
tyrannical disposition, was become the objed of
general compafflon, The Landgrave of Hesse,
in particular, his near relation,, warmly espoused
his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance. But the King of the
Romans obstinately refused to relinquish a va-
luable acquisition which his family had made
with so much ease,. The Landgrave, unable to
compel him, applied to the King of France his
new ally. Francis, eager to embrace any op-
portunity of distressing the house Qs Austria, and

!Booi V. desirous of wreffing from it a territory, which
1 3,. gave it footing and influence in a part of Ger-.

many at a distance from its other dominions,
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large fum of money.
This he employed to raise troops, ind marching
with great expedition' towards WVurtemberg, at-
tacked, defeated, and dispersed a considerable
body of Austrians, entrusted with the defence of
the country. All the Duke's fubjeds hastened,
with emulation, to receive their native Prince,
and re-invested him with that authority which is
frill enjoyed by his descendants. At the fame
time the exercise of the Pro eftant religion was
established in his dominions ".

The King FERDINAND , how sensible soever of this un-
ofthe Ro expeded blow, not daring to attack a Prince
am courts whom all the Protestant powers in Germany

were ready to support, judged it expedient to
conclude a treaty with him, by which, in the
most ample form, he recognized his title to the
dutchy. The success bs the Landgrave's opera-
tions in behalf of the Duke of VWurtemberg,
having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with
a league so, formidable as that of Smalkalde, 'was
to be avoided with the utmost care, he entered
likewise into a negociation with the Eledor of

" Sleid., 1 z. Bellay 1 9, &c.

Saxony, the head of that union , and by some
concessions in favour of the Protestant religion,
and others of advantage to the Emperor himself,
he prevailed on him, together with his confede-
rates, to acknowledge his title as King of the
Romans. At the fame time, in order to pre-
vent any such precipitate or irregular elecion
in times to come , it was agreed that no person
ihould hereafter be promoted to that dignity
without the unanimous consent of the Eledors;
and the Emperor soon after confirmed this ftipu-
lation 63. Boor V.

a cj 3 9.

THESE ads of indulgence towards the Pro- aul m.

teftants, and the close union into which the calls a ge
King of the Romans seemed to be entering with^ n.rai
the Princes of that party, gave great offence at at Mantua.
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from
a resolution of his predecessor, never to consent
to the calling of a general council, and had pro-
mifed, in the first consistory held after his elec-
tion, that he would convoke that assembly so
much desired by all Christendom, was no less
enraged than Clement at the innovations in
Germany, and no less averse to any scheme for
reforming either the dodrines of the church, or
the abuses in the court of Rome: But having
been a witness of the universal centure which
Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with re-

'" Sleid. I73. Corps Diplom. tonm. iv. p, z. 119,.

Blootr V, gard to hefe points, he hoped to avoid the fare

i 3 6 reproach ~by the seeming alacrity with which he

proposed a council; flattering himself, however,
that such difficulties would arise concerning the
time and place of nmeeting, the persons who had
a right to .be present, and the order of their pro.
ceedings, as would effelaually defeat the inten.
tion of those -who demanded that assembly,
without exposing himself to any imputation for
refusing to call it. With this view he dispatched
tiuncios to the several courts;, in order to make
known his intention and that he had fixed' on
Mantua as a proper place in which to hold the
council. Such difficulties as the Pope had fore-
seen, immediately pretented themselves in great
nunmber. The French King did not approve of
the place which Paul had chosen, as the Papal
and Imperial influence would necessarily be too
great in a town situated in that part of Italy;
The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that objedtibn, but refused,
beftides, to acknowledge any council called in
the name and by the authority of the Pope. 'The

Dec. 2. German Proteftants' having nmet together at

Smalkalde, insisted on their original demand of
a council to be held in Germany, and pleading
the Emperor's promise, as well as the agreement
at Ratisbon to that effed , declared that they
wopuld not confider an assembly held at Mantua
as a legal or free representative of the church.

IBy this diversity of sentiments and views, such
a field for intrigue and negociation opened, as
made it easy for the Pope to assume the merit
of being eager to assemble a council, while at
the fame time he could put off its meeting at
pleasure. The Protestants on the other hand sus-
peding his designs, and sensible of the importance
which they derived from their union, renewed
for ten years the league of Smalkalde, which
now became stronger and more formidable by
the accession of several new members "4 BOOK Y.

x535.

DURING these tranifations in Germany, the The Empe-

Emperor undertook his famous enterprize againftror''s expe.
the piratical itates in Africa. That part of the Africa, and
African continent lying along the coast of the tate of that
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the country
kingdoms of Mauritania and IVIaflylia, together

"€ This league was Concluded December, one thousand

five hundred and thirty-five, but not extended or signed in
form till September in the following year. The Princes
who acceded to it were John Elector of Saxony, Ernest
Duke of Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of Hesse, Ulric
Duke of Wurtemberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pome-
.rania, John George, and Joachim Princes of Anhalt, Geb-
hard and Albert Count of Mansfield, William Count of
Nassau. The cities, Strasburgh, Nuremberg, Constance,
Ulna, Magdeburhg, Bremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Mem-
mengen, Lindaw, Campen, Ifna, Bibrac, ' Windfheim,
Augsburgh, Frankfort, Efling, Brunswick, Goflar, Hanover,
Gottingen, Eimbeck, Hamburgh, Minden.

.3OOK V.

SS 3 S. with the republick of Carthage, and which is

now known by the general name of Barbary, had
undergone many revolutions. Subdued by the
Romans, it became a. province of their empire..
Conquered afterwaids by the -Vandals, they
ereded- a kingdom there. That being overturned
by Belisarius , the country continued fubjeA
to the Greek .Emperors, until it was overrun
towards the end of the seventh century, by the
rapine and irresistible arms of the Arabs. It re.
mnained for some time a part of that vast empire
which the Caliphs governed with absolute autho-
rity. Its immense distance, however, from the
feat of government, encouraged the descendants
of those leaders, who had subdued the country, or
the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient inhabitants;
to throw off the yoke, and to set up for inde-
pendence. The Caliphs, who derived their autho-
rity from a spirit of enthuliafm, more fitted for
making conquests than for preserving them, were
obliged to connive at ads of rebellion which
they could not prevent; and Barbary was divided
into several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Al.
giers, and Tunis were the most considerable.
The inhabitants of these kingdoms were a mixed
race, Arabs, Negroes \from the southern pro-
vinces, and Moors, either natives of Africa, or
who had been expelled out of Spain; all zealous
profeffors of the Mahometan religion, and in-
flamed against Chriftjanity with a bigotted hatred

propor-

proportional to their ignorance and barbarous BooK V,
imanners- x 53

AMoNG there people, no less daring, incoi- Rite of the

ftant, and treacherous, than the ancient inhabit- iratical
ants of the fame country described by the Ro-
iman historians, frequent feditions broke out, and
many changes in-government took place. These,
as they affeded only the internal state of a coun a
try so barbarous, are but little known, and de-
serve to be so: But about the beginning of the
sixteenth century a sudden revolution happened,
which, by rendering the states of Barbary formi-
dable to the Europeans. hath made their history
worthy of more attention. This revolution was
brought about by persons born in a rank of life andi of the
which entitled them to ad no fuich illuffrious Barbaroffias
part. Horuc and Hayradin, the sons of a potter
in the isle of Lesbos,- prompted by a restless and
eniterprizing Ipirit, forsook their father's trade,
ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates. They
soon diftinguilhed themselves by their valour
and activity, and becoming masters of a small
brigantine , carried on their infamous trade with
such condud and success, that they assembled a
fleet of twelve galleys,. besides many vessels of
imaller force. Of this .fleet Horuc, the elder
brother, called Barbarossa from the red colour
of his beard, was .admiral, and Hayradin second
in.command, but with almost equal authority,

VOL. IIL H

BooK V. They called themselves the friends of the sea,.

, . ~. 'and the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their

names soon became terrible from the JStraits of
the Dardanels,to those of Gibraltar. Together
with their fame and poiWer, their ambitious views
extended, and while adting. as Corfairs they
adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents of.
conquerors. They often carried the prizes which
:they took on the coaffs of Spain and Italy into:
the .ports of Barbary, and enriching the inhabit,
.ants by the sale of their booty, and the thought,
Mlei, prodigality of their crews, were welcome.
guests in every iplace at yvhich they touched.
The convenient situation ds these harbours, lying
so near the greatest corrmercial slates 'at that
<time in Chrif-endom, made the brothers wilh'
'for an establishment in that country. An op-
'portunity of accomplishing this quickly present-
ed itself, which they did niot fuffer to pass un-
improved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having.
attempted several times., without success, to take
a fort which the Spanish governors of Oran had
built not far from his capital, was so ill advised
as to apply for aid to Barbarossa, whose valour.
the Africans considered as irresistible. T.he

u.Sr . adive CorSair gladly accepted of the invitation,

and leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to
Algiers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a. force gave him the command of the:

town; and as he perceived that the Moors BOOK V.
neither fufpe~ted him of any bad intention, nor i 3 5.
were capable with their light armed troops
of opposing his disciplined veterans, he secretly
murdered the Monarch whom he had come to Homec, the
assist, and caused himself to be proclaimed King eler bro-
of Algiers in his stead. The authority which comes ma.
he had thus boldly usurped, he endeavoured to Ber of Al.
eflablifh by arts suited to the genius of the peo-
ple whom he had to govern; *by liberality with-
out bounds to those who favoured his promotion,
and by cruelty no .less unbounded towards all
whom he had any reason to distrust. Not satisfied
with the throne which he had acquired, he at-
tacked the neighbouring King of Tremecen,
and having vanquished him in battle, added his
dominions to those of Algiers. At -the fame
time, he continued to infest the coast of Spain
and Italy with fleets which resembled the arma-
ments of a great MIonarch, rather than the light
squadrons of a Corsair. The devastations, which
these committed, obliged Charles, about the be-
ginning of his reign, to furnish the marquis de
Comares, governor of Oran, with troops fuffi-
cient to attack him. That officer, assisted by xus.
the dethroned King of Tremecen, executed the
commission with such spirit , that Barbaroffa's
troops being beat in several encounters, he him-
self was shut up in Tremecen. After defending
it to the last extremity, he'was overtaken in at-

H z

MoosKV. tempting to make his escape, and slain while he
j .- fought with an obstinate valour, worthy of his

former fame and exploits.

The progress ..His 'brother Hayradin, known likewise by the
toeayrad" name. of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of Al-
brother. giers with the' fame ambition and abilities, bui

with better fortune. -His reign being undit-
turbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European
powers, he regulated with admirable prudence
the "interior police of his kingdom, carried on his
naval operations with .great vigour., and extends
ed his conquests on the continent of Africa. But,
perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted
to his governmeint with the utmost reludance,.
and being afraid that his continual depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the

Puts his ao. Christians, he put his dominions under the piro
minions teion of the Grand Seignior, and received froni
pro teaio of him a body of Turkish soldiers fufficient for his
the suitan. security against his domeftick as well as his foreign

enemies. At last, the fame of his exploits daily
increasing, Solyman offered him the command
of the Turkish fleet, as the only person whose
S valour and Hkill in naval affairs entitled him to
command against Andrew Doria, the greatest
fea-officer of that age. ,Proud of this diftindtion,
Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with
a wonderful versatility o[ mind, mingling the

arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair, BooK V.
gained the entire confidence both of the Sultan ixs3.,
and his Vizier. To them he communicated a
scheme which he had formed of making himself
master of Tunis, the most flourishing kingdom,
at that time, on the coast of Africa;; and this
being approved of by- them, he obtained what-
ever he demanded for carrying it, into execution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were HUis scheme

founded on the intestine divifiors in the kingdom f Tcolsuer-
of Tunis. JViahmed , the last King of that coun-
try, having thirty-four sons by different wives,
named Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest among
them, his successor. That weak prince, who
owed this preference:not to" his own merit, b'ut
to the ascendant which his mother had acquired
over a MVonarch doating with age, first poisoned
IVIahmed his father in order to prevent him from
altering his destination; and then, with the bar-
barous policy whichprevails wherever polygamy.
is permitted, and the right of succession is not
precisely fixed, he put to death all his brothers
whom he could get into his power. Alrafchid',
one of the eldest, was so fortunate- as to escape
his rage ; and finding a retreat among the
wandering Arabs, made several attempts, by
the assistance of some of their chiefs, to recover
the throne, which of right belonged to. him.
But these proving unfuccefsful, and the Arabs

H3

BIOOi V., frpom their riatural levity, being ready to deliver
xI3s. him up to his merciless brother, he fled to Al-

Sgiers, the only place of refuge remaining, and
implored the protedion of Barbarossa ;, who, dif-
cerning at once all the advantages which might be,
gained by supporting his title, received him with
every possible

. demonstration of friendship and

refpe3. Being ready, at that time, to set fail
for Conflantinople, he easily persuaded Alraf-
chid,- whose eagerness to obtain a crown disposed
him to believe or undertake any thing, to ac.
company him thither, promising him effedtual
assistance from Solyman, whom he represented
to be the most generous, as well as most power-
fil, Mionarch in the world. But no sooner were
they arrived, at Constantinople, than the false
Corsair, regardless of. all his promises to him,
opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering
Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish empire,
by making use of the name of this exiled Prince,
and by means of the party ready to declare in his
favour. Solyman approved, with too much
facility, of this perfidious proposal, extremely
suitable to the charadter of its author, but alto-
gether unworthy of a great Prince. A power-
ful 'fleet and numerous army were loon affem-
bled; at the fight of which the credulous Alraf-
chid flattered himself, that he would soon enter
his capital in triumph.

BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going .to EOOKi V,

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan, x ; 3 ~.
shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard of1ZErU eS.
snore. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty veffeIs towards Africa, After '
ravaging the caafts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country , he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
that he came to. assert the right of Alrafchid ,
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard the
Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta , which
commands the bay, s£on fell into his hands,
partly by his own address, partly by the treachery
of its commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis,
weary of Muley-Haften's government, took.
arms, and declared for Alrafchid with such zeal
and unanimity, as obliged the former to fly *so
precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind
him. The gates were immediately set open to
B.arb aroffa, as the restorer o.f their lawful fove-
reign. But when Alrafchid himself did not
appear, and when instead of his name, that of
Solyman alone was heard among the acclama-
tions of the Turkish soldiers marching into the
town, the people of Tunis began to fufpec the
Corfaire's treachery. Their suspicions being soon
converted into certainty, they ran to arms with,
the utmost fury, and surrounded the citadel, into
which Barbarroffa had led his troops. But hav-
ing foreseen such a revolution, he vrwas not un-

S H4

B0boK V, prepared for it; he immediately turned againfl

S 3

. them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one

brisk ,discharge , dispersed the numerous but
undiredled assailants, and forced them to ac-
knowledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to
submit to himself as his viceroy.

B'abaroffa's His first care was to put the kingdom, of
formidable which he had thus. got poffeffion , in a proper.
p ower. posture of defence. He strengthened the citadel

which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast expence,
made it the principal station for his fleet, and
his great arsenal for military as well as naval
stores. Being now poffeffed of such extensive
territories, he carried on his depredations against
the Christian States to a greater extent, and with
more deftrudive violence than ever. Daily com-
plaints of the outrages committed by his cruizers
were brought to the Emperor by his fubjeds,
both in Spain and Italy. All Christendom
seemed to exped .from him, as its greatest and
most fortunate Prince, that he would put an end
to this new and odious species of oppression.

The rxiled At the fame time Muley-Hafcen, the exiled
sinig o King of Tunis, finding none of the Mahometan
Tunis im-
plores the Princes in Africa willing or able to. assist him in
Fmpero9's recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the
afi flance.
April 21, only per.son who could aftert his rights in oppo-

a 5 3

5 .

ition to -such a formidable usurper. The Em- BooK V,.
peror, equally desirous of delivering his domi- iu.s
pious from the dangerous neighbourhood of Bar-
baroffa; of appearing as the protedtor of an
unfortunate Prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age, to every expedition against
the lVlahometans,

, readily concluded a treaty

with 1Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for
Invading Tunis. * Having made trial of his own
abilities for war .in the late campaign in Hun-
gary, he was now become so fond of the military
character, that he determined to command on
this occasion in person. The united firength of His prepara-
his dominions was called out upon an enterprize tion for the
in which the Emperor was about to hazard his expedition.
glory, and which drew the attention of all Eu-
rope. A Flemilh fleet carried from the ports
of the"Low Countries a body of German infan-
try 6"; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had diftinguilhed themselves by
so many vidories over the French; the Emperor
himself embarked at Barcelona with the flower
of the Spanish nobility, and was joined by a

o

considerable squadron from Portugal, under the
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Em-
prefs's brother; Andrew Doria conduded his
own gallies, the belt appointed at that time in

' Harei Annales Brabant. i. 99.

BooK V.

'5 3. 9

lands in ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting
hArica. of near five hundred vessels, having on board

above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail
from ' Cagliari, and after a pr6fperous naviga-
tion, landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa
having receiked early intelligence of the Em.
peror's immense armament, and fufpeding its
destination, prepared with equal prudence and
vigour for the defence of his new conquest. He
called in all his corfairs from their different fta.
tions; he drew from Algiers what forces could

" be spared; he dispatched messengers to all the

African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs, and
by representing Muley-Hafcen as an infamous
apostate, prompted by ambition and revenge,
not only to become the vassal of a Christian
Prince, but to conspire with him to extirpate the
iMlahbmmedan faith, he inflamed those ignorant
Europe, and commanded by the most skilful ofi
cers: The Pope furnished all the assistance in hi
power towards such a pious enterprize; and the
order of Malta, the perpetual enemies of the In
fidels, equipped a squadron, which, though finall,
was formidable by the valour of the knights wvho
served on board it. The port of Cagliari ii
Sardinia was the general pla-ce of rendezvous
Doria was appointed High Adniiral of the fleet;
the command of the land-forces under the EEi
peror was given to the marquis di Guaflo.

ind bigoted chiefs to such a degree, that they BooK V,
0ok arms as in a common cause. Twenty thou- I535.
and horse, together with a vast body of foot,
bon assembled at Tunis; and by a proper dif-
ribution of presents among them from time to
tme, Barbarossa kept the ardour which had
Srought themr together from subsiding. But as
he was too well acquainted with the enemy whom
he had to oppose, to think that these light troops
could resist the heavy-armed cavalry and veteran
infantry which composed the Imperial army, his'
chief confidence was in the strength of the Go-Lays siege to
letta, and in his body of Turkish soldiers who Goletta.
were armed and disciplined after the European
fashion. Six thousand of these, under the com-
mand of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest and
most experienced of all his corfairs, he threw
into that fort, which the Emperor immediately
invested. As Charles had the command of the
sea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not
only with the necessaries, but with all the luxu-
ries ,of life, that Muley-Hafcen, who had not
been accustomed to fee war carried on with such
order and magnificence, was filled with admira-
tion of the Emperor's power. His troops, ani-
mated by his presence, and considering it as
meritorious to shed their blood in such a pious
cause, contended with each other for the pofls
of honour and danger. Three separate attacks
were concerted, and the Germans, Spaniards, and

BOOKi V. Italians, having one of these committed to each
I 395, of them, pushed them forward with the eager

courage which national emulation inspires. Sinan
displayed resolution and skill becoming the conr
fidence which--his master had put in him; the
garrison performed the hard service on which
they were ordered with great fortitude. But
though he interrupted the besiegers by frequent
sallies, though the Moors and Arabs alarmed
the camp with their continual incursions; the
breaches Loon became so considerable towards
the land, while the fleet battered those parts of
the fortifications which it could approach with
no less fury and success, that an assault being

nkes. it b given on all sides at once, the place was taketi
jiu . by storm. Sinan, with the remains ,of his

garrison, retired, after an obstinate resistance,
over a shallow part of the bay towards the city.
By the redudtion of the Goletta, the Emperor
became master of Barbaroffa's fleet, consisting of
eighty-feven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mostly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts:; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remark-
able proof of the strength of the fort, as well as
of the greatness of the corfair's power. The
Erhpe.ror mardhed into the Goletta through the
breach , and turning to . Muley-Hafcen who at-
tended, him, " Here," says he, h' is a gate open

: you, by which you shall return to take pof- Booit V.
effion of your dominions." j5359.

BAnBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight
)f the blow which he had received did not,
lowever, lose courage, or abandon the defence
3f Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
mnd extremely weak; as he could not depend
on the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that
the Moors and Arabs would sustain the hard-
lips of a siege, he boldly determined to 'advance
with his army, which amounted to fifty thou-
sand men '", towards the Imperial camp, and to
decide the fate of his kingdom by the issue of a
battle. This resolution he communicated to his
principal officers, and representing .to them the
fatal consequences which might ,follow, if ten
thousand Christian slaves; whom he.had ihut up
in the citadel, Thould attempt to mutiny during
the absence of the army, he proposed as a ne-
ceffary precaution for the publick security, to
massacre them without mercy before he began
his march. They all approved warmly of his
intention to fight ; but inured as they were, inr
their piratical depredations, to scenes of blood-
Ihed and cruelty, the barbarity of his proposal
concerning the slaves, filled them with horror.;
and Barbarossa, rather from the dread of irritate

" Epifires des Princes, par Rufcelli, p. I 19 &c.

BooKI V. ing them, than swayed by motives of humanity,
1s3 q. consented to spare the lives of the slaves.

Defeats BY this time the Emperor had begun to ad.
Barbarolz's vance towards Tunis; and though his troops
arnmy. fuffered inconceivable hardthips in their march,

over burning sands, destitute of water, and ex.
posed to .the intolerable heat of the fun, they
soon came up with the enemy. The Moors and
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in
number, immediately rushed on to the attack
with loud fiouts, but' their undisciplined courage
could not long stand the shock 'of regular bat.
talions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable
presence of mind, and by exposing his own per.
son to the gr.eatest dangers, endeavoured to rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. There he found every thing
in the utmost confusion; some of the inhabit-
ants flying with their families and effects; others
ready to set open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the
citadel, which in such circumstances might have
afforded him some. refuge, already in the posses.
sion of the Christian captives. There unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had
laia hold on -the opportunity which Barbarossa
dreaded. As soon as his army was at some dif-
tance from the town, they gained two-of their

leepers, by whose assistance, knocking off their BOOK 3V.
fetters, and bursting open their prisons, they• I3So
overpowered the Turkish garrison, and turned
the artillery of the fort against their former
masters. Barbarossa, -disappointed. and enraged,
exclaiming sometimes against the false compaf-
sion of his officers, and sometimes condemning
his own imprudent compliance with their opi-
nion, fled precipitately to Bona.

MVIEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy Tunis fur-
anid almost bloodless viAory which he had renders.
gained, and advancing slowly with the precau-
tion necessary in an enemy's country, did not
yet know the whole extent of his own good for-
tune. But at last, a messenger dispatched by
the flave's acquainted him with the success of
their noble effort, for the recovery of their liber-
ty; and at the fame time deputies arrived from
the town, in order-to present him the keys of
their gates, and to implore his protection from
military violence. While he was deliberating
concerning the proper measures for this purpose-,
the soldiers, fearing that they should be deprived
of the booty which they had expeded, rulhed
suddenly, and without orders, into the town,
and began to kill and plunder without diftinc-
tion. It was then too late to restrain their
cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All the
outrages of which soldiers are capable in the fury
of a storm, all the excesses of which men can

Book V. be guilty when their passions are heightened
x 3~ . by the contempt and hatred which difference in

manners and religion inspire, were committed
Above thirty thousand of the innocent inhabit;
ants petiflhed on that unhappy day, and ten
thousand were carried away as Haves. Muley;
Hafcen. took poffeffion of a throne furrotinded
with carnage, abhorred by his fubje6s on ,vhoni
he had brought such calamities, and pitied even
by those whose rashness had been the occafionof
them. The Emperor lamented the fatal acci.
dent which had gfained the lustre of his viAory,
and amidst such a scene of horror there was but
one fpedacle that afforded him any fatisfadion.
Ten thousand Christian Haves, among whom
were several persons of diftindion, met hini as
he entered the towni; and falling on their knees,
thanked and blessed him as their deliverer.

Reffores the AT the fame time that Charles accormplifhed
exileda ing his promise to the Moorish King of re-establish.
to his
throne, ing him in his dominions, he did not neglet

what was necessary for bridling the power of the
African corfairs, for the security of his own fub'-
jeds, and for the interest of the Spanish crown.
In order to gazin these ends, he concluded a
treaty with Muley-Hafcen on the following con-
ditions-; that' he should hold the kingdom- of
Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain, and do hol
.mage --to the Emperor as his liege lord ; that
all the Christian slaves -noW within his domi-

nions,

niona, of whatever nation, thould be set at libe;ty BOOK( V.
without ransom ; that no filbjed of the Empe- Is3 .
ror's should for the future he detained in fervi-
tude; that no Turkifl corsair fhiould be admitted
into the ports of his dominions; that free tra.ie;
together with the publick exercise of the Christian
religion, should be allowed to all the Emperor's
fubjets; that the Emperor should not only re-
tain the Goletta. but that all the other sea-ports
in the kingdom which were fortified thould be
put into his hands; that Muley-Hafcen should
pay annually twelve thousand crowns ior the
subsistence of the Spanifl garrison in the Golet-
ta; that he should enter into no alliance with
any of the Emperor's enemies, and should pre-
sent to him every year, as an acknowledgment
of his vassalage, fix Moorifl horses, and as many
hawks 7. Having ,thus fettled the affairs of
Africa; chastised the inifolence of the corfairs ;
secured a safe retreat for the ships of his fubjeds,
and a proper station to hi, own fleets, on that
coast from which he was mofl infePced by pira-
tical depredations; Charles embarked again for
Europe, the tempestuous weather, and sickness Augn u

.

among his troops, not permitting him to pursue
Barbarossa 6l.

"7 Du Monts Corps. Diplomat. ii. I2 . Suninionte Hist-

di Napoli, iv. 89.

" Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetante, ap.

Scarc. v. ii. p. 3 0 , &c. Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxiv. I:1, &G,

VoL. III. 1

BooK V. BY this expedition, the merit of which feemns
ix35. to have been estimated in that age, rather by
The glory the apparent generosity of the undertaking, the
which the h nd.r
Emperor magnificence wherewith it was conducted, and
acquirea. the. success which crowned it, than by the irn.

portance of the corifequences that attended it,
the Emperor attained a greater height of glory
than at any other period of his reign. Twenty
thousand slaves whom he freed from bondage,
either by his arms, or by his treaty with Muley.
Hafcen 69. each of whom he clothed and fur.
nifhed with the means of returning to their
refpedive countries, spread all over' Europe the
fame of their benefad4r's munificence , extolling
his power and abilities with the exaggeration
flowing' from gratitude and admiration. In corn-
parison with him, the other Monarchs of Eu-
rope made an inconsiderable figure. They
seemed to be solicitous about nothing but
their private and particular interests ; while
Charles, with an elevation of sentiment which
became the chief Prince in Christendom, ap-
peared to be concerned for the honour of the
Christian name, and attentive to the publick fe.
curity and welfare.

Sandov. ii. I 4, &c. Vertot. -Hist. des Cheval. de Malthe.
Epiftres des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Belleforeft,.
p. xx 9, I o, &c. Anton. Pontii Confentini Hist. Belli adv.
Barbar. ap. Matthaei Analeda.

' Summonte Hist. di Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

# BOOK VI.

THE

H IS TOR Y

OF THE

REIGN

OF TIE

EMPEROR CHARL.ES V.

BOO0K VI.

UNFORTUNATELY for the reputation BooKr VI.
of Francis L among his contemporaries , his 5 %.<
conduct, at this junacure, appeared a perfect The caues
contrast to that of his rival, as he laid hold of a ew

war between

on the opportunity afforded him, by the Empe-the Empe-
ror's having turned his whole force against theror ania

. °. Francis.

common enemy, to revive his pretensions in
Italy, and to plunge Europe into a new war.
The treaty of Cambray, as has been observed,
did not remove the causes of enmity between the
two contending Princes; it covered up, but did

BOOKi VI. not extinguifl the flames of discord. Francis,
1, 45. in particular, who waited with impatience for a

proper occasion of recovering the reputation as
well as territories which he had loft , continued
to carry on his negociations in different courts
against the Emperor, taking the utmost pains to
heighten the jealousy which many Princes en-
tertained of his power or designs, and to inspire
the reft with the fame suspicion and fear : Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who,
though indebted to Charles for the poffeflion of
the dutchy of Milan, had received it on such
hard conditions, as rendered him not only a
vassal of the Empire, but a tributary dependant
upon the Emperor. The honour of having
married the Emperor's niece, did not reconcile
him to this ignominious fRate of fubjeclion, which
became so intolerable even to Sforza, a weak
and poor-fpirited "Prince, that he listened with
eagerness to *the first proposals Francis made of,
rescuing him from the yoke. These proposals
.I"were conveyed to him by lMaraviglia, or Mer-

veille, as he is called by the French historians,
a Milahefe gentleman residing at Paris; and
soon after,, in order to carry.on the negociation
with greater advantage, MIerveille was sent to
JVIilan, on pretence of visiting his relations, but
with secret credentials from Francis as his envoy.
In this charader he was received by Sforza. But
notwithstanding his care to keep that circum-

fiance concealed, Charles fufpeding, or having BooKr VI.
received information of it, remonftratedt and i 3S.
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke
and his miniffers, equally intimidated, gave the
world immediately a mofi infamous proof of
their servile fear of offending the Emnperor. As
Merveille had neither the prudence nor the tem-
per which the function wherein he was em-
ployed required, they artfully decoyed him in-
to a quarrel, in which he happened to kill his an-
tagonift, one of the Duke's domefticks, and hav- Dec. 1533.
ing instantly seized him ,they ordered him to be
tried for that crime, and to be beheaded. Fran-
cis, no less astonished at this violation of a cha-
racer held sacred among the most uncivilized'na-
tiors, than enraged at the insult offered to the dig-
nity of his crown, threatened Sforza with the es-
feds of his indignation, and complained to the
Emperor, whom he considered as the real author
of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with
no fatisfadion from either, he appealed to all the
Princes of Europe , and thought himself now en-
titled to take vengeance for an injury , which
it would have been' indecent and pufianimous
to let pass with impunity.

BEING thus furnished with a pretext for be-Francis de".

ginning a war, on which he had already resolved, tlih o
he multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his

13

Boolt VI. measures for this purpose were disconcerted by

c3 25. unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the

honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle.
ment, the death of that Pontiff had deprived
him of all the advantages which he expeded to
derive from. his friendlhip. Paul, his fiucceffor,
though attached by incitnation to the Imperial
interest, seemed determined to maintain the neu.
trality suitable to his charader as the common
father of the coitending Princes. The King of
England, occupied with domeftick. cares and pro.
jects, declined, for once, engaging in the affairs
of the continent, and refused to assist Francis,
unless he would imitate his example, in throw-

,s nego. ing off the Papal supremacy. These disappoint.
ciations ments led him to solicit, with greater earnest-
with the ness, the aid of the Protestant Princes associated
German
Protatants. by the league of Smalkalde. That he might

the more easily acquire their confidence, he en.
deavoured to accommodate himself to their pre-
dominant passion, zeal for their religious tenets.
He affeded .a wonderful moderation with regard
to the points in dispute ;'he permitted Bellay,
his envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments
concerning some of the most important articles,
in terms not far different from those used by the
Protestants '; he even condefcended to invite

'Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid.

Hist. 178. x83. Seckend. lib. iii. Iot.

IVlelandhon, whose gentle manners and pacifick BooKi VI.
spirit distinguished him among the Reformers, xi .
to visit Paris, that by his assistance he might
concert the most proper measures for reconciling
the contending seas, which so unhappily divided
the church \. These concessions must be confi-
dered rather as arts of policy, than the result of
conviction ; for whatever impression the new
opinions in religion had made on his sisters, the,
Queen of Navarre and Dutchess of Ferrara, the
gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his love of
pleasure, allowed him little leisure to examine
theological controversies.

BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this Irritates

disingenuous artifice, by a step very inconfiftenttlhem"
with his declarations to the German Princes.
This step, however, the prejudices of the age,
and the religious sentiments of his own fubjeds,
rendered it necessary for him to take. His close
union with the King of England, an excommu-
nicated heretick; his frequent negociations with
the German Protestants; but above all, his giv-
ing publick audience to an envoy from Sultan
Solymai, had excited violent suspicions con-
cerning the sincerity of his attachment to reli-
gion. To have attacked the Emperor, who,
on all occasions, made high pretensions to zeal

f Camerarii Vita Ph. Melandhonis, 12. Hag. 165 5o

1 4

13001 VT.:

I f 3, je in defence of the Catholick fa.ith, and at the very

juncture when he was preparing for his expe,
dition againR Barbarossa, which was then con-
fidered as. a pious enterprize, could not have
failed to contrm such unfavourable .sentiments
with regard to [rancis, and called on him to
vindicate himself by rfome extraordinary demon-
ftration of his reverence for the efablifihed doc,
trines of the: church. The in-discreet zeal of
some of his .subjects, who had imbibed the Pro,
teftant opinions, furnished him with such an
occaGfon as he desired. They had affixed to the
gates of the Louvre, and other publick places,
papers containing indecent refleaions on the
-docrines and rites of the Popilh church. .Six of
the persons concerned in this raifh adlion were dif-
covered and seized. The King, in ,order to avert
the judgments which it was supposed their blaf-
phemies might draw down upon the nation,
appointed a solemn proceflion. The holy sacra-
ment was carried through the city in great pomp.;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a.
torch, in his hand ; the Princes of the blood finp-
ported the canopy over it; the nobles niarched
in order behind. In the presence of thisnume-
rous assembly, the King, accufftomed to express
Jhimfelf on every fubjet in fftrong and animated
language , declared that if one of his hands were
infeaed with heresy he would cut it off with
the other, and would -oot spare even his own

children, if found guilty of that crime. As a Booi -VI.
dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the fix un- i x5.
happy persons were publickly burnt before the
procession was finished, with circumstances of
the most shocking barbarity attending their exe-
Cution O .

THE Princes of the league of Smalkalce, fille They reFre

with resentment and indignation at the crueltyto join him
with which their brethren were treated, could
not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he
offered to prdtecd in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigour in his own
dominions; so that all Bellay's art and eloquence
in vindicating his master, or apologizing for his
conduct, made but little impreflfn upon them.
They considered likewise , that the Emperor,
who hitherto had never employed violence against
the doc&rines of the Reformers, nor even given
them much molestation in their progress , was
now bound by the agreement at Ratisbon, not
to disturb fach as had embraced the new opi-
nions:, and the Protestants wifely regarded this
as a. more certain and immediate security , than
the precarlious and distant hopes with which
Francis endeavoured to allure them. Betides,
the mariner in which he had behaved to his allies
at the pe.ace of Cambray, was too recent to be

Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hist.

i7S, &c.

BOOK VI. forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely

1 3 4. much on his friendship or generosity. Up6n

all these accounts, the Protestant Princes refused
to assist the. French King in any hostile attempt
against the Emperor. The Eledor of Saxony,
the mnoft zealous among them, in order to avoid

ing |ny umbrage to Charles, would not per.

mit Melanthon to visit the court of France,
although that Reformer, flattered perhaps by
the invitation of so great a monarch, or hoping
that his presence there might be of signal advan.
tage to the Protestant cause , discovered a strong
inclination-t6 undertake the journey 4.

The French BUT though, none of the many Princes who
army ad van- enried or drealed the power of Charles , would
ces towards . ,
Italy. second Francis's efforts in order to reduce and

circumscribe it , he , nevertheless, commanded
his army to advance towards the frontiers of
Italy. As his sole pretext for taking arms was
that he might chastise the Duke of Milan for his
insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations,
it might have been expeded that the whole
weight of his vengeance was to have fallen on
his territories. But on a sudden, and at their
very ceommencement, the operations of war took
another diredion. Charles, Duke of Savoy, one
of the least adive and able Princes of the line

4 Camerarii Vita Melan. 142, &c. 415. Seckend. lib. iii,

107

from which he descended, had married Beatrix BooK VI.
of Portugal, the Emprefs's sifter. By her great 5.35
talents, she soon acquired an absolute ascendant
;bver her husband: and proud of her affnity to
the Emperor, or allured by the magnificent pro-
mises with which he flattered her ambition, she
formed an union between the Duke and the Im-~
perial court, extremely inconsistent with that
neutrality, which wife policy as well as the fitua-
tion of his dominions had hitherto induced him
to observe in all the quarrels between the con-
tending Monarchs. Francis was abundantly
sensible of the distress to which he might be e*-
posed, if, when he entered Italy, he fhbuld leave
behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted
so obsequiously to the Emperor, that he had sent
his eldest son to be educated in the court of
Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity.
Clement the Seventh, who had represented this
danger in a strong light during his interview
with Francis at Marseilles, suggested to him, at
the fame, time, the proper method of guarding
against it, having advised him to begin his ope-
rations against the Milanese,. by taking poffeffion
of Savoy. and Piedmont, as the only certain way
of securing a communication with his own do-
minions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke Takes poC-
on many accounts, particularly for having sup-

efo of

plied the Constable Bourbon with the money Savoy's do.
that enabled him to levy the body of troopsminions.

BooK~ VI. which ruined the French army in the fatal battle

IS3·. of. Pavia, was not unwilling to let him now feel

both how deeply he refehted, and how severely
he could punish these iniuries. Nor did he
want several pretexts which gave some colour of
equity to the violence that he intended. The
territories of France and Savoy lying contiguous
to each other, and intermihgled in many places,
various disputes, unavoidable in such a situation,
subsisted concerning the limits of their respective
property; and besides, Francis , in right of his
mother Louise of Savoy, had large claims upon
" te Duke her brother, for her share in their fa-
ther's succession. Being unwilling, . however,
to .begin hostilities without some cause of quarrel
more specious than these pretension , many of
which were obsolete,, and others dubious, he
demanded permission to march through Pied-
mont in his way to the Milanese , hoping that
the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the
Imperial intereft", might refuse this request ,. and
thus give a greater appearance of ju-ltice to all
his operations against him. But, if we'mav be-

* lieve the historians of Savoy, who appear to be

better informed with regard to this particular
than those of France; the Duke readily, and
with a good grace, granted what it was not in
his .power to deny, promising free passage to the
Frernsh troops as was desired; so that Francis,
.as tthe only method now left of justifying the

measures which he determined to take , was BooK VI.
obliged to insist for full fatisfation with regard Is35.
to every thing that either the crown of France or
his mother Louise could demand of the house
of avoy '. Such an evasive answer;, as might
have been expeded , being made to this requi-
fition, the French army under the admiral Brion
poured at once into the Duke's territories at
different places. The countries of Breffe and
Bugey , united at that time to Savoy, were over-
run in a moment. Most of the towns in the
dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the ap-
proach of the enemy; a few which attempted to
make resistance were easily forced; and before
the end of the campaign, the Duke saw himself
stripped of all his dominions, but the province
of Piedmont , in which there were not many
places in a condition to be defended.

To complete the Duke's misfortunes, the city The city of
of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed, cenvit
and in some degree poffeffed, threw off his yoke, liberty.
and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the
adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time,
an Imperial city ; and though under the dired
dominion of its own biffiops , and the remote
sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy , the form of
its internal constitution was purely republican,

SHiftoire Gendalogique de Savoye, par Guichenon. 2

tom. fol. Lyon. i66o, i. 639, &c.

*

BOOK VI.

r 5 32.
as e. being governed by , ndics and a council chosen

by the citizens. From these diftint and often
clashing jurifdidions, two opposite parties took
their rife, and had long subsisted in the state;
the one composed of the advocates for thefri.
vileges of the community, assumed the name of
Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty;
and branded the other, which supported the epif.
copal or ducal prerogatives, with the name of
.Mammelukes or slaves. At'length, the Protestant
opinions beginning to spread among the citizens,
inspired such as embraced them with that bold
enterprizing spirit which always accompanied or
was naturally produced by them in their first ope.
rations. As both the Duke and Bishop were
from interest, from prejudice, and from political
considerations, violent enemies of the Reforma.
tion, all the new converts joined with warmth
the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,
mingling with the love of liberty, added strength
to that generous passion. The rage and aninmo
fity of two fadions, ihut up within the fame
walls, occasioned frequent infurredions, which
terminating mostly to the advantage, of the
friends of liberty, they daily gained ground.

. The Duke and Bilhop, forgetting their an-
cient contests about jurifdiAion , had united
against their common enemies , and each attack-
ed them 4with his proper weapons. The Bilhop

excommunicated the people of Geneva as guilty BooK VI.
of a double crime; of impiety, in apostatizing i 53 *
from the established religion; and of sacrilege,
in invading the rights of his fee. The Duke at-
tacked them as rebels against their lawful Prince,
and attempted to, render himself master of the
city, first by furprize, and then by open force.
The citizens, despising the thunder of the Bi- x S34
fhop's censures, boldly asserted, their independ-
ence againit the Duke ; and partly by their
own valour, partly by the powerful affiltance
which they received from their allies, the canton
of Berne, together with some small supplies both
of men and money, secretly furnished by the
King of France, they defeated all his attempts.
Not satisfied with having repulsed him, or with
remaining always upon the defensive themselves,
they now took advantage of the Duke's inabi-
lity to resist them, while overwhelmed by the
armies of France, and seized several castles and
places of strength which he poffefled in the
neighbourhood of Geneva; thus delivering the
city from those odious monuments of its former
fubje&ion, and rendering the publick liberty
m6re secure for the future. At the fame. time
the canton of Berne invaded and conquered the
Pays de Vaud, to which it had some pretensions.
The canton of Friburgh, though zealously at-
tached to the Catholick religion, and having no
fubjed of contest with the Duke, laid hold on

BooKi VI. part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince. Ai

Ix 3 . great portion of these conqucfts or ufurpations

being 'till retained by the two cantons, add coni
fiderably to their power, and have become the
most valuable part o' their territories. Geneva;
notwithstanding many schemes and enterprizes
of the Dukes of Savoy to re-establish their do.
minion there, still keeps poffeffion of its inde.
pendence, and in consequence of that blefIing;
has attained a degree of consideration, wealth
and elegance, which it could not otherwise have
reached '.

The Empe- AMIDST such a fucceffioh of difaffrous events,
.oiajbI the Duke of Savoy had no other resource but
Duke of the Emperor's .protedtion, which upon his re-
savoy. turn from Tunis, he demanded with the most

earnest importunity ; and as his misfortunes
were occasioned chiefly by his attachment to the
Imperial interest, he had a just tide to imme.
diate assistance. Charles, however,. was not in
a condition to fIpport him with that vigour and
dispatch which the exigency of his affairs c ailed
for. Most of the troops employed in the Afri-
can expedition, having been raised for that ser-
tvice alone, were dilbanded as soon as it was

Hist. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. I2°. Utr.

168 ~. p. 99. Hist. de la Reformation de Sui(fe, par Rou-
chat, Gen. 1728.. tom. iv. p. 294, &c. tom..v. p. 216, &c.
Me6m. de Bellay, igI.

finished ;

jfinifhed; the veteran forces under Antonio de BooK VI.
Leyva were hardly fufficient for the defence of 153$.
the IVlilanefe; and the Emperor's treasury was
entirely dra>ed by his vast efforts against the
Infidels.

BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned, ot. -4,

Death of

according to some historians, by the terror of a Sfora i)uks
French invasion, which had twice been fatal to ors "an,
his Family, afforded the Emperor full leisure to
prepare for aAion. By this unexpecded event,
the nature of the war, and the causes of discord,
were totally changed. Francis's first pretext for
taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at
once cut off; but as that Prince died without
issue, all Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan,
which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
posterity, returned back to him in full force.
As the recovery of the Milanese was the fa-
vourite obje,d of that Monarch, he instantly
renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported
his pretensions by ordering the powerful army
quartered in Savoy to advance without losing a
moment towards Milan, he could hardly have
failed to secure the important point of poffeffion.
But Francis, who became daily less enterprizing
as he advanced in years, and who was overawed
at some times into an excess of caution by the
remembrance of his past misfortunes, endea-

VOL. 1I. 1 K

BooK VI. voured to establish his rights'by negociation,

i 3 5. not by arms; and from a timid moderation,
Francis's fatal in :all great affairs, negleAed to improve
to that" the favourable opportunity whic. resented it.
dutchy. self. Charles was more decifivre his opera.

tions, and in quality of sovereign, took pof.
session of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the Emr
pire. While Francis endeavoured to explain and
assert his title to it, by arguments and memo.
rials, or employed various arts in order to recon.
cile the Italian powers to the thoughts of his re.
gaining footing in Italy, his rival was silently tak,
ing effedual steps to prevent it. The Emperor,
however, was very careful not to discover too
early anyintention of this kind; but feeming'to
admit the equity of Francis's claim, he appeared
solicitous only about giving him poffeflion in
such a manner as might not diflurb the peace of
Europe, or overturn the balance of power in Italy,
.which the politicians of that country were so fond
of preserving. By this artifice'he deceived Francis,
and gained so much confidence with the reft of
Europe, that almost without incurring any sus.
picion, he involved the affair in new difficulties,
and protraded the negociations at pleasure,
Sometimes he proposed to grant the investiture
of -Vlilan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's
second fonr, sometimes to the Duke of Angou-
lkme, his third son; as the views and inclinations
of the French court varied , he transferred his

choice alternately from the one to the other, BOOK VLT
with such profound and well-conduaed diffimu- Ix35,
lation, that neither Francis nor his iiinifters
seem to have penetrated his real intention; and
all military operations were entirely suspended,
as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly
into poffeffion of what they demanded;

DURING the interval gained in this manner. i<6;
Charles, on his return from Tunis, assembled char'k's
the states both of Sicily and Naples, and as they preprations
thought themselves greatly honoured by the pre-
fence of.their sovereign, and were no less pleased
with the apparent disinterestedness of his expe-
dition into Africa, than dazzled by the success
which had attended his arms, prevailed on them <
to vote him such liberal subsidies as were seldom
granted in that age. This enabled him to re-
cruit his veteran troops, to levy a body of Ger-
mans, and to take every other proper precaution
for executing or supporting the measures on
which he had determined. Bellay, the French
envoy in Germany, having discovered the inten,
tion of raising troops in that country, hotwith-
standing all the pretexts employed in order to
conceal it, first alarmed his master with this evi-
dent proof of the

b mperor's insincerity 7. But

Francis was so poffeffed at that time with the

'.Mbmd de Bellay, Ig2.

Bo
-I OK VI. rage of negociation, in all the artifices and re.

536. finements of which his rival far surpassed him

that instead of beginning his .military operations
and pushing them with vigour, or seizing the
iVlilanefde before the. Imperial army was affem.
bled, he satisfied himself with making new offers
to the Emperor, in order to procure the inveifi.
ture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, in.
deed, so liberal and advantageous, that if ever
Charles had intended to grant his demand, he
could not have rejeded them with decency. He
dexterously eluded them by declaring that, un.
til he coirfulted the Pope in person, he could not
take his final resolution with regard to a point
which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy,

a By this evasion he gained some farther time for

ripening the schemes which he had in view.

e Empe- THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome,
enters and mad:e his publick entry into that city with
ri s. extraordinary pomp; but it being found necef-

fary to remove the ruins of an ancient templeof
Peace, in order to widen one of the streets,
through which the cavalcade had to paDs; all the
historians take notice of this trivial circumstance,
which they are fond to interpret as an omen of
the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is
certain, had by ,this time banished all thoughts
of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with
which he had so long covered his designs from

Th

ror

Roi
Ap]

he -court of France,'by a declaration of his fen- BooK VI.
iments no less singular than explicit. The s 36.
Lrench ambassadors having in their mafter's
ame demanded a definitive reply to his pro-
ofitions concerning ' the investiture of nMilan,
1harles promised to give it next day in presence
f the Pope and Cardinals 'affembled in full
onfiftory. These being accordingly met, and His publick
11 the foreign ambassadors invited to attend, i"venive against
he Emperor stood up, and addressing himself rancis.
o the Pope, expatiated for some time on the
incerity of his own wishes for ,the peace of
3hriftendom, as well as his abhorrence of war,
:he miseries of which he enumerated at great
length, with studied and elaborate oratory; he
complained that all his endeavours to preserve
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de-
seated by the restless and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile inten-
tions of that Monarch, that afterwards, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Imperial
crown which belonged to him by a title no less just
than natural; that he had next invaded his king-
dom of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he
had attacked his territories as well as those of his
allies both in Italy and the Low Countries; that
when the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered
irresistible by the protection of the Almighty,
had checked his progress, ruined his armies, and

K

BOOK VI. seized his person, he continued to pursue by de,

r536, ceit what he had undertaken with injustice; that

he had violated every article in the treaty of
IMadrid to which he owed his liberty, and as
soon as he returned to his dominions took mea-
fures for rekindling the war which that pacifi.
cation had happily extinguished; that when new
misfortunes compelled him to sue again for
.peace at Cambray, he concluded and observed
it with equal insincerity; that soon thereafter he
had formed dangerous connexions with the here,
tical Princes in Germany, and incited them to
disturb the tranquillity of the Empire; that now
he had driven the Duke of Savoy , his brother.
in-law and ally, out of the greater part of his ter-
ritories; that after in uries so often repeated, and
amidst so many sources of discord, all hope of
amity or concord became desperate; and though
he was fill willing to grant the investiture of
IVIilan to one of the Princes of France, there was
little probability of that event's taking place, as
Francis, on the one hand, would not consent to
what he judged necessary for securing the tran.
quillity of Europe, nor, on the other, could he
think it reasonable or safe to give a rival the un-
conditional poffeffion of all that he demanded.
L'et us not, however, added he, continue wan-

challenges tonly to flted the'.blood of our innocent fubjedsi
T~l com

to let us decide the quarrel man to man, with what

bat. arms he pleases to chufe, in our shirts, on an

island, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a BooK VL
river; let the dutchy of Burgundy be put in I s; 6.
deposit on his part, and that of Milan on mine;
tbefe shall be the prize of the conqueror; and
after that, let the united forces of Germany,
Spain, and France, be employed to humble the
power of the Turk, and to extirpate heresy out
of Christendom. But if he, by declining this me-
thod of terminating our differences, renders war
inevitable, nothing flhall divert me from prose-
cuting it to such extremity, as shall reduce one
of us to be the poorest gentleman in his own
dominions. Nor do I fear that it will be on me
this misfortune shall fall; I enter upon adion
with the fairest profped of success; the jufftice
of my cause, the union of my fubjeds, -the num-
ber and valour of my troops, the experience and
fidelity of my generals, all combine to ensure it.
Of all these advantages, the King of France is
destitute; and were my resources no more cer-
tain, and my hopes of vidory no better founded
than his, I would instantly throw myself at his
feet, and with folded hands, and rope about b
my neck, implore his mercy 8.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered
with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greateR vehemence of expression and gesture.
The French ambassadors, who did not fully

' Bellay, 199. Sandov. Hifior. del Emper. II. 226.

K 4

Booi VL, comprehend his meaning, as he spake in the

S364. Spanish tongue, were totally disconcerted, and

at a loss how they Thould answer such an unex.
peded inveAive; when one of them began to
vindicate his mafter's conduct, Charles inter.
posed abruptly, and would not permit him to
proceed. The Pope, without entering into any
particular detail, satisfied himself with a ihort
but pathetick recommendation of peace, together
with an offer of employing his sincere endea.
yours in order to procure that blessing to Chris.
tendom; and the assembly broke up in the
greatest astonishment at the'extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited. In no part of his

The motves conduct, indeed, did Charles ever deviate so
of this ra' widely from his general charader. Instead of

that prudent recollecion, that composed and re-
gular deportment so strictly attentive to deco-
rum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his
own passions, for which he was at all other times
conspicuous , he appears on this occasion before
the most august assembly ii Europe, boasting

. of his own power and exploits with insolence;

inveighing against his enemy with indecency;
and challenging him to combat with an oftenta-
tious valour, more becoming a champion in
romance, than the first Monarch in Christen-
dom. But the well-known and powerful opera-
tion of continued prosperity, as well as of exag-
gerated praise, even upon the firmest minds,

fnfficiently account for this seeming inconsistency.
After having compelled Solyman to retreat, and
having stripped Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles
began to confider his arms as invincible. He had
been entertained , ever since his return from'
Africa , with repeated scenes of triumphs and
pubjick rejoicings; the orators and poets of Italy,
the most elegant at that time in Europe, had
exhausted their genius in panegyrick, to which
the astrologers added magnificent promises of a
more splendid fortune still in store. Intoxicated
with all these, he forgot his usual reserve: and
moderation, and was unable to restrain this
extravagant sally of vanity, which became the
more remarkable, by being both so uncommon
and so publick. Booi: VI."

x 536.

HE himself seems to have been immediately
sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour, and
when the French ambassadors demanded next
day a more clear explanation of what he had'
said concernin~g the combat, he told them that
they were not to confider his proposal as a
formal challenge to their master, but as an expe-
dient for preventing bloodshed; he endeavoured
to soften other expressions in his discourse; and
spoke in terms full, of refpedt towards Francis.
But though this flight apology was far from
being fufficient to remove the offence which had
been given, Francis, by an unaccountable in-

~qOOR ~VI.

I ~ 36, fatuation, continued to negociate, as if it had

frill been possible to bring their differences to a
period -by an amicable composition. Charles,
finding him so eager to run into theJfnare, fa-
voured the deception, and by seeming to liften'
to his proposals gained time to prepare for the
execution of his own designs '

Charles AT lat, - the Imperial army assembled on the
invades frontiers of the IVlilanefe, to the amount of forty
France.

thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, while
that of France encamped near Vercelli in Pied-
mont, being greatly inferior in number , and
weakened by the departure of a body of Swiss,
whom Charles artfully persuaded the Popilh
cantons to recal , that they might not serve
against the Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally.
The French general , not daring to rifque a
battle, retired as soon as the Imperialiffts, ad-

May e. vanced. The Emperor put himself at the head

of his forces, which the Marquis del Guafto,
the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand, de Gonzaga
commanded under him, though the supreme di-
redion of the whole was committed to Antonio
cde Leyva, whose abilities and experience justly
entitled him to that diftindion. Charles soon dif-
covered his intention not to confine his opera-
tions to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy,

l Mem. de Bellay, 2os, &c.

but to push forward and invade the southern BooK VI.
provinces of France. This scheme he had long 1j36.
meditated, and had long been taking measures
for executing it with such vigour as might en-
sure success. He had remitted large sums to his
sifter, the governess of the Low Countries, and
to his brother, the King of the Romans, inftrud-
ing them to levy all the forces in their power,
in order to form two separate bodies, the one to
enter France on the fide of Picardy, the other ons
the fide of Champagne; while he, with the
main army, fell upon the opposite frontier of the
kingdom. Trusting to these vast preparations, he
thought it impossible that Francis could resist so
many unexpected attacks, on such different quar-
ters; and began his enterprize with -fach confi-
dence of its happy issue, that he desired Jovius
the historian, to make a large provision of paper
fufficient to record the vidories which he was
going to acquire.

His ministers and generals , instead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented to
him in the strongest terms the danger of leading
his troops so far from his own territories, to such
a distance from his magazines, and into pro-
vinces which did not yield fufficient subsistence
for their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to confider the inexhaustible resources of France
in maintaining a defensive war, and the adive

BOOK VI. zeal with which a gallant nobility would serve a

x536. Prince whom they loved, in repelling the ene-

mies of their country; they recalled to his re-
membrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon
and Pescara, when they ventured upon the fame
enterprize. under circumstances which seemed as
certainly to promise success ; the Marquis del
Guafto .in particular , fell on his knees, - and
conjured him to abandon the undertaking as
desperate. But many circumstances combined
in leading Charles to disregard all their remon-
firances. He could seldom be brought, on any:
occasion, to depart from a resolution which he
had once taken ; he was too apt to under-rate
and despise the talents of his rival the King of
France, because they differed so widely from his:
own; he was blinded by the presumption which
accompanies prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in
some degree on the. prophecies which prediaed
the increase of his own grandeur. He not only
adhered obstinately to his own plan, but deter.
mined to advance towards France without wait-
ing for the reducion of any part of Piedmont,
except such towns as were absolutely necessary
for preserving his communication with the IVli-
lanefe.

Recovers THE Wlarquis de Saluces, to whom Francis
part of thehad entrusted the command of a small body of
Duke of
Savoy's do- troops left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered
miniions.

this more easy than Charles had any reason to
exped. That nobleman, educated in the court
of France, distinguished by. continual marks of
the King's favour, and honoured so lately with
a charge of such importance, suddenly, and
without any provocation or pretext of disgust,
revolted from his benefador. His motives to
this treacherous adion, were as childish as the
deed itself was base. Being firongly poffeffed
with a superstitious faith in divination and aftro-
logy, he believed with full aflurance, that the
fatal period of the French nation was at hand;
that on its ruins the Emperor would eftablilh an
univeifal monarchy; that therefore he ought to
follow the dicates of prudence, in attaching
himself to his rising fortune, and could incur no
blame for deserting a Prince whom heaven had
devoted to deftrudion 1o. His reason became
still more odious, by his employing that very
authority with which Francis had inverted him,
in order to open the kingdom to his enemies.
Whatever was proposed or undertaken by. the
officers under his command for the defence of
their conquefs , he rejeded or defeated. What-
ever properly belonged to himfelf' as commander
in chief, to provide or perform for that pur-
pose, he totally neglected. In this manner, he ren-
dered towns even of the greatest consequence.

" Bellay,, 22z, a. z46, b. Booi VI.

i 536.

•BOOrt VI. untenable, .by leaving them destitute either of

1s36. provisions , or ammunition, or artillery , or a

fufficient garrison ; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as ihort a time as
was necessary to march through it, if Mlontpezat,
the governor of Foffano, had not, by an extra.
,ordinary effort of courage and military condud,
detained them almost a month, before that in,
considerable place,

Francis's By this meritorious and seasonable service, he
plan f'r the gained his master fufficient time for assembling
defence of
his king- his forces, and for concerting a system of de-
trom. fence against a danger which he now saw to be

inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper
and effectual plan for defeating the invasion of a
powerful enemy; and his prudence in chufing
this plan, as well as his perseverance in execut-
ing -it , deserve the greater praise , as it was
equally contrar-y to. his own natural temper, and
to the genius of the French nation. He deter.
mined to remain altogether upon the defensive;
never to hazard a battle, or even a great flir-
mith, without certainty of success ; to fortify his
camps in a regular manner; to throw garrisons
only into towns of great strength; to deprive
the enemy of subsistence, by laying waste the
country before them; and .to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces,
The execution of this plan he committed en"

tirely to the marechal Montmorency, who~ was BoorK IV.
the author of it; a man wonderfully fitted by xI 6.
nature .for fuch'a trust. Haughty, severe, con-EntruMts

, .. MontmoO

sident in his own abilities, and despising those ofrency with
other men; incapable of being diverted fromthe execu-

tion of its

any resolution by .remonftrances or entreaties;
and in prosecuting any scheme, regardless alike
of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY made choice of a ftrongHe encamps

camp under the walls of Avignon, at the con-~at Avig"o"
fluence of the Rhone and Durance , one of
which plentifully supplied his troops with all
necessaries from the inland provinces, and the
other covered his camp on that fide, where it
was most probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearied industry to render
the fortifications of this camp impregnable, and
assembled there a considerable army, though
greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at
Valence, higher up the Rhone. MVarfeilles and
Aries were the only towns he thought it necef-
fary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the sea; the latter, as the bar-
rier of the province of Languedoc; and each of
these he furnished with numerous garrisons of
his best troops, commanded by officers , on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The
inhabitants of the other towns as well as of the

/

B'OOK VL open country, were compelled to abandon their

1536.. houses, and were conduited to the mountai~ns

to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland pro.
vinces. The fortifications of such places as might
have afforded shelter or defence to the enemy,
were thrown down. Corn, forage, and provi.
fions of every kind, were carriedr away or de.
ftroyed; all the mills and ovens were ruined,
and the wells filled up or rendered useless. 'I he
devastation extended from the Alps to .Mar.
feilles , .and from the sea to the confines of
Dauphin6.; nor does hiflory afford any instance
among civilized nations , in which this cruel
expedient for the publick safety was employed
with the fame rigour.

Charles en- MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the
ters L-o. van of his army on the frontiers of Provence,

and was still so poffeffed with confidence of fuc.
cess , that during a few days, when he was
obliged to halt until the reft of his troops came
up , he be'gan to divide his future conquelts
among his officers; and as a new incitement to
serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises
of offices, lands, and honours in France ". The
face of desolation , however , which presented
itself. to him, when he entered the country, be-
gan to damp his hopes; and convinced him that

" Bellay, 266, a.

a IVo.

aMonarch , who, in order to difftrefs an enemy, BooK VI.
had voluntarily ruined one of his richest .pro- 1536.
vinces, would defend the reft with obstinate de-
Tpair. Nor was it long before he -became sensible,
that Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as
it alppeared 'to be extraordinary. His fleet, on
which Charles chiefly depended for subsistence,
was prevented .for some time by contrary winds,
and other accidents to which naval operations
ate fubjed , from approaching the French coast;
even after its arrival , it afforded at bell a pre-
carious and scanty supply to such a numerous
body of .troops '"; nothing was to be found in
the country itself for their support; nor could
they draw any considerable aid from the domi-
nions of the Duke of Savoy, exhauffed already
by maintaining two great armies. The Empe-
ror was no less embarrarfed how to employ, than
how to subsist his forces ; for, though he was
now in poffefiion of almost an entire province,
he could not be said to have the command of it,
while he held only defenceless towns; and while
the -French, besides- their camp at Avignon,
continued masters of Marseilles and Aries-. At
first he thought of attacking the camp , and of
-terminating the war by one decisive blow; but
skilful officers , who were appointed to viev it,
declared the attempt to be utterly impradicable.

Sandov. ii. 23.

.

VoL. II. L

BoOK VI. He then' gave orders to invest MNarfeilles and

1536. Arles, hoping that the French would , quit their
Befieges advantageous post in order to relieve them:
arfeilles.but 1Montmorency: adhering firmly to his plan,

remained immoveabl:e at Avignon, and the Imq
perialifts met with such a warm reception from
the garrisons of both towns, that they relin.
quifhed their enterprizes with loss and disgrace.
As a last effort, the Emperor advanced one
more towards Avignon, though with an army
hiaraffed by the perpetual incursions of fmali
parties of the French light troops, weakened by
diseases, and dispirited by disasters, which seemed
more intolerable, because they were unexpeded.

Montmo- DURING these operations IVlontmorency found
rency's for- himself exposed to greater danger from his own
titude in .
adhering to troops than from the enemy; and their inconfi.
his plan of derate valour went near to have precipitated the
efence. kingdom into those calamities, which he with

such industry and caution had endeavoured to
avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ray
vaging their country almost without controul;
impatient of such long inadion; unacquainted
with- the flow and remote, but certain effects of
Montmorency's system of defence ; the French
wished for a battle with' no less ardour than the
Imperialists. They considered the conduct of
their general as a disgrace to their country. His
caution they imputed to timidity; his circum-

fpe;ion to want of spirit ; and the constancy BooK rVI
with which he pursued his plan, to obstinacy or 15 36,
p/ide. These reiedtions , whispered at first
among the soldiers and fubalterns, were adopted,
by degrees, by officers of higher. rank:; and as
many of them envied IVIontmorency's favour
with the King, and more were diffatisfied with
his harsh disgusting manner, the discontent soon
became great in his camp, which was filled with
general murmurings and almost open complaints
against his meafares. Montmorency, on whom
the sentiments of his own troops made as little
impression as the insults of the enemy adhered
steadily to his system, though, in order to re-
concile, the army to his maxims, no less contrary
to the genius of the nation, than to the ideas of
war among undisciplined troops , he assumed an
unusual affability in his deportment, and often
explained with great condescension the motives
of his con dud , the advantages which had already
resulted from it, and the certain success with
which it would be attended. At' last Francis
joined his army at Avignon, which having re-
ceived several reinforcements, he now considered
as of strength fufficient to face the enemy. As
he had put no small constraint upon himself, in
consenting that his troops should remain so
long uponi the defensive, it can hardly be doubt-
ed but that his fondness for what was. dar-
ing and splendid, added to the impatience both

La

Sooit VI. of officers and soldiers, would at last have over.

Si6. ruled MIVonmhbtency's salutary caution ".

* ,

. .

* .

The retreat ; H~ivPILY 'the retreat of the enemy delivered
and wretch-
ad conition the kingdom- from the danger which any rash
of the im- tefolutionr might have occasioned. The Empe,
peral army. or, after Spending two inglorious months in

Proveheiife:, wikhout having, performed any thing
suitable to 'his vast preparations, or that -could
juftilfy t-he- confidence with which he had boasted
6of lin'own power , found that, besides Antonio
de Leyva, :and other officers of diftindion, 'he
had loft one half of his troops by diseases, or" by
famine ;' and that the reft were in no condition
to ftruggle-any longer with calamities, by which
so ~tany of their companions had perished.
Ncefllity , therefore extorted- from him orders
to retire; and though he was some time in -oo
tion before the French fufpeded his intention ;a
body'of light tioops, assisted by crowds of pea.
fan€s ,- eager to be. revenged on those who had
*brought fichli desolation on their country, hung
upon the rear of the Imperialists , and by seizing
.every favo~drable opportunity of attacking them,
;threw them often into confusion. The road by
-which:they fled ,'for they pfirfued their march
with such disorder and precipitation , that it
scarcely deser.ves the name of a- retreat ,, was
ftrewed-with arms or baggage, which in their

. MmIn de Bellay, 269, &c. 12g, &<c

hurry.and trepidation they had abandoned, and BOOK VI,
covered with the sick, the wounded., and the xzs36
dead; insomuch that Martin Bellay, an eye-
witness of their calamities, endeavours to give
his readers some idea of it, by comparing their:
miseries to those which the Jews fuffered from
the viaorious and deftrudive arms of the Ro-
mans '~. If MVontmorency at this critical mo-
ment had advanced with all his forces, nothing
could have saved the whole Imperial army from
utter ruin. But that general, by standing so

"

long and so obstinately on the defensive, had
become cautious to. excess ; his mind tenacious
of any bent it had.once taken, could not assume
Sa contrary one as suddenly as the change of cir-
cumftances, required; and he still continued to
repeat his favourite maxims, that it was more
prudent to allow the lion to escape, than to drive
iim to despair; and that a bridge of gold thould
lbe made for a retreating enemy.

THE Emperor having conduaed the thattered

remains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,
and appointed the marquis del Guafto to succeed
Leyva in the government of the dutchy, -set
out for Getoa. As he could not bear to ex-
pose himself to the scorn of. the Italians,, after
such a fad reverse of fortune; and did not choofeb

"4 Mim, de Bellay, 316. Sandov. IHift. del Emper. ii,

L3

6iOOi -VI; uinder his: pfefent circumflances, to revisit those:

S3'6,., -ities'through which .he had so lately passed in

triumph for one conquest, and in certain expec..
tation of another ; he: embarked direlty for

November. Spain' ..

operations NOR was the progress of his arms on the op.
mi LicarlY. polite frontier of France such as to alleviate in

any degree the losses which he had sustained in

. Provence. Bellay by his address and intrigues

bad prevailed on so many of the German Prines.
to withdraw the contingent of troops which they,
had furnifled to the King of the Romans, thatl
he was obliged to lay aside all thoughts .of his
intended irruption into Champagne. Though
a powerful army levied in the Low Countries
entered Picardy , which ..they found but feebly
guarded, while the strength of the kingdom was.
drawn towards the south; yet the nobility tak-
ing arms with their usual alacrity, supplied by
their spirit the defets of the King's preparations,
and defended Peronne, and other towns which
were attacked, with such vigour, as obliged the
enemy to retire without making any conquest of
importance 1.

THus Francis., by the prudence of his own

measures, arid by the union and valour of his

Jovii Hiftor, lib. xxxv. p. 174, &c.

"" Mdm. de Bellay, 318, t&c.

fubjedts, rendered abortive those vast efforts in- Booit VI.
which his rival had almost exhaufled his whole is 3 6
force. As this humbled the Emperor's arrogance
no less than it checked his power , he was mor-
tified more sensibly on this occasion than on any
other, during the course of the long contefRs be-
tween him and the French IVIonarch.

ONE circumfiance alone embittered the joy Death of the

with which the success of the campaign' inspired Dauphin.
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his.eldeft son, a Prince of great hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
resemblance to his father. This happening fud-
denly, was imputed to poison, not only by the
Vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
personages to extraordinary causes , but by the
King and his ministers. The count de Monte-Imputed to
cupuli, an Italian nobleman, cup-bearer to the poi"on.
Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and put to
the torture, openly charged the Imperial gene-
rals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with having infti-
gated him to the commission of that crime: he
even threw out some indiredt and obscure accufa-
tiohs against the Emperor himself. At a time
when all France was animated with implacable
lhatred againit Charles, this uncertain and extorted
charge was considered as an inconteftible proof
of guilt; while the confidence with which both
he and his officers asserted their own innocence,

L4.

BooiK VI. together with the indignation -as well as horrot

i S36. which they expr.essed on their being, supposed

capable of. such a *detestable action, were little
attended 'to , and less regarded '.. It is evident,
however, that the Emperor could have no in-
, ducement to perpetrate such a crime, as Francis
was still in the vigour of life himself ; and .had.
two sons, beside the Dauphin, grown up to a
good age. That single consideration ,

" withdut,

menitioning the Emperor's general chara&des
unblemished by the imputationr of any deed r-,
fembling this .in atrocity , is more than 'fifM
ficient to counterbalance the weight of a dubioius
testimony uttered during the anguish of torture 8'
According to the most unprejudiced hiftoriaiis;
the Dauphin's death was occasioned by "his hav-
inig drunk too freely of cold water after over~
heating himself at tennis; and this account, as
it is the most simple, is likewise the most cre-
dible. But if his days were cut short by poison;
it is not improbable that the .Emperor confi
jedured rightly, when he affirmed that it had
been administered by the diredion of Catharine
of Medicii, in order to secure the crown to the
Duke of Orleans, her husband '". The advan-
tages resulting to her by the' Dauphin's death,
'were obvious as well as great; nor did her:

" N4m. de Bellay, 289.

" Sandov. Hist. del Emper. ii. 2 !.

S-'9 Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlos V. p. 7;.

boun'dlefs. and daring ,ambition' ever ,scruple at B:oOK VL1.
any;-a&ionri necessary .towards; attaining the .ob- s 36
jeds .which she. had in view.!.

' ;NE-XT year opened with a tranfadion very 1

7-

uncommon, but so. incapable of producing, any LDecree of
effed, that it would n'otdeferve to be mentioned, the parlia

r

" i 1"1i 1 ment

OI

if it were not, a striking. proof of the- perfonalparis'againF
animosity which mingled :itself in! all the hofti- the Empe-
lities between Charles and Francis-, and which
often betrayed them into fich indecencies to-
wairds each other, as lessened 'the dignity of
both. Francis, .accompanied by the peers -and
princes of the blood, having taken his feat in
the: parliament of Paris with the usual folemni-
ties, .the advocate-general appeared; and after
accuiing Charls. of Aufiria (for bfo he affected
to call the Emperor), of having violated the.
treaty of Cambray, by which he was; absolved
from the homage due to, the crown of France-
for the counties of Artois iand Slanders, infifted"
that this treaty being now void, he was still to
be considered as'a vassal of the crown, and by
consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in
taking arms against his sovereign; and therefore
he demanded that Charles should be summoned
to appear in person, or by his- counsel, before
the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to an-
fwer for his crime., The - request was granted

i

a herald repaired to the frontiers of Picardy, and

JBo0K VI.' funinioned him with the. accustomed formalities,

'5 3 7. to appear against 'a day prefixed. That termn

being expired, and no person appearing in .his
namrne, the parliament gave judgment, " That
Charles of Auftr'ia had forfeited: by rebellion ahd

,,:iontumacy those fiefs.; declared :,Slanders :and

Artois to be re-united to the crown of' France;
and" ordered their decree for this, purpose to be
publish.ed by found iof trumpet on the frontiers
of these provinces. "

Campaign SooN after this v.ain display of his resentment,
ctheeLow, rather than of his power, ,Francis marched to-
Countries. Wards the Low Countries, as if he had intended
March. to execute the: feaitence which his parliament had

pronounced, and to seize those territories which
i't-had awarded to him, As the Queen of Hun-
gary, . to whom her brother the Emperor had
ecormmit'tedi the government of that part of his
dominions, was, not prepared for so early a cam-
paign, he at first made some progress, and took
several towns of' importance. But being obliged
soon to leave his; army, in order to superintend
the other operations of war, the Flemings hayv
ing affemrbled a numerous army, not only .re-
covered most of the places which they had loft,
butt began to -make conquests in their turn. At

'., Lettres et M6moirces{ d'Etat, par Rihier, z tom. Blois

'~666. torn. i . p. I.. .

Last they invested Terouenne, and the Duke of BOOKI VI.
Orleans, now Dauphin, by the death of his 1 37-
brother, and Montmorency, whom Francis had
honoured with the conftable's sword, as the re.
vward of his great -services during the former
campaign, determined to hazard a battle in
order to relieve it. While they were advancing A nfupen.
forthis purpose, and within a few miles of the sos arms
efemy, they were ftopt short by the arrival of an
herald from the Queen of Hungary, acquaint-
ing him that a suspension of arms was now
agreed upon.

THIS unexpected event was owing to the zeal-
ous endeavours of the two fifiers, the Queens
of France and of Hungary, who had long la-
boured to reconcile the contending IMonarchs,
The war in the Netherlands had laid waste the
frontier provinces of both countries, without any
real advantage to either. The French and
Flemings equally regretted the intrerruption of
their commerce, which was beneficial to both.
Charles as well as Francis, who had each strained
to the utmosT, in order to support the vast opera-
tions of the former campaign, found that they;
could not now keep armies on foot in this quar-
ter, without weakening their operations in Pied-
mont, where both wished to push the war with
the greatest vigour. All these circumstances fa- July so.
cilitated the negociations of the two Queens a

Bi00 VI. truce :-as concluded, to continue in force so0

ri ;.7. ten mnonths, but it extended no farther than the

Low Conrtries".

and in IN Piedmont the war was still prosecuted with
Piedlmolt. great :animosity; and. though neither Charles

nor Francis could make; the powerful efforts ta
which .this animosity: prompted them, they can,
tinied.-.to exert- themselves like combatants,
whiofe rancour- remains after their strength is ex,
haufted. Towns were alternately loft and re,
taken ; skirmishes were fought every day; and,
much blood was shed, without any decisive ac-
tion , that gave the superiority to either fide. At
last the two Queens, determining not to leav.
unfinifhed' the good work which they had' begun,
prevailed, by their importunate folicitations, the
one on. her

. brother, the other on" her hufbasnd,

to confei.t also to' a truce in Piedmont for three
months. The conditions of it were, that each
should keep poffeftion of what was in his hands,
and after leaving garrisons in the towns, should
withdraw his army out of the province; and that
plenipotentiaries thould be appointed to adju~f
all tnatters in dispute by a final treaty-".

Motives of ' THE, powerful motives which inclined both
it, Princes to this accommodation, have been often

- n.en.toned. The. expences of the war had far

2 Mimoires de Ribier, 5j6. "" Ibid. 62~

exceeded the sums which their revenues were
capable of fupply'ing , nor durst they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established , as fubjeds were not yet taught to
bear with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times.
The Emperor , in particular , though he had
contradced debts which in that age appeared
prodigious ", had it not in his power to* pay
the large arrears long due to his army. At
the fame time he had no profped of deriving
any aid in money or men either from the
Pope or Venetians, though he had employed
promises and threats , alternately, in order to
procure it. But he found the former not only
fixed in his resolution of adhering Readily to the
neutrality which he had always declared to be
suitable to his character, but passionately desirous
of bringing about a peace. He perceived that the
latter were still intent on their ancient objea of
holding the balance even between the rivals,
and solicitous not to throw too great a wveight
into either scale. BOOK VI.

S5 37.

"VHAT made a deeper impression on Charles oFwhvchi

:than all these, was the dread of the Turkish Franis's asS
arms, which by his league with Solyman, Fran- :a" witih
cis had drawn upon him. Though Francis, Emperor the

"3Ribjer, i. Zg4.

·-BOOK VI. without the assistance of a single ally , had a wa

i n7. to : maintinai against an enemy greatly fuperiio
most con- in power to himself, yet so great was the horror
fiderable, of Christians, in that age, at any union with

TInfidels, whictihthey considered not only as djif
hbhourable but profane,' that it was long befor
he could be brought to avail himself of the o0b
vious' advantages refiulting from such a confede
racy. Necessity at last surmounted his delicacy
and fciruples. Towards the close of the preced.
ing year, La Forest, a secret agent at the Ottb0
man Porte, had concluded a treaty with thi
Sultan, whereby Sblyman engaged to invade
the kingdom of Naples, during the next canm
paign, and to attack the King of the Romans
in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis
undertook" to enter the MIilanefe at the fame
time with a proper force. Solyman had punc-
tually performed what was incumbent ori him,
Barbarossa with a great fleet .appeared on the
coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from which
all the trobps had been drawn towards Piedmont,
with consternation, landed without resistance
near Taranto, obliged Castro, a place of some
ftirength, to Sfurrender., plundered the adjacent
country, and was taking mneafures for securing
and extending his conquefs, when the unexped-
ed*'arrival of Doria , together with the Pope's
gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian fleet,
made it prudent for him to retire. In Hungary

he progress of the Turks. was. more formidable., BOK VI.

lahmet, .their general, after gaining several i537.

riall advantages, defeated the Germans in, a
great battle at Effek on the Drave .". Happily
frChriftendom, it was not jn .Francis's: power
so execute with equal exadnefs what he had fli-
pulated; nor could he assemble at this juncture
a1 army strong enough to penetrate into the Mli-.
[snefe. By this he failed in recovering. poffeffion
of:that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved
from the calamitios of a new war, but from
feeling the desolating rage of the Turkish arms,
as an addition to all that it had fuffered ". As
the Emperor knew that he could not long resist
the efforts of. two such powerful confederates,
nor could exped that the fame fortunate acci-
dents would ioncur a second time to deliver
Naples, and to preserve the Milanese: As he
foresaw that the Italian Rfates would not only
tax him loudly with insatiable ambition, but
might even turn their arms against him, if he
Thould be so regardless of their danger as obfti-
nately to protract the war, he thought it necef-
fary, both for his safety and reputation, to give
his content to a truce. Nor was Francis willing
to sustain all the blame of obftruding the re-
establishment of peace, or to expose himself on

2+ Iftuanheffi Hist. Hung. lib. xiii. p. I39.
..' Jovii. Hiftor. lib. xxxv. p. 283.

' is. Vi.

go . BUT though both parties* confepted to a truce;

Negocia-.
tiolns ofa the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficul.
peace be- ties in fettling the articles .of a definitive treaty,
tweel charles and Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance 6f
Francis. a conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other;

and neither would so far acknowledge his infe-
riority, as to sacrifice any 'point of honour, or
to relinquish any matter of right; so that the

,538. plenipotentiaries spent the time in long and fruit.

less negociations, and separated after agreeing to
prolong the truce for a few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair of ac-
conduas complifhing a point in which the plenipotentiaries

e in per had failed, and took upon himnfelf the sole bur-

den

that'a'c tiunt o

t
' he danger of being deserted by

the Swvifs- ad. oth

° erdforeigners in his service: lie

even. I- bgan't appreherid that his own fubjeds
woild T'ervehliir -coldly, if' by contributing to
agianidize the 'pBwer of the Infidels, wYhich i
v/as-his dtity, and had been the ambition of his
aincefors todeprefs,; he'.continued to act in dired
opposition to all 'the principles which' ought tb
influence a Moharch distinguished by the title&if
VIoffl Christian King. He chose, for, all these
reasons, rather to run .the rift of difobliging his
new ally the Sultan, than, by an- unseasonable
adherence to the treaty with him , to fo'rfeit
what was of greater consequence.

deni of negociating a peace. To form a confe- BooK VI.
deracy capable of defending Christendom from i(; 8.
the formidable inroads of the Turkish arms, and
to concert effedual measures for the extirpation
of the Lutheran -heresy, were two great objeds
which Paul had much at heart, -and he considered
the union of the Emperor wiith the King of
France as an essential preliminary to both. To
be the instrument of reconciling these contends
inig Monarchs whom his predecessors; by. their
interested and indecent intrigues had so often
embroiied, was a circumstance which could not
fail of throwing diftinguifhirrg lustre on his cha-
rader and administration. Nor was he without
hopes that, -while he pursued this laudable end,
he might secure advantages to his own family,
the aggrandizing of which he did not negledt,
though he aimed at it with a less audacious am-
bition than was common among the Popes .o'f
that century. Influenced by these confidera-
tions, he proposed an interview between the°
two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair
thither in person , that he might ad as mediator
in composing all their differences WXVhen a
Pontiff of a venerable charadter, and of very
advanced age, was willing, "from his zeal for
peace, to undergo the fatigues of such a distant
journey, neither Charles nor Francis could with
decency decline the interview. But though both
came to the place of rendezvous, so great was

Volr, IlL 1,

BooK VI. the difficulty of adjuffing the ceremonial, or such

ix 3. the remains of difftruft and rancour on each fide,

that they refused to fee one another, and every
thing was tranfaded by the intervention of the
Pope, who visited them alternately. With all
his zeal and ingenuity he could not find out a
method of removing the obstacles which pre.
vented a final accommodation, particularly those
arising from the poffeffion of the IVlilanefe; nor
was. all the weight of his authority fufficient to
overcome the obstinate perseverance of either

A truce for Monarch in asserting his own claims. At last,
ten years that he might not seem to have laboured altoge.
atNice. ther without effed, he prevailed on them to sign
June is. a truce for ten years, upon the fame condition

with the former, that each should -retain what
was now in his poffeffion, and in the mean time
should fend ambassadors to Rome, to discuss
their pretensions at leisure '.

• THUS ended: a war of no long continuance,
but very extensive in its operations, and in which
both parties exerted their utmost strength.
Though Francis failed in the objed that he had
principally in view, the recovery of the Mila-
nefe, he acquired nevertheless, 'great reputa-
tion by the wisdom of his measures as well as'

2" Recueil des Traitez, ii. 21o. Relazione di Nicolo

Tiepolo deli' abboccamento di Nizza, chez Du Mont Corps
£Diplonmat. part, ii. p. 1*74

the success of his arms in repulsing a formidable Boor VL
invasion; and by securing poffeffion of one half x 8,,
of the Duke of Savoy's dominiions, 'he added,no
inconsiderable accession to his kingdom. Whereas
Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boalft
ed so 'arrogantly of :vidory, purchased an inglo-
rious truce, by sacrificing an ally who had rashly
confided too much in his friend-ship and power.
The unfortunate Duke murmured, complained,
and remonstrated against a treaty. so much to his
disadvantage, but in vain; he had no means of
redress, and was obliged, to submit. Of all his
dominions, Nice,. with its dependencies, was
the only corner of which he himself kept posses-
sion. He saw the reft divided between a power-
ful invader and the' ally to whole- prote5ion he
had trusted, while he remained a fad monument
of the imprudence of weak -Princes,, who by
taking part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours%,
between whom they happen to be situated,
are crushed and overwhelmed in the shock.

A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce, interview;

the Emperor set. fail for Barcelona, but was between

. . Charles and

driven by contrary winds to the island 'St. IVar-Francis ac
garet on the coast of Provence. When Francis, Aigues-
who happened to be not far distant, heard of lo

ttes

this, he considered, it as an office of civility to
invite him to take shelter in his dominions, and
proposed a personal interview with him at

Ma

BOOr VL Aigues-mortes. The Emperor, who would not

aS 3.8 be, out-d6ne by his rival in co:mplaisance, instantly

repaired thither.. ;As, soon- as he cast anchor in
the road, Francis, without' waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relyiing implicitly on
the:.'Emperor's honour for his security, visited
him on board,-his galley, and was received and
entertained" withi the warmest demonstrations of
esteem and affe&ioni. Next -day the Emperor
repaid the confidence which .the King had placed
in him. He landed at Aigues' mortes with as
little precaution , and met' with a reception
equally cordial He remained, on shore during
the night, and in both visits they vied with each
other in expressions of refped and friendship '.
After twenty years of open hofftilities, or of fe:
cret enmity; after so many injuries reciprocally
i'nflided or endured; after having formally given
the lie and challenged one another to single coma
bat; after the Emperor had inveighed so pub-
lickly against Francis as a Prince void of honour.
or integrity; and Francis had accused him as
accessary to the murder of his eldest son, such an
interview appears altogether singular and even
unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs
abounds with such surprising transitions. From

27 Sandov. Hist. vol. ii. 2 8. 'Relation de l'entrevue de

Charl. V. & Fran. I. par M. de la Rivoire. Hist. de Lan-
gued. par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette. tom. v. Preuves. p. 93*

implacable enmity they appeared to pass, in a BOOK VI.
moment , to the' most cordial reconcilement; 1538.
from suspicion and distrust to: perfedtconfidence;
and from praAifing all the dark arts of a deceit-
ful policy, they could assume, of a fudden,.the
liberal and open manners of two gallant gentle-

men.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having re-
stored peace to Europe, gained, according to
his expedation, a point of great consequence to
his family, by prevailing on the Emperor to be-
troth Margaret of Austria, his natural daughter,
formerly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to
his grandson Octavio Farnese, and in confidera-
tioh of this marriage, to bestow several honours
and territories upon his future son - in - law. A The arami,
very tragical event, which happened about the nati or

Alexander

beginning of the year one thousand five hundred i Medii.
and thirty-feven , had deprived Margaret of her
first husband. T-hat young Prince, whom the
Emperor's partiality had raised to the supreme
power in Florence, upon the ruins of the publick
liberty, negleded entirely the cares of govern-
ment, and abandoned himself to the mofl diffo-
lute debauchery. Lorenzo di MIVedici his nearest
kinsman was not only the companion but direc-
tor of his pleasures, and employing all the
powers of a cultivated and inventive genius in
this dishonourable minifiry, added such elegance

M 3,

Book VI.

15 8, as. well as variety to vice as gained him an abfo.

lute .ascendant over the mind of Alexander. But
while Lordhzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and
affe&ed such. an appearance of indolence and
effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword,
and trembled at the fight of blood, he toncealed
under that disguise, a dark, designing. audacious
spirit. Prompted either by the love of liberty,
or allured by the hope of attaining the supreme
power, he determined to affaffinate Alexander
his benefadtor and frierid. Though he long
revolved this design in his mind, hiS reserved
and fu'fpicious temper prevented him from com.
rnunicating it to any person whatever; and con-
tinuing to live with Alexander in their ufial
familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an assignation with a lady of
high rank whom he had often solicited , drew
that unwary Prince into a secret apartment of his
house, and there stabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch expecting the arrival of the
lady whose company he had been promised. But
no sooner was the deed done, than flanding
astonished, and ftruckwitfh horror at its atrocity,
he forgot, in a moment, all the motives which
had induced him to commit it. Instead of rous-
ing the people to recover, their liberty by pub-
lifhing the death of the tyrant, instead of taking
any step towards opening his own way to the
dignity now vacant, he locked the door of the

apartment, and, like a man bereaved of reason BOOK VI.
and presence of mind, fled with the utmost pre- 1538.
cipitation out of the Florentine territories. It
was late next morning before the fate of the un.
fortunate Prince was known, as his attendants,
accustomed to his irregularities, never entered his
apartment early. Immediately the chief persons
in the state assembled. Being induced partly by w
the zeal of cardinal Cibo for the house of Me-
dici, to which he was nearly related, partly by
the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who re- Cormo di
called to their memory and represented in ftrik- "eici

placed at the

ing colours the caprice as well as turbulence Of head of the
their ancient popular government, they agreed Florentine
to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eighteen,cate.
the only male heir of that illustrious house, at
the head of the government; though at the
fame time such was their love of liberty, that
they established several regulations in order to
circumscribe and moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place 1s1 govern-

.of safety, made known cohat he had done, to menrt opo-
Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who eby then
had been driven into exile, or who had vo- exiles.
luntarily retired, 'when the republican form
of government was abolished, in order to make
way for the dominion of the Medici. By
them, the deed was extolled with extravagant
praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was compared

M4

BOOKI VI. with that of the- elder Brutus, who disregarded

1 38. the ties of blood, or with that of the younger,,

who forgot the friendship and favours of the.
tyrant . that they might preserve or recover the
liberty of their country '. Nor did they refV
fatsisied with empty panegyricks ; they imme.
diately quitted their different places of retreat,

e assembled forces, animated their vassals and par.

tifans to take arms, and to seize this oppor-
tunity of re-eftablilhing the publick liberty on its
ancient foundation. Being openly assisted by
the French ambassador at Rome, and secretly
encouraged .by the Popes, who bore no good-
will to the house of IVMedici, they entered the
Florentine dominions with a considerable body
of men. But the persons who had elected Cosmo
poffeffed not only the means of supporting his
government, but abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner. They levied, with the
greatest expedition, a good number of troops;
they endeavoured by every art to gain the citi-
zens of greatest authority, and to render the
adminiffration of the young Prince agreeable to
the people. Above all, they courted the Em-
peror's protection, as the only firm foundation
of Cofmo's dignity and, power. Charles, know- .
ing the propensity of the Florentines to the
friendship of France, and how much all the
partisans of a republican government detested

"s Lettere de' Principi, torn. iii. p. 5z.

him as the oppressor of their'liberties, saw it to
be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-efRa-
blifhment of the ancient constitution in Florence.
For this reason, he not only acknowledged
Cofrno as head of the Florentine state, and con-
ferred on him all the titles of honour with which
Alexander had been dignified , but engaged to
defend him to the utmost; and. as a pledge of
this, ordered the commanders of -Such of his
troops as were stationed on the frontiers of Tuf-
cany, to support him against all aggressors. By
their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy vidory over
the exiles , whose troops he surprised in the
night-time, and took most of the chiefs pri-
foners: an event which broke all their measures,
and fully' eliablifhed his own authority. But
though he was extremely desirous of the addi-
tional honour of marrying the Emperor's daugh-
ter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles, fe-
cure already of his attachment, chose rather to
gratify the Pope, by beftowing her on his ne-
phew ". BooKr VI

1538.

<

DuRING the war between the Emperor and The friend-
Francis, an event had happened which abated Ship betweena

Francis and

in some degree the warmth and cordiality ofenry VIm.
friendlhip which had long subsisted between the begins to

abate.

" Jovii Hist. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment.

1. xxii. p, 696. Iftoria de' fuoi tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani.
Ven.'i5 87. p. Io.

B6oO VI. latter and the'King of England. James the Fifth
1538. of Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince, hav.

ing heard of the Emperor's intention to invade
Provence, was so fond of fhewing that he did
not yield to any of his ancestors in the sincerity
of his attachment 'to the French crown, andi'
eager to diftinguiflh himself by some militaiy
exploit, that he levied a body of troops widti
an intention of leading them in person to the
assistance of the King of France. Though some
unfortunate accidents prevented his carrying any
troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately upon
his landing, he baftened to Provence, but had
been' detained so long in his voyage that he came
too late to have any share in the military opera-
tions, and met the King on his return after the
retreat of the Imperialists. But' Francis was so
greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with
his manners and conversation, that he could not
refuse him his daughter Magdalen, whom he

3an. ,. demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-
a337. tremely to fee a Prince of whom he was immo-

derately jealous, form an alliance, from which
he derived such an accession of reputation as well
as security 3". He could not, however, with de.
cency, oppose Francis's beftowing his daughter
upon a MVonarch descended from a race of

° Hist. of Scotlaind, vol. i. p. 77,

Princes, the most ancient and faithful allies of BooK VI.
the French crown. But when James, upon the ,s38.
sudden death of Magdalen, demanded as his
second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly soli-
cited Francis to deny his suit, and in order to
disappoint him, asked that lady in marriage for
himfeif. When Francis preferred the Scottish
King's sincere courtship to his artful and male-
yolent proposal , he discovered much diffatis-
fation. The pacification agreed, upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if ,Francis had altogether renoun-
ced his friendship for the fake of new connec-
tions with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly The Empe-
acquainted with the temper of the Engliflh King,ror courts
and watchful to observe all the ihiftings and '
caprices of his .passions, thought this a favour-
able opportunity of renewing his negociations
with him, which had been long broken off. By
the death of Queen Catharine, whose interest the
Emperor could not with decency have abandon-
ed, the chief cause of their discord was removed;
so that without touching upon, the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take what
measures he thought most effpedual for regaining
Henry's good-will. For this purpose, he began
with proposing several marriage-treaties to the
King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the
King of Denmark, to Henry , himself ; he de-

Bo oK, VI.

I5 3 8. manded the Princess Mary for one of the Princes

of Portugal, and was even willing to receive her
as the King's illegitimate daughter ". Though
none of these projeded alliances ever took place,
or perhaps were ever- seriously intended, they
occasioned such frequent intercourse .between the
courts, and so many reciprocal profeffions of
civility and esteem, as considerably abated the
edge of Henry's rancour against the Emperor;
and paved the way for that union between them
which afterwards proved so disadvantageous to
the French King,

progrets of THE ambitious schemes in, which the Empe.
the Refor- rOr had been engaged, and the wars he had been

carrying on for some years, proved, as usual, ex-
tremely favourable to the progress of the Refor-
mation in Germany. While Charles was absent
upon his African expedition, or intent on his
vast projeds against France, his chief objed in
Germany was to prevent the dissensio.ns about
religion from disturbing the publick tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the Protestant
Princes as might induce them to concur with
his measures, or at'leaft hinder them from tak-
ing part with his rival. For this reason, he was
careful to secure to the Protestants the poffefimon
of all the advantages which they had gained by
the articles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the

"' Mitm. de Ribier, t. i. 496.

year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two3'; Boorc VI
and except some flight trouble from the pro- x5.38.
ceedings of the Imperial chamber, they met with
nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their
religion, or to interrupt the fuccefsful zeal with
which they propagated their opinions. Mean- Negocia-
while the Pope continued his negociations for tions and

intrigues

convoking a general council; and though the with refpe&
Protestants had expressed great diffatisfadionto a general
with his intention to fix upon Mantua as the
place of meeting, he adhered obstinately to his
choice, issued a bull on the second of June, one
thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing
it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of
IlMay the year following; he nominated three
cardinals to preside in his name ; enjoined .all
Christian Princes to countenance it by their au-
thority, and invited th'e prelates of every nation
to attend in person. This citation of a council,
an assembly which from its nature and intention
demanded quiet times, as well as pacifick difpo-
fitions, at the very jundure when the Emperor
was on his march towards France, and ready to
involve a great part of Europe in the confusions
of war, appeared to every person extremely un-
seasonable. It was intimated, however, to all
the different courts by nuncios dispatched of

D Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part &. p. 13 8d

r 38.

Feb. 2;.
1537. Germans, the Emperor, during his residence

in Rome,, had .warmly solicited the Pope to call
a council; but-:being at the fame time willing to
try every art in order to persuade Paul to de,
part from the neutrality which he preserved be,
tween him and Francis, he' sent Heldo his vice;
chancellor into Germany, along with a nuncio
dispatched thither; in'ftruding him to fecoind
all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce
them with the whole weight of the Imperial au.
thority." The Protestants gave them audience
at Smalkalde, where they had assembled in'a
body, in order to receive them. But after
weighing all their arguments they unanimously
rejfufed to acknowledge a council summoned in
*the name and by the authority of the Pope
alone, in which he assumed the sole right of pr.
siding; which was to be held in a city not only
far distant from Germany , but fubjed to'a
Prince, a stranger to them, and closely conned
ed with the court of Rome; and to which their
divines could not repair with safety, especially
after their doatrines had been stigmatized in the
very bull of convocation with the name of
:heresy. These and many other obje&ions againfi
(the council, which appeared to them unanfwer-
able, they enumerated in a large manifesto,

" Pallavic. Hist. Cone. Trid.

xx 3.

which they publilhed in vindication of their con- .BooK VI.

duc.... i* 38.

.AGAINST this, the court of Rome exclaimed
as a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and pre-
sumption, and the, Pope still persisted in his re-
solution to hold the council at the time and in
the place appointed. But some unexpeted dif-
ficulties being started by the Duke of VIantua,
both about the right of jurifdiAion over the per-
sons who resorted to the council, and the fecu-
rity of his capital amidst such a concourse of
fitrangers, the Pope, after fruitless endeavours
to adjust these, first prorogued the council for oaob. 8,
some months, and afterwards transferring the 1s38.
place of meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian ter-
ritories, appointed it to assemble on the firit of
May in the following year. As neither the Em-
peror nor French King, who had not then come-
to any accommodation, would permit their sub-
jeds to repair thither, not a single prelate ap-
peared on the day prefixed, and the Pope, that
his authority might not become altogether con-
temptible by so many ineffetual intimations,
put off the meeting by an indefinite proroga.
tion ".

"' Sleidan. 1. xii. z 12, &c. Seckend. Com. lib, iii. p.

14., &c.

£ F. Paul, 11x7. Pallavic. ixx

oo
0I VL BUT, that he might not seem to have' turned
18- :. his whole attention towards a reformnati.
Spartial which he was not able to accomplish, while he
reformation .
ofabufes'byfnegleC~ed that" which was in his own power,
the pope. 'he deputed a certain number of cardinals.and

bishops , with full authority. to inquire into'th'e
abuses and corruptions of the Roman court; and
to propose the most effe&ual method of remov.
ing thenm. The scrutiny, 'undertaken with re.
luctance, was carried on slowly and with remiif.
ness. All defects were touched with a geitk
hand, afraid of probing too deep, or of difcovey.
ing too much. But even by this partial exai

*

... nation, many irregularities 'were detedced, anid

many enormities Exposed -to light, while th'e re.
medides which they fuggeftcd as most propef,
\vere either inadequate , or were never applied.
The report and resolution of these deputies,
. though intended to be kept secret, were tratif
mnitted by some accident .into Germany, and be.
ing immediately made publick , afforded ample
matter for. reflection and triumph to the Pi-.l
teftants ". On the one hand they demonstrated
the necessity of a reformation in the head as well
as the'members of the church, and even pointed
out many of the corruptions against which Lui
ther and his followers had remonstrated with the
greatest vehemence. They fhewed,'on the othei

3" Sleidan. 23 3

hand,

Sand, that it was vain to exped this reforma- BOOK Te.
tion from ecclefiafticks themselves, who, as Li-

x 39.

tier ftrqngly expressed it, piddled at curing
warts, while they overlooked ·or confirmed ul.

37

cers .

THE earnefinefs with which the Emperor A league

formed it

seemed, at first, to press their acquiescing 'in the oppoftion
Pope's scheme of -holding a council in Italy, to that at
alarmed the Protestant Princes so much, thatsmalkal0e;
they thought it prudent to strengthen their con-
federacy, by admitting several new members
·who solicited that privilege , particularly the
King of Denmark. Heldo, who, during his re-
fidence in Germany, had observed all. the ad-
vantages which they derived from that union,
endeavoured.to counterbalance its effects by an
alliance among the Catholick powers of the Em-
pire. This league distinguished by the name of
Holy, -was merely defensive; and though con-
cluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes 3.

THE Protestants soon got -intelligence of this alarms th,

association, notwithstanding all the endeavours protetantu.
of the contracting .parties to conceal it ; and
their zeal, always apt to fufped and to dread,

7 Seek. 1. iii. 164. 3" Seek. 1. iii. I71. Recuei,

des Traitez.

. VOL. 111 N

' oOK V. eyen to excess, every thing ,that seemed to

1539. threaten religion,, instantly. took the alarm as if

th Emnpero:r hadkbeen just ready to enter upon
the execution of ifome formidable plan for the
extirpation of their opinions. In order to difap,
point this, they held frequent consultations, they
courted the Kings of France and England with
great assiduity, and even began to think of rails
ing the refpedlive contingents both in men and
money which they were obliged to furnish by the
treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not long be.
fore they were convinced that these apprehenw
fions were without foundation, and that the
Emperor ,' to whom repose was absolutely necef.
fary after efforts so much beyond his strength -in
the war with France, had no thoughts of dif.
turbing the tranquillity of Germany. As a proof
of this , at an interview with the *Protestant

apri1 19. Princes in Francfort, his, ambassadors agreed that

all concessions in their favour, particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
thould continue in force for fifteen months;
that during this period all proceedings of-the
Imperial chamber against them Thould be surf
pended; that a conference ihould be held by a
few divines of each party, in order to discuss the
points in controversy, and to propose articles of
accommod'ation which Thould be laid before the
next diet. Though the Emperor, that he might
not irritate the Pope, who remonstrated against

the first part of this agreement as impolitick, BOOK Vt»
and against the latter as an impious encroach- 1539.
ment upon his prerogative,, never formally rati-
fied this convention, it was observed with confi-
derable exaaCnefs, and greatly strengthened the
basis of that ecclesiastical liberty, for which the

,

Protestants contended ".

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, April W
George Duke of Saxony died, and his death was iRefonma:
an event of great advantage to the Reformation. blished in
That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or younger eery part oF

or yog Saxony.

branch of the Saxon family, poffeffed, as marquis
of Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dresden, Leipfick , and other
cities now the most cQnfiderable in the eledorate.
From the first dawn of the Reformation, he had
been its enemy as avowedly as the eledoral
Princes were its protectors, and had carried on
his opposition not only with all the zeal flowing
'from religious prejudices, but with a virulence
inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and
imbittered by the'domeftick animosity subsisting
between him and the other branch of his family.
By his death without issue, his succession fell to
his brother Henry, *whose attachment to the
Protestant religion surpassed, if possible, that of
his predecessor to popery. Henry no sooner took

"9 F, Paul, 82. Sleid. 247. Seck. 1. iii. 2oo.

N

DOOK VI. poffeffion of his new dominibns, than, disregard.

Aj39. ing a clause in George's will, dictated by his

bbigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his terri,
tories to the Emperor and King of the Romans
if his brother hiould attempt to make any inno.
vation in religion, he invited some Protestant
divines, and among them Luther himself, to
Leipfick. By their advice and assistance , he
overturned in a few weeks the whole fyftern of
ancient rites, establishing the full exercise of the
reformed religion, with the universal applatife
of his fabjeds, who had long wished for this
change, which the authority of their Duke alone
had hitherto prevente4d ". This revolution de.
livered the Protestants from the danger to which
they were exposed by having an inveterate ene.
my situated in the middle of their territorieS;
and their dominions now extended in one great
and almost unbroken line from the shore of the
Baltick to the banks of the Rhine.

A mutiny SOON after the conclusion of the truce at
ofthe Tmpe-Nice, an event happened, which satisfied all
-rialtroops. Europe that Charles had prosecuted the war to

the utmost extremity that the state of his affairs
would permit. Vast arreftrs were due to his
troops, whom he had long amused with vain
hopes and promises. As they now foresaw what

40 Sleidan, 249.

little attention would be paid to their demands, BOOKr VL
when by the re-establishment of peace their ser- Isj 9.
vices became of less importance, they loft all
patience, broke out into an open mutiny, and de-
dared that they thought themselves entitled to
seize by violence what was detained from them
contrary to all justice. Nor was this spirit of
redition confined to one part of the Emperor's
dominions; the mutiny was almost as general- as
the grievance which gave rife to it. The folb
diers in the Milanese plundered the open counr
try without controul, and filled the capital itself
with confiternation. Those in garrison at Go-
letta threatened to give up that important fort-
refs to Barbarossa. In Sicily the troops proceeded
to frill greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they eleted others in their stead,
defeated a body of men whom the viceroy sent
against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conduting themselves all the while, in such a
manner, that their operations resembled rather
the regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion,
than the rashness and violence of a military mu.
tiny. But by the address and prudence of the
generals , who partly by borrowing money in
their own name, or in that of their master,
partly by extorting large sums from the cities
in their refpedive provinces, raised what was
ls cient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers,

~N 3

[BooK VI these infurredions were quelled. The greater

5 39. part of the troops being disbanded, such a nuinj

ber only being kept in pay as was necessary
•for garrisoning the principal towns, and pro,
ted6ing the sea-coasts from the insults of tlie
Turks *~

Cortes of IT was happy for the Emperor that the abi,
'fTle holities of his generals extribated him out of these

difficulties, which it exceeded his own powerto
have remobved. He had depended , as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his
soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expede'd
from his Castilian fubjeds. For this purpose,
he affernbled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo,
and having represented to them the great ex.
pence of his military operations, together with
the vast debts in which there had neceflarily in,
volved him , he proposed to levy such supplies
as the present exigency of his affairs demanded,
by a general excise on commodities. But the

The com. Spaniards already felt themselves oppressed with
diffatisfac- a load of taxes unknown /to their anceflors,
tion of that They had often complained that their country
affrmbiy. was drained not only of its wealth but of its.

inhabitants, in order to prosecute quarrels in
wrhich it was not interested, and to fight battles
from which it could reap no benefit, and they
determined not to .add voluntarily to ir

' Jovii 2Hiftor. 1. xxxvii. 2o3, Sandov. Ferreras,

ix. 209.

,wvn burdens, or to furnish the Emperor with BOOIK Vr,
the means of engaging in new enterprizes no less 1539.
ruinous to the kingdom than most of those which
he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular , inveighed with great vehemence
against the imposition proposed, as an encroach-
ment upon the valuable and distinguished pri-
vilege. of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. -They demanded
a conference with the representatives of the cities
concerning the state of the nation. They con-
tended that if Charles would imitate the example
of his predecessors, who had resided constantly
in Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in
a multiplicity of tranfadtions foreign to the con-
cerns of his Spanish dominions, the stated reve-
nues of the crown would be fully fufficient to
defray the necessary expences of government.
They represented to him, that it would be unjust
to lay new burdens upon the people, while this
prudent and effeatual method of re-eftablilhing
publick credit, and securing national opulence,
was totally negle6led '. Charles, after employ.
ing arguments, entreaties, and promises, but
without success, in order to overcome their ob-
ftinacy, dismissed the assembly with great indig-The ancient

S* conititution

nation. From that period neither the nobles nor of the Cortes
the prelates have been called to these assemblies, subverted.

*4 Sandov. Hilt. vol. ii. z69,

BOOK VI. 'on pretence that such as pay no part of the puyibr

zs39. lick taxes, should not claim any vote in laying

them on. None have been admitted to the Cortes
but the procurators or representatives of eigh.$
teen cities. These,, to the number of thirty fix,;
being two from each community, form an as4
fembly which bears no resemblance either ini
power or dignity or independence to the ancienri-
Cortes, and are absolutely at the devotion of the
court in all their determinations ' 1. Thus the
imprudent zeal with which the Caflilian nobles
had supported the regal prerogative, in oppo.
fition to the claims of the commons during the
commotions in the year one thousand five hun.
dred and twenty-one, proved at last fatal to
their own body. By enabling Charles to depress
one of the orders in the state, they destroyed
that balance to which the constitution owed its
security, and put it in his power , or in that of his
successors, .to humble the other, and to firip it
of its most valuable privileges.

The Spanish. AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees
grandees till poffeffed extraordinary power as well as pri.
itill poffeffed ., a

. d e f e n d

high privi- vileges , which they exercised and defended with
leges. an h'aughtinefs peculiar to themselves, Of this

the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof dui
ring the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As

43 Sandov. ibid. La Science du Gouvernement, par M.

de Real, torn, ii. p. Ioz.

: was returning one day from a tournament ac- BOOK VL
companied by most of the nobility, one -of the - s539
serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to
iclear the way for the Emperor, struck the Duke
of Infantado's horse with his batton, which that
hiaugh'ty grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat
'arid wounded the officer. Charles, provoked
at such an insolent deed in his presence, imme-
diately ordered Ronquillo the judge of the court
to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advanced to exe-
cute his charge, when the constable of Castile
interposing, checked him, claimed the right of
jurifdiaion over a grandee as a privilege of his
office, and conduced Infantado to his own apart.
ment. All the nobles ,present were so pleased
with the boldness of the constable in asserting
the rights of their order, that deserting the Em-
peror, they attended him to his house with in-
finite applaufes, and Charles returned to the
palace without any person along with him but
the cardinal Tavera. The Emperor, however
sensible of the affront, saw the danger of irri-
tating a jealous and high-fpirited order of
men, whom the slightest appearance of offence
might drive to the most unwarrantable extremes.
For that reason, instead of straining at any ill-
timed exertion of his prerogative, he prudently
connived at the arrogance of a body too potent
for him to contfroul, and sent next morning to
the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflia what

~3O0t( VI.

s~I539o punilihment he pleased on the person who had

affronted him. The Duke considering this as a
full reparation to his honour, instantly forgave
the officer; beftowing on him, besides, a con,
fiderable present as a compensation for his
wound. Thus the affair was entirely forgotten4';
nor would it have deserved to be mentioned, if
it were not a firiking example of the haughty.
and independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in
that age, as well as an inflance of the Emperor's
dexterity in accommodating his conduct to the
circumstances in which he was placed.

Infurreaion CHA1RLES was far from discovering any such
at Ghent. condescension or lenity towards the citizens of

Ghent, who not long after broke out into open
rebellion against his government. An event
which happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix,, gave occasion to this
rash infurredtion so fatal to that flourishing city.
At that time the Queen dowager of Hungary,
governess of the Netherlands, having received
orders from her brother to invade France with
all the forces which the could raise, The affem-
bled the States of the United Provinces, and ob.
tained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins to defray the expence of that
undertaking. Of this fum, the county of
Slanders was obliged to pay a third part as its

' Sandov, ii, 274. Ferreras," ix. 2 I2. Miniana, II z

porportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the most BooK VIt
considerable city in that country, averse to a 1s9g.
war with France, with which they carried on an Pretensions
extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay o the Cnut
their quota, and contended, that in consequence
of stipulations between them and the ancestors
of their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax
could be levied upon them, unless they had
given their express consent to the irnpofition of
it. The governess, on the other hand, main-
tained, that as the subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins had been granted by the States
of Slanders, of which their representatives were
members, they were bound, of course, to con-
form to what was enacted by them, as it is the
first principle in society, on which the tranquillity
and order of government depend, that the in-
clinations of the minority must be over-ruled
by the judgment and decision of the superior
number.

THE citizens of Ghent, Thowever, were not Proceedings

willing to relinquish a privilege of such highg'i
importance as that which they claimed. Having
been accustomed, under the government of the
house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immuni-
ties, and to be treated with much indulgence,
they difdained to sacrifice to the delegated power
of a regent, those rights and liberties which they
had often and fuccefsfully asserted against their

BOOK VTI, greatest Princes. The Queen, though she en;

Is<e,, deavoured at first to fcoth them, and to recon,

cile them to their duty by various concessions,
was at last so much irritated by the obstinacy with,
which they adhered to their claim, that Ibe or.
dered all the citizens of Ghent, on whom the
could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands,.
to be arrested. But this. rash ation made an
impression very different from what ihe expected,
on men, whose minds were agitated with all the
violent passions which indignation at oppreffionr
and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affeded with
the danger of their friends and companions, than
irritated at the governess, they openly despised
her authority, and sent deputies to the otheu
towns of Slanders, conjuring them not to aban,
don their country at such a junature, but to con.
cur with them in vindicating its rights against
the encroachments of a woman, who either did
not know or did not regard their immunities.
All but a few inconsiderable towns declined en-

, tering into any confederacy against the gover-

ness; they joined, however, in petitioning her
to put off the term for payment of the tax so
long, that they might have it in their power to
fend some of their number into Spain, in order
to lay their title to exemption before their fove-
reign. This flie granted with some difficulty.
But Charles received their commissioners with an
fhaughtinefs to which they' were not accustomed

from their ancient Princes, and enjoining them BOOKI VIA
to yield the fame refpedful obedience to his 15 39,
sifter, which they owed to him in person, re.
nitted, the examination of their claim to the
council of Malines. This court, which is pro-
perly a standing committee of the parliament or
states of the country, and which poffeffes the
supreme jurifdi&ion in all matters civil as well
as criminal "', pronounced the claim of the citi-
zens ops Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed.
them forthwith to pay their proportion ,of -the

tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they con- They take

fidered as notoriously unjust, and rendered de-ams andb-
fperate on feeing their rights betrayed by that mit to
very court which was bound to proted them, the ra"nc0
people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary
manner; drove such of the nobility as resided
among them out of the city; secured several
of the Emperor's officers ; put one of them
to the torture, whoma they accused of having
stolen or destroyed the record, that contained *
the privileges of exemption from taxes which
they pleaded; chose a council to which they
committed the dire&ion of their affairs; gave
orders for repairing and adding to their fortifi-

"+ Defcrizione di tutti i paefi bafli di Lud.c Guicciardini.

^nt. 1571. fol. p. 53.

IOOK V I.cations; and; openly ere&ed the standard of re,

5,39. .bellion against their sovereign 4. Sensible, how.

.ever, of their inability to, support what their
zeal had, prompted them to .undertake, and de,
firous of feeuring a protector against the for,
midable forces by ,which they might exped soon
to be attacked, they sent some of their number
to Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him,
as theilr sovereign, and to put him in immediate;
poffeflion of Ghent, but to affifit him with ,all
their porces in recovering those provinces in the
"Netherlands , which had anciently belonged to
the crown of France, and had been to lately re,
united to it by the decree of the parliament of;
Paris. This unexpeced proposition coming
from persons who had it in their power to have
performed infrantly one part of what they unde-r-
took, and who could contribute so effedcuallyri
towards the execution of the whole, opened vast-
as well as alluring profpeds to Francis's ambi-.
;ion. The counties of Slanders and Artois were
of greater value than the dutchy of Milan, which.

* -he had so long laboured to acquire with pals

fionate btit fruitless desire; their situation with
refped to France. rendered it more easy to con?
quer or to defend them ; and they might be
formed into a separate principality for the Duke

" MImoires fur la revolte des Gantois en

I 5 3 9, par Jean

d'Hollander, 6crits en 47. A la Haye I747. P. Heuter.
Rer. Auftr. lib. xi. p. z62. Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. p. 28,.

of Orleans, no less suitable to his dignity than BOOK VIt
that which his father aimed at 'obtaining. To

! 39.

this, the Flemings, who were acquainted with
the French manners and, government , would
not have been averse; and his. own fubjeds,
weary of their deftrutive expeditions into Italy,
would have turned their arms towards -this quar-
ter with more good-will, and with greater vi-
gour. Several considerations, nevertheless, pre- Francis de-
vented Francis from laying hold of this oppor- of her"
tunity, the most favourable in appearance which
had ever presented itself, of extending his domi-
nions or diftrefiing the Emperor. From the
time of their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles
had continued to court the King of France with
wonderful attention ; and often flattered hint
with hopes of gratifying at last his withes con-
,cerniig the Milanese, by granting the invefti-
ture of it either to him or to one of his sons. But
though these hopes and promises were thrown
out with no other intention than to detach him
from his confederacy with the Grand Seignior,
or to raifeifufpicions in Solyman's mind by the
appearance of a cordial and familiar intercourse
fubfrfting between the courts of Paris and Ma-
drid, Francis was weak enough to catch at the
shadow by which he had been so often deceived,
and from eagerness to seize it, relinquished what
mufft have proved a more substantial acquisition.
Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of

I"S$39.a seemed to be of a restless and enterprizing nature

Thoild obtain an establishment, which from its
situation might be considered almost, as a do.
meftick one, made use of Montmorency,. who, by
a singular piece of good fortune, .was at the
fame time the favourite of the father and of the
Ion, to defeat the application of the Flemings,
and to divert the King from espousing their caufel
1Montmorency, accordingly, represented in strong
terms, the reputation and power which Francis
would acquire by recovering that footing which
he had formerly in Italy, and that nothing could
be so efficacious to overcome the Emperor's aver-
sion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce;
and refusing on this occasion to countenance his
rebellious fubjets. Francis, apt of himself td
over-rate the value of the Nlilanefe, because he
estimated it from the length of time as well ai
from the great efforts which he had employed
in order to re-conquer it, and fond of every
adion which had the appearance of generosity,
assented without difficulty to sentiments so agree.
able to his own, rejeded the proposition of the
citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their deputies
with an harsh answer +.

+7 Mnm. de Bellay, p. 263. P. Heueer. Rer. Auftr. lib..

xi. 263.

.NOT

NOT satisfied with this, by a farther refine- BOOK VL
nient in generosity, he communicated to "'the x 3 9,
Emperor his whole negociation with the nmale- "cmmu"i-
contents, and all that.he knew of their schemes intestios
and intentions " This convincing proof ofto the Emni
Francis's disinterestedness relieved Charles frompe°or.
the most disquieting apprehensions. and opened .a
way to extricate himself out of all his difficulties,
He had already received full information of all
the tranfations in the Netherlands, and of the
rage with which the people of Ghent had taken
arms against his government. He was thoroughly
acquainted with the genius and qualities of his
fubjeCs iri that counritry; with their love of li-
berty; their attachment to their ancient privi-
leges and c.utoms; as well as the invincible ob-
finacy with which their minds, flow but firm
and persevering, .adhered to any measure on
which they had leisure to fix: He easily saw.
what encouragement and support they might
have derived from the assistance of France; and
though now free from any danger on that quar-
ter he was still sensible that some immediate as
,well as vigorous iritelpofition was neceffaryv , in
ordei to prevent the spirit of difaffedion from
spreading in a country where the number of
cities, the multitude of-people, together with
the great wealth diffufed among them by comrn-

" Sandov. Hifior. tom. ii. 2 84.

VoL. iiL

BooK VI. merce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and

1 39.. would supply it with inexhaustible resources,
Charles's No expedient, after long deliberation, appeared
donernting to him so effedual as his going in person to the
his journey Netherlands; and the governess his sifter being
to th e- f the fame opinion, warmly solicited him to

undertake the journey. There were only two
different routes which he could take; one by land,
through Italy and Germany, the other entirely
by' lea, from forne port in Spain to one in the
Low Countries. But the former was more te.
dious than suited the present exigency of his
affairs; nor could he in consistency with his ,dig.
nity or even his safety pass through Germany
without such a train both of attendants apd of
troops, as would have added greatly to the time
that he must have consumed in his journey; the
latter was dangerous at this season, and while
*he remained uncertain with refpedt to the friend.
ship of the King of England, was not to be ven,
tured upon, unless under the convoy of a power.
ful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which he
was under a necessity of chufing, and did not
know what to chufe, inspired him at last with the

Probpoes tofingular and seemingly extravagant thought of

a T"ough.paffing through France, as the most expeditious

way of, reaching the Netherlands. He proposed
in his council to demand Fiancis's permission for
that purpose. All his counsellors joined with
one voice in condemning the measure as no less

rash than unprecedented, and, which must infal- Booi VI.
libly expose him to difgrace-or to danger; to 539,
disgrace, if the demand were rejeded in the
manneir that he had reason to expetd; to danger,
if he put his person in the power of an enemy
whom he had often offended, who had ancient
injuries to revenge, as well as fubjeds of preferit
contest still remaining undecided. But Charles,
who had studied the charaeder of his rival with
greater care, and more profound discernment
than any of his ministers, persisted in his plan,
and flattered himself that it might be accom-
plifhed not only without danger to his own per-
son, but even without the expence of any con-
ceffioni detrimental to his crown.

WVIT this view he comnriuniated thd matter To which
to the French ambassador at his court, and sent Francis
Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to coun1'ts.
obtain from Francis permission to pass through
his dominions, 'and to promise that he would
soon fettle the affair of the MVlilanefe to his fatis-
fadion. But at the fame time he entreated that
Francis would not exad any new promise, or
even insist on former engagements, at this junc·
ture, left whatever he should granti, under his
present circumstances, might seem rather to be
extorted by necessity, thian to' flow froni friend-
ship or the love of justice. Francis, inflead of
attending to the snare which such a flight artifice

SBooK VI. scarcely concealed, was so dazzled with the

1x,39. splendour of overcoming an enemy by aads:of

generosity, and so pleased with the air of fupe,
riority which the reditude and disinterestedness
of his proceedings -gave him on this occasion,
that he at once, assented to all that was demand.
ed. Judging of the Emperor's heart hy his own,
he imagined that the sentiments of gratitude,
arising from the remembrance of good offices
and liberal treatment, would determine him
more forcibly to fulfil what he had so often
promised, than the most precise stipulations
that could be infer ted in any treaty.;

His rece. NUPON this, Charles, to whom every moment
tion in that was precious, set out, notwithstanding the fears
kingdom. and- suspicions of his Spanish fubjeds, with a

small .but splendid train of about an hundred
persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of
France, he was received by the Dauphin and
the Duke of Orleans, attended by the constable
IVlontmorency. The two Princes offered to go
into Spain, and to" remain there as hostages for
the "Emperor's safety; but this. he rejedted, de-
claring that he re1ed with implicit confidence
on the King's honour, and had never demanded
nor would accept of any other pledge for his fecu-
rity. In all the towns through which he passed,
the greatest possible magnificence was displayed;
the -magistrates prese.nted him the keys of the

gates; the prifon-doors were set open; and, by BooiK VI.
the royal* honours paid to him,, he appeared ' I~39
nmore like the sovereign of the -country . than a
stranger. The King advanced as far as Chatel-
herault to meet him; their interview was dif-
,tinguifhed by the warmef expressions of friend-
ship and regard. They proceeded together to- I40,
wards Paris, and presented to: the inhabitants of
that city, the extraordinary fpedacle of two ,-rival
Monarchs, whose -enmity -had disturbed and laid
waRte Europe -during twenty- years, making
their solemn entry together with all the fymp-
toms of a confidential harmony, as if they had
forgotten for ever past injuries,- and would never
revive hostilities for the future '.

*CHARLES remained fix- days at Paris; but The Empe,
amidst the rprpetual caresses of the Prenich ror's folici.
court, and the various entertainments contrivedtude,
to amuse or to do him honour, he discovered an
extreme impatience to continue his journey,
arising as much from an apprehension of dainger
which constantly oppressed him, as from the
necessity of his presence in the Low Countries.
Conscious of the difingenuity of his own inten-
tions, he trembled when- he reflected that o£me
fatal accident might.betray them to his rival, bt
lead him to fufpecd them; and thougbh his. arti-

" Thuan. Hifi. lib. i. c. I4. 1l.m; de Bellay, 264.

0 3.

BO'O!o

V- : VII. ficest ,o conceal ;these thould be fuccefsful, he

- ' could not help rfearing that motives of interea
might'. at : lafto trirumph over the, frumples of ho
nour. t, and

c temptS Franci:s to avail himfelif of t-

advantage novwnir i hiis. hands. Nor. were theri
wanting perfdiasiS'amo~nag .the French iminifteri,
whor .advised the ;EKiag .to turn his ,own arts;'
agai:nftthe, .Emperor,:, arnd: as the, retribution! due
for so ,many, iniances of fraud or falsehood, to
feizee and deta-in l his :person until he granted him
full. fatisfadion with regard to- all the just clai~s
of the French crown. . But no consideration could
Sinduce, Francis to violate the faith which he had
pledged , nor co.uld ;any argument convince him
that Charles, after all .the promises that 'he .had
given,, and all the favours which he had receiv-
ed, mi-ght .till be capable of deceiving him.,

S.. Fulof thisifa~le confidence he accompanied him
'to

' ,S"t Quintin, and the two Princes, who had

tpi:,h-jm. on the: borders of Spain, did not takb
leave of him until he entered his dominions in the
Low Countries.

aifinget, As QooP as the Emperor reached his own ter.

ritories, the French- ambassadors demanded the

ry

,, acconmplifhment of what he had promised con-

S~erning:. the, investiture of Milan; but Charles,
uinder the plausible pretext that his whole atten.
tion was then engroffe y the consultations Pre-
ceffary towards fupprefling the rebellion in

and
nuity

3-anlu~

Ghent, put off the matter for some time., But Boor V.
in. order to prevent Francis from fufpedting his 1540.
incerity, he frill continued to talk of his refolu-
tipns with respeCt to that matter in the fame
rraiin as when he entered France, and even
vrote to the King much to the fame purpose,
though in general terms, and with equivocal ex-
prefions, which he might afterwards explain
away or interpret at pleasure °.

SIVLEANWHILE , the unfortunate citizens OfReduaion

Ghent, destitute 'of leaders capable either ofof oh"ent;
direting their councils, or conduAing their
troops; abandoned by the French King and un-
supported by their countrymen; were unable to
resist their offended sovereign, who was ready to
advance against them with one body of troops
which he had raised in the Netherlands, with
another drawn out of Germany, and a third
which had arrived from Spain by sea. The near
approach of danger made them, at last, so fen-
fible of their own folly, that they sent ambaffa-
dors to the Emperor, imploring his mercy , and
offering to set open their gates at his approach.
Charles without vouchsafing them any other an-
fwer, than that he would appear among them
as their sovereign, with the sceptre and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head

s" Mimoires de Ribier, i. $o4,

04

Bqo- VI. of his troops. Though he chose to enter the

1~40. city on the twenty-fourth of February, his birthi

day, he was touched with .nothing of that ten"
dernefs or indulgence which was natural towards
the' place of his nativity. Twenty -fix of the

nda puish- principal citizens were put to death; a greatei
Inent of the number was sent into banishment; the city was
citizens."
April zo,. declared to have forfeited all its privileges and;

immunities , the revenues belonging to it wert
confiscated; its ancient form of government was
abolished; the nomination of its magistrates was
vested for the future in-the Emperor and his fuca
ceffors; a new system of laws and political ad:
ministration was prescribed '", and in order to~
bridle the seditious spirit of the citizens, ordersi
- ere given to ered a ftrqng citadel, for defraying
the expence of which a fine of an hundred and
fifty thousand florins was imposed on the, in-
habitants, together with an annual tax of fix
thousand florins for the support of the garrifon:".
By.thefe rigorous proceedings, Charles not only
prinifhed the citizens of Ghent, but set an awfil
example of" severity before his other fubjeds ini
the Netherlands, whose immunities and privi,
leges, partly the effed., partly the cause of their.
extensive 'commerce , circunmfcribed the royal

'" Les co.utumes & loix du Comt6 de Flandre, par Alex,

le Grand, ; tom. fol. Cambray, 1 r 9, tonm, i. p. I69.

" Harad Annales Brabantiae, vol. i. 616.

prerogative within very^ narrow bounds, and BOOK VI.
0ften stood in the way of measures which he xo40.
vwifhed to undertake, or fettered and retarded
him in his operations.

CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-efta-charles re-

blifhed his authority in the Low Countries, and sUre to ful'

fil his en-

being now under no necessity of continuing-the gagements
fame scene of falsehood and dissimulation with to raz"is.
which he had long amused Francis, began gra-
dually to throw aside the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with refped to the Mi-
lanefe: At first, he eluded the demands of the
French ambassadors, when they again reminded
him of his promises; then he proposed, by way
of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant
the Duke of Orleans the investiture of Slanders ,
clogging the offer, however, with impraAicable -
conditions, or such as he knew would be reject-
ed ". At last, being driven from all his evasions
and subterfuges by their insisting for a categori-
cal answer, he peremptorily refused to give upj
a territory of.fuch value, or voluntarily to make
such a liberal addition to the strength of an ene-
my by diminishing his own power "4. He denied
at the fame time, that he had ever made any
promise .which could bind him to an adion so
fooflfh, and so contrary to his own intereft" .

" Mim., de Ribier, i. 509. 1x4. s* Ribier, i. 5x9,
" Bellay, 3 6 6.

BooK-VI. Or all . the trantfadons. in tht .Emperor's life

z54o. -this, without doubt, rieflecs the greatest dif.

honour on: his reputation^. Though Charles
-was not extremely scrupulous at other times
about the means which he employed for accom.
p:pfhing his ' ends,;.-or always observant of .the
,ftri; precepts of veracity and honour, he had
hitherto maintained fbme regard for; the maxims
of that. less precise and rigid morality by which
Monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their condud. But, on this occasion, the sch.eme
that he formed of deceiving a generous and
open-hearted Prince; the illiberal and mean
artifices by which, he carried it on; the infen.
fQbility with which he received all the marks of
his friendship, as well as the ingratitude with
which he requited them; are all equally unbe.
coming the dignity of his charader, and incon.
fiftent with the grandeur of his views.

THIS tranfadtion exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After
the experience of a long reign, after so many
opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity
with which he trusted him at this junadure seemed
*to merit no other return than it actually met
with. Francis, however, remonstrated and ex,

1~6 .. IEiit· lib. XXXh. a· ~48a a

claimed, as if this had been the first instance in BOOK .VI
which the Emperor had deceived him. Feeling, iz54Q.
as is usual, the insult -vich was offered to his
understanding still more sensibly than the injury
done to his interest, he discovered such resent-
ment, as made it obvious that he would lay hold
on the first opportunity, of being revenged, and
that: a war, no l efs rancorous 'than that which
had so lately raged, would'foon break out anew
in Europe.

THIs year is rendered memorable by the efta-The Pope

bliflrment of the Order of Jesuits ; a body whose authoris
influence on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs tion of h.r
hath been so. considerable, that an account of the Order of

. Jesuits.

genius of its laws and government justly merits
a place in history. When men take a view of
the rapid progress of this society towards wealth
.and power; when they contemplate the admi-
rable prudence with which it has been governed;
when they attend to the persevering and fyfte-
matick spirit with which its' schemes have beeat
carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a fingu-'
lar institution to the superior wisdom of its foun-
der, and to suppose that he had forred and di-
gefted his plan with profound policy. But the
Jesuits, as well as the other monaftick orders, are
indebted for the existence of their order not to
the wisdom of their founder, but to his enthu-
fiafm. Ignatio hoyola, whom I have. already

BOOK oo I mentioned on occasion of the wound which he

x O. received in defending Pampeluna57, was a fanatick,

ditinguifhed by extra gancies in sentiment and

' condut, no less incompatible with, the maxims

of sober reason, than repugnant to the spirits of
true religion., The wild adventures, and vi,
fiona.ry schemes, in which his enthtfiafm engaged
him, equal any, thing recorded in the legends of0
the Romish faints; but are unworthy of notice
in history.

ranaticari. PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited
iof' Loyo. by the love of power and diflinAtion, from which

such pretenders to superior fandity are not ex,
emp.t, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order. The plan, which
he formed of its constitution and laws, was fug.
gefted, as he gave out, and as his followers still
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven",
But notwithstanding this high pretension, his
design met at first with violent opposition. The
Pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fanc-
tion of his authority to confirm the institution,
referred his petition to a committee of Cardinals.
They represented the establishment to be.unne-.
ceffary as well as. dangerous, and Paul refused
to grant his. approbation of it. At last, Loyola

" Vol. ii. Bookii. p. I92.
"8 Compte rendu des Constitutions des Jefuites, au Parle-

ment de Provence, par M. de Monclir, p. z 85.

removed all his scruples by an offer which it was BooI VI.
impossible for any Pope to resist. He proposed 2 54o,
that besides the three vow.s of poverty, of cha-'-The Pope's

Smotivres for

tity, and of monaftick obedience, which are confirming
common to all the orders of regulars, the mem-the order.
bers of his society Thould take a fourth vow of
obedience to the 1Pope, binding themselves to go
whithersoever he should command for the service
of religion, and without requiring any thing
from the Holy See for their support. At a time
when the papal authority had received such a
thock by the revolt of so many nations from the
Romish church; 'at a time when every part of
the popish system was attacked with so much
violence and success, the acquisition of .a body
of men, thus peculiarly devoted to the See of
Rome, and whom it might set in opposition to
all its enemies, was an objea of the highest con- Sept. 27.
sequence. Paul, inriftantly perceiving this, con-
firmed the institution of the Jesuits by his bull';
granted the most ample privileges to the mem-
bers of the society; and appointed Loyola to
be the firrf general of the order. The event
hath fully justified Paul's discernment, in ex-
pedting such beneficial consequences to the See
of Rome fromnthis institution. In less than half
a century, the society obtained establishments in
every country that adhered to the Roman catho-
lick church; its power and wealth. increased
amazingly; the number of its. members became

BooK VI. great; their charader as well as accomplishments

r5 40.. were still greater; and the Jesuits were celebrated

by the friends, and dreaded by the enemies of
the Romish faith, as the most able and enterpriz.
ing order in the church,

Its contitu- THE constitution and laws of the society were
~so a merit eperfected by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two
particular generals who succeeded Loyola , men far fupe.
attention. rior to their maifer in abilities, and in the science

of government. They framed that system of
profound and artful policy which distinguishes
the order. The large infusion of fanaticism,
mingled with its regulations, should be imputed
to Loyola its founder. Many circumstances con,
curred in giving a peculiarity of charader to
the order of Jesuits, and in forming the mem-
bers 'of it not only to take greater part in the
affairs of the world than any other body of
monks, but to acquire superior influence in the
condud of them, *

The objea . THE primary obje of almost all the monaftick
of the order
ingular. orders is to separate men from the world, and

from any concern in its affairsr. In the solitude
and silence of the cloister, themnonk is called
to work out his own salvation by extraordinary
acs of mortification and piety. He is dead to
the world, and ought not to mingle in its tranf-
adions. He can be of no benefit to- mankind,

but by his example and by his prayers. On the BooxK. VI.
contrary, the Jesuits are tauight to confider thermn zX 40,
selves as formed for adion.. They are chosen
soldiers, bound to exert themselves continually
in the service of God, and of the Pope, his vicar
on earth. Whatever tends to inftrud the igno.
rant; whatever can be of use to reclaim or to
oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their
proper objeA. That they may have full leisure
for this adive service, they are totally exempted
from those fundions, the performance of which
is the chief business of other monks. They ap-
pear in no proceffions; they pradife no rigorous
aufterities; they do not consume one half of their
time in the repetition of tedious offices "'. But
they are required to attend to all the tranfadions
of the world, on account of the influence which
these may have upon religion; they are direded
to study the dispositions of persons in high rank,
and to cultivate their friendship "6; and by the
very constitution as well as genius of the order,
a spirit of adio-n and intrigue is infused into all
its members.

As the objeC of the society of Jesuits differed Peculiarities

from that of the other monaftick orders, the in the pfo
diversity was no less in the form of its govern- particularly

5 Compte Rendu, par M. de Monclar, p. xiii. 29c. Sur

14 destruct. des Jefuity, par M. D'Alembert, p. 42.

6 Compte par M. he Mondcar, p. xii.

BooK VI. mient. The other orders are to be considered as

A40o. foluntary associations, in which whatever assets

with refpe& the whole body, is regulated by the common
too t gtfi eruffrage of all its members. The executive power
ral. is vested in the persons placed at the head of

each convent, or of the whole society; the
legislative authority resides in the community.
Affairs of moment, relating to particular con.
Vrents, are determined in conventual- chapters;
such as refped the whole order are considered
in general congregations. But Loyola, full of the
ideas of implicit obedience, which he had de-
rived from his military profeffion, appointed that
the government of his order thould be purely
monarchical. A general , chosen for life by
deputies from the several provinces, poffeffed
power that was supreme and independent, ex.
tending to every person, and to every cafe,
He, by his sole authority, norriinated provincials,
rectors, and every other officer employed in the
government of the society, and could remove
them at pleasure. In him was vested the fove-
reign administration of the, revenues and funds
of the order. Every member belonging to it
was at his disposal; anid by his uncontroulable
mandate, he could impose on them any taft,
'or employ them in what service soever he
pleased. To his commands they were required to
yield not only outward obedience, but to resign
up to him the inclinations of their own wills,

and

and the sentiments of their own understandings.
They were to listen to his injundions, as if- they
had been uttered by Christ himself. Under his
direAion, they were to be mere passive inftru-
ments, like clay in the hands of the potter, or
like dead carcasses incapable of refifance '. Such
a singular form of policy could not fail to imni
press its charader on all the members of the
order, and to give a peculiar force to all its
operations. There is not in the annals of man-
kind any example of such a perfec despotism,
exercised not over monks shut up in the cells of
a convent, but over men dispersed among all the
nations of the earth.. BooK VI.

I540O

* As the confitutions of the order vest , in thre circumftan.
General, such absolute dominion over all its ce which
members, they carefully provide for his being to exercire.it
perfecly informed with refped to the charaderwith the

r greatest ado

and abilities of his fubjecs. Every novice who vantage.
offers himself as a candidate for entering into the
order, is obliged to manifefl his conscience to the
superior, or to a person appointed by him; and
is required to confess not only his fins and de-
feds, but to discover the inclinations, the pas-
fions, and the bent of his foul. This manifefta-,
tion must be renewed every fix months ". The

" Compte rendu au Parlem.. de Bretagne, par M. de Cha-

lotais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar. 83. i8s.

34;. " Compte par M. de Monclar. p. I21, &c.

VOL . III. P

BooiK VI. society not satisfied with penetrating in this man.
1540. ner into the.innermoft recesses of the heart, di.

reds each member to observe the words and
a&ions of the novices; they are constituted spies
upon their condud; and are bound to disclose
every thing of importance concerning them to
the superior. In order that this scrutiny into
their charader may be as complete as possible,
a long noviciate muff expire, during which they
pass through the several gradations of ranks in
the society, and they must have attained the full
age of thirty-three years, before they can be ad.
mitted to take the final vows, by which they
become profe/fed members "'. By these various
methods, the fu'eribrs, under whose immediate
infpedion the novices are placed, acquire a
thorough knowledge of their dispositions and
talents. In order that the General, who is the
foul that animates and moves the whole society,
may have under his eye every thing necessary to
inform or dired him,'the provincials and heads
of the several houses are obliged to transmit to
]him regular and frequent reports concerning the
n~embers under their infpetion. In these they
descend into minute details with refped" to the
charadter of each person, his abilities natural or
acquired, his temper, his experience in affairs,

"3 Compte par M. de MoncL xg. 241. Sur la deftr. des

Jef. par Y. D'Alemb. p. 39,

and the particular department for which he is
best fitted 6". These reports, when digested and
arranged, are entered into registers, kept of pur-
pose that the General may, at one comprehen-
five view, survey the slate of the society in every
corner of the earth; observe the qualifications
and talents of its members; and thus choose,
with perfect information, the instruments, which

" M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number

of these reports, which the General of the Jesuits must an-
nually receive according to the regulations of the society.
These amount in all to 6j84. If this fum be divided by
37, the number of provinces in the order, it appears that
177 reports concerning the fiate of each province are tranf-
mitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 2. Besides this,
there may be extraordinary 'letters, or such as are sent by
the monitors .or spies whom the General and Provincials en-
tertain in each house. Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 4 3 x
Hist. des Jefuites, Amrl. i 176 1. tom. iv. p. s 6. The pro-.
vincials and heads of houses not only report concerning the
members of the society, but are bound to give the General an
account of the civil affairs in the country wherein they are
fettled, as far as their knowledge of these may be of be-
nefit to religion. This condition may extend to every
particular, so that the General is furnished with full in-
formation concerning the tranfadlions of every Prince and
fRate in the world. Compte par Mi. de Moncl. 443-. Hit.
des Jesuit. ibid. p.

s -. \When the affairs with respect to

which the provincials 6r rectors write are of importance,
they are directed to use cyphers, and each of them hLas a
particular cypher from the General. Compte par M. Cha.
lotais, p. 54- BOOK VLI

x1540.

BooR VI. his absolute power can employ in any service for

x S4©. which he thinks meet to destine them "5.

progress of As it was the profeffed intention of the order
the power of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro.
and influ-
ence of the moting the salvation of men, this engaged them,
*order. of course, in many adtive fundions. From their

first institution, they considered the education of.
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at
being spiritual guides and confeffors; they
preached frequently in order to infirud the peo-
ple; they set out as missionaries to convert un-.
believing nations. The novelty of the inftitu-
tion, as well as the singularity of its objeds .pro.
. cured the order many admirers and patrons.
The governors of the society had the address to
avail themselves of every circumstance in its fa-
vour, and in a short time, the number as well
as influence of its members increased wonder-
fully. Before the expiration of the sixteenth
century, the Jesui.ts had obtained the chief direc-
tion of the education of youth in every catholick
country in Europe. They had become the con-
feffors of almost all its monarchs, a fundion of
no small importance in any reign, but under a
weak Prince, superior even to that of minister.
They were the spiritual guides of almost every
perfoh eminent for rank or power. They pof-

"5 Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 2 I ;. 43 9.-Compte par

AM. de Chalotais, p. 52. 222.

sessed the highest degree of confidence and in- Book ViL
terest with the papal court, as the most zealous 540.
and able champions for its authority. The ad-
vantages which an adtive and enterpFrizing body
of men might derive from all these circumffances
are obvious. They formed the minds of men
in 'their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They pof-
sessed, at different periods, the diredtion of the
most confiderabl'e courts in Europe. They"
mingled in all: affairs. They took part in every
intrigue and revolution. The General, by
means of the extensive intelligence which he re-
ceived , could regulate the operations of the
order with the most perfect discernment, and by
means of his absolute power could carry them?
with the utmost vigour and effect '".

TOGETHER with the power of' the order, itsProgrers or

wealth continued to increase. Various expedi-its weanlth
ents were devised for eluding the obligation of

" When Loyola in the year 1 $40 petitioned the Pope to

authorize the institution of the order, he had only ten dif+
ciples. But*iin the year I 608, fixty-eight years after their
'firit infitution, the number of Jefiitfs had increased to ten
tho,{and five hundred and eighty-one. In the year 710,
the order pofTeifed twenty-four profeffed houses; fifty-nine
houf'es of probation; three hundred and forty refidencies;
fix hundred and twelve colleges; two hundred millions; one
hundred and fifty fkminarics and boarding-fchoohls; and
conlilted of i9,998 Jesuits. Hill. des Jefuites, tomr. i. p. zo,

P 3

BOOK VI. the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample
-1540. poffeffions in every catholick country; and by

the number as well as magnificence of its pub-
lick. buildings, together with the value of its pro.
perty, moveable or real, it vied with the most
opulent of the monaftick fraternities. Besides the
sources of wealth common to all the regular
clergy, the Jesuits poffeffed one which was pecu.
liar to themselves. Under pretext of promoting
the success of their millions, and of facilitating
the support of their mifiionaries , they obtained
a special licence from the court of Rome, to
trade with the nations which they laboured to
convert. In consequence of this, they engaged
in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in
the East and Weft Indies. They opened ware-
houses in different parts of Europe, in which
they vended their commodities. Not satisfied
with trade alone, they imitated the example of
other commercial societies, and aimed at obtain-
ing settlements. They acquired poffeffion ac-
cordingly of a large and fertile province in the
southern continent of America, and reigned as
sovereigns over some hundred thousand sub-
jeAs ".

,

Pernicious .UNHALTILY for mankind , the vaRf influence
effeas of
tiere on which the order of Jesuits acquired by all there
civilfociety.

67 His. des JefI iv. 168--96, &c.

different means, has been often exerted with Booi VI.
the most pernicious effect. Such 'was the ten- .44.,
deicy of that discipline observed by the society
in forming its members, and such the funda-
mental maxims in its constitution , that every
Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the
order as the capital objea, to which every con-
fideration was .to be sacrificed. This spirit of
attachment to their order, the most ardent, per-
haps, that ever influenced any body of men ",
is the charaCderiftick principle of the Jesuits, and
serves as a key to the genius of their policy, as
well as to the peculiarities in their sentiments and
condut.

As it was for the honour and advantage of

the society, that its members Thould possess an
ascendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a diredtio.n of their condud, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a fyftermn
of relaxed and p nt morality, vwhich accommuo-
dates itself to the affions of men, which ju[filies
their vices, which tolerates their imperfe&ions,
which authorizes almost every action that the
rnoft audacious or crafty politician would wilh .
to perpetrate.

" Compte par M. de Moncl. p. .8%.

P 4

BoorK VI.

S:540. As the prosperity of the order was intimately

conneeced with the preservation of the papal au.
thority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame prin.
ciple of attachment to the interests of their so.
ciety, have been the most zealous patrons of those
doArines , which tend to exalt ecclesiastical
-power on the ruins of civil government. They
have attributed to the court of Rome a jurif.
didtion as extensive and absolute as was claimed
by the most presumptuous pontiffs in the dark
ages. They have contended for the entire in.
dependence of ecclefiaffticks on the civil magib
ftrate. They have published such tenets con.
cerning the duty of opposing Princes who were
enemies of the catholick faith, as countenanced
the most atrocious crimes, and tended to dif.
solve all the ties which connedc fubjeds with
their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au.

thority from the zeal with which it flood forth
in defence of the Romish ch h against the at-
tacks of the reformers, its members, proud of
this diftindion, have considered it as their pe.
culiar fundion to combat the opinions, and to
check the progress of the Protestants. They
have made use of every art, and have employed
every weapon against them. They have set
themselves in opposition to every gentle or to-
lerating measure in their favour. They have

incessantly stirred up against them all the rage BOOK VI.
of ecclesiastical and civil persecution. 1x 54.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed,
veritured to teach the fame .pernicious doArines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have ei-
ther delivered such opinions with greater -reserve,
or .have propagated them ,with less success.
Whoever recollec2s the events which have hap-
pened in Europe during two centuries, will find
that the Jesuits may justly be considered as re-
fponfible for molt of the pernicious effedis arif-
ing from that corrupt and dangerous casuistry,
from those extravagant tenets concerning eccle-
fiaftical power, and from that intolerant spirit,
which have been the disgrace of the church of
Rome throughout that period, and which have
brought so many calamities upon civil society "69

BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing some advan-

from the institution of this order, mankind, itages reu the
mufft be acknowledged, have derived from itinftitution
rome considerable advantages. As the Jesuits of this or.

, der.

made the education of youth one of their capital
objedls, and as their first attempts to establish
colleges for the reception of students were vio-

69 Encyclopedie, Art. Jefuites, torn. viii. 51 3.

Boor- VI. lently opposed by the universities in different

is40o. countries , it became necessary for them, as the

most effedual method of acquiring the publick
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in.

Particularly duftry. .This prompted them to cultivate the

study of ancient literature with extraordinary.ar-
dour. This put them upon various methods for
facilitating the inftruaion of youth; and by the
improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed so mtich towards the progress of
polite learning, that on this account they have
merited well of society. Nor has the order of
Jesuits been fuccefsful only in teaching the ele,
ments of literature, it has produced likewise
'eminent masters in many branches of science,
and can alone boast of a greater number of in.
'genious authors, than all the other religious
fraternities taken together 70

7 1M. d'Alembert has observed that though the Jesuits

have made extraordinary progress in erudition of every
species; though they can reckon up many of their brethren
who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and
critics; though they have even formed some orators of repu-
tation; yet the order has never produced one man, .whose
mind was so much enlightened with found knowledge, as
to merit the name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the
.unavoidable effet of monaftick education to contraac and
.fetter the human mind. The patrtial attachment of a monk
to the interest of his order, which is often incompatible
with that of other citizens; the habit of implicit obedience

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits BOOKI VL
have exhibited the most wonderful display of 1540.
their abilities, and have contributed most es- More erse-
fedually to the benefit of the human fpecies.cialy from
The conquerors of that unfortunate quarter ofmeyt of the
the globe had nothing in view, but to plunder, Jeruts i

' ' °Paraguay.

to enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants.
The Jesuits alone have made humanity the objecl
of their fettling there. About the beginning of
the last century they obtained admission into the
fertile province of Paraguay, which stretches
across the southern continent of America, from
the bottom of the mountains of Potofi, to the
confines of the Spanish and Portuguese fettle-
ments on the banks of -the river de,la Plata.
They found the inhabitants in a state little dif-
ferent from that which takes place among men
when they first begin to unite together; strangers
to thq arts.; subsisting precariously by hunting

to the will of a Superior, together with the frequent return
of the wearisome and frivolous duties of the cloister, debase
his faculties, and extinguiih that generosity of sentiment
and spirit, which qualifies men for thinking or feeling juffly
with refpedt to what is proper in life and condut. Father
Paul of Venice is, perhaps, the only person educated in a
cloiffer, that ever was altogether superior to its prejudices,
or who viewed the tranfahions of men, and reasoned con-
cerning the interests of society, with the enlarged sentiments
of a philosopher, with the discernment of a man converf£nt
in affairs, and with the liberality of a gentleman.

DOOKr VI. or fishing; and hardly acquainted with the firlt

3;40. principles of subordination and government.

The Je'fuits set themfelyes to inftrud and to
civilize these savages,, They taught them to
ciltivite the ground, to rear tame animals, and
to build houses. They brought 'them to live
together in villages. They trained them to arts
And manufadures. They made them taste the
sweets of society; and accustomed them to the
blessings of security and order. These people be-
came the fubjeds of their benefadors; who have
governed them with a tender attention, refem-
bling that with which a father direAts his chil-
dre n. Refpedted and beloved almost to adora-
tion, a few Jesuits presided qver some hundred
thousand Indians. They maintained a perfect
equality among all the members of the commu-
nity. Each of them was obliged to labour not
for himself alone, but for the publick. The pro-
duce of their fields, together with the fruits of
their ind'u'ftry of every species, were deposited in
common florehoufes, from which each individualt
received every thing necessary; for the supply of
his wants. By this institution, almost all the
passions which disturb the peace of society, and
render the members of it unhappy , were extin,
gbifhed.. A few magifirates, chosen by the In-
dians themselves, watched over the publick tran-
quillity and secured obedience to the laws.. The
sanguinary puniflhments froequent under other

governments were unknown. An admonition Booi VIL
from a Jesuit; a flight mark of infamy; or, io40.
on some singular occasion, a few lashes with a
whip, were i'ufficient to maintain good order
among these innocent and ,happy people r.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Even here

Jesuits for the good of mankind, the genius and tion and pa.
spirit of their torder have mingled and are dif- icy of the
cernible. They plainly aimed at establishing in gernile°t
Paraguay an independent empire, subject to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excel-
lence of its constitution and police, could scarce-
ly have failed to extend its dominion over all the
southern continent of America. With this view,
in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in the adjacent settlements, from acquiring any
dangerous influence over the people within the
limits of the province fubjet to the'fociety, the
Jesuits endeavoured to inspire the Indians with
hatred and contempt of these nations. They cut
off all intercourse between their fubjeas and the
Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They pro-
hibited, any private trader of either nation from
entering / their territories. When they were
obliged to admit any person in a publick charac-
ter from the neighbouring governments, they

71 Hist. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 42)
&c. Voyage au Perou par Don G, Juan & D. Ant. de Ul-
loa, tom. i. 5 40, &c. Par. 4to. 175 Z.

BOOK VI. did not permit him to. have any conversation with

2140. their fubjeds, and no Indian was allowed even

to enter the house where these firangers resided,
unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In order to
render .any communication between them as dif.
ficult as poflible, they industriously avoided giv-
ing the Indians any knowledge of the Spanish, or
of any other European language; but encouraged
the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain dialed of the Indian tongue
and laboured to make that, the, universal lan-
guage throughout their dominions. As all these
precautions, without military force, would have
been infufficient to have rendered their empire
secure and permanent, they inftrudted their fiib-
jets in the European arts of war. They formed
them into bodies of cavalry and infantry, com-
pletely armed and regularly disciplined. They
provided a great train of artillery, as well as
magazines stored with all the implements of war.
Thus they established an army so numerous and
well-appointed, as to be formidable in a coun-
try, where a few sickly and ill- disciplined batta-

, lions composed all the military force kept on

foot by the Spaniards or Portuguese 7.

" Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tonm. i. 549. Recueil de

toutes les Pieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jefuites en
jortugal, torn. i. p. 7, &c.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of BOOKI VI
power during the reign of Charles V. who, with 1540.
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten-Rearon for
dency of the institution, and checked its pro-full a vew
grefs 7. But as the order was founded in the ofthe go-
period of which I write the history, and as thev e r"refs
age to which I address this work hath seen its fall, of the order.
the view which I have exhibited of the laws and
genius of this formidable body will not, I hope,
be. unacceptable to my readers; especially as
one circumstance has enabled me to enter into
this detail with particular advantage. Europe
had observed, for two centuries, the ambition
and power of the order. But while it felt many
fatal effects of there, it could not fully discern
the causes to which they were to be imputed. It
was unacquainted with many of the singular re-
gulations in the political constitution or govern-
ment of the Jesuits, which formed the enterprizing
spirit of intrigue that diftinguilhed its members,
and elevated the body itself to such a height
of power. It was a fundamental maxim with
the Jesuits, from their first institution, not to
publish the rules of their order. These they.
kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery,
They never communicated them to strangers ;
nor even to the greater part of their own mem-
bers. They refused to produce them when rez

7" Compte par iM de lMrialcL 3 x..

BooK V.L - quired by courts of jufftice 7"; arid by a strange

x <4o. solecism in policy, the civil power in different

countries authorized or connived at the efta.
blifhment of an order of men, whose constitution
and laws were concealed with a solicitude, which
alone was a good reason for having excluded
them. During the prosecutions lately carried
on against them in Portugal and France, the
Jesuits have been so .inconsiderate as to produce
the mysterious volumes of their institute. By
the aid of these authentick records,, the principles
of their government may be delineated, and the
sources of their power investigated with a degree
of certainty and precision, which, previous to
that event, it was impossible to attain 7". But as
I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of
the constitution and spirit of the order with the
freedom becoming an hifforian, [the candour

- Hist. des Jef~ tom. iii. 2z 6, &c. Compte par I\. de

Chalot. p. 38,

7" The greater part of my information concerning the go-

vernment and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived
froil the reports of lMI. de Chalotais and M. de MIonclar. I
Sreft not. my narrative, hoiwever, upon the authority even of
these respeCtable magiffrates and elegant writers, but upon
innumerable passages which they have extraded.froni the con-
ftitutions of the order , deposited in their hands; Hofpinian,
a Protestant Divine of Zurich, in his Hifloria Jefuitica,
printed A. D. I619, publihed. a small part of the confti-
tutions of the Jefuita^ of which by some accident he had
got a copy; p. 13-546

and

and impartiality no lIss requisite in that charac-
ter call on me to add one observation, That no
class of regular clergy in the Romish church has
been more eminent for decency, and even purity
of manners, than the major part of the order of
Jesuits 7". The maxims of an intriguing, am-
bitious, interested policy, might influence those
who governed the society, and might even cor-
rupt the heart, and pervert the conduc of some
individuals, while the greater number, engaged
ji literary pursuits, or employed in the fundions
of religion, was left to the guidance of those
common principles which restrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and
laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin
of this mighty body, as w~ell as the circumstances
and effects with- which it has been attended' in
the different countries of Europe, though ob-
jects extremely worthy the attention of every
intelligent observer of human affairs, do not fall
within the period of this history. BOOK VI.

1 540.

No sooner had Charles re - eftablifh'ed order in Affairsof
the Lpw Countries, than he was obliged to turn0Ge"rman
his attention to :the affairs of Germany. The
Protestants pressed him 'earneftly to appoint that
conference between.a feled number -of the di-
vines- of each party, which had been stipulated

"' Sur la deftrut. des Jef. par M. D'Alembert,'p. 55
VOL. II. Q

BOOK VI. in the convention at Francfort. The Pope con-

1 o40. fidered such an attempt to examine or decide the

points in dispute as derogatory tq his right of
being ithe supreme judge in controversy; and
being convinced, that it would either be ineffec-
tual by determining nothing, or prove danger.
ous by determining too much, he employed

A confer- every art to prevent the meeting. The Em-
tween the perbr, however, finding it more, for his interest
Popish and t ofooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid
Protefiit little regard to his remonftrances. In a diet held
divines,
June i. at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for the con-
Dec 6. ference. In another diet assembled at Worms,

the conference was begun, Melandhon on the
one fide and Eckius on the other, sustaining the
principal part in the dispute; but after they had
made some progress, though without conclud-
ing any thing, it was suspended by. the Empe-
ror's command, that it might be renewed with

ix4i. greater folemnrity in his own presence in a diet

summoned to meet at Ra'tifbon. This assembly
* was opened with great pomp, and with a gene-

ral expectation that its proceedings would be
vigorous and decisive. By the consent of both
parties , the Emperor was entrusted with the
power of nominating the persons, who should
manage the conference, which it was. agreed
ihould be condu&ed not in the form of a publick
disputation, but- as a friendly scrutiny or exami-
nation into the. articles which had given rife to

the present controversies. He appointed Eckius,
Gropper and Pflug, on the part of the Catholicks;
MIVelanthon, 3Bucer, and Piftorius, on 'that of
the Protestants; all men of distinguished repu-
tation among their own adherents, and, except
Eckius, all eminent for their moderation, as
well as desirous of peace. As they were about
to begin their consultations, the Emperor put
into their hands a book, composed, as he said,
y a learned divine in the Low Countries, with
such extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as,
in his opinion, might go far to unite and com-
prehend the two contending parties. Gropper,
a canon of Cologne, whom he had named among
the managers of the conference , a man of address
as well as of erudition, was afterwards fufpeded
to be the author of this short treatise. It con-
tained positions with regard to twenty-twp of the
chief articles in theology, which included mos-
of the questions then agitated in the controversy
between the Lutherans and the church of Rome.
By ranging his sentiments in a natural order, and
expressing them with great simplicity; by em-
ploying often the very words of scripture, or of
the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of
some opinions, and explaining away what was
absurd in others; by concessions, now on one
fide, and now on the other; and especially. by
banishing as much as possible fcholaftick phrases,
those words and terms of art in controversy, BooK VL

IS4'.

BooK VI. which serve as badges of diftindion to the dif.

1 4x. ferent feds, and for which theologians often con-

tend more fiercely than for opinions themselves;
he framed his work in such a manner, as pro.
mifed fairer than any thing that had hitherto
been attempted, to compose and to terminate
religious dissensions 7.

fruitiefs. BUT the attention of the age was turned, with

such acute observation, towards theological con-
troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it
by any gloss, how artful or specious soever.
The length and eagerness of the dispute had fe-
parated the contending parties so completely,
and had set their minds at such variance , that
they were not to be reconciled by partial con-
ceflions. All the zealous Catholicks, particularly
the ecclefiafticks who had a feat in the diet, joined
in condemning Gropper's treatise as too favour-
able to the Lutheran opinions, the poison of
which heresy it conveyed, as they pretended,
with greater danger, because it was in some de-
gree disguised. The rigid Protestants, especially
Luther himself, and his patron the Eledor of
Saiony., were for rejeding it as an impious
compound of error and truth, craftily prepared
that it might impose on the weak, the timid, and
the unthinking. But the divines, to whom the ex-

'7 Goldaft. Conitit. Imper. ii. p. I82.

.anination of it was committed, entered upon- BooK VI;
that business with greater deliberation and tern- i 4i.
per. As it was more easy in itself, as well as
more consistent with the dignity of the church
to make concessions, and even alterations with re-
gard to speculative opinions, the discussion where-
of is confined chiefly to schools, and which pre-
sent nothing to the people that either strikes their
imagination or assets their senses, they came. to
an accommodation about these without much
labour, and even defined the great article con-
cerning justification to their mutual fatisfadion.
But, when they proceeded to points of jurifdic-
tioni, where the interest and authority of the
Roman See were concerned, or to the rites and
forms of external worship, where every change
that could be made must be publick, and draw
the observation of the people, there the Catho-
licks were altogether untradable; nor could the
church either with safety or with honour abolish
its ancient institutions. All the articles relative
to the power of the Pope, the authority of coun-
cils, the administration of the sacraments, the
worship of faints, and many other particulars did
not, i|l th]eir nature, admit of any tempera-
ment; so that after labouring long to bring,
about an accommodation with refped to these,
the Emperor found all his endeavours ineffedual.
Being impatient, however, to close the diet, he
at last prevailed on a majority of the members

,Q3

gooK VI. to approve of the following recess; " That the

i 4i. articles concerning which the divines had agreed.
Recers of in the conference, should be held as points de-
Ratib0n in cided, and be observed inviolably by all; that
favour of a the other articles about which they had differed,
genera should be deferred to the determination of a ge-
Founcil
Ju!y 28. neral council, or if that could not be obtained, to

a national synod of Germany; and if it should
prove impradticable, likewise, to assemble a
synod, that a general diet of the Empire thould
be called within eighteen months , in order to
give some final judgment upon the whole con-
troverfy ; that the Emperor should use all his
ijntereft and authority with the Pope, to procure
the meeting either of a general council or synod;
that, in the mean time, no innovations should
be attempted, no endeavours should be em-
ployed to gain profelytes; and neither the re-
venues of the church, nor the rights of the mo-
pafteries, thould be invaded ".

gives oF- ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as
to Papifts the recess in which they terminated, gave great
anad rotef offence to the Pope. The power which the
nets. Germans had assumed, of appointing tl fir own

divines to examine and determine matters of
controversy, he considered as a very dangerous
invasion on his rights; the renewing of their

" Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav. 1. iv. c. i.p. p 136. F Paul,

p. 86. Seckend, 1. iii. 2 6.

ancient proposal. concerning a national synod, Boor VI.
whic'h had been so often rejected by him and his i4*i.
predecessors, appeared extremely undutiful; but
the bare mention of allowing a diet,. composed
chiefly of laymen, to pass judgment ,kith refped
to articles of faith, was deemed no less criminal
and profane, than the worst of those .herefies
which they seemed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the Protefiants were no less diffatif-
fied with a recess, that considerably abridged the
liberty which they enjoyed at that time. As theycharles
murmured loudly against it, Charles, unwilling courts the

P 'roteftaiits,

to leave any feeds of discontent in the Empire,
granted them a private declaration, in the. most
ample terms, exempting them from whatever
they thought oppressive or injurious in the recess,
and ascertaining to them the full poffeffion of all
the privileges which they had ever enjoyed 7.

EXTRAORDINARY as these concessions may Affairs of

appear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at" t"gary.
this juncure made it necessary for him to grant
them. He for'efaw a rupture with France to be
not only unavoidable, but near at hand, and durst
not give any such cause of disgust or fear to the
Protestants, as might force them, in feif-defence,
to court the protection of the French King,

79 Sleid. 283. Seclkend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom.

iv.p. ii. p. 240.

Q. 4

Loor~ VI. from whom, at present, they were much alien-

1 4I. ated. The rapid progress of the Turks in Hun-

gary, was a more powerful and present cause of
the moderation which Charles discovered. A
great revolution had happened in that kingdomrn
John Zapol Scepus having chosen, as has been
related, rather to possess a tributary kingdom,
than to renounce the royal dignity to which he
had been accustomed, had, by the assistance 'of
his mighty protector Solyman , wrested from
Ferdinand a great part of the country, and left
him only the precarious poffeffion of the reft.
But, being a Prince of pacifick qualities, the fre-
quent attempts of Ferdinand, or of his partisans
among the Hungarians, to recover what they
had loft, greatly difquieted him; and the neceffi-
ty on these occasions, of calling in the Turks,
whom he considered and felt to be his masters
rather than auxiliaries, was hardly less mortify-
ing. In order, therefore, to avoid these diftref-
fes, as well as to secure quiet and leisure for en-

A. D.

D. . joying the arts and amusements in. which he de.

lighted, he secretly

. came -to an agreement with

his competitor, on this condition; That Ferdi-
nand thould acknowledge him as King of Hun-"
gary, and leave him, during life, the unmolested
poffeffion of that part of the kingdom now in
his power; but that, upon his demise, the sole
right of the whole should devolve upon Ferdi-

nand '8. As John had never been married, and BooK VL
was then far advanced in life, the terms of the x154.
contrad seemed very favourable to Ferdinand.
But, soon after, some of the Hungarian nobles,
solicitous to prevent a foreigner from ascending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end
to a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella , the
daughter of Sigifmond, King of Poland. JohnDeath of the
had the fatisfadion, before his death , which h ap-m ,ng of
pened within less thap a year after his marriage, ungary.
to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom. To
him without regardiing his treaty with Ferdi-
nand, which he considered, no doubt, as toid,
upon an event not foreseen when it was conclud-
ed, he bequeathed his crown; appointing the
Queen and George Martinuzzi, bishop of Wa-
radin, guardians of his son, and regents of. the
kingdom. The greater part. of the Hungarians
immediately acknowledged the young Prince as
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their
monarchy, they gave the name of Stephen 8.

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted Ferdinand's

by this unexpeded event, resolved not to aban- efforts to
don the kingdom which he had acquired by hisbtain th, e
compad with John. He sent ambassadors to
the Queen to claim poffeffion, and to offer the

Iftuanhaffi Hist. Hung. lib. xii. p. 13; .
Jovii Hist. lib. xxxix. p. 239, a. &c.

Bd.oiK VL. province ;of Transylvania as a settlement for. het

i 4.. fohb, preparing at the fame time to assert his,

right' iby force of ;arms. But John had com-
mitted the care tof his, son to persons, who had
too'much fpiriit to give ,up the crown, tamely, and
rho poffeffed abilities fufficient to defend it.
The Queen, to all' the address peculiar to her
on.
o sex, added a mafculiiie courage -ambition,

Charaer and mag:nanimity. Nlartinuzzi, who had raised
of Mti herhinielf- from th.e lowest rank in life ito his pre-
nuzzi. sent dignity, was one of those extraordinary

meni-,'who , by the extent asfwell as variety of their
talents, are fitted to ad a superior part in buff-
ling and fadtious times. In discharging the
functions of his ecclesiastical office, he put on
the semblance of an humble and austere fandity.
In civil tranfadions, he difeovered industry,
dexterity ,-:and boldness. During war he laid
aside the cassock, and appeared on horseback
with Ihis fcymitar arid buckler, as adive, as of-
tentatious, and as gallant as any of his country-
men. Amidst all these different and contradic-
tory forms which he could assume, an insatiable
desire of dominion and authority was confpicu-
ous. From such persons it was obvious what
,nfwer Ferdinand had to exped. He soon per-
ceived that he must depend -on arms alone for
recovering Hungary. Having levied ,for this
purpose a considerable body of Germans, whom
his partisans among the Hungarians joined with

:tleir vassals, he ordered them to march into that BOOK VI.
part of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. 1541.
VIartinuzzi, unable to make head against uich
a powerful army in the field, satisfied himself
with holding out the towns, all of which, efpe-
cially 'Buda, the place of greatest consequence,
he, provided with every thing necessary for de-
fence; and in the mean time he tent ambassadors Calls in the
to Solyman, beseeching him to extend towards Turks.
the son , the fame Imperial protection which had
so long maintained the father on his throne. The
Sultan, though Ferdinand used his utmost en-
deavours to thwart this negociation, and even
offered to accept of .the Hungarian - crown on
the fame ignominious condition of paying tri-
bute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had
held it, saw such profpeds of advantage from
espousing the interest of the young King, that
he instantly promised him his protection; and
commanding one army to advance forthwith
towards Hungary, he himself followed with an-
other. Meanwhile the Germans, hoping to ter-
minate the, war by the reducion of a city in
which the King and his mother were shut up,
had formed the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi,
having drawn thither the strength of the Hun-
garian nobility, defended the town with such
courage and skill, as allowed the Turkish forces
time to come up to its relief. They instantly

Bhoir VI. attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue,

x14x. diseases, and desertion, and defeated them'with

grea-flaughter ".

solyman's SoLYMAN soon after joined his vidorious
Seeous troops, and being weary of so many expensive

expeditions undertaken in defence of dominions
which were not his own, or being unable to resist
this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while poffeffed by an infant, under the guardian.
h1ip of a woman and a priest, he allowed in.
terefted considerations to triumph with too much,
facility over the principles of honour and the
sentiments of humanity. What he planned un.
generously, he executed by fraud. Having pre-
vailed on the Queen to fend her son, whom he
pretended to be desirous of2 feeing, into his
-camp, an4 having at the fame time invited the
chief of the nobility to an entertainment there,
while they, fufpeAing no treachery, gave* them.
selves up to the mirth and jollity of the feast, a
feleva band of troops by the Sultan's orders
seized one of the gates of Buda. Being thus
master of the capital, of the King's person, and
of the leading men -among the nobles, he ordered
the Queen, together with her son, to be conduted
to Transylvania, which province he allotted to
them.- and, appointing a Bafha to preside in Buda

' Iftuanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xiv. p.

I o.

with a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary BlORK VI.
to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and corn- 1x4x,.
plaints of the unhappy Queen had no influence
to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi
either resist his absolute and uncontroulable com-
mand, or prevail on him to recall it 83.

BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation Ferdinand's
reached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to soy.s t
have dispatched new ambassadors to Solyman
with a fresh representation of his right to the
crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of his
former overture to hold the kingdom of the
Ottoman Porte, and to pay for it an annual tri-
bute. This ill-timed proposal was reje6ted with
scorn. The Sultan elated with success, and
thinking that he might prescribe what terms he
pleased to a Prince who voluntarily proffered
conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, de'
dared that he would inot suspend the operations
of war, unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated all
the towns which he still held in Hungary, and
consented to the imposition of a tribute upon
Austria, in order to reimburse the sums which
his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had
obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence
of that kingdom 8.

" Iftuanhaffli, lib. xiv. p. ' 6. Jovii hiftor. lib. xxxix.

p. 2476, &c.

8* Ifluanrhaffli.hift. Hung. lib. xiv. p. I 8.

BooiK Vl. IN this state were the affairs of Hungary,

xI~4r. 'As the unfortunate events there had either hap.

pened before the diffolution' of the diet at Ra·
tifbon, or were dreaded at that time, Charles
-faiw the danger of irritating and inflaming the
minds of the Germans , while a formidable
enemy was ready to break into the Empire; and
perceived that he could not expedt any vigorous
assistance either towards the recovery of Hun.
gary, or the defence of the Austrian frontier, uri-
iefs he courted and satisfied the Protestants. By
rhe concessions which have been mentioned, he
gained this point, and such liberal supplies both
of men and money were voted for carrying on the
war against the Turks, as left him- under little
anxiety about the security of Germany during
next campaign '.

Emperor IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet,
viIts Italy, the Emperor set out for Italy. As he passed

through Lucca he had a short interview with
the Pope, but nothing could be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of composing the
religious disputes in Germany, between two
princes, whose views and interest with regard to
that matter were at this juncture so opposite.
The Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of
discord between Charles and Francis, and to

"r Sleid~.zg;,

extinguish those mutual animofities which threat- BOOK VI.
ened to break out suddenly into open hostility, x'4'.
were not more fuccefsful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entire- His expedi-
ly, at that time, on the great enterprize which tion against
he had -concerted against Algiers, that he listen- motives of
ed with little attention to the Pope's schemes or it
overtures, and hastened to join his army and
fleet.

.

ALGIERS frill continued in that state of de-
pendence on the Turkish empire to which Bar-
baroffa had fubjeced it. Ever since he, as cap-
tain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Al-
giers had been governed by Hafcen-A-ga, a re-
negado eunuch, who, by pjafIing through every
Ration in the Corfair's ifrvice, had acquired such
experience in war, that he was well fitted for a
fration which required a man of tried and daring
co.trage. THafcen, in order to shew how well he
deserved that dignity, carried on his piratical
depredations againft' the Christian States with
amazing ativity, and out-did, if possible, Bar-
baroffa ,himself in boldness and cruelty. The
commerce bs the Mediterranean was greatly in-
terrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent
alarms given to the coast of Spain, that there
was a necessity of ereding watch-towers at pro-

Sandov. hiftor. tom. ii. 2 98.

JBooi VI. per: distances, and of keeping guards constantly

1541,. on foot, in order to descry the approach of his

squadrons, and to protect the inhabitants from
their descents "7. Of this the Emperor's fubjeas
had long complained, reprefepting it as an en-
terprife corresponding to his power, and becom.
ing' his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which,
fince'the conquest of Tunis, was the common
receptacle of all the free-booters; and to exter.
minate .that lawless race, the implacable ene.
mies of the Christian name. Moved partly by
their entreaties, and partly allured by the hope
bs adding to the glory which he had acquired
by his last expedition into Africa, Charles, be-
fore he left Madrid, in his way to the Low Coun-
tries, had issued orders both in Spain and Italy
to prepare a fleet and army for this ipurpofe.
No .change in circumstances, since that time,
could divert him from this resolution, or prevail

. on ,him to turn his arms towards Hungary;

though the success of the Turks in that country
seemed more immediately to require his presence
there.; though many of his most faithful adhe-
rents in Germany. urged that the defence of the
Empire ought to be his first and peculiar care;
though such as bore him no good-will ridiculed
his preposterous conduct in flying from an. ene-

, my almost at hand, that he might go in quest of

" Jovii hist. 1. xl. p. 366.

- a re-

a remote and more ignoble foe. But to attack BooK VL
the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that 5441r.
measure might -appear, was an undertaking which
exceeded his power, and was not consistent 'with
his interest. To draw troops out of Spain or
Italy , to march them into a country so distant
as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus ne-
ceffary for transporting thither the artillery, am-
munition, and baggage of a regular army , and
to push the war in that quarter, where it could
not be brought to any issue during several cam-
paigns, were undertakings so expensive and un-
wieldy as did not correspond with the low con-
dition of the Emperor's treasury. While his
principal force was thus employed, his domi-
nions in Italy and the Low Countries must have
lain open to the French King, who would not
have allowed such a favourable opportunity of
attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which
were already finished, and almost the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, . would depend upon a
single effort, and besides the security and fatis-
fa&ion which the success of it must give his
fubjeas, would detain him during so short a
space, that Francis could hardly take advantage
of his absence, to invade his dominions in Eu-
rope.

VOL. IIL R

BOoK VI. ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his

1x54i. first plan, and with such determined obstinacy,
His preya. that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised,

"or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not to
expose his whole armament to almost unavoid,
:able deftrudtion, by venturing to approach the
dangerous coast of Algiers at such an advanced
season of the year, and when the autumnal
winds were so violent. Having embarked on
board Doria's gallies at Porto-Venere in the
Genoese territories, he soon found that this ex.
perienced sailor had not judged wrong concern-
ing the element with which he was so well .ac.
quainted; for such a storm arose that it was with
'the utmost difficulty and danger he reached .Sar-
dinia, \the place of general rendezvous. But as
his courage was, undaunted , and his temper
often inflexible, neither the remonftrances of the
Pope and Doria, nor the danger to which he
had already been exposed by disregarding theni,
had any other effed than to. confirm him in his
f.tal resolution. The force, indeed, which .he
had collected was such as might have inspired a
Prince less adventurous, and leTs confident in his
own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of
success. It conf~fted of twenty thousand foot,
and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and
Germans, mostly veterans, together with three
thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spanilh

and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Booi VI.
Emperor by attending him in this favourite ex- 5s4x.
pedition, and eager to share in the glory which
they believed he was going to reap; to these
were added a thousand soldiers sent from Malta
by the order .of St. John, led by an hundred of
its most gallant Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the AfricanLanas in
coast, was not less tedious, or full of liazard, rica.
than that which he had just finished. When he
approached the land,' the roll of the sea, and
vehemence of the winds, would not permit the
troops to disembark. But at last, the Emperor,
seizing a favourable opportunity, landed them
without opposition, not far from Algiers., and
immediately .advanced towards the town. To .
oppose this' mighty army, Hafcen had only
eight hundred Turks, and five thousand Moors,
partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees
from Granada. He returned, however, a fierce
and haughty answer, when summoned, to furren.
der. But with such a handful of soldiers , nei-
ther his desperate courage, nor consummate skill
in war, could have long resifted forces superior to
those which had defeated Barbarossa at the
head of sixty thousand men , and which had re-
duced Tunis, in spite of all his endeavours to
save it.

BooiK VI. BUT howsoever far the Emperor might thisa

x41r:. himself beyond the reach of any danger from th(
The difaf- enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dreadi
ters which
b,efell his ful calamity, and one against which human pru.
army, dence and human efforts availed "aothing. 'On

the second day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to disperse some light.
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea.
vens to appear with a fierce and threatening f,
ped. Towards evening, rain began to fall, accom-.
panied with violent wind, and the rage of the tern.
pest increasing, during the night, the soldiers, who
had brought nothing ashore but their arms, re-
mained exposed to all its fury, without tents, or
Thelter, or cover of any kind. The ground was
Loon so wet that they could not lie down on it;
their camp being in a low situation was over-
flowed with water, and they funk at every step
to the ankles in mud; while the-wind blew with

- such impetuosity, that, to prevent their falling,

they were obliged to thrust their spears into the
ground, and to support themselves by taking
hold of them. Hafcen was too vigilant an
officer to allow an enemy infuch distress to re.
main unmolested. About the dawn of morning,.
he sallied out with soldiers, who, having been
screened from the storm under their own roofs,
were fresh and vigorous. A body of Italians
Who awere flationed nearest the city, dispirited

and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach BooK VL.
of the Tuiks. The troops at the post behinrd xiQr.
them, discovered greater courage, but as the
rain had extinguished their matches and wet their
powder, their muskets were useless, and having
scarcely firength to handle their other arms,
they were soon thrown into confusion. Almost
the whole army, with the Emperor himself in
person, was obliged to advance, before the ene-
my could be iepulfed, who, after spreading such
general consternation, and killi'ng a considerable
number of men, retired at last in good order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and fleet,
and danger were quickly obliterated by. a more
dreadful as well as affeding fpedacle. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the. sea appeared agi-
tated with all the rage of which that deftrudive
element is capable; all the ships, on which alone
the whole army knew that their safety and sub-
fiftence depended, were seen driven from their an-
chors, some dashing against each other, some
beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced ashore,
and not a few sinking in the waves. In less than
an hour, fifteen ships of war, and an hundred
and forty transports with eight thousand men
perished; and such of the unhappy crews as
escaped the fury of the sea, were murdered with-
out mercy; by the Arabs, as soon as they reached

R3

BooK VI. land. The Einperor stood inflerit anguish aiiff

jx4x. atonifhmennt beholdifng thi: fatal Mevent, which

at once blasted all his hopeks of'fuccefs,' and bu.
ried in the depths tdi vast fiores vwhich he had
provided, as well for annoying-the enemy, as 'f6
subsisting his oni trooips;. Hie haid it not in'his
power to afford them any other afliftance o re-
lief than by sending some troops to drive awiay
the Arabs, and thus delivering a few who were
so fortunate as to get ashore from the cruel fate
which their companions had met with. At lift
.the wind began to fall, and to give some hodpes
that as many Thips .might escape, as to. save the
army from perishing by famine, and transport
them back to'Europe. But these were only
hopes; the approach of evening covered the sea
with darkness, and it being impossible for the'
officers aboard the ships which had outlived the
fiorm, to fend any intelligence to their compa.
nions who were ashore, they remained during
the night in all the anguiflh of suspense and un-
certainty. Next day, a boat dispatched by Doria
made shift to reach .land, with information, that
having weathered out the storm, to which, du-
ring fifty years knowledge of the sea, he had
never seen any equal in fierceness and horror, he
had found it necessary to bear away with his
thattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He ladvifed
the Emperor, as the face of, the sky was still
lowering and tempestuous, to march with all

speed to that place, where the troops could re- BooK VL
embark: with igreater ease. 4- 54.r.

iWHATEVEi comfort this intelligence afford- obliged to

ed Charles, froiqm being assured that part of retreat
his fleet had escaped , was balanced by the new-
cares and perplexity in which it involved him
with regard to his army. Metafuz was at least
three days march from his present camp; all
the provisions which he had brought ashore at
his first landing were now consumed; his fol-
diers, worn out with fatigue, were hardly able
for such a' journey, even in a friendly country;
and being dispirited by a fuccefftion of hardships,
which viktory itself would scarcely have rendered
tolerable, they were in no condition to undergo
*new toils. But the situation of the army was
such, as. allowed not one moment for delibera-
tion, nor left it in the least doubtful what to
choose. They were ordered instantly to march,
the wounded, the tfick, and the feeble being
placed in the center; such as seemed most vi-
gorous were stationed in the front and rear.
Then the fad effeats of what they had fuffered
began to appear more manifeIly than ever, and
new calamiti'; were added to all those which
they had already endured. Some could hardly
bear the weight of their arms; others, spent
with the toil .of forcing their way through deep
and almost impassable roads, funk down and

R 4

Boor VI. died; many perished by famine-, as the- whole

x541. army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or

the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's or.
der, and distributed among the several batta.
lions;, many were drowned in brooks, which
were fwolhi fob much by the excessive rains, that
in passing them they waded up to the chin; not
a few were killed by 'the enemy, who, during the
greatest part of their retreat, alarmed, harassed,
and annoyed them night and day. At last they
arrived at MVletafuz; and the weather being now
so calm as to restore their communication with
the fleet, they were supplied with plenrty of pro-
visions, and cheered with the profpedt of safety.

mis forti- DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the
tude of Emperor discovered great qualities, many of

which an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity
had hitherto afforded him no opportunity of
displaying. He appeared conspicuous for firm.
ness and constancy of spirit, for magnapimity,
fortitude, humanity, and compafion. He en-
dured as great hardlhips as the meanest soldier;
he exposed his. own person wherever danger
threatened ; he 'encouraged the defponding,
visited the sick and wounded; anid animated all
by his words and example. When the army em-
barked, he was among the last who left the
ihore, although a body of Arabs hovered at no
great distance, ready to fall on the rear. By

these virtues, Charles atoned, in some degree, Boor VI,.
for his obstinacy and presumption in undertak- I 541.
ing an expedition so fatal to his fubjeas.

THE calamities which .attended this unfor- Returns to
tunate enterprize did not end here; for no sooner Europe,
'were the forces got on board, than a new storm
arising, .though less furious than the former, fecat-
tered the fleet, and obliged them, separately,
to make towards such ports in Spain or Italy as
they could first reach; thus spreading the ac-
count of their disasters, with all the circum-
stances of aggravation and horror, which their
fear or fancy suggested. The Emperor himself,
after escaping great dangers, and being forced
into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he was Decem. 2.
obliged by contrary winds to remain several
weeks, arrived at last in Spain, in a condition
very different from that in which he had return-
ed from his former expedition against the In-
fidels'.

^s" Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villag-
nonem Equitem Rhodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 3 6. Jovii
Hist. 1. xl. p. 269, &c. Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos V.
p. 83. Sandov. Hiftor. ii. z99, &c,

# BOOK VII.

~THE

HIS T OR Y

OF THE

REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VI I

BOOK VII. ' HE calamities which the Emperor fuffered

I541. 'in his unfortunate enterprize against Algiers
Renewal of were great; and the account of these, which
ranofiities b augmented in proportion as it spread at a great'
1is motives .er distance from the scene of his disasters,
for it. .encouraged Francis to begin hostilities, on

which he had been for some time resolved.
But he did not think it prudent to produce,
as the motives of this resolution, either his
ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or
the Emperor's difingenuity in violating his
repeated promises with regard to the restitution

of that couritry. The former might have been Boo.VPIL
a good reason against concluding the truce oF 541.
Nide, but- was none for' breaking it; the latter
coiuld not be urged' without exposing his own
credulity as much as the Emperor's want of in-
tegrity. A violent and unwarrantable adion of
one of the Imperial generals, furnished him with
a reason to justify his taking 'arnms, which was
of greater weight than either of these, and such
as would have roused him, if he had been as
desirous of peace as he was eager for war-
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice,
without consulting Solyman, gave (as he fore-
saw) great offence to that haughty Monarch,
who considered an alliance with him as an ho-
nour of which a Christian prince had cause to
be proud. The French King's friendly inter-
view with the Emperor in Provence, followed
by such extraordinary appearances of union and
confidence as accompanied Charles's reception
in France, induced the Sultan to fufped that
the two rivals had at last forgotten their ancient
enmity, in order that they might form such a
general confederacy against the Ottoman power,
as had been wiihed' for in Christendom and
often -attempted in vain. Charles, with his
usual art, endeavoured to confirm and firengthen
these suspicions, by inftrudting his emissaries at
Constantinople, as well as i'n those courts with
which Solyman held any intelligence, to repre-

BoOK VII. sent the concord between him and Francis to be

Ix54. so entire, that their sentiments, views, and pur.

suits, would be the fame for the future'. It
was not without difficulty that Francis effaced
these impressions; but the address of Rincon,
the French ambassador at the Porte, together
with the manifest advantage of carrying on hpf.
tilities against the house of Austria in concert
with France, prevailed at length on the Sultan
to enter into a closer conjunCtion with Francis
than ever. Rincon returned into" France, in
order to communicate to his master a scheme of
the Sultan's, for gaining the concurrence of the
Venetians in their operations against the com-
mon enemy. Solyman having lately concluded
a peace with that republick, to which the media.
tion of Francis, and the good offices of Rincon
had greatly contributed, thought it not impof..
fible to allure the senate by such advantages, as,

The murder together with the .example of the French Mo-
ofrhisdam. narch, might overbalance any scruples arising
baffialors, his
pretext for either from decency or caution that could ope-
this. rate on the other fide. Francis, warmly ap-

proving of this measure, dispatched Rincon
back to Constantinople, and, direding him to go
by Venice along with Fregofo, a Genoese exile,
whom he appointed his ambassador to that re-
publick, empowered them to negociate the mat-

Minm. de Ribier. tom. i. p. 5o2z,

ter with the senate, to whom Solyman had sent Booi VIL
an 'envoy for the fame purpose '. The marquis 14x.
del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, apn officer
of great abilities, but capable of attempting and
executing the most atrocious adions, got intel-
ligence of the motions and destination of these
ambassadors. As he knew how much his master
wished to discover the intentioris of the French
King, and of what consequence it was to retard
the execution of his measures , he employed
some soldiers belonging to the garrison of Pavia
to lie in wait for Rincon and Fregofo as they
failed down the Po, who murdered them and
most of their attendants, and seized their papers.
Upon receiving an account of this barbarous
outrage, committed, during the subsistence of
truce, against persons held sacred by the most
uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for the un-
happy fate of two servants whom he loved and
trusted, his uneasiness at the interruption of his
schemes by their death, and every other passion,
were swallowed up and loft in the indignation
which this insult on the honour of his crown
excited. He exclaimed loudly against Guafto,
who, having drawn upon himself all the infamy
of affaffination without making any discovery of
importance, as the ambassadors had left their in-

* Hist. di Venet. del Paruta, iv.

1 s ,

BooI VII. ftrudtions. and other papers of con fequenrce be.

:54.i; hind them,! now 'boldly denied his being accef.

fary in :any wife to the crime. He sent an, ambaf.
fador, to' the Emperor, to. demand suitable repa,
'ration for an indignity., which no prince, how
inconsiderable soever ,.or pusillanimous , could
tamely endure: Apd when Charles, impatient at
that time to set out on his African expedition,
endeavoured to put him off with an, evasive
answer, he appealed to all the courts in Europe,
setting forth the heinousness of the injury,, the
spirit of moderation with which he had applied
for redress, and the iniquity of the Emperor in
disregarding this jufV request.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with which
Guafto asserted his, own innocence, the accufa.
tions of the French gained greater credit than all
his protestations; and Bellay, the French com.
mander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by
his induifry and address, such a minute detail of
the tranfadion, with the testimony of so many
of, the parties concerned, as amounted almost to
a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In confe-
quence of this opinion of the publick, confirmed
by such strong evidence, Francis's complaints
were universally .allowed to be well founded,
and the steps which he took towards renewing
hostilities, were ascribed not merely to ambition

or resentment, but to the unavoidable necessity Booi VII.
of vindicating the honour of his crown .. x54x.

HOWEVER jua Francis might esteem his own
cause, he did not trust so much to that, as to
neglec the proper precautions for gaining other
allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he might
counterbalance the Emperor's superior power,
But his negociations to this effed were attended
with very 'little success. Henry VIII. eagerly
bent at that time upon schemes against. Scotland,
which he knew would at once dissolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part
with the Emperor, than to contribute in any
degree towards favouring the operations against
him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient
system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwith-
standing Solyman's folicitations , imitated the
Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with
the religious liberty which they enjoyed, found
it more their interest to gratify than to irritate
the Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark
and Sweden, who on this occasion were first
drawn in to interest themselves in the quarrels
of the more potent Monarchs of the south, and
the Duke of Cleves, who had a dispute with
the Emperor about the poffeffion of Gueldres,
were the only confederates whom Francis secured.

' Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hist. lib. xl. 2z6

'BoOK VII. But the dominions of the two former lay at fuci

Ss41-. a distance, and the power of the latter was fc

inconsiderable, that he gained little by thehi
alliance. ,

Francis's FRANCIS, however, supplied all defeAs by his
inunftry in own a&ivity. Being afflited at this time with
r war. a distemper, the effec of his irregular pleasures,

and which prevented his pursuing them with the
fame licentious indulgence, he applied to bufi.
ness Wvith more than his usual industry. The
fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary
attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
diffatisfied with the "minifters whom he had hi.
therto employed. This accidental peevishness
being iharpened by refleting on the false fleps
into which he had lately been betrayed, as well
as the insults to which he had been exposed,
some of those in whom he had hitherto placed
the greatest confidence felt the effeAs of this
change in his temper, and were deprived of
their offices. At last he disgraced Montmorency
himself, who had long direced affairs as well
civil as military with all the authority of a
minister no less beloved than trusted by his maf.
-ter; and Francis being fond of fhewing that the
fall of such a powerful favourite did not affec
the vigour or prudence of his- administration,
this was a new motive to redouble his diligence

in

in preparing to open the war by some splendid Boot VII.
and extraordinary effort. Is4z. -

FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field He brings

five armies. One to ad in Luxemburgh under~, a1mrnie
the Duke of Orleans, accompanied by the Duke field.
of Lorraine as his inftru&or in the art of war.
Another commanded by the Dauphin marched
towards the frontiers of Spain. A third led by
Van Roffem the marlhal of Gueldres, and com-
posed chiefly of the troops of Cleves, had Bra-
bant allotted for the theatre of its operations. A
fourth, of which the Duke of Vendome was ge-
neral, hovered on the borders of Slanders. 'The
last, consisting of the forces cantoned in Pied-
mont, was destined for the admiral Annibaut.
The Dauphin and his brother "were appointed to
command where the chief exertions were in-i
tended, and the greatest honour to be reaped; the
army of the former amounted to forty thousand ,
that of the latter to thirty thousand, men. Nothing
appears more surprising than that Francis did
not pour with these numerous and irresistible
armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
.the objel of his wishes as well as -enterprizes;
and that he should choose rather to turn almost
his whole strength into another direction, and
towards new coniquefts. But the remembrance
of the disasters which he had met with in his
former expeditions inlto Italy, together with the

VoL,. II, . S

BOOK VII. difficulty of supporting a war tarried on at such

I542. a distance from his own dominions, had gra-

dually abated his Violent inclination to obtain
footing in that country, and made him willing
to try the fortune of his arms in another quarter.
At the .fame time he expeded to make such a
powerful impression on the frontier of Spain,
where there were few towns of any strength,
and no army assembled to oppose him , as
might enable. him to recover poffeftion of the
country of Roufillon, lately difmemnbered from
the French crown, before Charles could bring
into the field any force able to obftrud his
progress. The necessity of supporting his ally,
the Duke of Cleves, and the hope of drawing a
considerable body of soldiers out of Germany by
his means, determined him to a& with vigour ir
the Low Countries.

uaue. THE Dauphin and Duke of Orleans opened
Their ope- the campaign much about the fame time; the
,rationis. former laying siege to Perpignan the capital of

Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxemburgh.
The Duke of Orleans pulhed his operations with
the greatest rapidity and success, one town fall-
ing after another, until no place in that large
dutchy remained in the Emperor's hands but
Thionville. Nor could he have failed of over-
running the adjacent provinces with the fame
ease, if he had not voluntarily ftopt short in this

career . of vidory. But a report prevailing that BOOK VII.
the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle 1S44a
in order to save Perpignan, on a fuddeti the
Duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or moved,
perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, whom he
both envied and hated , abandoned his own con-
quest, and hastened towards Roufiilon~, in order
to divide with him the glory of the vidory,

ON his departure fbme of his troops were difl

banded, others deserted their colours, and the
reft, cantoned in the -towns which he had takeni
remained inadive. By this condud, which leaves
a dishonourable imputation either on his under*
standing or his heart, or on both, he not only
renounced whatever he could have hoped fromn
fach a promising commencement of the cam-
paign,. but gave the enemy an opportunity of
recovering, before the end of summer, all the
conquests which he had gained. On the Spanish
frontier, the Emperor Was not so inconsiderate
as to venture on a battle, the loss of which
might have endangered his kingdom. Perpignan,
though poorly fortified , and briskly attacked,
having been largely supplied with ammunition
and provisions by the vigilance of Doria 4,' was
defended so long and so vigorously by the Duke
of Alva, the persevering obstinacy of whole

' Sigonii Vita A. Doriae, p. x1x 9

i

B0ooK VII. temper fitted himi admirably for such service,

1542. that last the F'rench, after a siege of three

/months, wasted by diseases, repulsed in several
assaults, and defpairinig of success, relinquished
the, und-ertaking , and retired into their own
country 5. Thus all Francis's mighty preparations,
either from some defed in his own condud, or.
from the superior power and prudence of his
rival, produced no effecs which bore any pro-
portion to his expence and efforts, or such as
gratified, in any degree, his own hopes, or ain-
fwered the expedation of Europe. The only solid
advantage of the campaign was the acquisition of
a few towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained
rather by stratagem and address; than by the
force of his arms ".

preparations
for another
campaign. 1MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though

both considerably exhausted by such great but
indecisive efforts, discovering no abatement of
their mutual animosity , employed .all their
attention , tried every expedient, and turned
themselves towards every quarter, in order to
acquire new allies, together with such a rein-
forcement of strength as would give them the
superiority in the ensuing campaign. ,Charles,
taking advantage of the terror and resentment of

5 Sandov. Hist. tom. ii. 3 1.
* Sandov. Hist. ii. 3x8. Bellay, 387, &c. Ferrer. ix.

237.

the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of their Boo lVII.
country, prevailed on the Cortes of the several IS43.
kingdoms to grant him fubfidles with a more
liberal hand than usual. At the fame time, he:
borrowed a large fum from John, King of Por-
tugal, and, by :way of security for his repay-.
ment, put him in poffeffion of the Molucca isles
in the East Indies, with the gainful commerc.e:
of precious spices, which that sequestered corner
of the globe yields. Not satisfied. with this, he
negociated a marriage between Philip his only
son , now in his sixteenth year, and VIary
daughter of that Monarch, with whom her fa-
ther, the most opulent Prince in Europe, gave
a large dower; and having likewise persuaded
the Cortes of Aragon and Valencia. to recognise
Philip as the heir of these crowns, he obtained
from them the donative usual on such occa-
fipns 7. These extraordinary supplies enabled
him to make such additions to,,his forces in
Spain., that he could detach a great body into
the pow Countries, and yet reserve as many as.
were fufficient for the defence of the kingdom.
Having thus provided for the security of Spain,.
and committed the government of it to his son,
he| failed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But May.
how attentive soever to raise the funds for carry-

Ferreras, ix. 238. 241. Jovii HiPc, lib. xlii. z98. 6.

S3

BdoI VII. i~g oi the wvar, or eager to grasp at any new

1543, expedient for that purpose, he was not so incon.

fiderate as to accept of an overture which Paul,
.knowing his necessities, artfully threw out to
him. That ambitious Pontiff, -no les~ sagacious
. to. discern Than watchful to seize opportunities

of aggrandizing his family , solicited him to
grant Otavio his grandchild, whom the Empe.
ror had .admitted to the \honour of being his
fon-in-law , the investiture. of the dtitchy of
MIVilan, in return for which he promised. such a
vast fuim of money as would have gone far to-
wards supplying his' present exigencies. But Char-
les,: as well from unwillingness to alienate a pro.
virnce of so much value, as fronm disgust at the
Pope, who had hitherto refused to join in the
War against Francis, reiected the proposal. His
diffatisfadion with Paul at that junacure was so
great, that: he even refused to approve his alien-
ating Parma and Placentia from the patrimony of
St. Peter, and fettling them on his son and grand-
son as a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no
other expedient for raising money among the
Italian states remained , he consented to with-
draw the garrisons which he had hitherto kept
in, the citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in con-
fideration for which, he received a large present
from Cosmo di Medici , who by this means fe-
cured his own independence, and got poffeflion

of two forts, which were justly called the fetters BooK VII.
of Tuscany '. 'i43.

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned The Empe-

his whole attention towards faifing the sums ne-ciations
·'effary for defraying the expences of the year, with Henry
Jad not been negligent of objects more distant, vm.
though no less important, and had concluded a
league offenfive and defensive with Henry VIII.
from which he derived, in the end, greater ad-
vantage than from all his other preparations.
Several flight circumitances, which have already
been mentioned, had, begun to alienate the affec-
tions of that Monarch from Francis his present
ally , and new incidents of greater moment had
occurred to increase his disgust and animosity.
Henry, desirous of establishing an uniformity in Henry's
religion in Great Britain, as well as fond ofrupture with

' France and

making profelytes to his own opinions., had scotlana.
formed a scheme of persuading his nephew the
King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's fupre-
macy, and to adopt the fame system of refornia-
ti'on, which he had introduced into England.
This measure he pursued with his usual eager-
ness and impetuosity, making such advantage-
ous overtures to James, whom he considered as
not over-fcrupuloufly attached to any religious

, Adriani Iftoria, i. I 9g. Sleid. ;i . Joyii Hist. lib.

xliii. p. 3 o01. Vita di Co£s iMedici. di Baldini, p. 34.

S4

Boor VII. tenets, that he hardly doubted of success. His-

xs4;. propositions were accordingly received in such,

a manner that he flattered himself with having
gained his point. But the .Scottish ecclefiafticks,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the con-,
sequence of the King's union with England; and
the partisans of France , no less convinced that
it would put an end to the in'iuence of that
crown upon the publick councils of' Scotland,
combined together, and by their insinuations
defeated Henry's scheme at the very moment

< when he expedted it to have taken effeA. Too

haughty to brook such a disappointment, which
he imputed as much to the arts of the French
as to the levity of the Scottish Monarch, he
took arms against Scotland, threatening to sub-
due the kingdom, since he could not gain the
friendship of its King. At the fame time, his
refentmept at I-rancis quickened his negociations
with the Emperor, an alliance with whom he
'was now as forward to accept as the other could
be to offer it. During this war with Scotland,
and before the conclusion of his negociations
with Charles, James V. died, leaving his crown
to IMVary his only daughter, an infant a few days
old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once his
whole system with regard to Scotland', and aban-
doning all thoughts of conquering it, aimed at
what was more advantageous as well as more
praticable, an union with that kingdom by a

marriage between- Edward his only son and- the BOOK VIIL
young Queen. But here, too, he apprehended a Ix43.
vigorous opposition from the French faAion in.
Scotland, which began to bestir itCelf in order
to thwart the measure. The necessity of crush-
ing this party among the Scots, and of prevent-
ing Francis from furnishing them any effedual--
aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of breaking
with France, and pushed him on to put a finish-
ing hand to the treaty of confederacy with the
Emperor.

IN this league were contained 'firft of all, ar-Feb, ir.

tides for securing their future amity and mutual~ a'11
defence; then were enumerated the demands Chales and
which they- were refpedively to -make uponHenry"
Francis; and the plan of their operations was
fixed, if he should refuse to grant them fatif-
fation. They agreed to require that Francis
,should not only renounce his alliance with Soly-
man, which had been the source of infinite ca-
lamities to Christendom, but also that he should
make reparation for the damages which that
unnatural union had occasioned; that he should
restore Burgundy to the Emperor; that he
should desist immediately from hostilities, and
leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common-
enemy of the Christian faith; and that he ihould
immediately pay the sums due to Henry, or
put some, towns in his hands as security to that

Boi6r VII. effed. If within forty days, he did not coy,.

Ir43. ply with these demands, they then engaged tor

invade France each with twenty thousand foot
and five thousand horse, and not to lay down their
arms until they had recovered Burgundy, toge.
Sther #vbith the towns on the Somme, for the Emrn.
peror, and. Normandy and Guienne, or even the
whole' realm of France, for Henry'. Their
heralds, accordingly,, set out with these haughty
requisitions; but not being permitted to enter
France, could not perform their commiffiont, and
the two Monarchs held themselves fully en.
titled to execute whatever was stipulated in their
treaty.

trancis's FRANCIS on his part was not less diligent in
leg~otio- 'preparing for the approaching campaign. Hay.
man. ing early observed the symptoms of Henry's dif.

gust and alienation, and finding all his endeavours
to sooth and reconcile him ineffectual, he knew
his temper too well not to exped that open hot
tilities would quickly follow upon this cessation
of friendship. For this reason he redoubled his
endeavours to obtain from Solyman such aid as
might counterbalance the great accession of
ftrerigth twrhich the Emperor would receive by
his alliance with England. In order to supply
the place of the two ambassadors who had been

* Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. 238.

murdered by Guafto, he sent as his envoy, first BOOK VII
to Venice, and then to Coniftantinople, Paulin, I~43.
a captain of foot, a man of a daring ative spirit,
and on account of these qualities thought wor-
thy of this service, to which he was recommend-
ed by Bellay, who had trained him to the arts
of negociation, and made, trial of his talents and
address on several occasions. Nor did he belie
the opinion conceived of his courage and abili-
ties. Hastening to Constantinople, without re-
garding the dangers to which he was exposed,
he urged his mafter's demands with such bold-
ness, and availed himself of every circumstance
with such dexterity, that quickly he removed all
the Sultan's difficulties. As some of the Bafhaws,
swayed either by their own opinion, or influenced
by the Emperor's emissaries, who had made
their way even into this court, had declared in
the Divan against ading in concert with France,
he found means either to convince or silence
them0". At last he obtained orders for Barba-
roffa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to regu-
late all his. operations by the dire&ions of 'the
French King. Francis was not equally success.
ful in his attempts to gain the princes of the
Empire. The extraordinary rigour with which
he thought it necessary to punish such of his

" Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. 346, .Jovii Hist. lib. xli. 28%s

&c. 300, &c. Brantome.

66oR YII. fubjecds as -had embraced the protestant opinions,
1r43, in order to give some notable evidence of his

'.own zeal for the Catholick faith, and to wipe off
the imputations to which he was liable from his
confederacy with the Turks, placed an infuper.
able barrier between him and such of the ,Ger.
mnans as interest or' inclination would have
prompted most readily to join him". His chief
advantage, however, over the Emperor, he de-
rived on this, as on other occasions, from the
contiguity of his dominions, as well as-from the
extent of. the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and difap.
"pointments unavoidable wherever popular as-
femblies provide for the expences of government
by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence his do.
meitick preparations were always carried on with
vigour and rapidity, while those of the Emr
peror, unless when quickened by some foreign
supply, or some temporary expedient, were to
the last degree flow and dilatory.

Operations LONG before any army was in readiriefs to
in the Low- o
Countries. oppose him, Francis took the field in the Low-

Countries, against which he turned the whole
weight of the war. He made himself master of
Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the
key to the whole province of Hainault; and or-
dered it to be fortified with great care. Turning

" Seck. lib. iii. 40 .

from thence to the right, he entered the dutchy of BooK VII.
Luxemburgh, and found it in the fame defence- xI<43.
less slate as.in the former year. While he was thus
employed ,. the Emperor having drawn together
an army, composed of all the different nations
fubjeA to his government, entered the territories
of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had vowed
to inflic exemplary vengeance. This Prince,
whose icondu& and situation were similar to that
of Robert de-la Mtark in the first war between
Charles and Francis, resembled him likewise in
his fate. Unable, with his feeble army, to face
the Emperor , who advanced at the head of forty-
four thousand men , he retired at his approach;
and the Imperialists being at liberty to ad .as The Empe-
they pleased, immediately invested Duren. That ror becoes
town, though gallantly defended , was won by the Dutchy
assault, all the inhabitants put to the sword , and of cleves.

'

. . Augufi 24.

the place itself reduced to aflies. This dreadful
example of severity struck the people of the coun-
try with such general terror , that all the other
towns , even such as were capable of resistance,
sent their keys to the Emperor ,; and before a
body of French detached to his assistance could
come up, the Duke himself was obliged to make
his submission to Charles in the most abje6t man-
ner. Being admitted into the Imperial pre-
fence, he kneeled, together with eight of his prin-
cipal subjects, and implored mercy. The Em-
peror allowed him, to remain in that ignominious

rBOOK VII. poftue , and eying himn with an haughty and

1543. implacable look, without deigning to answer a

single word, remitted him to his ministers The
conditions, however , which they prescribed were

sept ,. Pot so rigorous as he had reason to have expecled

after such a reception. He was obliged to rea
nounce his alliance with France and Denmark,
to resign all his pietenfions to the dutchy of
Gueldres; to enter into perpetual amity with
the Emperor and King of the Romans. In re-
turn for which, all his hereditary dominions were
restored, except two towns which the Emperor
kept as pledges of his fidelity during the cons
tinuance of the war, and he was re-inflated in
his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after, Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of
his reconcilement, gave him in marriage orie of
the daughters of his brother Ferdinand"*

seneges . HAVING thus chastised the prefumption-of
Lanarecy. the Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies

from Francis, arid added to his dominions in the
Low Countries -a considerable province which
lay contiguous to them , Charles advanced to-

_a wards Hainault, and laid. siege to Landrecy,

There , as the first fruits of his alliance with

,

Henry, he was joined by fix thousand English

" Harei Ahnal. Brabant. t. ib

68, Recueil des Trai-

tez, t. ii. 226.

under Sir John Wallop. The garrison , confif- BOOK VII,
ing of veteran troops commanded by De la 1s43.
Lande and Deffn, two officers of reputation,
imade a vigorous resistance. Francis approached
with all his forces to relieve that place; Charles
covered the siege ; both were determined to
hazard an engagement; and all Europe expeat
ed to fee this contest , which had continued so
long, decided at last by a battle between two
great armies, led by their refpedive Monarchs in
person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was such, as put the disadvantage
manifestly on his fide who thould venture to at-
tack, and neither of them chose to run that
rifque. Amidst a variety of movements , in or-
der to draw the enemy into this snare, or to
avoid it themselves , Francis , with admirable
conduct, and equal good fortune, threw first a
supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of
{rovifions into the town, so that the Emperor,
despairing of success, withdrew into winter-quar-
ters ', in order to preserve his army from,being
entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

DURING this campaign , Solyman fulfilled his November.
engagements to the' French King with great punc- ulYman in-
tuality. He himself marched into Hungary with gary.
a numerous army; and. as the princes of the Em?

," Bellay, 4o05 &¢.

¾-

BooK VII. pire made no great effort to save a country which

1543. Charles, by employing his own force against

Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice , there was
no appearance of any body of troops to oppose
his progress. He besieged, one after another,
Quinque Ecclefise, Alba, and Gran , the three
most considerable towns in the kingdom, of
which Ferdinand had kept poffeflion. The first
was taken by storm ; the other two furrendered;'
and the whole kingdom, afmall'corner excepted,
was fubjeAed to the Turkilh yoke'. About

Barharorra's the fame time, Barbarossa failed with a fleet of
descent on
Italy. an hundred and ten gallies, and coasting along

the shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheg<
gio, which he plundered and burnt; and ad-
vancing from thence to the mouth of the Tiber,
he ftopt there to water. The citizens of Rome,
ignorant of his destination, and filled with. ter-
ror, began to fly with such general precipitation;
that the city would have been left deserted, if
* they had not resumed courage upon letters from
Paulin the French envoy, assuring them that no
violence or injury would be offered by the Turks
to any state in alliance with the King his maf-
ter ". From Offia, Barbarossa failed to Marseilles,
and being joined by the French fleet with a body
of. land-forc.es on board, under the count d'En-

$ Iftuanhaff. Hiftor. Hung. 1. xv. 67.
S Jovii Hist. 1. xliii. 3 04, &c. Pallavic. i 6o.

guien,

guien, a gallant young Prince of the house of BoOdi VIi.
'Bourbon , they direaed their course towards x54.
Nice, the fole' retreat of the unfortunate Duke
of Savoy. There, to the astonishment and scan- Augut 0o.
,dal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France and
Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjuncion
against a fortress on which the Cross of Savoy
was displayed. The town, however, was bravely
defended against their combined force by Mont-
fort a Savoyard gentleman, who stood a general
assault, and repulsed the enemy with great loss,
before he retired into the castle. That fort situ-
ated upon a rock , :on which the artillery .made
no impression, and which could not be under-
mine, [Ihe held out so long, that Doria had
timneto approach with his fleet, and the marquis
del Guafto to march with a body of troops
from Milan. Upon intelligence of this,, the Sept. s,
French and Turks raised the siege "; and Francis
had not even the consolation of success, to render
the infamy, which he drew on himself by calling
in such an auxiliary, more tolerable.

FROM the small progress of either party du- Pe wa-;

S" . ' tions for at

ring this campaign it was obvious to what a new cam-
length the war might be drawn out between two paignd
princes, whose power was so equally balanced,

'1 Guichenon Hiltoire de la Savoye, t, i. p. 6 1. Bellay,

42;, ,&C.

VOL. IIi T

BooK VII. and who, by their own talents or a~divity, could

1543. so vary and multiply their resources. The trial

which they had now made of each other's strength
might have taught them the imprudence of per-
sifting in a war, wherein there was greater-ap,
pearance of their diftrefling their own dominions
than of conquering those of their adversary, and
should have disposed both to wish for peace. If
Charles and Francis had been influenced by con-
fiderations of interest or prudence alone, this,
without doubt, must have been the manner in
which they would have reasoned. But the personal
animosity, which mingled itself in all their quar.
rels, had grown to be so violent and implacable,
that, for the pleasure of gratifying it, ity dif-
regarded every thing else; and were infinitely
more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, ihan
how to secure what would be of advantage to
themselves. No sooner then did the season force
them to suspend hostilities, than, without paying
any attention to the Pope's repeated endeavours
or paternal exhortations to re-establish peace,
they began to provide for the operations of the.
next year with new vigour, and an adtivity,
increasing with their hatred. Charles turned, his
chief attention towards gaining i the princes of
the Empire , and endeavoured to rouse the for-

Affairs ofmidable' but unwieldy strength of the Germanick
Germany.body against Francis. In order to understand

the propriety of the steps which he took for that

purpose, it is necessary to review the chief tranf- Boos VIL
.adliohs in that country since the diet' of Ratisbon 154'3.
in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-

one.

VMCucH about the time that assembly broke up, Maurice o'

MVaurice succeeded his father Henry in the go- Saxony Cuc

. ceeds his si&

vernment of that part of Saxony which belonged thee
to, the 'Albertine branch of the Saxon family.
This young Prince, then. only in his twentieth
year, had, even at that early period, begun to
discover the great talents which qualified him
for ading such a distinguished part in the as-
fairs of Germany. As soon as he entered upon
the administration, he struck out into such a
new and singular path, as fhewed that he aimed,
from the beginning, at something great and un-
common. Though. zealously attached to th he views
Protestant opinions both from education and "and s

aco

principle, he refused to accede to the league ofyydung
Smalkalde, being determined, as he said, to princ'e
maintain the purity of religion which was the
original objea of that confederacy, but not ,to.
entangle himself in the political interests or com-
binations to which it had given rife. At the
fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles
and the confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiv-
ing which of them was most likely to prevail ini
the contest, instead of that jealousy and distrust
Which the other Protestants expressed of all the

T-d £

BOOK VII. Emperor's designs, he affeted to place in him

x543. an unbounded -confidence; and courted his fa-

vour with the. utmost assiduity. When the other
Protestants, in the year fifteen hundred and forty.
two, either declined assisting Ferdinand in Hun.
gary, or afforded him reluAant and feeble aid,
MVIaurice marched thither in person, and rendered
himrfelf conspicuous by his zeal and courage.
From the fame motive, he had led to the Em-
peror's assistance, during the last campaign, a
body of his own troops; and the gracefulness of
his person, his dexterity in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity, which courted and
delighted in danger, did not distinguish him
more in the field, than his great abilities and
insinuating address won upon the Emperor's
confidence and favour I. While by this con-
duct, which appeared extraordinary to those
who held the fame opinions with him concern-
ing religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court
to the Emperor, he began to discover some de-
gree of jealousy of his cousin the Eledor of
Saxony. This, which proved in the sequel so
fatal to the Eledor, had almost occasioned an
open rupture between them ; and soon after
Maurice's accession ·to the government , they
both took arms with equal rage, upon account
of- a difpqte about the right of jurifdidion over

" Sleid, 31 7. Seek. 1. iii, 37i. 3_86. 4z8.

a paultry town situated on the Moldaw. They BOOK VIT.
were prevented , however, from proceeding to x543.
adiion' by the .mediation of the Landgrave of
Hesse, whose daughter Maurice.had married, as
well as by re pbwerful and authoritative ad-
monitions of Luther '.

AmIDST these tranfadiobs, the Pcipe, though The Pope
extremely irritated at the Emperor's concessions proposes to

hold a gene-

to the Protestants, at the diet of Ratisbon, was so ral council
warmly solicited on all hands, 'by such as were at Tre,,t.
m6ft devoutly attached to the See of Rome, no
less than by those whose fidelity or designs he
fufpeced, to summon a general council, that he
found it impossible -to avoid any longer calling
that assembly. The impatience for its meeting,
and the expedtations of great effects from its de-
cifions, seemed to grow in proportion to the dif-
ficulty of obtaining it. He frill adhered, how-
ever, to his original resolution of holding it in
some town of Italy, where, by the number of
ecclefiafticks, retainers to his court, and de-
pending on his favour, who could repair to it
without difficulty or expence, he might influence
and even dired all its proceedings. This pro,
position, though often rejected by the Germans,
he inftruded his nuncio to the diet held at Spires,
in the year one thousand five hundred and March 3.
forty-two, to renew once more; and if he found

" Sleid. 292. Seck. 1. iii. 403.

T3

BOOK VII. it gave no greater fatisfa&ion than formerly, he,

ag 4, as a last concession, empowered him, to propose

for the place of meeting, Trent, a city in the
Tyrol, fubjeAito the King of the Romans, and
situated on the confines between fGermany and
Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet, after
giving it as their opinion that the council might
. ave been held with greater advantage in Ratif-
bon, Cologne, or fonme of the great cities in the
Empire, approved of the place which the Pope
had named. The Protestants unanimously ex-
prefled their, diffatisfadion. and protested that
they would pay no regard to a council held
without the precinas of the Empire, called by
the Pope's authority, and in which he assumed
the right of presiding ~',

jvIay 2., THE Pope, without' taking any notice of their
summonsun it objeaions , published the bull of intimation,
to meet. named three cardinals to preside as his legates,

and appointed them to repair to Trent before
the first of November, the day he had fixed for
opening the council. But if Paul had desired
the meeting of a council as sincerely as he pre-
tended, he would not have pitched on such arn
improper time for calling it. Instead of that
general union and tranquillity, without which
the. deliberations of a council could neither be

Sl" id, z91. Seck. i. iii, a83,

eonduded with security, nor attended with au-Boor VII.
thority, such a fierce war was just kindled be- '543.
tween the Emperor and Francis, as rendered it
impossible for the ecclefiafticks from many parts
of Europe to resort thither in safety. The le-
gates, accordingly, remained several months at
Trent; but as no person appeared there, except
a few prelates from the ecclesiastical ftat&, the
Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and con-Obliged to
tempt which this drew upon him from the ene-prorogu'e it.
mies of the church, recalled them and prorogued
the council ".

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the papal he Empe-

fee, at the very time that the German Protest-° ro courts

SJthe Protest-

Snts took every occasion of pouring contempt ants.
upon it, the Emperor and King of the Romans
found it necessary not only to connive at their
condudc, but to court their favour by repeated
ads of indulgence. In the fame diet of Spires,
wherein they had protested in the most difre-
fpedful terms against assembling a council at
Trent, Ferdinand, who depended on their aid
for the defence of Hungary, not only permitted
that protestation to be inserted in the records of
the diet, but renewed in their favour all the
Emperor's concetfions at. Ratisbon, adding to
them whatever they demanded for their farther

°" F. Paul, p. 97. Skid. 296.

OOK I II. security. Among other particulars, he granted
9f.4 a fufpenflon of a decree of the Imperial chamber

against the city of Goflar, one of those which
had entered into the league of Smalkalde, on
account of .its having seized the ecclesiastical re-
venues within its ,domains, and enjoined Henry
Duke of Brunswick to desist from his attempts
to carry that decree into execution. Biut Henry,
a furious bigot, and no less obstinate than rah.
in all his undertakings, continuing'to disquiet
the people of Goflar by his incursions, the Elee,

Their vigor- tor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, that
ous proceed-
ings. they might not fuffer any member of the Smal-

kaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their
forces, declared war in form against Henry, and
in the space of a few weeks, firipping him entirely
of his dominions, drove him as a wretched exile
to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By this
ad of vengeance, no less severe than sudden,
they filled all G9rmany with dread of their
power, and the confederates of Smalkalde ap-
peared, by this first effort of their arms, to be
as prompt as capable to proted those who had
joined their association ".

EMBOLDENED by so many concessions in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their

Sleid. 296. Commemoratio fuccincta caufarum Belli,

&c. a Smalkaldicis contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edita;
ap. Scardium. tom. ii. 30o.

opinions daily made, the princes of the league BOOK VII.
of Smalkalde took a solemn protest againfl the I543.
Imperial chamber, and declined its jurifdidion
for the future, because that court had not been
visited, or reformed according to the decree of
Ratisbon, and continued to discover a most in-
decent partiality in all its proceedings. Not
long after this, ,they ventured a step farther;
and protesting against the recess of a diet held
at Nuremberg, which provided for the defence April 23.
of Hungary, refused to furnish their contingent 1543.
for that purpose, unless the inperial chamber
were reformed, and full security were granted
them in every point with regard to religion ".

SUCH were the lengths to which the Proteft-Dietat Spires.
ants had proceeded, and such, their confidence in 1i44.
their own power, when the Emperor returned
from the Low Countries, to hold a diet, which
he had summoned to meet at Spires. The re-
sped due to the Emperor , as well as the import-
ance of the affairs which were to be laid before
it, rendered this assembly extremely full. All
the Electors, a great number of princes eccle-
fiaffical and secular, with the deputies of most
of the cities , were present. Charles soon per-
ceived that this was not a. time to offend the jea-
lous spirit of the Protestants, by asserting in any'

?a Sleid. 304. 307, Seck, 1. iii. 404, 416.

BoOK VII. high tone the authority and doArines of the

15 44. church, or by abridging, in the smallest article,

the liberty which they. now enjoyed ; but that,
on the contrary, if he expeded any support
from them, or wished to preserve Germany from
intestine disorders while he was engaged in a
foreign war, he must sooth them by new con-
ceffions, and a more ample extension of their re-
ligious privileges. He began; accordingly, with
courting th'e Eledor of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse, the heads of the Protestant, party, and
by giving up some things in their favour, and
granting liberal promises with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition

The Empe-on their part. Having ascertained this capital
ror solicits
its aid point, he then ventured to address the diet with
againit greater freedom. He began by representing his
France. own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to

two things most essential to Christendom, the
procuring of a general council in order to
compose the' religious dissensions which had un-
happily arisen in Germany, and the providing
some proper means for checking the formidable
progref of the Turkish arms. But that his pious
endeavours had been entirely defeated by the
un.justifiable ambition of the French King, who
having wantonly kindled the flame of war in
Europe, which had been so lately extinguished
by the truce of Nice, rendered it impossible for,
the fathers of the church to assemble in council,

or to deliberate with security; and obliged him BOOK VII.
to employ those forces in his own defence, which, 1544.
with greater fatisfahion to himself, as well as
more honour to Christendom, he would have
turned against the Infidels. That Francis, not
thinking it enough to have. called him off from
opposing the Infidels, had, with unexampled
impiety, invited them into the heart of Christen-
dom, and, joining his arms to theirs, had openly
attacked the Duke of Savoy a member of the
Empire. That Barbaroffa's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the re-
turn of spring to carry terror and desolation to
the coast of some Christian slate. That in such
a situation it was folly to think of distant expe-
ditions against the Turk, or of marching to op-
pose his armies in Hungary, while such a power-
ful ally received him into the center of Europe,
and gave him footing there. That prudence
dicdated to oppose the nearest and most immi-
nent danger, first of all, and by humbling the
power of France , to deprive Solyman of the
advantages, which he derived from the unnatu-
ral confederacy formed between him and a Mo-
narch, who still arrogated the name of Most
Christian. That, in truth, a war against the
French King and the Sultan ought to be con-
fidered as the fame thing ; and that every ad-
vantage gained over the former, was a severe
and sensible blow to the latter.' That, there-

B3ooI VII. fore, he now demanded their aid against Francis,

1544. not merely as an enemy of the Germanick body,

or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the'
Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent

invetive of the Emperor, the King of the Ro.
mans stood up, and related the rapid conqu-fts
of the S.ultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he
said, by the fatal necessity imposed On his bro-
ther of employing his arms against France.
When he had finished, the arnbaffadors of Savoy
gave a detail of Barbaroffa's operations at' Nice,
and of the ravages which he had committed on
that coast. All these, added to the general in-
dignation which Francis's unprecedented union
with the Turks excited in Europe, made such
an impression on the diet as the Emperor wished,
and difpord most of the members to grant him
such effetual aid as he had demanded. The
rmbaffadors whom Francis had sent to explain
the motives of his conduA , were not permitted
to enter the bounds of the Empire; and the
apology which they publifiled for their master,
vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by ex-
amples drawn from scripture, and the pradice
of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced against him to
such a degree, as to be incapable of allowing

their proper weight to any arguments in his be- BoorK VII.
half. i s 44.

SUCH being the favourable disposition of the His vas
Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could concemfon

. . . in order to

now obftrut his gaining all that he aimed at, gain the
but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants, Protestants,
which he determined to quiet by granting every
thing that the utmost solicitude of these passions
could desire for the security of their religion.
With this view, he consented to a recess, whereby
all the rigorous edicts hitherto issued against the
Protefants were suspended; a council either
general or national to be assembled in Germany
was declared necessary, in order to re-establish
peace in the church; until one of these should
be held (which the Emperor undertook to
bring about as soon as possible ), the free and
puiblick exercise of the Protestant religion was

i

authorized; the Imperial chamber was to give

no molestation to the Protestants; and when the
term, for which the present judges in that court
'were eleded, .should expire, persons duly qua-
lified were then to be admitted as members,
without any diftindion on account of religion.
SIn return for these extraordinary ads of indul-
gence, the Protestants concurred with the other Aid granted
t members of the diet, in declaring war againftby tle diet.
I Francis in "name of the Empire; in voting the

Emperor a body of twenty-four thousand foot, and

Boio VII. four thousand horse, to be maintained at the

it44. publick expence for fix months, and to be elm-

ployed against France; and at the fame time

N the diet imposed a poll-tax to be levied through-

out all Germany on every person without ex.
* ception, for the support of the war against the

Turks.

Charles's CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention
negociations to the minute and intricate detail of particulars
with Den-.
mark and necessary towards conduding the deliberations
England. Of a numerous and divided assembly to such a

fuccefsful period, negociated a separate peace
with the King of Denmark; who, though he
had hitherto performed nothing considerable in
consequence of his alliance with Francis, had it
in. his power, however, to make a formidable
diversion in favour of that monarch ". At the
fame time, he did not neglecd proper applications,
to the King of England, in order to rouse him
to more vigorous efforts against their common
enemy. Little, indeed, was wantinig to accom-
plifh this; for such events had happened in
Scotland as inflamed Henry to the molt violent
pitch of resentment against Francis. Having
concluded with the parliament of Scotland a
treaty of marriage between his son and theit
young Queen, by which he reckoned himself

" Dumont Corps 'Diplom. t. iv. p. ii, p. Z74,

secure of effedling the union of the two king- BOOK VII.
doms, which had been long desired, and often

x 544.

attempted without success by his predecessors,
IVary of Guise the Queen-mother , cardinal
Beaton, and other partisans of France, found
means not only to break off the match, but to
alienate the Scottish nation" entirely from the
friendship of England , and to strengthen its
ancient attachment to France. Henry , how-
ever, did not abandon an object of so much
importance; and as the humbling of Francis,
besides the pleasure of taking revenge upon an
enemy who had disappointed a favourite mea-
sure, appeared the most effeAual method of
bringing the Scots to accept once more of the
treaty which they had rejeded, he was so eager
to accomplish this, that he was ready to second
whatever the Emperor could propose to be at.
tempted against that monarch. The plan, ac-
cordingly, which they concerted, was such , if
it had been punAually executed, as must have
ruined France in the first place, and would have
a augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's power
and territories as might in the end have proved
fatal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed
to invade France each with an army of twenty- «
five thousand men, and, without losing time in
besieging the frontier towns, to. advance direCtly

BopiK VII. towards the interior .provinces, and to join their

1i44. forces near Paris +.

The French IMEANW1HILE , Francis stood alone in oppofi.
iea

in Ition to all the enemies whom Charles was muster.

Piedmont. .ing against him. Solyman had been the only

ally who did not desert him; but the assistance
vwhich he received from him had rendered him
so odious to all Christendom , that he resolved
rather t0 forego all the advantages of his friend.
hip , tbhan to become, on that account, the ob.
jedt of general detestation. For this reason , he'
-difmniffed Barbarossa as soon as winter was over,
who, after ravaging the coast of Naples and Tuf.
-cany, returned to Constantinople. As Francis
could not hope to equal the forces of his rival,
he enideavoured to supply that defed by dif.
patch, which was more in his power, and toget

jnvefnca- the ftarc of him in taking, the field. Early in
rignan. the spring the count d'Enguien invested Carig.

nan, a town in Piedmont, which the marquis
del Guafto the Imperial general having surprised
the former year, considered as of so much im-,
portance, that he had fortified it at great ex-
!pence. The count pushed the siege with such
, vigour, that Guafto,. fond of his own conqueit,

and feeing no other way of saving it from fall-

*+ Herbert, 245. Bellay, 448,

ing::into the hands of the French, resolved to Booit -VII,.
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began x944..
his: march from Milan for this purpose , and as The Impne-
heivas at no pains to conceal his intentions, it march to
was soon known in the French camp. Enguien, relieve it.
aigallant and enterprising young man, wished
passionately to try the fortune of a battle; his
troops desired it with no less ardour; but the
peremptory injunclion of the .King not to ven-
ture a generatl engagement, flowing from a pru-
dent. attention to the present situation of affairs,
as well as from the remembrance of former dif-
afters, restrained him from venturing upon it.
Unwilling , however , to abandon .Carignan,
when it was just ready to yield, and eager to dif-:
tinguilh . his command by some memorable ac-
tion, he dispatched IVonluc to court, in order to
lay before the Khg .the. advantages of fighting
the enemy, and the hopes which he had of vic-
tory. . The - King. referred the matter to the
council; all the ministers declared,, one after an-
other, against fighting, and supported their fen,
timents by reasons. extremely plausible. While.
they were delivering their opinions, Monluc,
who was permitted to be present, discovered
such visible and extravagant symptoms of im-
patience to speak, as well as such diffatisfaaioa
with what he heard, that Francis , diverted with
his appearance, called on him to declare what
he could offer in reply to sentiments which

VoL. III. U

B0ooK VII. seemed to be as just as they were general. Upon

S54'4. this, MIonluc ,sa plain but spirited soldier, and

ofi known coturage, represented the good condi.
tion. of the troops, their eagerness to meet the
ernemy in the ;field, their confidence in their of-
f'icers, together with the everlasting infamy which
the declining of a battle would bring on the
French arms'; and he urged his arguments with
futch livelyfimpetuofity , and' such a flow of mili-
.tary eloquence-, as gained' over to his opinion,
not only the King , naturally fond of daring ac.
tion~s, butfeveral of the council. Francis, catch.
ing the fanie enthusiasm which had animated his
troops j,: ftdderily started up , and. having lifted
his -hands to heaven., and implored the divine
protection , he& then addressed himself to Mon-
lue, " Go., fTys he, return to Piedmont , and
fight in the name of God.,,.

,attle of No fooneri tas it known that the King had
erifroies. given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists,

than such was the martial ardour of the gal-
lant and high-fpirited gentlemen of that age,
. that the court was quite deserted, every per-

soir desirous of reputation, or capable of ser-
vice, hurrying to Piedmont, in order to share,
as volunteers , in the danger and glory of
the adion. Encouraged by the arrival of so

S' Mlemoires de Monluc.

many brave officers, Enguien immediately pre- BooK VII.
*pared for battle, nor did Guafto decline the 1544.
combat. The number of cavalry was almost
equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded the
krench by at least ten thousand men. They April Ir.
met near Cerifoles , in an open plain , which
afforded to neither any advantage of ground, and
both had full time to form their army in proper
prder. The shock was such as might have been
expedted between veteran troops, violent and ob-
ftinate. The French cavalry rushing forward to the
charge with their usual vivacity, bore down every
thingthat opposed them; but, on the other hand,
,the steady and disciplined valour/ of the Spanish
infantry having forced the body which they en-
countered to give way, viaory remained in sus-
pence , ready to declare for whichever general
could make the best use of that critical moment.
Guafto, engaged in that part of his army which
was thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling
into the hands of the French, whose vengeance
he dreaded on account of the murder of Rincom
and Fregofo, loft his presence of mind, and for-
got to order a large body of reserve to advance;
whereas Enguien, with admirable courage and
equal cpnduct supported , at the head of his
gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to
yield; and at the fame time he ordered the
Swiss in his service , who had been victorious
wherever they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards.

. ~U

BOOK VII. This motion proved decisive. All that f6llowed

1544. was confusion and slaughter. The marquis del

Guafto, wounded in the thigh, escaped only by
the fwiftnefs of his horse. The vidory of- the
French was complete, ten thousand of the ina.
perialifts being slain, and a considerable nuii.
ber, with all their tents , baggage and artillery;
taken: On the part of the conquerors , th@ii
joy was without allay, a few only being kiled-

Effe'ts of it. .and among these no officer of diftindion '.

THIs splendid adion, beside the reputatibni

with which it was attended, delivered: France
from an imminent danger , as it ruined the army
with which Guafto had intended to infade .the
country between the Rhone and Sabne , where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular
forces to oppose his prog:rfs. But it was' 'rint
in Francis's power to pUrsue the vid'ory witih
such vigour as to reap the :advantages, which it
might have yielded; for though the Miilanefe
remained, now almost defenceless; though the
inhabitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready
to throw off the yoke: though Enguien, flulhed
with success, urged the King to seize this happy
opportunity of recovering a country, the ac-

" Bellay, 429, &c. MImoires de Monluc. Jovii hi@.

1. xliv. p. 327. 6,

quifition of which had been long, his favourite Boost VIL
objed; yet, as the Emperor. and King of' Eng- 14.4.
land were preparing to break in upon the oppo-
site frQntier off France with superior force , it
becam- neceffaiy to sacrifice all thoughts of con-
quest to thepublic safety, and to' recall twelve
thoifand of E'nguien's best troops to be em-
pl6yed in defence 'of the kingdom. Enguien's
subsequent operations were, of consequence , so
:languid and inconsiderable, that the redution
of Carignan and some other towns in Piedmont,
was all that he gained by his great viAory at
Cerjfoles. .'

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking Operations
the field, but he appeared, towards the begin-

t rieow.

ning of June, at the head of an army more nu-
merous, and better appointed than any which
he had hitherto led against France. It amounted
almost to fifty thousand men, and part of it hav-
ing reduced Luxemburgh and some other towns
in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it,
henow marched with the whole towards the
frontiers of Champagne. Charles , according Jce;
to his agreement with the King of England,
ought to have advanced diretly towards Paris;
and the Dauphin , who commanded the only
army to which Francis trusted, for the security

1" Bella-y, 4 38, &c

U3

BOOK VII: of his dominions," was. in no' condition to oppose

him. But the :success with w:hich the French
had defended Provence in the year one thotifaind
five hundred and thirty-fix:, had taught tjhem
th, most effedual; method :of diftrefling' an in
vading enemy. Champagne., a: country abound.
ing more in vines than corn, was' incapable of6
maintaining a, great army; and 'before the Emi
peror's approach , whatever could be of any uife
to him had been carried off or destroyed, This
rendered it necessary for him to be master of
some places of strength, in order to secure: the
convoys on which alone he now perceived that
he must depend for subsistence; and he found
the frontier towns so ill provided for defence,
that he hoped:it would not be a work either of
much time or difficulty to, reduce them. Ac-
cordingly Ligny and Commercy , which he first
attacked, surrendered after a short refiftaiice.

The Empe-He then inverted St. Difier, which,' though it
ror ivefts commanded ,an important pass on the Marne,

Siys.er"' was destitute of every thing necessary for sustain-

ing a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M.

e;- la Lande, who had acquired, such reputa-

tion by the defence of Landrecy , generously
threw themselves into the town, and undertook
to hold it out to the last extremity. The Em-
peror soon found how capable t~hey were of mak-
ing good their promise, and that he could not
exped to take the town without besieging it in

form. This accordingly' he undertook ; and as BoorK VIL
;it was his nature never to abandon any enterprise 1x 44.
in which he had once .engaged ,- he persisted in
it with an inconsiderate obftimnapy.-

.

THE King of England's preparations for the enry vm.
campaign were complete long!before the Em- "ogne.
peror's; but as- he did not choose , on the one
hand, to encounter alone the whole power of
France, and was. unwilling, on the other , that
'his troops ffhould remain inadive,, he took that
opportunity of chat-ifing the Scots, by sending
his fleet, together with a considerable part of his
infantry, under the ,earl of Hertford, to invade
.their country. Hertforad executed his commis-
sion with vigour, plundered and burnt Edin-
burgh and Leith , laid waste the adjacent coun-
try, and reimbarked his men with such dispatch,
that they joined their sovereign soon after his J~y I4.
landing in France. -When Henry arrived in that
kingdom, he found the Emperor engaged in
the siege of St. Difier; an ambassador, however,
whom he sent to congratulate the English Mo-
narch on his safe arrival on the continent , soli-
cited him to march, in terms of the treaty, di-
realy to Paris. But Charles had set his ally such
an ill example of fulfilling the conditions of tl!eir
confederacy with exadnefs, that Henry , obferv-
ing him employ his time and forces, in taking
towns for his own behoof, saw no reason why

U4

Boon VII. he should not attempt the reduction of some

1q44. places that lay conveniently for himself. With-

out paying anriy regard to the Emperor's remon-
ftrances, he, imiiediately invested Bologne, and
commanded the Duke of Norfolk to press the
siege of Mo~rtrenibl, which had been begun be.
. fore his arrival,; by a body of Flemings, in con.
j'undion withc some English 'troops. While
Charles and Henry fhewed such attention each
to his own interest, they both negleded the
common cause. Instead of*the union and con-'
fidence requisite, towards conduAing the great
plan that they had formed, they early discovered
a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by de.
grees, begot distrust, and ended in open hatred '.

Galant de. Bxy this time, Francis had , with unwearied
fence of st. induffry , drawn together an army , capable, as

well from the number as from the valour of the
troops , of making head against the enemy. But
the Dauphiri, who still aded as general , pru-
dently declining a battle, the loss of which
would have endangered the kingdom, satisfied
himself, with harassing th| Emperor with his
light troops, cuttiog off his convoys, and laying
waste the country around him. Though ex-
tremely distressed by these operations, Charles
still prelfed the siege of St. Difier,. which San-
cerre defended with aftonilhing fortitude' and

Hr~terbert.

conduc. He stood repeated assaults, repulsing
the enemy in them all; and undismayed even by
the death of the.brave De la Lande, who was
killed by a cannon-ball, he continued to shew
the fame bold. countenance and obstinate refdlu.
tion. At the end of five weeks, he was still
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granville's induced him to fur-
render. That crafty politician, having 'inter-
cepted the key to the cypher which the Duke of
Guise used in communicating nttegigence to San'
cerre, forged a letter in his name, authorizing San-
cerre to capitulate, as the King, though highly
satisfied with his behaviour, thought it impru-
dent to hazard a battle for his relief. This let-
ter he conveyed into the town in a manner which
could raise no fufpircion, and the governor fell
into the snare. Even then, he obtained such
honourable conditions as his gallant defence
i~erited,. and among others a cessation of hofti-
lities for eight days, at the expiration of which
he bound himself to open the gates, if Francis,
during that time, did not attack the Imperial
army, and throw fresh troops into the town ".
Thus Sancerre, by detaining the Emperor so
long before an inconsiderable place, afforded his
sovereign full time to assemble all his forces, and,
what rarely falls to the lot of an officer in such

B. Dantome, torn. vi. 48 9· BOOK VII.

I 544q

Boort VII. an inferior contmand, acquired the glory of

x 44, having saved his country.

August 7. As soon as St. Difier farrendered, the Em.
The Empe-
ror pene- ror advanced into the heart of Champagne, but
tratesinto Sancerre's obstinate resistance had damped his
France. Ofanguine hopes of penetrating to. Paris, and led

him seriously to refledt on what he might expedL
before towns of greater strength, and defended
by more numer|||| garrisons. At the fame time,
the procuringfut fiftence for his army was at.
tended with great difficulty, which increased in
proportion as he withdrew from his 6wn frontier.
He had loft a great number of his belt troops
in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell ,daily
in skirmishes, which it was not in his power. to
avoid, though they) wafted' his army insensibly,
without leading to any decisive adtion.' The
season advanced apace, and he had not yet the
command either of a fufficient extent ofa territory,
or of any such considerable town as rendered it
safe to winter in the enemy's country. Great
arrears too were due to his soldiers, who were
upon the point of mutiny for their pay, while
he, knew not from what funds to fatisfy' them.
All there considerations induced him to listen to
the overtures of peace, which a Spanish Domi-
nican, the confeffor of his sifter the Queen of
France, had secretly made to his confeffor, a
monk of the fame order. In consequence of this,

plenipotentiaries were named on both fides,' and BooI VII.
began their conferences in Chauffe, a small vil- ix 44
lage near Chalons. At the fame time, Charles,
either jfrom a desire of making one great final
effort agairift France, or merely to gain a pre-
text for deserting his ally and concluding a fe-
parate peace, sent an ambassador formally to
require Henry, according to the flipulation in
their treaty, to advance towards Paris. While
he expeded a return from him, and waited the
iffle of the conferences at Chaufft, he continued
to march forward, though in the utmost distress
from scarcity of provisions. But at last, by a
fortunate motion on his part, or through some
negled or treachery on that of the French, he
surprised first Efpernay and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable maga-
zines. No sooner was it known that these towns,
the latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than
that great capital, defenceless, and susceptible
of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with consternation. The in-
habitants, as if the Emperor had been already
at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and
'defpair, many sending their wives and children
-down the Seine to Roiien, others to Orleans,
and the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself,
more afflided with this than with any other
event during his reign, and sensible as well of

lBOOK VII. the triumph tlat.his rival would enjoy in insult,

S544. ing his, capital, as of the danger to which the

kingd~om - was exposed , could not refrain from
crying out, in the first emotion, of his :surprise
and sorrow, " How dear, O my God, do I pay
for' this crown, which I thought thou hadit
granted me freely ! !" But recovering in a moo,
inent from this sudden sally of peevishness and

. impatience, he devoutly added, "Thy will,

however, be done; " and proceeded to issue the
necessary orders for opposing the enemy with
his usual adivity and presence of mind. The
Dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris,
which revived the courage of the affrighted citi-
zens; he threw a frong garrison into. Meaux,
and by a forced march got irito Ferte , between
the Imperialists and the capital.

Obliged to UPON" this, the Emperor, who began again
sei'e, to feel the want of provisions, perceiving that

the Dauphin still prudently declined a battle,
and not daring to attack his camp with forces f0
much shattered and reduced by hard service,
turned suddenly to the right, and began to fall
back towards Soissons. Having about this time
received Henry's answer, whereby he. refused to
abuandon the sieges of Bologne and MontreuiB,
ps both which he expeded every moment to get

" Brantome, tom. vi. 3 8

poffeffion, he thought himself absolved from all BOOK VII.
bbligatibbos of adhering to the treaty with him, x 44.
and at full liberty to consult his own' interest 'in
what manner soever he pleased. He consented,
theref6re, to renew the conference, which the
futrpife of Efpernay had broken off., To con-
clude a peace between two Princes, one of whom Peace be-
greatly' desired, and 'the other greatly needed it,t'" h~e~r
did not require a long negociation. It was signed conecluded
a.t Crefpy , a small town near lMeaux, an the at Creiy.
eighteenth of September. The chief articles of
it were, That all the conquests which either
party had made since the truce of Nice shall be
restored; That the Emperor shall give in mar-
riage to the Duke of Orleans, either his own
eldest daughter, or the second daughter of his
brother Ferdinand; That if he chose to bestow
ohn him his own daughter, he shall fettle'dn her
al; the provinces of the Low Countries, to be
ereted into an independent fiate, which shall de-
scend to the mnate issue of'the marriage; That if he
determi-ned to give him his niece, he shall, with
her, grant hiin the investiture of IVlilan and its
dependencies; That he shall within four months
declare which of these two Princesses he had
pitched upon , and fulfil the refpecdive condi-
tions upon the consummation of the marriage,
which shall take place within a year from the date
of the treaty; Thait as soon as the Duke of Or-
leans is put in poffeflion either of the Low

BOOK VII. Countries or f, NI ilan, Francis shall refltore to\

.4,4. the D.uke of Savoy all that he now poffeffes of

his territories, ekicept Pignerol and- lMontmilian;
That Francis shall renounce all pretensions to the
kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois., and Charles: shall give up
his claim to the'dutchy of Burgundy and county
of Charolois; That Francis shall give ho aid to
the exiled King of Navarre; That both Mo.
narchs shall join in making' war upon the Turk,
towards which the King shall furnitfh, when re-
quired by the Emperor and Empire, fix hundred
,men at arms, and ten thousand foot ".

Motives of BESIDES the immediate .motives to this peace,
incucling arising from the distress of his .army throuigh

want of provifionrs; from the difficulty of re-
treating out of France; and the impoflibility of
4recuring winter-quarters there; the. Emperor
was influenced by other considerations, more
distant, indeed, but not less. weighty, The Pope
was offended to a great degree, as well at his
concessions to the Protestants in the: late diet, as
at his consenting to call a council, and to admit
of publick difputations in Germany, with a view
of determining the doctrines in controversy. Paul
considering both thefd steps as sacrilegious en.

"' Recueil des Traitez,t.i. 227. Belius de Caufis Pacis

Crepiac. in Atis Erudit. Lips. 1763.

croachments on the jurisdiction as well as .privi- BOOK VII
leges of the Holy See, had addressed to the Em- 1444.
peror a remonstrance rather than a letter on this
fubje6t, written with such acrimony of language,
and in a style of such high authority, as disco-
wered more of an intention to draw on a quar-
rel than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill
humour was not a little inflamed by the Empe-
ror's league with Henry, which being contracted
with an heretick, excommunicated by the apo-
ftolick fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alli-
ance, and was not less dreaded by him, than ?
that of Francis with Solyman. Paul's fdn and
grandson, highly incensed at the Emperor for
having refused to gratify them with regard
to the alienation of Parma and Placentia, con-
tributed , by their suggestions to four and disgust
him frill more. To all which was added the
powerful operation of the flattery and promises
which Francis. incessantly employed to gain him.
Though from his desire of maiintaining a neu-
trality, the Pope had hitherto suppressed his own
resentment, had eluded the artifices of his ownr
family, and resifted the folicitatioris of the
French King, it was not safe to rely much on
the steadiness of a man whom his passions, his
friends, and his interest combined to flhake.
The union of the Pope with France, CharleT
well knew, wou!d inflantly expose his domi-
nions in Italy to be attacked. The Venetians

BOOK VII. he foresaw, would probably follow .the example,

1544. of a Pontiff, who was confidered'as a model of

political wisdom among the.Italians; and thus,
at a junAure when he felt himself hardly equal
to the burden of tie -present war, he would-be
overwhelmed, with the weight of a new confede.
racy against Ihim 3. At the fame time, the
Turks, almost unresisted, made such progress
in Hungary, reducing town after town , that
they approached near to 'the confines of the
Austrian provinces '". Above all these,, the ex.
traordinary progress of the Protestant dotrines
in Germany, and the dangerous combination
into which the Princes of that profeffion had en-
tered, called for his immediate attention, Al-
most one half of Germany had revolted from the
established church; the fidelity of the reft was
i~nch shaken; the nobility of Austria had de.
rnanded of Ferdinand the free exercise of reliW
gion 3; the Bohemians, among whom tome
feeds of the dotrines of Huss still remained,
openly favoured the new opinions; the arch-
bishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among eccle·
fiafticks, had begun the reformation of his dio-
cefe; nor was it possible, unless some timely and
effecual check were 'given to the spirit of inno-
.vation, to foresee where it would end. He him-

3" F. Paul, oo. Pallavic. 16 3.
33 Ifluanhaffii Hist. Hung. 177.
3+ Sleid. 8 s.

.elf

self had been a witners, in the late diet, to the
perenmptory and decisive tone which the Proteft-b
ants had now assumed. He had seen how, from
confidence in their number, and union, they
had forgotten the humble fryle of their first peti:
tions, having grown to such boldness as openly
to despise the Pope, and to shew no great ireve-
rence for the Imperial dignity itself. If, there-
fore , he wished to maintain either the ancient
religion or his own authority, and would not
choose to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the
Empire, some vigorous effort was requisite,
which could not be made during a war that re-
quired ' the greateff exertion of his ftrengtli
against a foreign and powerful enemy: BOOK V1L

1544.

SucH being the Emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty of
Crefpy so as to pronmote all the ends which he
had in view. By coming to an agreement with
Francis, he took from the Pope all profpeC of
advantage in courting the friendship of that
Monarch in preference to his. By the proviso
with regard to a war with the Turks. he not
only deprived Solyman of a powerful ally .but
turned the arms of that ally against him. By
a private article , not inferred in the treaty that
it might not raise any unfeafoiiable alarmn, he
agreed with Francis that both ihould exert all
their influence and 'power in order to procure a

VOL. III. - X

Booi VII. general council, to assert its authority, and to

x544. exterminate the Protestant heresy out of their

dominions. This cut off all hope of assistance
which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-
pet from the French King 5; and left their soli-
citations, or his jealoufyl of an ancient rival,
should hereafter tempt Francis to forget this en.
gagement, he left him embarrassed with a war
against England, which would put it out of his
power to take any part in the affairs of Ger.
many.

War con.- HENRY , poffeffed at all times with an high
tee- idea of his own power and importance , felt, in
France and the most sensible manner, the negled with which
England. the Emperor had treated him in concluding a

separate peace. But the situation of his affairs.
was such as somewhat alleviated the mortifica.
tion which this occasioned. For though he was
obliged to recall the Duke of Norfolk from the

sept. 14. siege of Montreuil, because the Flemish troops

received- orders to retire, Bologne had furren.

| tidered before the negociations at Crefpy were
* brought to an issue. While elated with vanity

on account of this conquest, and inflamed with
indignation against the Emperor, the ambaffa-
dors whom Francis sent to make overtures of
peace, found him too arrogant to grant what was

a Seck. 1. iii. 496.

moderate or equitable. His demands were in- BooK VII.
deed extravagant, and made in the tone of a x 44.
conqueror; that Francis should renounce his
alliance with Scotland, and not only pay up
the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the
money whish he had expended in the present
war. Francis , though sincerely desirous of
peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order
to obtain it, being now free from the pressure
of the.Imperial arms , rejedted these ignominious
propositions with disdain; and Henry departing
for England, hostilities continued between the
two nations '".

THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever The lraiu,

to the people of France, whom it delivered fromri p iF
the dread of an enemy Who had penetrated into the peace of
the heart of the kingdom, was loudly corn-cre'iy
plained of by the Dauphin. He considered it as
a. manifest proof of the King his father's extra-
ordinary partiality towards his youinger brother,
now Duke of Orleans, and complained that
from his eagerness to gain an eftablifhrtent for a
favourite son

, he had facrihced the honour of

the kingdom .· and renounced the most ancient
as well as -valuable rights of the crown. But as
he durst not venture to offend the King by re-
fusing to ratify it, though extremely desirous at

SMNiem. de Ribier, t. i. p. 572; Herbert, 244.

ooKJ VII. the fame time of securing to himself the privi.
i 544. lege of reclaiming what was now alienated so

much to his detriment, he secretly protested, in
presence of some of his adherents, against the
whole tranfadion; and declared whatever he
thould be obliged to do in order to'eonfirm it,
null in itself, and void of all obligation. The
parliament of Thouloufe , probably by the in.
ftigation of his partisans, did the fame 37: But
Francis, highly pleased as well with having de.
livered his fubjeds from the miseries of an inva-
filn, as with the profped of acquiring an inde-
pendent settlement for his son at no greater price
than the renouncing conquests to which he had
no just claim; titles which had hitherto proved
the source of expence or disasters to the nation;
and rights grown obsolete and of no value;
ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles,
within the time preferibed by the triaty, declared
his intention of giving Ferdinand's daughter in
marriage to the Duke of Orleans, together with
the dutchy of Milan as her dowry ". Every
circumstance seemed to promise the continuance
of peace. The Emperor, cruelly afflided with
the gout, appeared to be in no condition to un-
dertake any enterprise where great adivity was
requisite, or tnuch fatigue to be endured. He

" Recueil des Trait&s, t. ii. 25 . 23».
" Recueil des Traites , t. ii. 238.

himself felt this, or wished at least that it should BooiK VT.
be believed ; and being to much disabled by this 44,
excruciating distemper, when a French ambaffa-
fador followed him to Brussels, in order to be
present at his ratification of the treaty of peace,
that it was with the utmost difficulty he signed
his name, he observed, that there was no great
danger of his violating these articles, as a 'hand
that could hardly hold a pen, was little able to
brandish a lance.

THE violence of his disease confined the Fm-The E.m,
peror several months in Brussels, and was the Pl0os
apparent cause of putting off the execution of with, ^,.
the vast fcherhes which he had formed in order to0 :r-

man V.

to humble the Protestant party in Germany.m .
But there' were other reasons for this delay. For,
however prevalent the motives were which de-
termined him to undertake this enterprise, the
nature of that great body which he was about
to attack, as well as the situation of his own
affairs, made it necessary to deliberate long, to
proceed with caution, and not too suddenly to
throw aside the veil under which he had hi-
therto concealed his real fentiments' and schemes.
He was sensible that the Protestants, conscious
of their own strength, but under continual ap-
prehenfions of his designs, had all the boldness
of a powerful party joined to the jealousy of a

X 3,

BoorK VII. feeble fadtion; and were no less quick-fighted

i $44. to discern the firit appearance of danger, thaa

ready to -take arms in order to repel it. At the
fame time, he continued involved in a Turkish
war; and though, in oirder to deliver himself
from this incumbrance, 'he had determined to
fend an envoy to the Porte with most advantage.

, ous and even fubmifiyve overtures of peace, the

refohlutions of that haughty court were so uncer.
tain, that before these were known, it would
have been highly imprudent to have kindled
the flames of civil war in his own domuinim
ons.

-he Pope UPON this account, he appeared diffatisfied
maTmons a with a bull issued by the Pope immediately after

general

: • 'Y

council to the peace of Crefpy. summoning the council to
eet at assemble at Trent early next spring, and exhort-
Nov. 19. ing all Christian Princes to embrace the oppor-

tunity that the present happy interval of tran.
.quillity afforded them, of suppressing those he-
refies which threatened to -subvert whatever was
sacred or venerable among Christians. But after
such a flight expression of dislike, as was necef-
fary in order to cover his designs, he determined
to countenance the council, which might be-
come no inconsiderable instrument towards ac-
complifhing his projeas, and therefore not only
appointed ambassadors to appear there in his

name, but ordered the ecclefiafticks in his domi- BooK VII.
nions to attend at the time prefixed 39. I[54.

SucH were the Emperor's views, when the Diet at
Imperial diet, after several prorogations, wasMa'rch wm.
opened at Worms. The Protestants, who en.
joyed the free exercise of their religion by a very
precarious tenure, having no other security for
it than the recess of the last diet, which was to
continue in -force only until the meeting of a
council, wished earnefitly to establish that im-
portant privilege upon some firmer bails, and
to hold it by a perpetual not a temporary title.
But, instead of bffering them any additional fe-
curity, Ferdinand opened the diet with obferv-
ing, that there were two points chiefly, which
required consideration, the prosecution of the
war against the Turks, and the state of religion;
that the former was the most urgent, as Soly-
man, after con'quering the greatest part of Hun-
gary, was now ready to fall upon the- Austrian
provinces; that the Emperor, who, from the
beginning of his reign, had neglected no oppor-
tunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and
with the hazard of his own person had resifted
his attacks, being animated frill with the fame
zeal, had now contented to flop short in the
career of his success against France, that, in

" F. Paul, 104.

X4

BooK VII. conjun&i ion with his ancient rival, he might

i94n. turn his arms with greater vigour against the

common adversary of the Christian faith; that
it became all the members of the Empire to fe.
cond those pious endeavours of its head; that,
therefore. they ought, without delay, to vote
him such effectual aid as not only their duty but
their iftereft called upon them to furnish; that
the controversies about religion were so intricate,
and of such difficult difcufion, as to give no
hope of its being pofflible to bring them at pre-

Ferdinan. sent to any final issue; that by perseverance and
regquire the repeated folicitations the Emperor had at length
G-ermans eo .....g
pcknow, prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for
ledge tha which they had so often wiflhed and petitioned;
gouncil. , that the time appointed for its meeting was now

come, and both parties ought to wait for its de-
crees, and submit to them as the decisions of the
universal church.

THE popish members of the diet received this

declaration with great applause, and signified
their entire acquiescence in every particular
which it contained The Protestants expressed
great surprise at propositions, which were so
manifestly repugnant to the recess of the former
diet they insisted that the quieftions with regard
to religion, as firRt in dignity and importance,
pught to come first under deliberation; that,
alarming as the progress of the Turks ywas to all

Germany, the securing the free exercise of their BooKr VII.
religion touched them frill more nearly , nor ix54
could they prosecute a foreign war with spirit,
while solicitous and. concerned about their do-
meftick tranquillity; that if the latter were once
rendered firm and permanent, they would con-
cur with their countrymen in pushing the for-
mer, and yield to none of them in adivity or
zeal. But if the danger from the Turkish arms
was indeed so imminent, as not to admit of such
a delay as would be occasioned by an immediate
examination of the controverted points in reli-
gion, they required that a diet should be in-
ftantly appointed, to which the final settlement
of their religious disputes ffhould be referred;
and that in the mean time the decree of the for-
mer diet concerning religion filould be explained
in a point which they deemed essential. By the
recess of Spires it was provided, that they should
enjoy unmolested the publick exercise of their re-
ligion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to submit, they
began to fufped that their adversaries might
take advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of
the recess, and pretending that the event therein
mentioned had taken place, might pronounce
them to be no longer entitled to the fame indul-
gence. In order to guard against this interpret-
ation, they renewed their former remonftrances

" J '

BooK VII. againfb a council called to meet without thd

ix49. bounds of the Empire, summoned by the Pope's

authority, and in which he assumed the right of
presiding; and declared that, notwithstanding
the convocation of any such illegal assembly,
they still held the recess of the late diet to be in
full force.

lEperor ar- AT other junctures , when the Emperor

rmat thought it of advantage to sooth and gain the

Protestants, he had devised expedients for giv.
ing them satisfaction with regard to demands
seemingly more extravagant; but his views at
present being very different, Ferdinand ·by his
command adhered inflexibly to his first propo-
fitions, and would make no concessions which
had the most remote tendency to throw difcre.
dit on the council, or to weaken its authority.
The Protestants, on their part, were no less in-
flexible; and, after much time spent in fruitless
endeavours to convince each other, they came
to no conclusion. Nor did the presence of the
Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at

May ri. Worms , contribute in any degree to render the

Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced
that they were maintaining the cause of God
and of truth, they fhewed themselves superior
to the allurements of interest, or the suggestions
of fear; and in proportion as the Fmperor re-
doubled his folicitations, or discovered his de.

signs, their boldness seems to have increased. BoOK VII.
At: lia they openly declared, that they would r 45.
not even deign to vindicate their tenets in pre- The Proteri
fen'ce of a council, assembled not to examine, tnimt ai
but to condemn them; and that they would pay connexion
no regard to an affemby held under the influencewith thef
of a Pope , who had already precluded himself rent.
from all title to aA as a judge, by his having
stigmatized their opinions with the name of he-
rely and denounced against them the heaviest
censures, which, in the plenitude of his usurped
power, he could inflid ".

WHILE the Protestants , with such union as Condun o

well as firmness, rejeded all intercourse with the Mauice of

Saxony in

coundil, and refused their assent to the Imperial this diet.
demands in refped to the Turkish war, IVau-
rice of Saxony alone fhewed an inclination to
gratify the Emperor with regard to both.
Though he profeffed an inviolable regard for
the Proqteftant religion, he assumed an appear-
ance of moderation peculiar to himself, by which
he confirmed the favourable sentiments which the
Emperor already entertained of him, and gra-
dually paved the way for executing the ambi-
tious designs which always occupied his adive
and enterprising mind " His example , how-

4* Sleid. 4 3, &c. Seek. iii. 543, &c, Thuan. Hiftor.

lib. ii p. 6.

SSeck, iJii S Io

BOOK~VII. ever, had little influence upon such as agreed

iJ4S. with him in their religious opinions; and Charles

perceived that he could not hope either to pro0
cure present aid from the Protestants against the
Turks, or to quiet their fears and jealousies on
account of their religion. But as his schemes
were not yet ripe for execution, nor his prepa.
tions so far advanced that he could force their
compliance, or punish their obstinacy, he art-

Augut'4. fully concealed his own intentions. That he

might augment their security, he appointed a
diet to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in
order to adjust what was now left undetermined;
and previous to it, he agreed that a certain num.
ber of divines of each party should meet, in
order to confer upon the points in dispute ".

The Proter- BUT how far soever this appearance of a de-
tants begin r
to frupea fire. to maintain the present tranquillity might
the Empe. have imposed upon the Protestants, the Empe-
ror. ror was incapable of such uniform and thorough

diffinulation, as to hide altogether from their
view the dangerous designs which he was medi-
tating against them. Herman count de Wied,
Archbishop and Elector of Cologne, a prelate
conspicuous for his virtue and primitive fimpli-
city of manners, though not more diftinguihed
for learning than the other descendants of noble
families, who in that age poffeffed most of the

" Sleid. 3 5

great benefices in Germany, having become a BOOK VII,
piofelyte to the doArines of the Reformers, had 154g.
begun in the year ,one thousand five hundred
and forty-three, with the assistance of Vielandhon
and Bucer, to abolish the ancient superstition in
his diocese, and to introduce in its place the
rites established among the Protestants. But
the canons of his cathedral, who were not pof-
sessed with the fanie spirit of innovation, and
who foresaw how fatal the levelling genius of the.
new fed would prove to their dignity and wealth,
opposed, from the beginning , this unprecedented
enterprize of their Archbishop with all the zeal
flowing from reverence for old institutions,
heightened by concern for their own interest.
This opposition, which the .Archbishop confi-
dered only as a new argument to demonstrate
the necessity of a reformation, neither shook his
resolution nor slackened his ardour in profecut-
ing his plan. The canons, perceiving all their
endeavours to check his careei- to be ineffedual,
solemnly protested against his proceedings, and
appealed for redress to the Pope and Emperor,
the fotmer as his ecclesiastical, the latter as his
civil superior. This appeal being laid before the '
Emperor, during his residence in Worms, he
took the canons .of Cologne under his imme-
diate protedion; enjoined them to proceed with
rigour against all who revolted from the efta-
blifhed church ; prohibited the Archbishop to

Booi VII. make any innovation in his diocese; and fum.

1 45, moned him to appear at Brussels within thirty

days, to answer the accusations which should bi
preferred against him ,-

To this clear evidence of his hoftiie intentions

against the Protestant party, Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary do.
minions of the Low Countries, he persecuted all
who were suspected of Lutheranifm with unre-
lenting rigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms,
he silenced the Protestant preachers in that city,
He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against
the Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel,
and to call upon him, as he regarded the favoiur
of God , to exterminate that pestilent heresy,
He dispatched the embassy, which has been al-
ready mentioned, to. Constantinople, with over-
tures of peace, that he might be free from any
apprehensions of danger or interruption from
that quarter. Nor did any of these steps , or
their dangerous tendency, escape the jealous ob0
servation of the Protestants, or fail to alarm
their fears, and to excite their solicitude for the
safety of their fecd

Deathofthe. IVEAiNWHILE, Charles's good fortune, which
Duke of predominated on all occasions over that of his
Orleans.

Sleid. 310. ;40o; 5x. Seckend. iii. 443. 5S3"

rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty, BooR VII.
from which, with all his sagacity and address, aj4S.
he would have found it no easy matter to have
disentangled himself. Just about the time when sept. 8.
the Duke of Orleans Thould have received Ser-
dinand's daughter in marriage, and together
with her the poffeflion of the IVlilanefe, he died
of a pestilential fever. By this event, the Em-
peror was freed from the necessity of giving up
an important province into the hands of an enemy,
or from the indecencyr of violating a recent and so-
lemn engagement, whichmuft have occasioned an
immediate rupture with France. He affeced,
however, to express great sorrow for the un-
timely death of a young Prince, who was to
have been so nearly allied to him; but he care-
fully avoided entering into any fresh discussions
concerning the RMilaoefe; and would not lifter
to a proposal which came from Francis of new-
modelling the treaty of Crefpy, so as to make
him some reparation for the advantages which
he had loft by the demise of his son. In the
more adtive and vigorous part of Francis's reign,
a declaration of war would have been the certain
and instantaneous consequence of such a flat re-
fufal to comply with a demand seemingly so
equitable; but the declining state of his own

"

'health, the exhausted condition of his kingdoms,
together with the burden of the war againfd
England, obliged him, at present, to dissemble

Boor VII. his resentment, and to put off thoughts of re

I545. venge to some other junCdure. Ith consequence

of this event, the unfortunate Duke of Savoy
loft all hope bs obtaining the restitution of his
territbries; and the rights or claims relinquished
by the treaty of Crefpy , returned in full force
to the crown of France, to serve as pretexts for
future wars.".

The Popie UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of
grants the Orleans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde
dutchies of
Parina and flattered themselves that the essential alterations
placentia which it occasioned could harlly fail of .pro.

- to his son. .

1

ducing a rupture, which would prove the means
of their safety. But they were not more difap,
pointed with regard to this, than in their ex;
pedations from afl event which seemed to be the
certain prelude ot a quarrel between the Empe-
ror and the 'Poped When Paul, whose paftion
for aggrandizing his family, increased as he ad-
vanced in years, and as he saw the dignity and
power which they derived immediately from him
becoming more precarious, found that he could
not bring: Charles to\ approve of his ambitious
schemes, he ventured to grant his son Peter
Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia,
.though at the rifkl of incurring the displeasure
of the Emperor. At a time when a great part

4. Belcarii, Comment. 7 69. Paruta, Hist. Venet. iv, p. 177.

of

of Europ.e inveighed openly against the corrupt BooK VII.
manners and exorbitant power of Ecclefiafficks, 154$.
and when a council was summoned to reform the
disorders in the church, this' indecent grant of
such a principality, to a son of whose illegitimate
birth the Pope ought to have been ashamed, and
whose licentious morals all good men detested,
gave general offence. Some Cardinals in the
Imperial interest· remonstrated against such an
unbecoming alienation of the patrimony of the
church; the Spaniflh anbaffador would not be
present at .the solemnity of his infeofment; and
upon pretext that these cities were part of the
Milanese fRate, the Emperor peremptorily le-
fused to confirm the deed of investiture. But
both the Emperor and ,Pope being intent upon
one common objedt in Germany, sacrificed their
particular passions to that publick cause, and sup-
pressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they
might jointly pursue what each efteenied of
greater. importance".

ABOUTr this time the peace of Germany was Henry of

diffturbed by a yiolent but short eruption of(iun"wic"
Henry Duke of Brunswick. This 'Prince , war in Ger-
though still ffript of his dominions,, which the"'afy-
Emperor held in sequestration, until his differ-

" Paruta, Hist. Yenet. ivY: 78. Pallavic. 180.
VOL. IIL Y

BOOK VI. ences with the confederates of Smnalkalde should

1549. be adjusted, poffeffed however so much credit

in Germany, that he undertook to raise for the
French King a considerable body of troops to be
employed, in the war against England. The
money stipulated. for this purpose was duly ad.
vanced by Francis; the troops were levied; but
Henry, instead of leading them towards France,
suddenly entered his own dominions at their
head, in-hopes of recovering them before any
army could be assembled to oppose him. The
confederates were not more surprised at this un-
expeded attack, than the King of France was
astonished at a mean thievish fraud, so unbecom.
ing the charadcer of a Prince. But the.Land.
grave of Hesse, with incredible expedition, col-
leated as many menas put a fltop to the progress
- of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being joined
by his son -in-law Maurice, and by some troops
belonging to the Eledor of Saxony, he gained
such advantages over Henry, who was rash and
bold in forming his'fchemes, but feeble and un-
determined in executing them, as obliged him
to disband his army, and to surrender himself, to-
S gether with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion.
He was kept in close confinement, until a new
reverse of affairs, procured him liberty',

*6 Sleid. 3 ~. Seck, iii. 5 67.

As this defeat of Henry's wild- enterprise add- BooK VII,
ed new reputation to the arms of the Protest 5i46.
ants, the Reformation of the Palatinate brought'The Refor.
a great accession of strength to their party. the Palati-
Frederick, who succeeded his brother Lewis in nate.
that Eledorate, had long been fufpeded of a
secret propenfitiy to the docrines of the Re-
formers, which, upon his accession to the prin.
cipality, he openly manifested. But as he ex-
peded that something effedual towards a gepe-
ral and legal establishment, of religion, would be
the fruit of so many diets, conferences, and ne-
gociations, he did not, at first, attempt any pub-
lick innovation in his dominions. Finding all Jana. ,o
these issue in nothing, he thought himself called,
at length, to countenance by his authority the
system which he approved of, and to gratify the
wishes of his fubjeds, who, by their intercourse
with the Protestant fiates, had universally inm-
bibed their opinions. As the warmth and im-
petuofity which accompanied the spirit of Re.
formation in its first efforts, had somewhat abated,
this change was made with great order and re-
gularity; the ancient rites were abolished, and
new forms introduced, without any ad of vio-
lence, or symptom of discontent. Though
Frederick adopted the religious system of the
Protestants, he imitated the example of Maau.

Y

Boo VII. nice, and did not accede to tihe league of Smal-

S546. kalde7 '7

The council A rnw 'weeks before this revolution in the
.teinbes at Palatinate, the:-general council was opened with

the accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes
of the Catholick states were turned with much
expeaation, towards -an assembly, which all had
considered ass a natural and adequate remedy for
-the disorders of the church when they first broke
out, though many were afraid that it was now
too late to hope for great benefit from it, when
the malady, by being fuffered to make progress
during twenty-eight years, had become invete.
rate, and grown to such extreme violence. The
Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had ap.
-pointed the firIft meeting to be held in March.
But his views, and those of the Emperor, were.fo
different, that almost the whole year was spent
'in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the
rigorous decrees of the council against the Pro.
teftants would soon drive them, in felf-defence
as well as from resentment, to some desperate
extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until
his warlike preparations were so far advanced,
;that he, might be in a condition to second its de-
difions by the force of his arms. The Pope,

47 Sleid, 3 6. Seek. 1. iii. 6-x 6.

whb had early sent to Tre;nttheelegates -who, were BooK VfIt
to preside in his name, knowing to what con- is546.
tempt it would expose his authority, and what
suspicions it would.beget of his intentions, if the
fathers ,of the council ihould remain in a state of
inadcivity, when the church, was in such danger
as to require their immediate and vigorous inter-
position, insisted either upo':traonflating the coun-
cil to some city. in Italy, or *upon fufpending:alto-
gether its proceedings at that juncture, or upon
authorizing it-to begin its deliberations immedi-
ately. The Emperor rejeded the two former
as equally offenfive to the Germans of every de-
nomination , but finding it impossible to elude
the latter , he proposed that the council should
begin with reforming the disorders in the church,
before it proceeded to examine or define articles
of faith. This was the very thing which the
court of Rome dreaded most., and which had
prompted it to employ, so many artifices in order
to prevent the, meeting of such a dangerous ju-
dicatory. Paul, though more compliant than
some of his predecessors with regard to calling
a council, was no lefsjealous than they had been
of its jurifdidion , and saw what ,matter of
triumph , such a method, of proceeding would
afford the hereticks. He apprehended confe-
quences not only humbling but fatal to. the
papal fee, if the council came to confider an in-
quest into abuses - as their only business.; or if

DooR VII. inferior prelates were allowed to gratify their

1546; own envy and eevifhnefs , by prefcri~ing rules

to those who were exalted above them in dignity
and power. Without listening, therefore, to
this insidious proposal of .the !Emperor, he in-
ftruded his legates to open the council.

3an: 8.

. THE first session w asfpent in' matters of form.

its proceed. In a subsequent one it. was agreed that the

framing a confeffion of faith, wherein should be
contained all the articles which the church requir-
ed its members to believe, ought to be the first
-and principal business of the council; but that, at
the fame time, due attention thould be given to
what was necessary towards the reformation -of
manners and discipline. From this first fymp-
tom of the spirit with which the council was
" animated, from the high tone. of authority which

the legates who presided in it assumed,, and from
the implicit deference with which most of the
members follolwed their dire&tiois , the Protest-
ants conjedtured with ease what decisions they
might exped. It astonished them, however, to
fee forty prelates (for no greater number were
yet assembled) assume authority as reprefenta-
tives of the universal church, and proceed to de-
termine the most important points of doarine in
its name. Sensible of this indecency, as well as
of the ridicule with which it might be attended,
the council advanced slowly in its deliberations,

and all its proceedings were for some time lan- BOOK VII.
guifhing and feeble .+. As soon as the confede- 1546.
rates of Smalkalke received information of the
opening of the council, they published a long
nmanifefto, containing a renewal of their protest
against its meeting, together with the reasons
which induced them to decline its jurifdiAion "'.
The Pope and Emperor, on their part, were so
little, solicitous to quicken or add vigour to its
operations, as plainly difcoveredc that some ob-
jeA of greater importance occupied and in-
,terefted them.

THE Protfltants, as they were not inattentive, Apprehen-
or unconcerned fpedators of their motions, en- sos of the
tertained every day more violent suspicions otf
their intentions, and received intelligence from
different quarters of the machinations carrying
on against them. The King of England in-
formed them, that the Emperor having long
resolved to exterminate their opinions, would
not fail to employ this interval of tranquillity
which he now enjoyed, as the molt favourable
junAure for carrying his design into execution.
The merchants of Augfburgh, which was at that
rime a city of extensive trade, received advice,
by means of their correspondents in Italy, among

" F. Paul, i2o, &c. Pallavic. p. I8o, &c.
€9 Seckend, 1. iii. 602, &c.

BOOK VII. whom were ofame who secretly -favoured the

1546. Protestant 'caufe ~", that a dangerous confederacy

against it was forming between the Pope and
EJmperor. In confirmation of this, they heard
from the Low Countries that Charles had issued
orders, though with every precaution which
could keep the measure concealed, for raising
troops both there and in other parts of his do-
minions. Such a variety of information, corro-
borating all that their own jealousy or obferva.
tion led them to apprehend, left the Protestants
little reason to doubt of the Emperor's, hostile

Their de- intentions. Under this impression, the depu-
liberations. ties of the confederates of Smalkalde assembled

at Francfort, and by communicating their intel.
ligence and sentiments to each other, recipro-
cally heightened their sense of the impending
daiger. But their union was not such as their
situation required, or the preparations of their
enemies rendered necessary. Their league had
not subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom
of Germany, had created an infinite variety of
mutual rights and claims by intermarriages, al-
liances, and contrads of different kinds', sub,
jets of jealousy and discord had unavoidably
arisen. Some of the confederates, being cons

" Seck. 1. iii. 579,

neded with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly BOOK VII.
disgusted with the Landgrave, on account of the

x 46.

rigour with which he had treated that rash but
unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Elector of
Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league,
with having involved the members in unnecessary
and .exorbitant expences by their profufenefs or
want -of oeconomy. The views, likewise, of
those two great Princes, who, by their superior
power and authority, .influenced and direcded
the whole body, being extremely different, ren-
dered all its', motions languid, at a time when
the utmost vigour and dispatch were requisite.
The Landgrave, of a violent and enterprising
temper, but not forgetful, amidst his zeal for
religion,. of the usual maxims of human policy,
insisted that, as the danger which threatened
them was manifest and unavoidable, they should
have recourse to the most effectual expedient
for securing their own safety, by courting the
protedion of the Kings of France and England,
or by joining in alliance with the Protestant
cantons of Swifferland, from whom they might
expect such -powerful and present assistance as
their situation demanded. The EleCtor, on the
other hand, with the most upright intentions of
any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the
administration of government in any tranquil

BooK VII, period, was poffeffed with such fuperflitious ve.

j546. neration for all the parts of the Lutheran fyftert

and such bigoted attachment to all its tenets, as
mnade him averse to an union with those who
differed from him in' any article of faith, and
rendered him very incapable of undertaking its
defence in times of difficulty and danger. He
seemed to think, that the concerns of religion
were to be regulated by principles and maxims
totally different from those which apply to the
common affairs of life; and being swayed too
much by the opinions of Luther, who was not
only a stranger to the rules of political condua,
but despised them, he often discovered an uncom.
plying spirit, that proved of the greatest detriment
to the cause which he wished to support. In.
fluenced, on this occasion, by the severe and
rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to
enter into any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit
the friendship of Henry, because he was no less
impious and profane than the Pope himself; or
even to join in alliance with the Swiss, because
they differed from the Germans in several essential
articles of faith. This dissension, about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural effeds.
Each secretly c.epfured and reproached the other.
The Landgrave considered the Elcktor as set-
tered by narrow prejudices , unworthy of a

prince called to a6 a chief part in a scene of BoOK VI,.
such importance. The Eledtor fufpe6ed him of

x 546.

loose. principles and ambitious views, which
corresponded ill with the sacred cause wherein
they were engaged. But though the Elecor's
scruples prevented their' timely application for
foreign aid; and the jealousy or discontent of
the other Princes defeated a proposal for renew-
ing their original confederacy, the term during
which it was to continue in force being on the
point of expiring; yet the sense of their common
danger induced them to agree with regard to
other points , particularly that they would
never acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a
lawful council, nor fuffer the Archbishop of
Cologne to be .oppressed on account of the steps
which he had taken towards the reformation' of
his diocese ".

THE Landgrave, about this time, desirous ofTheir nego-
penetrating to the bottom of the Emperors in-with the
tentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to Emperor.
be thoroughly acquainted with all his mafter's
schemes, informing him of the several parti-
culars which raised the suspicions of the Pro-
teftants, and begging an explicit declaration
of what they had to fear or to hope. Gran-
velle, in return, assured them that the intelli-

'_X Seek. ·I..iii. 566· s7o. ~13· Sleid. 31~~·

0"6oK VII. gence which they had received of the Enipe
1 546. ro's military preparations was exaggerated!

and all their suspicions destitute of foundation0
that though, .in order to guard his frontiers
against any irifult of ,the French or Englift
he had commanded a small body of men to
be raised in the Low Countries, he was as
solicitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in
Germany ".

BUT the Emperor's adions did not c'orre.

fpond with these profeffions. For, instead of
appointing men of known moderation and a
pacifick temper to appear in defence of the
Catholick dodtrines at the conference which
had been agreed on, he made choice of fierce
bigots , attached to their own system with a
blind obstinacy, that rendered all hope of a re.
concilement desperate. NIalvenda, a Spanish di,
vine, who took the condud of the debate on the
part of the Catholicks, managed it with all the
subtle dexterity of a fcholaftick metaphysician,

* more fludious to perplex his adversaries than to

convince them, and more intent on palliating
error than on discovering truth. The Protestants
filled with indignation, as well at his sophistry
as at some regulations which the Emperor endea

?? Skeid. 3 56

voured to impose on the difputants, broke off BOOK VII,
the conference abruptly, being now fully con- 1546,
vinced that, in all his late measures, the Em-
per6r could have noit'her view than to amuse
them, and to gain time for ripening his own
schemes ".

"3 Sleid. 3 5 8. Seek. 1. iii, 62 ,

# BOOK VIII.

THE

H I R * Y.I

OF THE

R E I G TN-

REIG THE
OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES

BOOK VIII.

Boo VIHILE appearances of danger daily increased,

and the tempest which had been so long a ga.

Death of thering was ready to break forth in all its vio.
Luthcr. lence against the Protestant church, Luther was

saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or
beholding its deftrudtive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining state of health, and during
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eifleben,
in order to compose, by his authority, a diffen-
sion among the counts of Mansfield, he was
seized with a violent inflammation in his stomach

Feb. is. which in a few days put an end to his life, in

vl

T~ O

the fixty-third year of his age. As he was raised BooK VIII
up by providence to be the author of one of the 1s46.
greatest and most interesting revolutions recorded
in history, there is not any person perhaps
wholfe charader has been drawn with such op-
pofite colours. In his own age, one party, struck
with horror and inflamed with rage, when, they
saw with what a daring hand he overturned
every thing which they held to be sacred, or
valued as beneficial, imputed to him not only
all the defeAs and vices of a man, but the qua-
lities of a daemon. The other, warmed with the
admiration and gratitude, which they thought
he merited as the restorer of light and liberty to
the Christian church, ascribed to him perfections
above the condition of humanity, and viewed all
his adtions with a veneration bordering on that
which thould be paid only to those who ar'e
guided by the immediate inspiration of Heaven. His cha.
It is his own condud, not the undiftinguifhing' taer"
censure or the exaggerated praise of his contem-
poraries, that ought to regulate the opinions of
the present age concerning him. Zeal for what he
regarded as truth, undaunted intrepidity to main-
tain his own system, abilities both natural and
acquired to defend his principles, and unwearied
industry in propagating them, are virtues which
ihine so conspicuously in every part of his be-
haviour, that even his enemies must allow him
to have poffeffed them in an eminent degree. To

OOKIt VIII. these may be added,- with equal justice, such
I546. purity and even austerity of manners, as became,

one who assumed the charadter of a Reformer;
such fandity of life as suited. the doctrine which
he delivered; and such perfed disinterestedness
as affords no flight presumption of his sincerity,
Superior to all felfifh considerations, a stranger
to the elegancies of life, and despising its plea...
fures, he left the honours and emoluments of.
the church to his disciples, remaining satisfied
himself in his original state of profeffor in the
university, and pastor of the town of Wittem,
berg, with the moderate appointments annexed
to these offices. His extraordinary qualities were
allayed with no inconsiderable mixture of human
frailty and human passions. These, however,
were of such a nature, that they cannot be
imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart,
but seem to have taken their rife from the fame
source with many of his virtues. His mind,
forcible and vehement in all its operations,
roused by great objecs, or agitated by] violent
passions broke out, on many occasions1, with
' an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler
spirits, or such as are placed in a' more tranquil
situation. By carrying some praise-worthy dif-,
positions to excess , he bordered fometim'es on
what was culpable, and was often betrayed into
actions which exposed him to censure. His

- confidence

confidence that his own opinions were well BoOK VIIL.
founded, approached to arrogance; his courage I5 46.
in asserting them, to rashness ; his firmness in
adhering to them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in
confuting his adversaries, to rage and scurrility.
Accustomed himself to confider every thing as
subordinate to truth, he expedted the fame de-
ference for it from other men; and, without
making any allowances for their timidity' or pre-
judices, he poured forth against such as difap-
pointed him in this particular, a torrent of in-
vedtive mingled with. contempt. Regardless of
any diftin6tion of rank or chara~er when his
dodrines were attacked, he chastised all his ad-
verfaries indiscriminately, with the fame rough
hand; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII.
nor the eminent learning and abilities of Eras-
mus, screened them from the fame gross abuse*
with which he treated Tetzel or Eccius.

BUT these indecencies of which Luther was
guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
lence of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners, of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which, by putting continual restraint on the
passions of individuals, have polished society
and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind
were managed with heat, and strong emotions

VOL. III. Z

BOOR VIII. were uttered in their natural language, without

ix46. reserve or delicacy. At the fame time, the works

of learned men were all composed in. Latin, and
they were not only authorized, by the example
of eminent writers in that language, to use their
antagonists with the most illiberal scurrility;
but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every
kind appear lets shocking than in a living lan.
guage, whose idioms and phrases seem gross,
because they are familiar.

IN passing judgment upon the characters of

mern, we ought to try them by the principles
and maxims of their own age, not by those of
another. For, although virtue and vice are at
all times the fame, manners and customs vary
continually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour,
which to us appear most culpable, gave no dif-
gift to his contemporaries. It was even by some
of those qualities, which we are now apt to
blame, that he was fitted for accomplishing the
great work which he undertook. To rouse
mankind, when funk.in ignorance or superstition,
and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with power, required the utmost vehemence of
zeal, as well as a temper daring to excess. A
gentle call would neither have reached, nor have
excited those to whom it was addressed. A
spirit more amiable, but less vigorous than Lu-
ther's, would have shrunk back from the dan-

gers, which- he braved and surmounted. To-BoOK VIII.
wards the close of Luther's life, though without 1 4.4^
any perceptible declension of his zeal or abilities,
the infirminties of his temper, increased upon him,.
so that he grew daily more peevish, more iraf-
cible, and more impatient". ofg .contradikion.
Having lived to be witness of his own amazing
success; to fee a great part .of Europe embrace
his dodrines; and to ihake the foundation of
the papal throne, before which the mightiest
Monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some
occasions, symptoms of vanity and felf-applaufe.
He must have been indeed more than man, if,
upon contemplating all that he adually accom-
plifhed, he had never felt any sentiment of this
kind rising in his breaft'.

zA remarkable instance of this, as well as of a certain

fungularity and elevation of sentiment, is found ini his Last
Will. Though the effects which he had to bequeath were
very inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a
Testament, but scorned to frame it with the usual legal
formalities. Notus fum, says he, in coelo, in terra, & inferno,
& audtoritatem ad hoc fufficientem habeo, ut mihi fo!i cre-
datur, cumn Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et mifera-
bili peccatori, eX paterna nmifericordia Evangeliuni fliii fui
crediderit, dedetitcque ut in eo, verax & fidelis fuerim , ita
ut multi in mundo Alud per me acceperint, & me pro Doc-
tore veritatis agnoverint, fpreto banno Papse, Caefaris, Re-
gum, Principum & facerdotum, immo omnium demonum
odio. Quidni, igitur, ad difpolitionem hanc, in re exigua,
fufficiat, si adfit mianus mese teftimonium, & dici poffit,
hzec fcripfit 0. Martinus Luther, Nbtarius Dei, & tetis
Evangelii ejus. Seck. 1. iii. p.. 65 1.

BOOK vIII. 'Sori time before his death he felt his firength

x46. `'declmriing, his 'coimfkitution being worn out by a

Sprodigious multiplicity of bufineCs, added to
Sthe labour of discharging his ministerial funtion
with unremitting diligence; to the fatigue 6f
constant study,- befid"e~stthe composition of works
as voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupt.
ed leisure and retirement. His natural intrepi.
dity did not forsake him at the approach of
death; his last conversation with his friends was
concerning the happiness reserved for good men
in a future world, of which he spoke with the
fervour and delight natural to one who expeaed
and wished to enter soon upon the enjoyment of
"it'. The account of his death filled the Roman
Catholick party with excessive as well as indecent
joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers;
neither party fufficiently considering that his
doctrines.were now so firmly rooted, as to be in
a condition to flourish independent of the hand
which first had planted them. His funeral was
celebrated by order of the EleAor of Saxony with
extraordinary pomp. He left several children by
his wife Catharine a Boria, who survived him.
Towards the end of the last century, there'were
. in Saxony some of his descendants in decent and

honourable ftations'.

Sleid. 362. Seck. lib. iii. 63 , &c,

* Seck. 1. iii. 6f i.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the ,planBooK VIII,

of dissimulation with which he had set out,i em-, 1 46.
ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and The Empe-
to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this o dea-to-
purpose he contrived to have, an interview with amure and
the Landgrave of Hesse, the most aci-ve of alldaeceive the
the confederates, and the most suspicious of his
designs. To him he made such warm profef- March 2.
fions of his concern for the happiness of Ger-
many, and of his aversion to all violent mea-
fures ; he denied in such express terms, his havy
ing entered into any league, or having begun
any military preparations which thould give
cause of alarm to the Protestants, as seem to
have dispelled all the Landgrave's doubts and
apprehensions, and sent him away fully satisfied
of his pacifick intentions. This artifice was of
great advantage, and effectually answered the
purpose for which it was employed. The Land-
grave upon his leaving Spires, where he had
been admitted to this interview, went to Worms,
where the Smalkaldick confederates were affem-
bled, and gave them such a flattering reprefenta-
tion of the Emperor's favourable 'difpofition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from
the temper of the German nation, as from the
genius of all great associations or bodies of men,
to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
deliberations, thought there was no necessity of

Z 3

Boot VIII. takinig any irimediate measures against dangers

i 46. Which appeared to ee 'diftant or imna.ginary4.

iing; Suci' events,' hwever, fobn occurred, as

. fltggered the c'redit ",hich the 'Proteftants had
t given to the Emperor's declarations. The

council of Trent, though still composed of a
small nunmber of Italian and Spanish prelates,
without a single deputy from any of the king-
doms which it affurmed a right of binding by.
its decrees, being ashamed of its long inadi-
vity, proceeded now to fettle articles of the
greatest importance. Having begun with exa-
mining the first and chief point in controversy
between the church oftRome and the Reformers,
concerning the rule which mhould be held as fu-
preme and decisive in matters of faith, the
council, by its infallible authority, determined,

- " That; the books to which the designation of

Apocryphlal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive <.hriftians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from
the apoftolick age, and preserved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the doArines
and precepts which the inspired authors have
committed to writing; that. the Latin tranfla-
tion of the Scriptures, mnade or revised by St,

Sleid. Hist. 367. 37

Jerome, and known by the name of the rulgate Booi VII
translation, should be read in churches, and is46~
appealed to in the schools as authentick and ca,
nonical.. Against all who disclaimed the truth
of these tenets, anathemas were denounced -in
the name and by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. The decision of these points, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the Pro-
tefiants what judgment they might exped when
the council should have leisure to take into con-
fideration the particular and subordinate articles
of their creed '.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was
Loon followed by a striking instance of the
Pope's resolution to punish such as embraced
them. The appeal of the canons of Cologne
against their Archbishop ,having been carried to
Rome, Paul eagerly seized on that oppbrtunity,
both of displaying the extent of his own autho-
rity, and of teaching the German ecclefiafticks
the danger of revolting from the established
church. As no person appeared in behalf of
the Archbiflop, he was held to be convided of
the 'crime, . of heresy, and a Papal bull was
issued, depriving him of his ecclefieftical dig-

. F, Paul, 142. Pallav. zo6&

Z4

I|ooK VIII.nity, inflicing on him the sentence of excom-.

1546. munication, and absolving his fubjeAs from the

oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the
only crime imputed to him, as well as the only
reason assigned to justify the extraordinary rigour
of this decree. The Protestants could hardly
believe that Paul, how zealous soev.er to defend
the established system, or to humble those who
invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to
such extremities against a Prince and Elector of
the Empire, without having previously secured
such powerful proteclion as would render his
censure something more than an impotent and-
despicable sally of resentment. They were of
course deeply alarmed at this sentence against
the Archbishop, considering it as a sure indica-
tion of the malevolent intentions not only of
the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the
whole party'.

CEarles UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with
about to such violence as is natural to men roused fro'm
ofiities a false security, and conscious of their having
against the been deceived, Charles saw that it was now ne-
ProteQtants. ceffary to throw aside the veil, and to declare

openly what part he determined to ad. By a

! Sleid. 4. F. Paul, i 9 . Pallavic. 224.

longiferies. of artifice and fallacy, he had gained BooK VIII.
so much time, that his measures, though not 1546.
altogether ripe fdr execution were greatly ma-
tured. The Pope, by his proceedings against
the Elecor of Co'ogne, as well as by the de-
cree of the council, had precipitated matters
into such a situation, as rendered a breach be-
tween the Emperor and the Protestants almost
unavoidable. Charles had now no choice left
him but either to take part with them in over-
turning what the See of Rome had determined,
or to support the authority of the church openly
by force of arms. Nor did the Pope think itNegoCeiate

S1with the

enough to have brought the Emperor under a pope.
necessity of ading; he pressed him to begin his
operations , by promising to second him with
such vigour as could not well fail of securing
his success. Transported by his zeal against
heresy , Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious
maxims of the papal fee , with regard to the
danger of extending the Imperial authority
beyond due bounds; and in order to crush the /
Lutherans, he was willing to contribute towards
raising up a master that might one day prove
formidable to himself as well as to the reft of
Italy.

Concludes a

BUT, besides the certain expecation of affift-t ,ce with
ance from the Pope, Charles was now fecu're Soyman.

Booi VIII. from any danger of interruption to his designs

s146. by the Turkish arms. His pegociations at the

Porte, which he had carried on with great afli.
duity since the peace of Crefpy, were on the
point of being terminated in such a manner as
he defired'. Solyman , partly in compliance with
the French King, who, in order to avoid the
disagreeable obligation of joining the Emperor
against his ancient ally, laboured with great zeal
to bring about an accommodation between
them; and partly from its being necessary to
turn his arms towards the east , where the Per.
sians threatened to invade his dominions, cone
fented without difficulty to a truce for five years.
The chief article of it was , That each' Ihould
retain poffeffion of what he now held in Hun.
gary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the pride
of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tri.
bute of fifty thousand crowns .

Gains Mau. BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of
rice, and the Germans themselves that the Emperor re-
other
rrinces in lied with the greatest confidence. The Germa-
Germany. nick body, he knew, were of such vast strength,

as to be invincible if it were united, and that
. it was only by employing its own force that he
could hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the
union of the several members in this great sys-

'Iftuanhaffii Hist. Hung. 80o. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i1

582.

tern was so feeble , the whole frame was so BooI VIII.
Ibofely compaced, and its different parts tended xs46.'
so violently towards separation from each other,
that it was almost impossible for it , on any im-
portant emergence, to join in a general or vi-
gorous effort. In the present junAure , the
sources of discord were as many, and as various *
as had been known on any occasion. The Ro-
man Catholicks , animated with zeal in defence
of their religion proportional to the fierceness
with which it had been attacked, were eager to
second any attempt to humble those innovators
who had overturned it in many provinces, and
endangered it in more. John and Albert of
Brandenburgh, as well as several other Princes,
incensed at the haughtiness and rigour with
which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated
by the confederates of Smalkalde, were impa-
tient to rescue him, and to be revenged on them.
Charles observed, with fatisfadion, the work-
ing of those passions in their minds, and count-
ing on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
ihould think it proper to ad, he found it, in
the mean time, more necessary to moderate than
to inflame their rage.

SucH was the situation of affairs, such the solas a die
discernment with which the Emperor' forefawat Ratisbon.
and provided for every event, when the diet of
the Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the.

BOOK VIII. Roman Catholick members appeared there i

*z 146. person, but most of the confederates of Srnal.

) kalde , under pretence of their being unable to

bear the expence occasioned by the late unne.
ceffary frequency of such assemblies , sent only
deputies. Their jealousy of the Emperor, to.
gether with an apprehension that violence might,
perhaps, be employed, in order to force their
approbation of what he ihould propose in the
diet, was the true cause of their absence. The
speech with which the Emperor opened the diet
was extremely artful. After profeffing, in com.
mon form , his, regard for the prosperity of the
Germanick body, and declaring, that, in order
to bestow his whole attention upon the re-elta.
blifhment of its order and tranquillity , he had
at present abandoned all other cares', rejeded
the most pressing folicitations of his other sub.
jedts to reside among them, and postponed as-
fairs of the greatest importance; he took notice,
with some disapprobation, that his disinterested
example had not been imitated ; many mem-
bers of chief consideration having neglected to
attend an assembly to which he had repaired with
such manifest inconvenience to himself. He
then mentioned their unhappy dissensions about
religion ; lamented the ill success of his past
endeavours to compose. them ; complained of
the abrupt dissolution of the late conference,
-and craved their advice with regard to the belt

and most effeAual method of restoring union to BooK VIII.
thae churches of Germany, together with that Is46.
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their
ancestors had found to be of no less advantage
to their civil interest, than becoming their Chris-
tian profeffion.

BY this gracious and popular method of con-
ulting the members of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own,
besides the appearance of great moderation,
and the merit of paying much refped to their
judgment, the Emperor dexterously avoided dif-
covering his own sentiments, and reserved to
himself, as his only part, that of carrying into
execution what they should recommend. Nor
was he less secure of such a decision as he wiihed
for, by'referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman Catholick members, prompted by their
own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues joined
immediately in representing that the authority
of the council now met at Trent ought to be
final in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians should submit to its decrees as the in-
fallible rule of their faith; and therefore they
besought him to exert the power, with which
he was inverted by the Almighty, in prot~eting
that assembly, and in compelling the Protestants
to acquiesce in its determinations. The Protelt-
ants, on the other hand, presented a memorial,

BooK VIII. in which, after repeating their objections to th

1.46. council of Trent, they proposed , as the only it

effedual method of deciding the points i, dijf
pute, that either a free general council ihould
be assembled in Germany, or a national council
of the Empire should be called , or a felea
number of divines Thould be appointed out o1
.each party to examine and define articles o01
faith. They mentioned the recesses of several
diets favourable to this proposition, and which
had afforded them the profped of terminating
all their differences in this amicable manner;
they now conjured the Emperor not to depart
from his former plan, and by offering violence
to their consciences, to bring ca amities upon
Germany, the very thought of which muff fill
every lover of his country with horror. The
Emperor receiving this paper with a cohtemptu.
ous smile, paid no farther regard to it. Having
already taken his final resolution, and perceiv-
ing that nothing but force could compel them

June 9. to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of

Trent to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance
with the Pope, the terms of which were already
agreed on; he commanded a body of troops,
levied on purpose in the Low Countries , to ad.
.vance towards Germany; he gave commissions
to several officers for raising men in different
parts of the Empire; he warned John and Al-
bert of Brandenburgh, that now was the proper

me of exerting themselves, in order to refcueBoor VIII. ~
leir ally , Henry of Brunswick , from cap- ix46.
ivity 8:
ALL these things could not be tranfaded The Pro-
vithout the observation and knowledge of the alarmed.
'roteftants. The secret was now in many
lands; under whatever veil the Emperor still
iffeted to conceal his designs, his officers kept
o0 such myferious reserve ,, and his allies and
fabjets spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarm-
ed with reports of this kind from every quar-
ter, as well as with the preparations of war which
they saw begun , the deptities of the confede-
rates demanded audience of the Emperor, and,
in the name of their masters, required to know
whether these military preparations were car-
ried on by his command , and for what end,
against what enemy. To a question put in such
a tone, at a time when fads were become
too notorious to be denied, it was necessary to
give an explicit answer, Charles owned the
orders which he had issued , and profeffing his
purpose not to molest any on account of reli-
gion who should ad as dutiful fubjeds; de-
clared that he had nothing in view but to main-
tain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and, by punishing some fadious mem-
bers, to preserve the ancient constitution of the

SSleid, 374. Seck. iii. 6 8. "

Biio VIII. Empire frdm being impaired or dissolved by

iS46. their irregular and licentious condud. Though

the Emperor did not name the persons whom he
charged with such high crimes, arid destined to
be the objeAs of his vengeance, it was obvious
that he had =the Eledor of Saxony and Land.
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi.
dering what he had said, as a plain declaration
of his hostile intentions, immediately retired
from Ratifbon'.

The Empe- THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult
Sswith the matter to treat with the Pope, who having at
rope. length brought the Emperdr to adopt that plan

which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The
league was signed a few days after the Cardi.
nal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Protestants in rejeding the holy council

, assembled at Trent, and the necessity of main.

taining found dodrine, together with good or-
der in the church, are mentioned as the mo-|
tives of this. union between the contrading par-.
ties. In order to check the growth of these
evils, and tQ punish such as had impiously con-
.tributed to spread them, the Emperor, having
long and without success made trial of gentler
remedies, engaged instantly to take the field

' Sleid. 376.

with a fufficient army-, that he might compelBooRK VIII.
all who disowned the council, or had apoffa- 1546.
tized fromn the religion of their forefathers, to
return into the bosom of the church, and sub-
mit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without assigning him his share in
any conquests which should be made upon them ;
and that even after this period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church, or to the interest of
religion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to
deposit a large fum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain, at his own charge, during the space
of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five
hundred horse; to grant the Emperor , for one
year, half of the ecclesiastical revenues through-
outs Spain; to authorize him, by a bull, to alie-
nate as much of the lands, belonging to religious
houses in that country, as would amount to the
fum of five hundred thousand crowns; and to
employ not only spiritual censures, but military
force against any Prince who should attempt. to
interrupt or defeat the execution of this treaty".

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in

which the extirpation of heresy was declared to

" Sleid. r., PallaV. c. Durnmont Corps Diplom. Ix z

VOL. II, A a

LOOK VIII. be the object of the war which was to follow

x 46. upon this treaty, Charles still endeavoured to
Endeavours persuade the Germans that he had no design to
still to

con. * * *

-

ceailhi in- abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed
tentions only at vindicating his own authority, and re.
fp.om2ts. pressing the insolence of such as had encroached

upon it. With this view, he wrote circular
letters in the fame strain with his answer to the
deputies at Ratisbon, to most of the free cities,
and to several of the Princes who had embraced
the Protestant dodrines. In these he complained
loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt
into which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and
of the presumptuous as well as disorderly beha.
viour of some members of the Empire. He
declared that he now took arms, 'not in a reli-
gious, but in a civil quarrel; not to oppress any
who continued to behave as quiet and dutiful
fubjeds, but to humble the arrogance of such
as had thrown off all sense of that fubordina.
tion in which they were placed under him as
head of the Germanick body. Gross as this de-
ception was, and manifest as it might have apS
peared to all who considered the Emperor's
conduc with attention, it became necessary for
him to make trial of its effe&; and such was
the confidence and dexterity with which he em-
ployed it, that he derived the most solid advan-
tages from this artifice. If he had avowed at
once an intention of overturning the Protestant

church, and of reducing all Germany under its BOOK VIII
former state of fubjedion to the papal fee, none i546.
of the cities or Princes who had embraced the
new opinions could have remained neutral after
fich a declaration, far less could they have
ventured to assist the Emperor in such an en-
terprize. Whereas, by concealing, and even
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all
the Protestant states, .but he furnished the timid
with an excuse for continuing inadive, and the
designing or interested with a pretext for join-
ing him, without exposing themselves to the in-
famy of abandoning their own principles, or
having an adive hand in suppressing them.
At the fame time the Emperor well knew, that
if, by their assistance, he were enabled to break
the power of the Eledor of Saxony and Land-
grave, he might afterwards prescribe what terms
he pleased to the feeble remains of a party
without union or leaders, who would then re-
gret, too late, their mistaken confidence in him,
and their inconsiderate desertion of their affo-
\ciates.

THE Pope, by a 'fudden and unforeseen dif- The ope

play of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this foncer
plan which the Emperor had -formed with so
much care and art. Proud of having been tihe

Aa

B6ord VIII. author of such a formidable confederacy againit

?4;. the Lutheran heresy, and happy in thinking

that the glory "of extirpating it was reserved for
his Pontificate

" he published the articles of his

league with the Emperor, in order to demon.
ftrate the pious intention of their confederacy,
a-s well as to display his own zeal, which
prompted him to make such extraordinary es-
forts for maintaining the faith in its purity.
Not satisfied with this, he soon after issued a
bull, containing most liberal promises of ihduil
gence to all who Thould engage in this holy en-
terprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,

. to increase the fervour of their prayers , and the

severity of their mortifications, that they might
draw down the blefling of Heaven upon those
who undertook it "'. Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so
inconsistent with the account which the Em-
peror himself gave of *his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
dissimulation in such a cause; at his seeming
to be ashamed of owning his zeal for the
church, and at his -endeavours to make that
pass for a political contest, which he ought to
lihae gldried in as a wai which had no other ob.
.jed than the defence of religion, With as

" Du 1VYont Corps Diplom.

mnuch solicitude, therefore, as the Emperor la- BOOK VfIIL
boured to disguise the purpose of the confede- ? j46,
racy, did the Pope endeavour to publilh their
real plan, in order that they might come at
once to a. o.pea rupture with the Pro.testants,
that all h.ope. of reconcilement might be cut off,
and that. Charles might be. under fewer tempta-
tions, and have it less in his power than at pre.
sent, to. betray the interests of the church by
any accommodation. beneficial to himself ".

THE Emperor, though not a little offended

at. the Pope's indiscretion or malice in. making
this d'ifcovery, continued- boldly to pursue his
own plan, and to. affett his intentions to. be no
other than what he had originally avowed. Se.
veral of tlW Protestant states, whom he had
previously, gained, thought themselves justified,
in some measure, by his declarations, for. aban-
doning their associ-ates, ^and even for .giving
assistance tg him.

BUT t here artifices. did not impose on theThe e repa-

greater- and founder part of the Proteflant con-ration of the

-

, Protefltants

federates. They clearly, perceived: it; to. be for their
against the reformed religion, that the Emperor wn dae.
had taken arms, and that not only the fuppref-
sion of it, but the. extinction of the Germian

54 ~. Paul, T88· ~L~lrua~i, IZi~ti. cLrS

Boo VIIII.,liberties, would b' e ,the certain consequence of

i546. his obtaining such an entire superiority as would

enable him to execute his schemes in their full
extent. They determined, therefore, to prepare
for .their owa' defence, and neither to renounce
those religious: truths;. to the knowledge. of which
they had attained by means so wonderful, nor
to abandon those, civil rights which had been
transmitted to them.. by their anceftdrs. In or-
der to. giver the necessary diretions for this pur.
pose, their deputies met at Ulm, soon after their
abrupt departure .from. Ratisbon: Their delibe-
rations were now conduaed with. such vig6ur
and'unanimity, as the imminent danger which
threatened them required. The. contingent of
trdops , which each of the cohfederates was to
furnish, having been fixed by. the original treaty
of union, orders wvere given for- bringing them
immediately into the field. .Being sensible, at
last, that through the narrow prejudices of
some of their members, and the imprudent fe.
curity of others, they had neglected too long to
strengthen themselves -by foreign allianices, they
now applied with great earnestness, to the Vene-
tians and Swiss. r

i

-

eThey solicit 'To the Venetians: they represented the Em-
the aidof peror's intention of overturning the present sys-
tia,,s. tem of Germany , and of raising himself to

absolute power in that country by means of

foreign force furnished by the Pope; they BOOK VIII.
warned them how fatal this event would prove I546,
toi the liberties of Italy, and that by fuffering
Charles 'to acquire unlimited authority in the
one country, they would soon feel his dominion
to be no less defpotick in the other; they be-
fought them, therefore, not to grant a passage
through their territories to those troops, which
ought to be treated as common enemies, be-
cause by subduing Germany they prepared
chains for the reft\ of Europe. These refleaions
had not escaped the sagacity of those wife re-
publicans. They had communicated their fen-
timents to the Pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render irresistible the power of a potentate,
whose ambition he already knew to be bound-
]efs. But they had found Paul so eager in the
prosecution of his own plan, that he disregard-
ed all their remonftrances ". This attempt to
alarm the Pope having proved unfuccefsful,
they would do nothing more towards preventing
the dangers which they foresaw; and in return
to the application from the confederates of Smal-
kalde, they informed them, that they could not
obstruct the march of the Pope's troops through
an open country, but by levying an army fitrong
enough to face them in the field; and that this

" Adriani Iltoria de' fuoi tempi, liv. v. p. 3 3~

S-Aa4

BOOK VIII. would draw upon themselves the whole weight

i4 46, -o f his as well as of the Emperor's iridignation.

For the fame reason they declined lending a
fum of .money, which the Eledor of Saxony
and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them,
towards carrying on the war "

of the THE demands of the confederates upon the
swiss. Swiss were not confined to the obftruiing of the

entrance of foreigners into Germany; they re,
quired of 'them, as the nearest neighbours, and
closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with
their wonted vigour for the preservation of its
liberties, and not to stand as inadive fpedators,
while their brethren were oppressed and enslave.d.
-But with whatever zeal the reformed Cantons
might have been disposed to ad when the cauft
of the Reformation was in danger, the Helve-
tick body was so divided with regard to religion,
as rendered it unsafe for the Protestants to take
any step without- consulting their associates;
and among them the emissaries of the Pope and

, Emperor had such influence, that a resolution

of maintaining an exact neutrality between the
contending parties, was the utmost which could
be procured '.

,' Sleid. 38i. Paruta Iftor. Venet. torn. iv. I o. Laim-

bertus Hortenfius de bello Germanico, apud Scardium,
vol. ii. p. 547.

" Sleid. 392.

-BE.ING disappointed in both these applications, BOOK VII.
the. Protestants, not long after, had recourse to x 44$.
the Kings of France anid England; the ap-of Francis
proach of danger either overcoming the EleCtor ry vm.
of Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield
to the importunities of his associates. The situ-
ation of the two. Monarchs flattered them with
hopes of success, Hostilities between them had
continued for some time after the peace of Cref-
py. But becoming weary at last of a war, at-
tended with no glory or advantage to either,
they had lately terminated all their differences
by a peace concluded at Campe near Ardres.
Francis, having with great difficulty procured
his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that concession he engaged to pay
a great fumn, which Henry demanded as due to
him on several accounts, and he left Bologne in
the hands of the English , as a pledge for his
faithful performance of that article. But though
the re-establishment of peace seemed to leave
the two Monarchs at liberty to turn their atten-
tion towards Germany , so unfortunate were
the Protestants, that they derived no immediate
advantage from this circumflance. Henry ap.
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the supreme direc-
tor of their league; a pre-eminence which, as
the bondl of unioh or interest between them

Biobi VIIT..were but feeble, and as, he differed from .then

x 46. so widely. in his religious sentiments, they had'

no inclination to admit "'. Francis, more power.
,fully inclined by political considerations to. as
ford them assistance , found his kingdom so
much exhausted by a long war, and was fto
much afraid of irritating the Pope,. by entering
into close union with excommunicated Here,
ticks, that he durst not undertake the pro.
tedtion of the Smalkaldick league. By this ill.
timed caution, or superstitious deference to fcru.
ples, to which at other times he was not much
addided, he loft the most promising opportu.
nity of mortifying and distressing his rival, which
presented itself during his whole reign.

Protestants BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their
take the foreign ,
field with a Iegociations with foreign courts, the confede.
great army. rates found no difficulty at home, in bringing a

fufficient force into the field. Germany abound.
ed at that time in inhabitants; the feudal infti-
tutions, which subsisted in full force, enabled
the nobles to call out their numerous vassals,
and to put them in motion on the shortest warn-
ing; the martial spirit of the Germans, not
broken or enervated by the introdudion of com-
merce and arts, had acquired additional vigour
during the continual wars in which they had
been employed, for half a century , either in

" Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, s258

the pay of the Emperors, or Kings of France. BooK YIII.
Upon every opportunity of entering into ser- $46.
vice, they were accustomed to run eagerly to
arms; and to every standard that was ereded.,
volunteers flocked from all quarters T". Zeal
seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour.
Men on whom the doctrines of the Reforma.
tion had made that deep impression which ac-
companies truth when first discovered, prepared
to maintain it with proportional vigour; and
among a warlike people , it appeared infamous
to remain inaAive, when the defence of religion
was the motive for taking arms. Accident com-
bined with all these circumifances in facilitating
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being dismissed by the King on the
profpet of peace with England, joined in a
body the standard of the Protestants '". By such
a concurrence of causes , they were enabled to
assemble in a few weeks an army composed of
seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse,
provided with a train of an hundred and
twenty cannon , eight hundred ammunition
waggons, eight thousand beasts of burden, and
fix thousand pioneers ". This army, one of the

7 Seek. 1. iii. 161, " .Thuan. 1. i. 68.
, Thuan. 1. i. 601. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Cor

mentariorum de bel. Germ. lib. duo, Antw. is o. 12 mo
p. 13, a.

Biio VIII, most numerouS, and undoubtedly the best ap;

1s46, pointed of any which had been levied in Europe

during that century, was not raised by the united
effort of the whole Protefant body. The Eiledtor
of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke
of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhalt, and the
Imperial cities of Augfburgh, Ulm, and Stra
burgh, were the only powers which contributed
towards this. great armament: The Ele'tors of
Cologne, of Brandenburgh, and the Count.' Pa
latine, overawed by the Emperor's threats, or
deceived by his. profeffions , remained neuter,
John marquis of Brandenburgh Bareith, and Al-
bert of Brandenburgh Anfpach, though both
early converts to Lu.theranifm., entered openly
into. the Emperor's service, under pretext of
having obtained his promise for the security of
the Proteflant religion; and 1Vaurice of Saxony
soon followed theii example,

DT1e inequa. THE number of their- troops, as well as the
Em,peor's amazing rapidity wherewith they had assembled
forces to them, astonished the Emperor, and filled him
teit. with the most disquieting apprehensions. He

was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a
mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of
no great strength, whose inhabitants being most-
ly Lutherans, would have been more ready
to betray than to assist him, with only three thou-
sand Spanish foot, who had served in Hungary,

and about five thousand Germans who -had Booi VIII.
joined him from different parts of the Empire, 1 546.
he must have be:xi overwhelmed by the approach
of such a numerous army, which he could not
fight, nor even hope to retreat from it in safety.
The Pope's troops, though in full march to his
relief, had hardly reached the frontiers, of Ger-
many; the forces which he expeded from the
Low Countries had not yet begun to move, ,and
were even far from being complete ". His fittu
ation, however, called for more immediate fuc·
cour, nor did it seem praaicable for him to wait
for such distant auxiliaries, with whom his junc-
tion was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that They irn.

the confederates did not avail themselves of the prudently begoeciate
advantage which lay so full in their view. ininiteaa of
civil wars, the first freps are commonly taken aking.
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance
of moderation and equity; they strive to gain
partisans by seeming to adhere ftrialy to known
forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those eftablilhed institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most

" Sleid. 389. Avila, 8, a.

EBGit VIII.vigorous and decisive. Influenced byl those

x546. .c6nfiderations, which, 'happily for the peace of

society, operate powerfully on the human mind,
the confederates could not think of throwing off
that allegiance which they regularly owed to the
head of the Empire, or of turning their arms
againfl him without one solemn appeal more to
his candour, and to the impartial judgment of
their fellow - fubjets. For this purpose, they
addressed a letter to the Emperor, and a mani.
fefto to all the inhabitants of Gerrmiany. The
tenour of both was the ,fame. They represented

aJulyt. . their own conduct with regard to civil affairs

as dutiful and submissive; they mentioned the
inviolable union in which they had lived with
the Emperor, as well as the many and receni
marks of his good-will and gratitude where.
withal they had been honoured; they asserted
religion to be the sole cause of the violence
which the Emperor now meditated against them;
and in proof of this produced many arguments
to convince those who were so weak as to be
deceived by the artifices with which he endea-
voured to cover his real intentions; they de-
clared their own resolution to risk every thing
in maintenance of their religious rights, and
foretold the dissolution of the Germnan conftitu-
tion, if the Emperor ihould finally prevail
against them a.

x Sleidc 384.

CHARLES, though in such a perilous situation BooK VIL.
as might' have ,inspired him with moderate fen- J 446.
timents, appeared as inflexible and ,haughty as ifThe Empe-
his affairs had been in the most prosperous state. m uner
His only reply to the address and manifesto of the ban of
the-Proteftants, was to publish the ban of the the Erm"p,
Empire against the Eledor of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all
who Thould dare to assist them. By this fen-
tence, the ultimate and most rigorous one which
the German jurisprudence has provided for the
punishment of traitors, or enemies to their coun-
try, they were declared rebels and outlaws, and
deprived of every privilege which they enjoyed
as members of the Germanick body; their goods
were confiscated; their fubjeas absolved from
their oath of allegiance; and it became not only
lawful but meritorious to invade their territories,
The nobles, and free cities, who framed or per-
feted the conflitution of the German govern.
ment, had not been to negligent of their own
safety and privileges as to trust the Emperor
with this formidable jurifdiaion. The autho-
rity of a diet of the Empire ought to have been
interposed before any of its members could be
put under the ban. But Charles overlooked
that formality, well knowing that, if his arms
were crowned with success, there would remain
none who would have either power or courage

BDoort VIII, to call in question what he had done ". The

X146; Emperor, however, did not found his sentence

against the Eledor and Landgrave on their re.
volt from the established church, or their con,
duCt with regard to religion ; he affeAed to assign
for it reasons purely civil, and those too expref.
fed in such general and ambiguous terms, with.
out specifying the nature or circumstances of
their guilt, as rendered it more like an ad of
defpotick power than of a legal and limited jurif.
didion. Nor was it altogether from choice, or
to conceal his intentions, that Charles had re.
course to the "ambiguity of general expressions;
he durst not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every adion which he could
have charged uponer the Elector and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal justice to condemn many of the Protestants
whom he still pretended to confider as faithful
fubjests, and whom it would have been ex,
tremely imprudent to alarm or difgufh

Trey e.- THE confederates , now perceivirig all hopes

e war of accomrmodation to be at an end, had only to

ChaJrlis. choose whether they would submit without re,

serve to the. Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hostilities. They were not destitute of publid
spirit and resolution to make the proper choice

' Sieid. 86. Dui Mont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. Ir. ;I4

Pfeffel Abreg6 du Droit Publ. i68. 736. S 8.

A few

A few days after the ban of the Empire w.asBooia VIIL
published, they, according to the custom of that. 1546,
age, sent a herald to the Imperial camp with a
solemn declaration of war against Charles , to
whom they no longer gave any other title thanr
that of pretended Emperor , and renounced all
allegiance, homage or duty which he might
claim .or they had hitherto yielded to him. But
previous to this formality, part of their troops
had begun to ad. The command of a confidera-rTher Bfir
ble body of men raised by the city of. Augfburgh opatons"
having been given to Sebastian Schertel, a fol-
dier of fortune, who by the booty that he got
when the Imperialists plundered Rome, together
with the merit of long service, had acquired
wealth and authority Which placed him on a
level with the chief of the German nobles: that
gallant veteran resolved, before he joined the
main body of the confederates. to attempt some-
thing suitable 'to his former fame, and to the
expedation of his counltrymen. As the Pope's
forces were hastening towards Tyrol, in order
to penetrate into Germany by the narrow passes
through the mountains which run across that
country, he advanced thither with the utmost
rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffftein,
two fitrong carfles which commanded the prin-
cipal defiles,. Without stopping a moment, he
continued his march towards Infpruck, by get-
ting poffeftion of which he would have obliged

VOL. IlI B b

BoioK VI[I. the Italians to stop ifhort, and with a fm all bddy

1546. of men could have resifted all the efforts of"

the greatest armies. Caftlealto, 'the governor of
Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would
be' to the Emperor, all whose designs must have
proved abortive if his Italian auxiliaries had
been intercepted, taited a few' troops with the
utmost dispatch , and threw himself into the
town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the
enterprize, and was preparing to attack the place,
when the intelligence of the approach of the
Italians, and an order from the Eledtor and Land-
grave, obliged him to desist 2. By his retreat the
passes were left open, and the Italians entered
Germany without any opposition, but from the
garrisons which Schertel had placed in Ehren-
berg and Cuffftein, and these having no hopes
of being relieved , surrendered, after a ihort
resistance ".

as Seckend. lib. ii. 7o. Adriani Ifforia de' fuoi tempi,

" Seckendorf, the indufftrious author of the Commenta-

rius Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long
and safely followed as my guide in German affairs, was
a descendant from Schertel. With the care and solicitude of
a German, who was himself of lioble birth, Seckendorf
has published a long digreflion' concerning his ancestor,
qalcidlated chiefly to ihow how Schertel was ennobled, and
his posterity allied to many of the most ancient families in
the Empire. Among other curious particulars, he gives
us an account of his wealth, the chief source of which was

NoR was the recalling of Schertel the only Biort V111L
error of which the confederates were guilty. As is-46.
the supreme cotmman of their army was coin- and in coii
mnitted, in terms of the league or Smalkalde, to
the Pledor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse
with equal authority , all the inconveniences
arising from a divided and co-ordinate authority,
which is always of fatal confe quence in the
operations of war. were immediately felt. The
Eledtor, though intrepid in his own person to
excess, and most ardently zealous in the cause,
was flow in deliberating. uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and safe,
to such as were bold or decisive The andgrave,
of a more adive and enterprising nature, formed
all his resolutions with promptitude, wished to
execute them with spirit, and uniformly prefer-
red such schemes as tended to bring the conteaf
to a speedy issue. Thus their maxims , with
regard to the conduit of the war , differed as
widely as those by which they were influenced
in preparing for it. Such perpetual contrariety
in their sentiments gave rife, imperceptibly, to

the plunder he got at Rome. His landed eftate' was fold by
his grandsons for fix htindred thousand florins. By this
we may form some idea of the riches amassed by the Condot-
tieri, or commanders of mercenary bands in that age. At the
taking of Rome Schertel was only a captain. Seckendb
lib. ii. 7 3

Boox. VIII. jealoufyj and the spirit .'f contention. These

xS46. multiplied the dissensions flowing from the

incompatibility of their, natural ' temper , and
tendered them ,more violent. The other memr-
bers of the league considering themselves as
independent:,, and fubje&, to the Eletor and
Landgrave, only in consequence of the articles
of a voluntary confederacy, did not long retain
a proper veneration for commanders , who
proceeded ,with so little unanimity ; and the
numerous army of the Protestants, like a vast
machine whose parts are ill compated, and which
is deftittute of any power fufficient to move and
regulate the whole, aded with no consistency,
vigour, or effedc

The Pope's THE Emperor , who was afraid that, by re-
the E"pe- maining at Ratisbon, he might render it im-
ror. possible for the Pope's forces to join him, having

boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the. terri-
tories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly
abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave
only a small garrison. By this time the papal
troops, amounting fully to that number which Paul
had stipulated to furnish, had reached Landshut,

and were soon followed by fix .thousand Spaniards BoolK VIIL
of the veteran bands stationed in Naples. The 946.
confederates, after Schertel's spirited but fruitless
expedition, seem to have permitted these forces
to advance unmolested to the place of rendezvous,
without any attempt to attack either them or
the Emperor separately , or to prevent their
jundtion '. The Imperial army amounted now
to thirty-fix thousand men, and was frill more
formidable by the discipline and valour of the
troops, than by their number. Avila, com-
mendador of Alcantara, who had been present
in all the wars carried on by Charles, and had
served in the armies which gained the memorable
vitory of Pavia , which conquered Tunis, and
invaded France , gives this the preference to
any martial force he had ever seen assem.bled ".
Odavio Farnese, the Pope's grandson, assisted
by the ablest officers formed in the long wars
between Charles and Francis, commanded the
Italian auxiliaries. His brother the Cardinal
Farnese , accompanied him , as papal legate;
and in order to give the war the appearance of
a religious enterprize, he proposed to march at
the head of the army, with a, cross carried before
him, and to publish Indulgences wherever he
came, to all who should give them any affiftancep

s Adriani Iftoria de' fuoi tempi, lib. v. 4o0.
a" Avila, 1 8,

Bb3

Joolr VIII. as had anciently been the praftice in the. Cru.

j4 ,. fades against the Infidels. But this the Emperor

ftridtly prohibited, as inconsistent with all the
declarations which he had made to the Germans
of his own party; and the legate perceiving, to
his astonishment. that the exercise of the Protelf,
ant religion, the extirpation of which he confi,
dered as the sole object of the war, was publiekly
permitted in the Imperial camp , soon returned
in disgust to Italy "'.

THE arrival of these troops enabled the Em,

peror to fend such a reinforcement to the garri.
son at Ratisbon, that. he confederates; relinquifhq
ing all hopes of reducing that town, marched
towards Ingoldftadt on the Danube , near. to
which Charles ,was now encamped. They ex-
claimed loudly against the Emperor's notori.
ous violation of the laws and constitution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to
lay waste Germany, and to oppress its .liberties.
As in that age, the dominion of the Roman See
was so odious to the Protestants, that the name
of the Pope alone was fufficient to inspire them
with horror a any enterprize which he counte-
nanced,, and to raise in their minds the blackest
suspicions it came to be universally believed
among them , that Paul not satisfied with at,
tacgking theim openly by force of arms, had di-

£7 F, Paul, 191.

perfed his emissaries all over Germany, to set on Boot VIII.
fire their towns and-magazines, and to poison s546.
the wells and fountains of water. Nor did this
rumour spread only among the vulgar, being ex-
travagant as well as frightful enough to make a
deep impression on their credulity ; even the
leaders of the party, blinded by their prejudices,
published a declaration, 'in which they accused
the Pope of having employed such Antichriftian
and diabolical arts againit them 28. These senti-
ments of the confederates were confirmed, in
some measure, by the behaviour of the papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous to-
wards Hereticks anathematized by the church,
were guilty of great excesses in the Lutheran
territories, and aggravated the calamities of war,
by mingling with it all "the cruelty of bigoted
zeal.

THE first operations in the field, however, The confe.

did not correspond with the violence of those derates ad-

S" . .vance to-

passions which animated individuals. The Em- wards the
peror had prudently taken the resolution ofImperial
avoiding an ation with an enemy fao far fuperioraimf'
in number ", especially as he foresaw that no-
thing could keep a body composed of so many and
such dissimilar members, from falling to pieces,
but the pressing to attack it with an inconfide-
rate precipitancy. The confederates, though it

" Sleid, 399, "9 Avila, 78, a.

Sb 4

. 3bOr VIII. was nio efs evident that, to them every moment's

x 460 delay was'-pernicious, were'ftill prevented by the

weak ness or division of the'r leaders from exert.
ing that vigour, with which- their situation, as,
wdel' as the ardour of their soldiers, ought to have

Augu 9. inspired therm. On their arrival at Ingoldftadt,

they found the Emperor in a camp not remark.
able for fitrength, and surrounded only by a flight
entrenchment. Before the camp lay a plain of0:
such extent , as afforded fufficient space for:
drawinlg out their whole army, and briniging it
to a&d at once. Every consideration should have
determined them to have seized this opportunity
of attacking the Emperor; and their vast fupe.
riority in numbers, the eagerness of their troops,
together with the stability of the German in-
fantry in pitched battl'es; afforded them the most
probable expecation of vicory. The LandT
grave urged this with great warmth, declaring
that if'the sole command were vefled in him, he
would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general adion the fate of the two
parties. But the Elector, refleding on the va-
lour and discipline of the enemy's forces, ani-
mated by the presence* of the Emperor, and con-
du&ed by the belt officers of the age, would
not venture upon an action, which he thought
to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body
of .veterans on ground which they themselves
had chosen, and while covered by fortifications

which, though imperfect, would afford them no Bgor VIgI
fmail advantage in the combat. Notwithftand- 1x 4.6.
ing his hesitation and remonftrances, it was
agreed to advance towards the enemy's camp,
in battle - array, in order to make a trial whe-
ther by that insult and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the
Imperialists out of . their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into
this snare. He adhered to his own system withThe Empe-
inflexible conftandy; and drawing up his, sol-a battle.
diers behind their trenches, that they might be
ready to receive the confederates if they should
venture upon an assault, calmly waited their ap-
proach, and carefully refitrained his own men
from any excursions or skirmishes which might
bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addressing the troops of the
different nations in their own language, encou-
raged them by the cheerfulness of his voice and
countenance; he exposed himfelE in places of
greatest danger, and amidst the warmefR fire of
the enemy's artillery, the most numerous that
had hitherto been brought into the field by any
army. Roused by his example, not. a man
quitted his ranks; 'it was thought infamous to
discover any symptom of fear when the Emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the. comn

BoQOK VIII. bat at present was not the effect of timidity i,

1546. their general, but, the result of a well weighed

caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours on the Imperialists, with more noise and
terror than execution, feeing no profped of al.
luring them to fight on equal terms, retired to
their own camp. The Emperor employed the
night with such diligence in strengthening his
works, that the confederates, returning to the
cannonade next day, found that, though they had
now been willing to venture upon such a bold
experiment, the opportunity of making an at.
tack with advantage was loft ".

The Fle- AFTER such a discovery of their own feeble.
mish troops
join the ness or irresolution, and of the prudence as well
.Emperor, as firmness of the Emperor's conduct, the con,

federates turned their whole attention towards
preventing the arrival of a powerful reinforce,
mnent of ten thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, which the count de Buren was bringing
to the Emperor from the Low Countries.. But
though that general had to traverse such an ex-
tent of country; though his route lay through
the territories of several slates warmly disposed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach, and by their vast fu-

°" Sleid. 395. 397. Avila, .7, a. Lamb. Hortentf. ap.

Scard. ii.

periority in numbers might easily have detached BOOKi VIII.
a force fufficient to overpower him, he advanced 1546.
with such rapidity, and by such well-concerted
movements, while they opposed him with such
remitinefs, and so little military skill , that he
conduded this body to the Imperial camp with- sept. o.
out any loss ".

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom
he placed great confidence, the Emperor altered,
in some degree, his plan of operations, and be-
gan to ac more upon the offenfive, though he
still avoided a battle with the utmost induffry.
He made himself master of Neuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen,
and several other towns, situated on the most
considerable streams which fall into that mighty
riwer. By this he got the command of a great
extent of country, though not without being
obliged to engage in several sharp encounters,
of which the success was various, nor without
the most imminent danger oftener than once of
being drawn into a battle. In this manner the State es
whole autumn was spent; neither party gained totarmie
any remarkable superiority over the other, and
nothing was yet done towards bringing the war
to a period. I he Emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of

"\ Sleid. 40qo

BooK VIII.money would compel the confederates to disperse

546. that unwieldy body, which they had neither

abilities to guide, nor funds, to support "; but
though he waited with impatience for the ac.
complifhmrent of his prediction, there was no
profped of that event being at hand. Mean.
while he himself began to fuffer from the want
of forage and provisions; even the Catholick
provinces being so much incensed at the intro.
dudion of foreigners into the Empire, that they
supplied them with reludance, while the camp
of the confederates abounded with a profusion
of all necessaries, which the zeal of their friends
in the adjacent countries furnished with the ut.
most liberality and good will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to
the climate or food of Germany, were become
unfit for service through sickness ". Considers
able arrears were now due to the troops, who
had scarcely received any money from the be-
ginning of the campaign; the Emperor, ex-
periencing on this as well as on former occasions,
that his jurifdidion was more extensive than his

, revenues , and that the former enabled him to

affembie a greater number of soldiers, than, the
latter were fufficient to pay. Upon all these
accounts, he found it difficult to keep his army

" Belli Smnalkaldici Commentarius Graeco fermone scrip.

tus a Joach. Camerario, ap. Freherum, vol, iii, p. 479.

'3 Camerar. ap. Freher. 48 .

in the field; fom'e of his ablest generals, and BOOK VIII.
even the Duke of Alva himself, persevering and 1546.
obstinate as he usually was in the prosecution of
every measure, advising him to disperse his
troops into winter-quarters. But as the argu-
ments urged against any plan which he had
adopted, raTely made much impression upon the
Emperor, he paid no regard to their opinion,
and determined to continue his efforts in orderl
to weary out the confederates; being well affur-
ed that if he could once oblige them to separate,
there was little probability of their uniting again
in a body "'. Still, however, it remained a doubt-
ful point, whether his steadiness was most likely
to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It was
still, uncertain which party, by first dividing its
forces, would give the superiority to the other;
when an unexpeded event decided the contest,
and occasioned a fatal reverse in the affairs of
the confederates.

MAURICE of Saxony having insinuated him-The
self into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts resic
which have already been described, no sooner of Saxony.
saw hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
profpeds of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, .which descended to

÷ Thuan. 83.

o0o0 VIII. him from his ancestors, Was far from fatisfyinI

I 46. his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea

sure. the approach of. civil war, as amiidft th
revolutions and convulsions occasioned by it, o0
portunities of acquiring additional power o
dignity, which at other times re fought ii
vain , present themselves to apJ enterprifin1
spirit. As he was thoroughly acquainted wi'tl
the slate of the two conte,nding parties, am
the qualities of their leaders, he did not hefitatf
long in determining on which fide the greatef
,advantages were to -be expeded. Having re
volved all these things in his own mind. anm
having taken his final resolution of joining th,
Emperor, he prudently determined to declar
early in his favour; that by the merit of this
he might acquire a title to a proportional r
compenfe. With this view, he had repaired ti
Ratisbon in the month of May, under pretem
* of attending the diet; and after many confei

His league ences with Charles or his ministers, he, wit.
with the the most mysterious secrecy, concluded a treat)
Emperor. in which he engaged to concur in assisting th

Emperor as a faithful fubjed: and Charles, i
return, stipulated to bestow on him all th
spoils of the Eledor of Saxony, his dignities 2
well as territories ". History hardly records an

3 Haraei Annal. Brabant, vol. i. 63 8. Struvii Cor

1048. Thuan. 84o

treaty that can be considered as a more mani-Boor VIII.
Sfft violation of the most powerful principles x546,
which ought to influence human adions. Mau-
rice, a profeffed Protestant, at a time when the
belief of religion, as well as zeal for its interests,
took strong poffeffion of every mind, binds him-
self to contribute his assistance towards carrying
on a war which had manifestly no other object
I than the extirpation of the Protestant doarines.

lHe engages to take arms against his father-in-
law, and to strip his nearest relation of his ho-
nours and dominions. He joins a dubious friend
againif a known benefaaor, to whom his obli-
gations were both great and recent. Nor was
the Prince who ventured. upon all this, one of
thpfe audacious politicians, who, provided they
can accomplish their ends, and secure their
interest, avowedly disregard the most sacred
obligations, and glory in contemning whatever
is.honourable or decent. Maurice's conduct, if
the whole must be ascribed to policy, was more
artful and masterly; he executed his plan in
all its parts, and yet endeavoured to preserve,
in every step which he took, the'appearance of
what was fair, and virtuous, and laudable. It
is probable, from his subsequent behaviour, that,
with regard to the Protestant religion at least,
his intentions were upright, that he fondly
trusted to the Emperor's promises for its security,
but that, according to the fate of all who refine

BooIc VIIItoo much in policy,. and who tread in dark :and

1546. crooked paths, in attempting to deceive others'

he himself was, in- f.me degree, deceived.

His artifices His first care, however, was to' keep th'fe
in order to .

c Con

conceal his engagements with the Emperor, cloiely con-
intentions, cealed: and so perfed6 a master was he in the

art of dissimulation, that the confederates, not-
withstanding his declining all connexions with
them, and his remarkable assiduity in paying
court .to the Emperor, seemed to have enter.
tained no suspicion of his, designs. Even the
Eledor of Saxony, when he marched at the be-
ginning of the campaign to join his associates,
committed his dominions to Maurice's protec-
tion, which he, with an insidious appearance of
friendship,* readely undertook 3. But scarcely
had the Eledor taken the field, when Maurice
began to consult privately with the King of the
Romans how to invade those very territories,
with the defence of which he was entrusted.
Soon after, the Emperor sent him a copy of the
Imperial ban 'denounced against the Eledor and
Landgrave. As he was next heir to the for-
mer, and particularly interested in preventing
firangers from getting his dominions into their
poffeffion, Charles required him, not only for
his own fake, but upon the allegiance and duty

. 5 Struvii Corp. I046.

which

,ehich he owe.d to .the head of the Empire, in- BooiH. VIIIL
ftantly to seize and detain in his hands the for- xI46
feited estates of 'the; Eledor; ;warning him , at

•

the fame.tiime that if he negleded to obey these
commands,, he should be held as accessary to the
;rimes ,of his kinsman, and be liable to 'the fame
punishment '

,

. THTS artifice, which it is probable Maurice
himself suggested, was employed by hini in or-
der that his conduct towards the Eledor might
seem a matter of neceflfity butt not of choice, an
adt of. obedience to his superior , rather than a
voluntary invasion of. the rights of; his kinsman
and ally. But in order to give foime more fpe-
cious appearance to thi. thin veil with which he
endeavoured to cover his ambition , he, foori
after his return from Ratisbon, had called toge-
ther the Rates of his country; and representing to
them that a .civil war between the Emperor and
confederates of Smalkalde was now become un-
avoidable, "defired their advice with regard to
the part which he fhiould aa in that event. They
being prepared, .no doubt, and tutored before-
hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their
Prince, whom they boti esteemed and loved,
gave such counsel as they knew would be most
agreeable; advising him to offer his mediation

"7 Sleid. 391. Thuan. 84;
VOL. lit l -

bOOK VIIL towards recohibiling the cobitending parties; but

.. 46, if that were rejeded, and he could obtain proper

* fecurity' for the Protestant religion, 'they deliver.

ed it as their opinion that, in all other points,'he
tught to yield obedience to the Emperor,
Upon -receiving the Imperial .refript, together
with the ban against the Eledor-and Landgrave,
Maurice summoned the slates of his country a
second tiime; he laid before them the orders
which he had received, and mentioned the pu;
niflhment with which he was threatened in cafe
of disobedience; he acquainted them that the
confederates had refused to admit of his medi;
ation; and ithat the Emperor had given him t1
xwoft fatfisatory declarations with regard to. re.
ligion; he pointed out h. own interest in fecur-
ing poffeffion.of tfhe eledoral dominions, as well
as the' danger of allowing strangers to obtain an
eftablhflinienit in Saxony; and upon the whole,
as the point under deliberation refpeded his
fubjeAs no less than himself, he desired to know
their sentiments how he ihould fleei in that dif-
ficuilt and arduous conjuncture. The slates, no
less obsequious and complaisant than formerly,
relying on the Emperor's promises as a perfed
security for their religion, proposed that, before he
had recourse to more violent methogs, they would
Wvrite to the Eledor, exhorting him, as the best
means, not only of appdafing the Emperor, but
of preventing his dominions from being seized

by foreign or hostile powers, to give his con-BoorK VIII.
ent that Maurice should take poffeffion of them 1546.
quietly and without opposition. Maurice him-
seif seconded their arguments in a letter to the
Landgrave, his father-in-law. Such an extra-
vagant proposition was rejeAed with the scorn
and indignation which it deserved. The Land-
grave, in return to MVIauirice, taxed him with
his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinf-
man to whom he was so deeply indebted ; he
treated with contempt his affedtation of execut-
ing the Imperial ban, which he could not but
know to be altogether void, by the unconftittu-
tional and arbitrary manner in which it had been
issued he, besought him, not to fuffer himself
to be so far blinded by ambition, as to forget
the obligations of honour and friendship , or to
betray the Protestant religion, the extirpation
of which out of Germany, even by the acknow-
ledgment of the Pope himself, was the great
objec of the present war ".

BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-He inv!aes
verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or thies o te
arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-~Eleor of
cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carriedsaxony.
on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his
boldness in adion inferior to his subtlety in con-

' Sleid. 40o, &c. Thuan. 8S. Camerar. 484.

* - Cc

2

BiOK VIIL trivance. Having assembled about twelve thou.

1546. sand men, he luddenly invaded one part of the

eleCoral provinces, while Ferdinand with an
army composed of Bohemians and Hungarians,
over-ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp en:
counters, defeated the troops which the Eledtor
had left to guard his country; and improving
these advantages to' the utmost, made himfell
master of the whole Eledorate, except Wittemn.
berg, Gotha, and Eisenach, which being place·
of considerable strength, and defended by sus
ficient garrisons, refused to open their gates
The news of these rapid conquests soon reach
ed the Imperial and confederate camps. In th(
former, their fatisfadion with 'an event, whicl
it was foreseen would be produAive of the mos
important consequences , was expressed by ,evern
·possible demonfitration of joy. The latter wa
filled with astonishment and terror. The nani
of Maurice was mentioned, with execration, a
an apostate from religion, a- betrayer of th
German liberty, and a contemner of the m.o
facred' and natural ties. Every thing that th
rage or inventi6n bs the party could suggest, ii
order to blacken and render him odious; invet
tives, satires ahd lampoons, the furious dech
mnations of their preachers , together with th
rude wit of their authors, were all employe,
against him. While he, trusting to the art
which he had so long pradifed , as if his a<

tions could have admitted of any serious juftifi-BooiK VIl.
cation, published a manifesto, containing the

x 46,

fame frivolous reason ,for his condui , which
he had formerly alleged in the meeting of his
dates,, and in his letter to the Landgrave ".

;THE Elecor, upon the first intelligence of The confe-
MIaurice's motions , proposed to return home derates

. make over-

with his troops for the defence of .Saxony.. But ctres of ac.
the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm, coml nodat-

.rem. . ai n to the

prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with mperor;
the army, and to prefer the success of the com-
mon cause before the security of his own domi,
onins. At length the fufferings and complaints
of his fubjecs increased so much, that he dif-
covered the utmort impatience to set out, in or,
der to rescue them from the oppression of Mau-
rice, and from the cruelty of the' Hungarians,
who having been accustomed, to that licentious
and merciless species of war which was thought
lawful against the Turks, committed, wherever
they came, the wildest acs of rapine and? vior
lence. This desire of the Eledor was fa natu-
ral and so warmly urged, that the deputies at
Uln, though fully sensible of the unhappy con-
fequenees of dividing their army, durst not re-
fuse their consent, how unwilling soever to grant
it. In this perplexity, they repaired to, the

'3 Sleid. 409, 419.

Cc3

Booi VIII. camp of the confederates at Giengen on the

1 546. Brenz, in order to consult their constituents

Nor were they less at a loss what to determine
in this pressing emergence. But, after having
considered seriously thesopen desertion of forne of
their allies; the scandalous lukewarmness of others
'who had hitherto contributed nothing toward
the war; the intolerable load which had fallen
of consequence, upon such members as wver
mnoft zealous for the cause, or most faithful to
their engagements; the ill success of all their
endeavours to obtain foreign aid; the 'unufua
length of the campaign; the rigour of the sea
son; together with the great number of soldiers
and even officers, who had quitted the service
on that account; they concluded that no.
thing could save them, but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a
battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an
accommodation of all their differences with
Chfarjes by a treaty. Such was the despondency
and dejeaion which now oppressed the party,
that of these two they chose what was moil
feeble and unmanly, empowering a minister of
the Eledor of Brandenburgh to propound over-
tures of peace in their name to the Emperor.

which he NO sooner did Charles perceive this haughty
rejea"s confederacy, which had Tso lately threatened to

drive him out of Germany, condescending to

make the firIt advances towards an agreement, BOOK VIII
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their i54<(.
union to be broken, he immediately assumed
the tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had
been already at his mercy, would not hear of
a negociation, but upon condition of the Elector
of Saxony's consenting previously to give up
himself and his dominions absolutely to his dif-
-pofal ". As nothing more intolerable or igno-
,minious could have been prescribed, even in
the worst lituation of their affairs, it is no won-
der that this proposition was rejected by a party,
humbled, and disconcerted rather than subdued.
But though they refused to submit tamely to
the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pur-
sue the only plan which could have preserved
their independence; and forgetting that it was
the union of their troops in one body which had
hitherto rendered the confederacy formidable,
and had more than onc'e obliged the Imperialists
'to think of quitting the field, they inconfider-
ately abandoned this advantage , which, in
spite of the diversion in Saxony, would still The troops
have kept the Emperor in awe; and yielding to fee cfon-
the Eledor's entreaties , consented to his pro-parat,.
pofal of dividing 'the army. Nine thousand
men were left in the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in
order to protec that province as well as the

" Hortenfius, ap. Scard. ii. 485~

Cc4

B.o0K VIII. free cities of Upper Germany; a considerable

X546< body marched with the Eletor towards Saxony;

but the greater part returned with theirl]refpec.
tive leaders into their own countries, and were
dispersed there ".

- AlmoB all' THE moment that the troops ieparated, the.

the mem-
bers of it confederacy ceased to be the objea of terror;
submit to and the members of it, who, while they com-

Ir, I";pofed part of a great body , had felt but little

anxiety about their own security , began to
tremble when they reflected that they now flood
exposed singly to the whole weight of the Em-
peror's vengeance. Charles did not allow them
leisure to recover from their conifternation, "or
to form any new schemes of union. As soon
as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the
depth of winter, he resolved to keep the field,
in. order to make the most of that favourable
jundture for which ,he had waited so long. Some
small towns, in which the enemy had left gar-
rifons, immediately opened their gates. Nord-
lingen, Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could
not prevent the Ele&or from levying , as he
retreated , large contributions upon the archbifh-
op of MT8entz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclefiafticks ", this was more than balanced by

° Sleid, 4 x-. * Thuan. 88~

the submission of Ulm, one of the chief cities BooK VIII.
of Suabia, highly distinguished by its zeal for ixs46.
the Smalkaldick league. As soon as an example
was set of deserting the common caufe,' the reft
of the members became instantly impatient to
follow it, and seemed afraid left others, by
getting the itart of them in returning to their
duty, thould, on that account, obtain more
favourable terms. The Eletor Palatine , a
weak Prince , who , notwithstanding his profef-
fions of neutrality, had, very preposterously,
sent to the confederates four hundred horse, a
body so inconsiderable as to be scarcely any ad-
dition to their strength , but great enough to
render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the molt abjeC
manner. The inhabitants of Augfburgh, shaken
by so many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleased to
grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among
the first who had offered to submit, was obliged
to sue for pardon on his knees; and even after
this mortifying humiliation, obtained it with
difficulty 4'. Memmingen, and other free ci- I547.
ties in the circle of Suabia , being now aban,

4

e

Mine de Ribler, tom. i. $8s.

Boo00 VIII.doned by all their former associates., found it

1.547. necessary to provide for their own safety, by

throwing themselves on the Emperor's mercy.
Strafburgh and Frankfort on the Maine, cities
far remote from the feat of danger, discovered
no greater steadiness than those which lay more
exposed. Thus a confederacy, lately so power.
ful as to shake the Imperial throne, fell to
pieces and was dissolved in the space of a few
weeks; hardly any member of that formidable
combination now remaining in arms, but the
Elecdor and Landgrave, whom the Emperor,
having from the beginning marked out as the
vidtims of ,his vengeance, was at no pains to re.

The rigor- concile. Nor did he grant those who submit.
ous condi- ted to him a gerierous and unconditional par.
tions im-
posed by the don. Conscious of his own superiority, he
Emperor. treated them both with haughtiness and rigour.

' All the Princes in person, and the cities by

their deputies, were compelled to implore
mercy in the humble posture of supplicants.
As the Emperor laboured under great difficul-
ties from the want of money, he imposed heavy
fines upon them , which he levied with most
rapacious exaadnefs. The Duke of Wurtem-
berg paid three hundred thousand crowns; the
city of Augfburg(h an hundred and fifty thou-
sand; Ulm - an hundred thousand; Frankfort
eighty thousand ; Memmingen fifty thousand;
and the reft in proportion to their abilities, or

their different degrees of guilt. They were BooK VIII,
obliged , besides, to renounce the league of i. 47.
Smalkalde; to furnish assistance , if required,
towards executing the Imperial ban against the
Eledtor and Landgrave ; to give up their artil-
lery and warlike stores to the Emperor; to ad-
mit garrisons into their. principal cities and
places of strength; and, in this disarmed and
dependent situation, to expeC the final award
which the Emperor should think proper to pro-
nounce when the war came to an issue ". But,
amidst the great variety of articles didated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to
his original plan, took care that nothing relat-
ing to religion should be inserted; and to such
a degree were the confederates humbled or
over-awed, that,, forgetting the zeal which had
so long animated them, they were solicitous
only about their safety, without venturing. to
insist on. a point, the mention of which they saw
him avoiding with so much industry. The in-
habitants of MIemmingen alone made some fee-
ble efforts to procure a promise of protection in
the exercise of their religion, but were checked
so severely by the Emperor's ministers that they
instantly fell from their demand.

* Sleid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. 125. M4m. de

Ribier, torn. i. 606.

.B00K VIII. THE Eledor of Cologne, whom, notwith.

i 47. standing the sentence of excommunication issued

against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in poffeflion of the archiepif.
copal fee, being now required by the Emperor
to fabmit to the censures of the church, this
virtuous and disinterested prelate, upwilling to
expose his fubjeds to the miseries of a war on

Jan. 2^. his own account, voluntarily re'igned that Jigh

dignity. , With a moderation becoming his age
and character, he chose to' enjoy truth together
with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society
by engaging in a doubtful and violent struggle
:in order to retain his office "'.

The EIleor 'MEANWHILE the Eledtor of Saxony reached the
returns to frontiers of his country unmolested. As Maurice
Saxony, and
recovers poT. could assemble no force equal to the army which
fefion ofit. accompanied him, he, in a short time, not only

recovered poffeffion of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all
that belonged to him, except Dresden and Leip-
sic, which, being towns of some firength, could
not be suddenly reduced. lVlaurice obliged to
quit the field, and to shut himself up in his
capital, dispatched courier after courier to the

" Sleid. 4 8. Thuan, lib. iv. Iz8,

Emperor, representing his dangerous situation, BoOK VIID.
and soliciting him with the most earnest impor- 15s47.
tunity to march immediately to his relief. But
Charles, busy at that time in prescribing terms
to such members of the league as were daily re-
turning to their allegiance, thought it fufficient
to detach Albert Marquis of Brandenburgh-An.
fpach with three thousand men to his assistance.
Albert, though an, enterprising and aicive of-
ficer, was unexpedCedly furprized by the .Elec-
tor, who killed many of his troops, dispersed
the remainder:, and took him prisoner *4. MVlau-
rice continued as much exposed as formerly;
and if his enemy had known how to improve
the opportunity which presented itself, his ruin
must have been immediate and unavoidable.
But the Eledor, ,no less flow and dilatory when
invested with the sole command, than he had
been formerly 'When joined ;in authority with a
partner, never gave any proof ps military aAi-
vity but in this enterprize against Albert. In-
stead of marching diredly towards Maurice,
whom the defeat of his ally ;had greatly alarmed,
he inconsiderately listened to overtures of ac-
commodation, which l~s artful antagonist pro-
posed with no other intention than to amuse
him, and to slacken the vigour of his ope-
rations.

* Avila, 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier, tomn i. 6a.

B£ot VIII. SucH-, indeed, was the poftire of the Em,

1547. peror's affairs that he could not march instantly
The Empe- to the relief of his ally. .Soon after the fepa;
ror prevent-
ed from at. ration of the confederate army, he, in order to
tacking the ease 'himfelf of the burden of maintaining a
letor and

gra perfluous numbes of troops, had dismissed

the count of Buren - with his Flemings 47, ima-
gining that the Spaniards and Germans, toge.
ther with the papal forces, would be fully sus.
ficient to crufih any degree of vigour that yet
remained among the members of the league.
But Paul, growing wife too late, began now to
discern the imprudence of that measure, from
which the more sagacious Venetians had endea-
Youred in vain to dissuade him. The- rapid
progress of the Imperial arms, and the ease
with which they had broken a combination that
appeared no less firm than powerful, opened his
eyes:at l.irgth, and rmade him riot only forget
at once all the advantages which he had ex-
peaed from such a. complete triumph over he-
refy, but placed, in the strongest light, his own
impolitick condut, in having contributed towards
acquiring for Charles such an immense increase
of power, as would enable him, after oPppref-
fihg the liberties of Germany, to give law with
absolute, authority to all the fRates of Italy.
The moment that he perceived his error, he

"' Avila, 83. 6. BIMeii de Ribiet, tom. i. 95;.

endeavoured to correct it. Without giving the BOOK VIII,
Emperor any warning of his intention, he or- r4-7.
dered Farnese , his' grandson, to return instantly The Pope

. )recalls his

to Italy with all the troops under his command, troops.
and at the fame time recalled the licence which
he had granted Charles, of appropriating, to his
own use, a large share of the church-lands ink
Spain. He was not deftittite -of pretences to
justify this abrupt defertion' of his ally. The
term of fix months, during which the ftipula-
tiots in their treaty 'were to continue in force,
was now expired; the league, in opposition to
which their alliance had been framed, seemed to
be entirely dissipated; Charles, in all his nego-
ciations with the Princes and cities which had
.submitted to his will, had neither consulted the
Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the coii-
qufefts which he had made, nor had communi-
cated to him any share in the vast contributions
which he had raised. He had. not even made any
provision for the fuppreffiorn of heresy, or the
re-establishment of the Catholick religion, which
were Paul's chief inducements to bestow the
treasures of the church so liberally in carrying
on the war. These colours, however fpeciouts,
did liot- bonrceal from the Emperbr that fe-
cret jealoiufy which was the true motive of the
Pope's condudt. But, as Paul's orders with
regard to the fnarch of his trtoops were no less
peremptory than unexpedted, it was impdflible

BOOK VIII. to prevent their .retreat. Charles exclaimed

as47. loudly against his treachery, in abandoning hirm

so unseasonably, while he was prosecuting a war
undertaken in obedience to the papal injunc.
tions,, and from. which, if fuccefsful, so much
honour. and advantage would redound to the
church. To complaints he added threats and
S expoftulations. But Paul remained inflexible;
his troops continued .their march towards the
ecclesiastical state;. and in an elaborate memo.
rial 'intended as an, apology for his behaviour,
he discovered new and more manifest symptoms
.of alienation from the Emperor, together with
a deeprooted dread of his power r. Charles,
Wealkened by the withdrawing of so great a body
friom his army, which was already much dimi-
aithfed by the number of garrisons that he had
been obliged to throw into the towns which had
capitulated, found it necessary to recruit his
forces by new levies, before he could venture to
march in person towards Saxony,

A confpi. THu fame and splendour of his success could
xacy toove^tnOt have failed of attracing such multitudes of
turn the go

1. .

ternment ofoldiers into his service from all the extensive
Genoa. territories now fubjea to his authority, as muff

.have soon put him in a. condition of taking the
field igainft the EleCtor; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as

'8 F. Paul, 2o8. Pallavic. par, ii. p. a. Thuan. i26.

yWell

well as the great revolutions which that event, BOOK VIIL
extremely mysterious in its first appearances, 547.
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid en-
tangling himself in new operations in Germany,
until he had fully discovered its source and ten-
dency. The form of government which had
been established in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of
former dissensions, and received at first with
eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near
twenty years, give universal fatisfadion to those
turbulent and factious republicans. As the en-
tire administration of affairs was now lodged in
p certain number of noble families, many en-
vying them that pre - eminence, wished for the
restitution of a popular government, to which The obje&
they had been accustomed; and though all re-fothe conm.
verenced the disinterested virtue of Doria, and piratols'
admired his talents, not a few were jealous
of that ascendant which he had acquired in the
councils of the commonwealth. His age, how-
ever, his moderation, and love of liberty, as-
forded ample security to his countrymen that he
would not abuse his power, nor sLain the close
of his days by attempting to overturn that fa-
brick, which it had been the labour and pride
of his life to ere&. But the authority and in-
fluence which in his hands were innocent, they
easily saw would prove deftrudive, if usurped

VOL. I1. D d

Boo VIII. by any citizen of greater ambition, or less vir,

$547. tue. A citizen of this dangerous character

had actually formed such pretensions, and with
some profpeC of success. Giahnetino Doria,
, whom his grand uncle Andrew defPined to be
the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise
at. being his successor in power. His temper
haughty, insolent, and overbearing to such a
degree as would hardly have been tolerated in
one born to reign, was altogether insupportable
in the citizen of a free state. The more saga-
cious among the Genoese already feared and
hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While
Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and
undifcerning affecion which persons in ad-'
vanced age often contrad for the younger
members of their family, iet no bounds to the
indulgence with which. he treated him; seeming
less solicitous to secure and perpetuate the free-
dorh of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize
that undeferving kinsman.

, BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or
whatever diffatisfadlion with the system of admi-
niftration in the commonwealth, these circum-
stances might have occasioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis Si-
cfco count of Lavagna, observing this growing

disgust, had not been encouraged by it to at-BooK VIII.
tempt one of the boldest actions recorded in s47.
history. That young nobleman, the richest andFiefco count
most illustrious fubje§ in the republick, pof- oe haador
sessed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities the confpi-
which win upon the human heart, which com-racy.
mand refped, or secure attachment. He was
graceful and majeftick in his person; magnifi-
cent to profusion; of a generosity that prevent-
ed the wishes of his friends, and exceeded the
expectations of strangers; of an insinuating ad-
dress, gentle manners, ancd a flowing affability.
But under the appearance of these virtues, which
seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning
civil life, he concealed all the dispositions which
mark men out for taking the lead in the most
dangerous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable
and restless ambition, a courage unacquainted
with fear, and a mind that difdained fubordi-
nation. Such a temper could ill brook that
station of inferiority, wherein he was placed in
the republick; and as he envied the power
which the elder Doria had acquired, he was
filled with indignation at the thoughts of its de-
fcending, like an hereditary poffeffion, to Gian-
netino. These various passions, preying with
violence on his turbulent and aspiring mind,
determined him to attempt overturning that
domination to which he could not submit.

Dd

Boor VIII. AT first he thought of an alliance with Fraun-

I 47. cis, and even proposed it to the French ambaf-
nitrigues fador at Rome,' as the most effetdual means of
an d prepara-
tions ofthe accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria,
conspirators. together with the Imperial fadion, by his assist-

ance, he retolved to put the republick once more
under the protecion of that Monarch, hoping
in return for that service to be enitrufted with
the principal ihare in the administration of go-
vernment. But having communicated his scheme
to a few chosen confidents, from whom he kept
nothing secret, Ve rina, the chief of them, a
man of desperate fortune, capable alike of ad-
vising and executing the most audacious deeds,
remonstrated with earnestness against the folly
of exposing himself to the most imminent dart.
get , while he allowed another to reap all the
fruits of his success; and exhorted him warmly
to aim himself at that pre-eminence in his coun-
try , to which he was destined by his illustrious
birth,. was called by the voice of his fellow-
citizens, and would be raised by the zeal of his
friends. This discourse opened such vast pro-
fpeds to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius,
that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other persons
present, though sensible of the hazardous -na-
ture of the undertaking, did not choose to con-
demn what their patron had so warmly approved.
It was instantly .resolved, in this dark cabal, to

4ffaffinate the two Dorias, as well as the prin-BooK VIII.
cipal persons of their party, to overturn the x54€7.
established system of government, and to place
Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa. Time,
however, and preparations were requisite to
ripen such a design for execution; and while
he was employed in carrying on these, Fiefco
made it his chief care to guard against every
thing that might betray his secret, or create
suspicion. The disguise he assumed, was of all
others the most impenetrable. He seemed to
be abandoned entirely to pleasure and diffipa-
tion. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by the
pursuit of all the amusements becoming his age
and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole
of his time and thoughts. But amidst this hurry
of dissipation , he prosecuted his plan with
the most cool attention, neither retarding the
design by a timid hesitation , nor precipitating
the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French
ambassador at Rome, though without commu-
nicating to him his real intentions, that by his
means he might secure the proteUion of the
French arms, if hereafter he should find it
necessary to call them to his aid. He entered
into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of
Parma, who being disgusted with the Emperor
for refusing to grant him the investiture of that
dutchy, was eager to promote any meaftre that

Dd' 3

BooK VIII.tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or tq

S947. ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as

that of Doria. Being sensible that, in a mari-
time state, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased
four galleys^ from the Pope, who probably was
not una~quainted with the design which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of these galleys to
fail on a cruise against the Turks, he not only
assembled a good number of his own vassals,
but engaged in his service many bold adven-
turers, whom the truce between the Emperor
and Solyman had deprived of their usual occu,
pation and subsistence,

WVHIrLE Fiefco was taking these important

steps, he preserved so admirably his usual ap-
pearance of being devoted entirely to pleasure
and amusement, and paid court with such art-
ful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not
only on the generous and unfufpicious mind of
Andrew, but deceived Giannetino, who, con-
fcious of his own criminal intentions, was more
apt to distrust the designs of others. So many
i-nfiruments being now prepared , nothing re-
mained but to strike the blow, Various consult-
ations were held by Fiefco with his confidents,
in order to fettle the manner of doing it with
the greatest certainty and effect. At first, they

*proposed to murder the Dorias and their chiefBooK VIIL
adherents, during the celebration of high mass s547*
in the principal church ; but as Andrew wvas
often absent from religious folemnities, on ac-
count of his great age , that design was laid
aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco fliould
inVite the uncle and nephew, with all their
friends whom they had marked out as vidims,
to his house; where it would be easy to cut
them off at once without danger or resistance;
but as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town
on the day which they had chosen, it became
necessary likewise to alter this plan. They at
last determined to attempt by open force, what
they'found difficult to effed by stratagem, and
fixed on the night between the second and third
of January, for the execution of their c.terprize.
The time was chosen with great propriety; for
as the Doge of the former year was to quit hi's
office, according to custom, on the first of the
month, and his successor could not be elepded
sooner than the fourth, the republick remained
during that interval in a fort of anarchy, and
Fiefco might with less violence take poffeflion
of the vacant dignity.

THE niorning of that day, Fiefco employed in The corpi.

rators a£-

visiting his friends, passing some hours amongcemble to
them with a spirit as gay and unembarraffed asexecute
at other times. Towards evening, he paid court their ll"n.

Dd4

BoOK , VIII. to the' Dorias with his usual marks of refpeBt;

1--47. and surveying their countenance and behaviour

.with the attention natural in his situation, was
happy to obfeive the perfect security in which
they remained, without the least foresight or
dread of that storm which had been so long
a gathering, and was now ready to burst qver
their heads. From their palace he hastened to
his own, which stood by itself in the middle
of a large courts, surrounded by a high wall.
The gates had been set open in the morning,
and all persons, without diftindion, were allowed
to enter, but firong guards posted within the
court fuffered no one to return. Verrina, mean.
°while, and a few perfons-trufted with the secret
of the conspiracy , after conduding Fiefco's
vassals , as well .as the crews .of his galleys
into the palace in I'mall bodies , with as little
noise as possible, dispersed themselves through
the city , and, in the name of their patron, in-
vited to an entertainment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the ad-
ministration of the Dorias, and to have inclina-
tion as well as courage to attempt a change in
the government. Of the ,vast number of per-
sons who now filled the palace, a few only knew
for-what purpose they were assembled; the reft,
astonished at finding, instead of the preparations
for a feast, a court crowded with armed men,
and apartments filled with the instruments of

-war, gazed on each other with a mixture o0 GU-BooR VIIL
riofity, impatience, and terror.

x 1 47.

WHILE their minds were in this state of fuf--Fiero's ex-

hortations

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a to them.
look full of alacrity and confidence, he address-
ed himself to the persons of chief diftinaion,
telling them, that they were not now called to
partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but
to join in a deed of valour, which would lead
them to liberty and immortal renown. He set
before their eyes the exorbitant as well as into-
lerable.aauthority of the elder Doria, which the
ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of
the Emperor to a family more devoted to him
than to their country, was about to enlarge and
to render perpetual. This unrighteous domi-
nation, continued he, you have it now in your
power to subvert, and to establish the freedom
of your country on a firm bais. The tyrants
muff be cut off. I have taken the most effec-
tual measures .for this purpose. IMy associates
are numerous. I can depend on allies and pro-
te&tors if necessary. Happily the tyrants are as
secure as I have been provident. Their insolent
contempt of. their countrymen has banished the
suspicion and timidity which usually render the
guilty quick-fighted to discern, as well as saga-
cious to guard against the vengeance which they
deserve. / They will now feel the blow,-before

BOOK VIII, they fufped any hostile hand to be nigh. Let

1^47, us then sally forth, that we may deliver our

country by one generous effort, almost unac.
companied with danger,. and certain of success.
T'hefe words, uttered with that irresistible fert
vour which animates the mind when roused by
great objets, made the desired impression on
the audience. Fiefco's vassals, ready to execute
whatever their mafter'fhould command, received
his, discourse with a murmur of applause. To
many who6se fortunes were desperate, the licence
and confusion of an infurreation afforded an
agreeable profpec. Those of higher rank and
more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the
surprise or horror with which they were struck at
the proposal of an enterprize no less unexpected
than atrocious; as each of them imagined the
other to be in the secret of the conspiracy,
and saw himself surrounded by persons who
"waited only a signal from their leader to perpe.
trate the greatest- crime. With one voice then
all applauded, or feigned to applaud the under,
taking.

Inis inter. FIESCO having thus fixed and encouraged his
,iw with" afTociates, before he gave. them his last. orders, he

hastened for a moment to the apartment of, his
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved' with tender affedion, and whose beauty
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love.

The noise of the armed men who crowded the BOOK VIIL
court and palace, having long before this I547.
reached her ears, the concluded some hazardous
enterprize to be in hand, and she trembled for"
her husband. He .found her in all the anguifhl
of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now im-
possible to keep his design concealed, he in-
formed her of what he had undertaken. The
profped of a scene so full-of horror as well as
danger, completed her agony; and foreboding
itmmediately in her mind the fatal issue of it, she
endeavoured, by her tears, her entreaties, and
her despair, to divert him from his purpose.
Fiefco, after trying in vain to sooth and to in-
spire her with hope, broke from a situation into
which an excess of tenderness had unwarily fe-
duced him, though it could not shake his refo-
lution. " Farewel, he cried, as he quitted the
apartment, you shall either never fee me more,
or you shall behold to-morrow every thing in
Genoa fubjed to your power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he They attack

allotted each his proper station; some were ap-the city.
pointed to assault and seize the different gates
of the city; some to make themselves masters
of the principal fireets or places of strength :
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the
harbour where Doria's gallies were laid up, as
the post of chief importance, and of greatest

BooK VIII. danger. It was now midnight, and the citizen.

x547. slept in the security of peace, when this band of

confpirators', numerous, desperate, and well-arm.
'ed, rushed out to execute their plan. They fur.
.prifed some of the gates, without meeting with
ahy resistance. .They got poffeffion of others after
a sharp conflii with the soldiers on guard. Ver,
rink, with the galley which had been fitted out

3, against the Turks, blocked up the mouth of

the Darfena or little flarbour where Doria's fleet
lay. All possibility of escape being cut off by
this precaution, when Fiefco attempted to enter
the galleys from the shore to which they were
mnade fast, they were in no condition to make
refinance, as they were not only unrigged- and
disarmed, but had no crew on board, except
the slaves chained to the oar. Every quarter of
the city was now filled with noise and tumult,
all the streets resounding with the cry of Fiefco,
and Liberty. At that name, so popular and be-
loved, many of the lower rank took arms, and!
joined the conspirators. The nobles and parti.
fans of the aristocracy, astonished or affrighted,
shut the gates of their houses, and thought of
nothing but. of securing them from pillage. At
last, the noise excited by this scene of violence
and confusion, reached the palace of Dorian;
Giannetino started immediately from his bed,
and imagining that it was occasioned by some

Simutiny among the sailors, rushed out with a

few attendants, and hurried towards the harBooit VIIE
bour. The gate of St. Thomas, through which 1547.
he had to pass, was already in the poffeffion of
the conspirators, who, the moment he entered,
fell upon him with the utmost fury, and mur-
dered him on the spot. The fame must have
been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de
Fiefco had executed his brother's plan, and had
proceeded immediately to attack him in his pa-
lace; but he, from the sordid consideration of
preventing its being plundered amidst the con-
fusion, having forbid his followers to advance,
Andrew got intelligence of his nephew's death, as
well as of his own danger; and mounting on horse-
back, saved himself by flight. Amidst this gene-
ral consternation, a few senators had the courage
to assemble in the palace of the republick'". At
first, some of the most daring among them at

'

tempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to at-
tack a body of the cpnfpirators; but being relulf-
ed with loss, all agreed that nothing now remained,
but to treat with the party which seemed to be
irresistible. Deputies were accordingly sent to
learn of Fiefco what were the conceflions with
which he would be satisfied, or rather to submit
to whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they aufeof

their rmif-

were empowered to negociate, was no more. arrige.
Just as he was about to leave the harbour, where

49 I1 palazzo della Signoria.

BooI VIII.gevery thing had fiucceeded to his with, that he

S547. might join his vicorious companions, he heard

some extraordinary uproar on board the Ad.
iniral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fear,
ing that the slaves might break their chains,
and overpower his associates, he ran thither;
but the plank which reached from the shore to
the vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
tea, whilst he hurried forward too precipitately.
Being loaded with heavy armour, he funk to
the bottom, and perishe.d in ;the very moment
when he must have taken full poffeffion ds every
thing that his ambitious heart could desire.
Verrina was the first who discovered this fatal
accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its confe.
quences, concealed it with the utmost industry
from every one but a few leaders of the confpi.
racy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the darkness
and confusion of the night, to have kept it sea
cret, until a treaty with the senators Thould have
put the city in the power of the conspirators.
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the
imprudence of Jerome Fiefco, whio, when the
deputies of the senate inquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposals to him, replied, with a childish
'vanity, " I am now the only person to whom
that title belongs, and with me you must treat. "
These words discovered as well to his friends as
to his enemies what had happened, and made

the impression which might have been expeded BooiK VII,
upon both. The deputies, encouraged by this i$47.
event, the only one which could occasion such a
ftdden revolution as might turn to their advan-
tage, assumed instantly, with admirable presence
of mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in
their circumstances, and made high demands.
While they endeavoured to gain time by pro-
trading the negociation, the reft of the senators
were busy in assembling their partisans, and in
forming a body capable of defending the palace
of the republick. On the other hand, the.confpi-
rators, astonished at the death of a 'man whom
they adored and trusted, and placing no confi-
dence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage
die away, and their arms fall from their hands.
That profound and amazing secrecy with which
the conspiracy had been concerted, and which
had contributed hitherto so much to its success,
proved now the chief cause of its miscarriage.
The leader was gone, the greater part of those
who aded under him, knew not his confidents,
and were strangers to the objed at which he
aimed. There was no person among them
whose authority or abilities entitled him to as-
fume Fie fco's place, or to finish his plan; after
having loft the spirit which animated it, life and
ativity d'eferted the whole body. IVMany-of the
conspirators withdrew to their houses, hoping
that amidst the' darkness of the night they had

BOOKR VIII.paffedunobferved, and might remain unknown;

14:7- Ot ers.fOuhttrfor safety by a timely retreat; and

before break ·of daty, most of them fled with pre.
eipitatidon from a city, which, but a few hours be-
fore, was ready to acknowledge them as masters.

Tranquillity NEXT morning every thing was quiet in' Ge.
d in Gehoa. noa ; not an enemy was: to be seen ; few marks

of the violence of the former night appeared,
the conspirators having conduaed their enter.
prize with more noise than :bloodshed, and gain.
ed all their advantages by surprise, rather than
by force, of arms. Towards evening, Andrew
Doria returned to the city, being met by all the
inhabitants, who received him with acclamations
of joyS". Though the disgrace as well as tanger
of the preceding night, were fresh in his mind,
and the mangled body of his kinsman still before
his eyes, such was his moderation as well as
magnanimity, that the decree issued by the fe-
nate against the conspirators, did not exceed that
just measure of severity which was requisite for
the support of government, and was didated
neither by the violence of resentment, nor the
rancour of revenge".

"o Thuan. 9;. Sigonii vita Andres Doria. x 196. La

Conjuration du Comte de Fiefque, par Cardin. de Retz.
Adriani Iftoria, lib. vi. 3 69. Folietfe Conjuratio Jo. Lud.
Fiefci ap. Graev. Thef. Ital. i. 883.

- It. is -remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at the age of

eighteen, composed a history of this conspiracy, containing

AFTER

AFTER taking the necessary precations for BOOK VItL

preventing the flame, which was now so happily ,I 347.
extinguished, from breaking out anew, the fira The ~;Em-e.

- ror alarmed

care of the senate was to fend an ambassador to att iiscron-
the Emperor, to give him a particular detail of piracy.
what had happened, and to beg his assistance *
towards the redudion ofI Montobbjo, a. strong
fort on the hereditary estate of the .Fiefci, in
which Jerome had fhtit himnfelf up. Charles was
no less alarmed than astonished at an event so
strange and lnexpeded. He could not believe
that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever,
dirft have attempted such an enterprize, but on
foreign suggestion, and from the hope of foreign
aid. Being informed that the Duke of Parma
was well acquainted with the plan of the con-
fpirators, he immediately supposed that the Pope
could not be ignorant of a mneafure, which his
son had countenanced. Proceeding from this to
a farther conjedure, which Paul's cautious max-
ims of policy in other instances rendered ex-
tremely probable, he concluded that the French
King must have known and approved of the
design.; and he began to apprehend that this

such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefcd and his enter-
prize, that it is not surprising that a minister, so jealous
and discerning as Richelieu, should be led, by the petufal of
it, to predid~ the turbulent and dangerous Thirit of thla
young Ecclefiaftick. MIem. de Retz, torn. i. p. 3.

VOL . III. Ee

BOOK YIII. spark might again kindle the flame of war which

I 47. had raged so long in Italy. As he had drained
Sufpenrashis his Italian territories of troops on account of

eations the German war, he was, altogether unprovided
i" for resisting any hostile attack in that country;

. and on the first appearance of danger, he must

have, detached thither the greatest part of his
forces for its defence. In this situation of affairs,
it would have been altogether imprudent in the
Emperor, to have advanced in person against the
Eledor, until he ihould learn with some degree
of certainty whether such a scene were not about
to open in -Italy , as might put it out of his
power to keep the field with an army fufficient
to oppose him.

# BOOK IX.

THE

HIR TOR Y

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.

TFHE Emperor's dread of the hofite intentions BooiK iX
of the Pope and French King did not proceed ,s 4
from any imaginary or ill-grounded fufpicioi. Francis iea,
Paul had already given the strongest proofs p, rorl,
both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could power and
not hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip of for0CceF'
long continuance, would behold the great ad-
vantages which he had gained over the confe4
derate Protestants , without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in 1this
conjeature. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefs of his arms wit-h deep concern, and though

Ee

Booi IX.

1547. hithei-to prevented, by circumstances which have

been mentioned, from interposing in, order to
check them, he was now convinced that, if he
didinot mnke some extraordinary and timely
effort, Charles must acquire such a degree of
power as would enbile him to give law to the
reft of Europe. This apprehension, which did
not take its rife from the envy of riyalfhip alone,
but was eintertained bys the Awifeft politicians of
the age, luggefted various expedients which might
serve to retard the course of the Emperor's vido.
ries, and to form by degrees such a combination
ag~inft him as might put a frop to his dangerous

career.

.sNegociates WITH this view ; Francis inftrudted his emif-
pri~ats.faries in Germany to employ all their address in

order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from submitting to the
Emperor. He made liberal offers of his assistance
to the Eledtor and Landgrave., whom he knew
to be the most zealous as well as the most power.
ful of the whole body; he used every argument,
and proposed every advantage which could either
confirm their dread of the Emperor's designs,
or determinie them not tb imitate the inconfide-
rate credulity of their associates, in giving up
their religion and liberties to his disposal. While
he took this step towards continuing the civil
war which raged int Germany, he endeavoured,

likewise, to flir up foreign enemies against the BOOnK I.
Emperor. He solicited Solyman ::to seize :this x157.
favourable opportunity of invading Hungary·, withsoly-
which had been drained of' alli they troops necef-
fary foi. its defence, in order to form the army
against the confederates of Smalkacle. He ,ex-
horted the Pope to repair, by a -vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he 'had been
guilty in contributing to raise the Emperor to
such a formidable height of power. Finding Paul, with the
both from the consciousness of his own mistake, veis;
and his dread of its confequences,' abundantly
disposed to listen to his exhortations, he avail'eiL
himself of this favourable disposition which the
Pontiff began to discover, as an argument· to
gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to convince
,them that nothing could save Italy, and ,even
Europe, from oppreflion and servitude, but their
joining with the Pope and him , in giving the
first beginning to a general confederacy, in order
to humble that ambitious potentate, whom they
had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot these negociations in the with the

southern courts , he turned, his attention next ~'ingsrk
towards those in the 'north of Europe. As the and Eng.
King of Denmark had particular reasons to belana"
offended with the Emperor , Francis imagined
that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had projected; and left

Ee3

.Bdol-X,I cdnfiderations of c.eaution or pruden ce should

r4.7. reifrain him from -joining in it, he attempted to

oveircome these , by offering him the young
Queen of Scots in marriage to his son '. As
the ministers who governed England in the
name of Edward VI. had openly declared them,
selves converts to the opinions of .the Reform,
ers, as soon as it became safe utpon Henry's
death to lay aside that disguise which his unfor.
giving bigotry had forced them to assure,
Francis flattered, himself that their zeal would
not allow them to remain inadtive fpedators of
the overthrow and deftru&ion of those who
profeffdd the fame faith with themselves. He
hoped , that notwithstanding the struggles of
fadio.n incident to a minority, and the profped
of ,an approaching rupture with the. Scots, he,
might prevail on them likewise to take part in
the common cause '.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of ex.

pedients, and exerted himself with such extra.
ordinary adivity, to rouse the different slates
of Europe againif his rival, he did not negled
what depended on himself alone. He levied
troops in all parts of his dominions; he colleCed
military

. stores; he cqntra,rted with the Swiss

a Mem. de Ribier, i. 600. 6o6.

-

^ Mn.m de Ribier, i. 6 35

cantons, for a considerable body of men; he put BooK IX,
his finances in admirable order; he remitted con- 1547.
fiderable sums to the Fledeor and Landgrave; and
took all the others steps neceffarv towards com-
mnencing hostilities, on the shortest warning, and
with the greatest vigour ',

OPERATIONS so complicated, and' which re-The Empe-

quired the putting so many instruments in mo- arely
tion, did not escape the Emperor's observation.
He was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in
the several courts of Europe, as well as of his
domeftick preparations; and sensible how fatal
an interruption a foreign War would prove to
his designs in Germany, he trembled at the pro-
fpedt of that event. The danger, -however, ap-
peared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and wel-direded am-
bition of Solyman, and that he always chose
the season for beginning his military enter-
prifes with prudence equal to the valour with
which he cond'uded them. The, Pope , as
he had good reason to believe, wanted not
preterts to juflify,-a rupture, nor inclination to
begin hostilities. He had already made some
discovery of his sentiments, by expressing a joy
altogether unbecoming the head of the church,
upon receiving an account of the advantage
which the Eledor of Saxony had gained ove.s

a Mem, de Ribier,. i. S9

E e4

3B:oK IX. Albert of Brandenburgh; and as he vwas now

SS47- secure of, fiding:in the French King, an ally of

fufficient power to support him , he was ati no
pains to conceal the violence and extent of his
enmity 4, 'The Venetians, Charles was well
assured, had long observed the growth of his
power with jealousy, which added to the folicita-
tions and promises of France , might at lalt
quicken their flow counsels, and overcome their
2natural caution. The Danes and English, it was
evident, had both peculiar reason to be disgusted,
as welLas strong motives to at against him. But
above all , he dreaded the adive emulation of
Francis hirmfelf, whom he considered as the foul
and mover of any confederacy that could 'be
formed against him; and , as that Monarch had
afforded protedion to Verrina, who failed diredly
to IVIarfeilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefeo's
conspiracy, Charles, expeded every moment the
commencement of those hostile operations in
Italy, of which, he conceived the infurredtion ip
Genoa to have been only the prelude.

a.nwtet., BUT 'while he remained in this fRate of sus-
hope from pence and solicitude, there was one circumstance
the declin
,ing taste Qfwhieh afforded him some profpe& of escaping
'rancis's the danger. ,The French King's health began
health, to decline. A disease, the effed of his- intem-

perance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure ,

SMm. de Ribier, tom. i. 63 7

preyed gradually on his constitution. The pre- BooII IX...
parations for war, as well as the negociations in 1 47.
the different courts, begar to languish, together
with the Monarch wh6oPgave spirit to both.
The Genoese, during that interval, reduced Marchs
Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and
putting him to death, together with his chief
adherents, extinguished all remains of the con-
fpiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in Ger-
many, despairing of timely assistance from
France, submitted to the Emperor. Even the
Landgrave seemed disposed to abandon the Elec-
tor, and to bring matters to aofpeedy accommo-
dation, on such terms as he could obtain. In
the mean time , Charles waited with impatience
the issue of a distemper, which was to decide
whether he .must relinquish all other schemes, in
order to prepare for resisting a combination of,
the greater part of Europe against him, or whe-
ther he might proceed to invade Saxony, with..
out interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious Death of

to his family, that some hiftpriaes have called it Francis, and

refleajions

the Star of the House of Austria, .did not deferton his cha.
him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram-,raer an
bouillet, on the. last day of 'March- in the fifty- whi111P
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of Charles.
his reign. During twenty eight years of that
time, an avowed rivalfhi'p subsisted between

1547. their own dominions, .brt the greater part of

Europe in wars, ,prosecuted with more violent
inimofity, and drav out to a greater length
than .had been known in any former period.
NVIany circumstances contributed to both. Their
ani:mosity was founded in opposition of in.
terest, heightened by personal emulation, and
exasperated not only by mutual injuries, but by
reciprocal insults. At the fame time, whatever
advantage one seemed to poflefs towards gaining
the ascendant, was wonderfully balanced by
some favourable -circumstance, peculiar to the
other. The Emperor's dominions were of great
extent, the French King's lay more coripad;
Francis governed his kingdom with absolute
power; that of Charles was limited, but he sup-
plied the want of authority by address: the troops
of the formererwere more impetuous and enter-
prifing; those of the latter better difcipliiied,
and more patient of fatigue. The talents a^nd
abilities of the two Monarchs. were as different
as the advantages which they poffeffed, and con,
tributed no left to prolong the contest between
them, Francis took his resolutions suddenly,
prosecuted them at first with warmth, and push-
ed them into execution with a most adventurous
courage; but, being destitute of the perseverance
necessary to surmount difficulties, he often aban-
doned his designs, or relaxed the vigour of pur-

ruit, from impatience, and sometimes from le- Booie IX,
vity., Charles deliberated long, and determined 1547

"

.with coolness; but having once fixed his plan,
he adhered to it w~ith iniexible obstinacy, and
neither danger nor discouragement could turn
him aside from the execution of it. The success
of their enterprizes was as different as their cha-
rad6ers, and was uniformly influenced by them.
Francis, by his impetuous ativity, often dif.
concerted the Emperor's best laid ichemes;
Charles, by a more calm but steady prosecution
of his designs, checked the rapidity of his rival's
career, and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous
efforts. The former, at the opening of a war
or of a campaign, broke in upon his enemy with
the violence of a torrent, and carried all before
him; the latter, waiting until he saw the force
of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the
end not only all that he had loft, but made. new
acquisitions. Few of the French Monarch's at-
tempts towards conquest, whatever promising
aspeCt they might wear at firft," were conduted
to an happy issue; many of the Emperor's en-
terprizes, even after they appeared desperate and
impradicable, terminated in the most prosperous
manner. Francis was dazzled with the' fplen-
dour of ahi undertaking; Charles was allured
Sby the profpedt of its turning to his advantage,

B6o:KiTlX THE degree, however, of their comparative
'1547. meriit and reputation has not been fixed either

by a striCt scrutiny into their abilities for govern-
ment, or by an impartial consideration of the
greatriefs and success of their undertakinigs;
and Francis is one of those Monarchs who
occupies a higher rank in the temple of Fame,
than either his talents or performances entitle
him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed to
many different circumstances.- The fuperio-
rity which Charles acquired by the viaory of
Pavia, and which from that period he pre-
served through the remainder of his reign, was
so snanifeft, that Francis's struggle against his
exorbitant and growing dominion was viewed
by most of the other powers, not only with the
partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but .with
the favour due to one who was resisting a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to
a Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
charaders of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government; but upon their
qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the
many 'errors conspicuous in his foreign policy
and domeftick administration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, .generous. - He ,poffeffed
dignity without pride; affability free from mean-
ness; and courtesy exempt from deceit. All

who had access to him, and no man of merit BooK IX:
was ever denied that privilege, refpeded and 54.7.
loved him. Captivated with his personal qua-
lities, his fubjeds forgot his defeds as a MIo-
narch, and admiring him as the most accom-
plifhed and amiable gentleman in his dominions,
they hardly murmured at ads of male-admini-
ftration, which, in a Prince of less engaging dif-
positions, would have been deemed unpardon-
able. This admiration, however, must have
been temporary only, and would have died away,
with the courtiers who bestowed it; the illusion
arising from his private virtues must have
ceased, and posterity would have judged of his
publick conduct with its usual impartiality; but
another circumstance prevented this , and his
name hath been transmitted to posterity with in-
creasing reputation. Science and the arts had,
at that time, made little progress in France.
They were just beginning to advance beyond the
limits of Italy, where they had revived, and
which had hitherto been their only feat. Francis
took them immediately under his proteAion, and
vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and miuni-
ficence with which he encouraged them. · He
invited learned men to his court, .he conversed
with themi familiarly, he employed them in bu-
finefs, he raised them to offices of dignity, and
honoured them with his confidence. That race
of men, not more prone to complain when de-
nied the refped to which they fa~ncy themselves

0

~DOor IX. entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated
. 1547 with the diftincion which they confider as their

due, thought they could not exceed in gratitude
to such. a -benefacTor, and strained their inven.
tion, - and \employed all their ingenuity in pane,
gyrick. Succeeding authors, warmed with their
descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted their
encomiums, and refined upon them. The ap.
pellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred among
historians:; and they seem to have regarded it as
a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defeAs. Thus Francis, notwith.
standing his inferior abilities, and want of fuc.
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of
Charles. The virtues which he poffeffed as a
man,, have entitled him to greater admiration
and praise, than have been bestowed upon the
extensive genius, and fortunate arts of a more
capable, but less amiable rival.

Effeas of BY his death, a considerable change was made,
ranis's in the state of Europe. Charles, grown old in

the arts of government and command, had now
to contend only with younger MVionarchs, who
could not be regarded as an equal match for
.him, who had stood the encounter with Henry
VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honour
in all those different contests. By this event, he
was eased of all his disquietude, and was happy
'to find; that he might begin with £afety those

operations against the Ele-tor of Saxony, which
he had hitherto been obliged to suspend. He
knew the abilities of Hebry II. who had just
mounted the throne of France, to be greatly
inferior to those of his father, and foresaw that
he would be so much occupied for some time
in displacing the late King's ministers, whom he-
hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands
of his own favourites, that he had nothing to
dread, either from his personal efforts, or from
any confederacy which this unexperienced Prince
could form. Bo~oi I'X.

P'$47.

BUT as it was uncertain how long such an Chares

1 rmarches as

interval of security might continue, Charles de-gainit the
termined instantly to improve it: and as soon as Eleior of
he heard of Francis's demise, he b.egan his march apni 3.
from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the
departure of the papal troops, together with
the retreat of the Flemings, had so much dimi-
nifhed his army, that sixteen thousand men were
all he could assemble. With this inconsiderable
body he set out on an expedition, the event of
which was to decide what degree of authority
he should possess from that period in Germany:
but as this little army consisted chiefly of the
veteran Spanish and Italian bands, he did not,
in trusting to them commit much to the deci-
sion of chance; and even with so small a force
he had reason to entertain the most fanguipe

iJ5~47b levied an army greatly superior in number, but

ineither the experience and discipline of 'his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to
be compared with those of the Emperor, The
'Eledor, betides, had already been guilty of an
error, which deprived him of all the advantage
which he might have derived: from his fupe.
riority in number, and was alone fufficient to
have occasioned his ruin. Instead of keeping
his forces united, he detached one great body
towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to
facilitate his jundion with the malecontents of
that kingdom, and cantoned a condfiderable part
of what remained in different places of Saxony,
where he expeded the Emperor would make
the' first impression, vainly imagining that thde
open towns, with small garrisons, might" be ren-
dered tenable against an enemy.

Progrerfsor- THE Emperor entered the southern frontier
his arms. Of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfter.

'The folly of the measure which the Eledor had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted
in that town surrendering without resistance; ,add
those in' all the other places between that and
the Elbe, either imitated theiir example, or fled
as the Imperialists approached. Charles, that
-they might not recover from the panick with
which they seemed to be struck, advanced with-

out

out Jofing a moment. The Elctor, who had BooK IXr
fixed his head-quarters at Meissen, continued xS47.
in his wonted state of flutuation and uncertain-
ty. He even became more uindetermined, in
proportion as the danger drew near, and called
for prompt and decisive resolutions. Sometimes
he aded, as if he had resolved to defend the
banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a battle with
the enemy, as soon as the detachments which he
had called in were able' to join him. At other
times, he abandoned this as rath and perilous,
seeming to adopt the more prudent counsels of
those who advised him to endeavour at protrat-
ing the war, and for that end to retire under
the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Im-
perialifts could not attack him without manifest
disadvantage, and where he might wait, in
safety, for the succours which he expeded from
Mecklenburgh, Pomerania, and the Protestant
cities on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either
of these plans , he broke down the bridge at
Meissen, and marched along the east bank of the
Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew,
and, after much hesitation, adopted one of these
middle schemes, which are always acceptable to
feeble minds incapable of deciding. He left a
detachment at IVuhlberg .to oppose the Imperi-
alifts, if they should attempt to pass at that place,
and advancing^a few miles with his main body,
encamped there in expedtation of the event, ac-

VOL. III. Fs

BioK IX. cording to which he proposed to regurate his

x1547. subsequent motions.

Paires the CHARLES,' meanwhile, pushing forward in.
"see. . ceffantly, arrived" the evening of the, twenty.

third of April on the banks of the Elbe, opposite
to Muhlberg. . The river, at that place, was
three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet
,in depth, its current rapid, and the bank poffeff.
ed by the Saxons was higher than that which
he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all
these obstacles, he called together his general
'officers, and, without alking their opinions, com-
municated to them his intention of attempting
next morning to force his passage over the river,
-and to attack the enemy wherever he could come
up with them. They all expressed their afto0.
nilhment at stich a bold resolution, and even.
the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring and'
impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony, notwith.
standing his impatience to crush his rival the
Elector, rernonftrated earnestly against it. But
the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment
or good-fortune, paid no regard to their argu-
ments, and gave the orders necessary for execut-
ing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spgnifh

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incessant fire upon the .enemrhy. The

Jong heavy muskets used in that age; did execu-
tion on the opposite bank, and many of the fob
diers hurried on by martial ardour in order to
get nearer the enemy, rushed into the ftrearn,
and advancing breaft-high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effet. Under
cover of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun.
to be laid for the infantry, and a peasant hav-
ing undertaken to conduct the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was wvell ac-
quainted, they also were put in motion. 'The
Saxons ported in MVluhlberg endeavoured to ob-
ftrua these operations , by a brisk fire from a
battery which they had ereted; but as a thick
.fog covered all the low grounds upon the
river, they could not take aim with any cera
tainty, and the Imperialists ftiffered very little ;
at the fame time the Saxons being much galled
by the Spaniards and Italians , they set on
fire some boats which had been colleted near
the village, and prepared to retire. The lm-
periahfts perceiving this , ten Spanish soldiers
inftantlV stript themselves , and holding their
swords with their teeth, swam across the river,
put to, flight such of the Saxon, as ventur d to
oppose them, saved from the flames as many
boats as were fifficient to complete theii owni
bridge, and by this spirited and fucc fsful aaiorn
encouraged their companions no less thari they
intimidated the enemy;

* ft£ fldott ~Txi~-

I547g'a

BOOKi IX. BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper hav

1547. ing a foot soldier behind him, began to enter

the river, the light horse marching in the front
followed by the men at arms, whom the Emp
ror led in person, mounted on a Spanish horse
:dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carrying a jave.
lin in his hand. Such a numerous body ftrug.
gling through a great river, in wvhich, accord.
ing to the directions of their guide, they weie
obliged to make several turns, sometimes tread.
'ing on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions, whom they left
-behind, a fpedacle equally magnificenit and in.
terefling '. Their courage, at last, surmount.
ed every obstacle, no man betraying any fymp.
-tom of fear, when the Emperor shared in the
:danger no less than the meanest soldier. The
moment that they reached the opposite fide,
Cha~rles, without waiting the arrival of the reft
of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with
:him, who, flushed with their good fortune, and
`despising an enemy who had negleted to op-
,pose them, when it might have been done with
<fuch advantage, mnade no account of their fupe-
rior nu'mbers, and marched on as to a certain
victory.

-AV'TIla, .,a

DURING all these operations, which neceffa- BooR IX.
rily confumed' much time, the EleAtor remained x i 47.
inactive in his camp; and from a;n infatuation m condua

S of the Elec»

which appears to be so amazing , that the best, t.
informed 'hiftorians impute it to the treacherous
arts of his' generals, who deceived him by false
intelligence, he would not believe that the Em-
peror had passed the river, or could be so near
at hand ". Being convinced, at last, of his fa- 4
tal mistake, by the concurring testimony of eye-
witnesses, he gave orders for retreating towards
Wittemberg. But a German army, encumbered,
as usual, with baggage and artillery, could not
be put -suddenly in motion. They had just be-
gun to march when the light troops of the ene-
my came in view, and the Elecor saw an en-
gagement to be unavoidable. As he was no
less bold in adion than irresolute in council, he
made the disposition for battle with the' greatest nattlc of
presence of mind, and in the most proper man- Mulaher.
ner; taking advantage of a great forest to cover
his wings, so as to prevent his being surround-
ed by the enemy's cavalry, which were far more
numerous than his own. 'I'he Emperor, like-
wife. ranged his men in order as they came up,
and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with
few but efficacious words to do their duty. It
was with a very differenL spirit that the two ar-

' Camerar. ap. Freher. ,iii 493.. Struv. corp. hit,

Germ. 1047. 1049.

Fs3

Beo!K X. mies advanced to the charge. As the day, wvich

147.7 had hitherto been ,dark and cloudy, happened

to clear up.'at that moment, this accidental cir,
cumftance made an impression on the different
parties corresponding to the, tone of their minds;
the Saxons , furprnfed and difheartened, felt
pain .at being exposed fully to the view of the
enemy; the imperiahfts, being now secure that

* the PIroteftant forces could not escape from

" - them , rejoiced at the return of sun-shine, as a

certain prelage of vicory. TIhe Thock of bIttle
would not have been long or doubtful, if the
personal courage which the [ ledor displayed,
together with the adivity which he exerted from
the moment that the approach of the- enemy
rendered an engagement certain, and cut offall
possibility of helitation, had not revived in some
degree the spirit of his troops. They repulsed
the Hungarian light horse who began the at,
tack, and received with firmness the men at
arms' who next advanced to the charge; but as
there were the flower of the Imperial army, were
commanded by experienced officers, and fought
under the Fmperor's eye, the Saxons soon be.
gan to give way, and the light troops rallying
at ~he fame time and falling on their flanks, the
,flight became general. A small body of chosen

Ti'e Eeaonfoldiers, among whom the Eledor had foughl
defeated, in person , 'till continued to defend themselves
and taken to e their by
naisE. aidd qndeavoured to save their marter by reutirin

into the forest; but being surrounded on every BOOK IX,
fide, the Eledor, wounded in the face, exhaust-

• I47.

ed with fatigue, and perceiving all resistance to
be vain, surrendered himself a prisoner. He
was conduded immediately towardsethe Empe-
ror, whom he found just returned from the pur-
suit, standing on the field of battle in the full
exultation of success, and receiving the con-
gratulations of his officers, upon this complete
vidory obtained by his valour and condut,
Even in such an unfortunate and humbling situ-
ation, the Eledtor's behaviour was equally mag-
nanimous and decent. Sensible of his condition,
he approached his conqueror without any of the
sullenness or pride, which would have been im-
proper in a captive; and conscious of his own
dignity, he descended to "no mean submission,
unbecoining the high station which he held
among the German Princes. " The fortune of
war, said he, has made me your prisoner, most
gracious Emperor, 'and I hope to be treated'*
- Here, Charles harshly interrupted him
"And am I then, at last, acknowledged to beHi harsh
Emperor? Charles of Ghent was the only title he Ene, Y
you lately allowed me. You shall be treated asror. -
vou deferve." At these words, he turned from
him abruptly. with an haughty air. To this
cruel repulse, the King of the Romans added
reproaches in his own name, using expressions
still more ungenerous and insulting. The Elec-

- F, f 4

s0oK IX.. tor made no reply; but, with an unaltered
1547. countenance, which discovered neither astonish,

ment nor dejetion, accompanied the Spaniaf
soldiers appointed to guard him '.

Charles's THIS decisive vialory colt the Imperialists
rogref only fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons
viaory. were killed, chiefly in. the pursuit, and a greater

number taken prisoners. About four hundred
kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg,
together with the eledoial Prince, who had
likewise been wounded in the adion. After
resting two days in the field of battle, partly to
refresh his army, and partly to receive the de.
puties of the adjacent towns; which were impa-
tient to secure his protection by submitting to
his will, the Emperor began to move towards
WVittemberg, that he might terminate the war.
at once, by the reduction of that city. The
unfortunate Eletor was carried along in a fort
of triumph, and exposed every where, as a cap-
tive, to his own fubjets ; a fpedacle extremely
affli'ing to them who both honoured and loved
him; though the insult was to far from fubdu.
ing his firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the
wonted tranquillity and composure of his mind.

' Sleid. hist. 426. Thuan. ,16. Hortenfius de Bello

German. ap. Scard. vol. ii. 498. Defcript. Pugnm Muhl-
berg. ibid. p. 509 P. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. xii. c. 1,3-
p. 298.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, Booi fX,
of the electoral branch of the Saxon family, was IS47.
one of' the strongest cities in Germany , and nvefts Wit-
could not be taken, if properly defended, with- temherg.
out great difficulty , the Emperor marched
thither with the utmost dispatch, hoping that
while the consternation occasioned by his viAory
was frill recent', the inhabitants might imitate
the example of their countrymen, and submit
to his power, as soon as he appeared before
their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the EleAor's
wife, a woman no less dirfinguifhed by her abi-
lities than her virtue, instead of abandoning
herself to tears and lamentation upon her hus-
band's misfortune , endeavoured by her ex-
ample as well as exhortations, to animate the
citizens.: She inspired them with such refolu-
tion , that, when summoned to surrender, they
returned a vigorous answer, warning the Em-
peror to behave towards their sovereign with
the refped due to his rank, as they were deter-
mined to treat Albert of Brandenburgh, who was
fRill a prisoner , precisely in the fame manner
that he treated him. The spirit of the inhabi-
tants no less than the ftrengthi of the city seemed
now to render a siege in form necessary. After
such a signal vidory it would have been disgrace-
ful not to have undertaken it, though at the fame
time the Emperor was destitute of every thing
requisite for carrying it on. But AMaurice re-

BOOK IX. moved all difficulties, by engaging to furnifih

1947. proviGons, artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and

whatever else should be needed. Trusting to
this, Charles gave orders to open the trenches
before the town. It quickly appeared, that
Maurice's eagerness to reduce: the capital of
those dominions, which he expeced as his re.
ward for taking arms against his kinsman, and
deserting the Protestant cause, had led him to
promise what exceeded his power to perform,
A battering train was, indeed, carried safely
down the Elbe from Dresden to, Wittemberg;
but as Maurice had not fufficient force to pre.
serve a secure communication between his. ter.
ritories and the camp of the besiegers, Count
Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of eledo-
ral troops, destroyed a convoy of provisions and,
military stores, and dispersed a band of pioneers,
destined for the service of the Imperialists. This
put a flop to the progress. of the siege, and con-
vinced the Emperor, that as he could not rely
on Maurice's promises, recourse ought to be
had to some more expeditious as well as more
certain method of getting poffeffion of the
town."

The Empe. THE unfortunate Eledor was in his bands,
ror's nge- and. Charles was ungenerous and hard-hearted
nerous treat- .
mentofthe enough to take advantage of this, in order to
Eleaor. make an experiment whether he might not bring

about his design, by working upon the tender- Booi IA,
jpefs of a wiie for her husband, or upon the piety T47.
of children towards their-- parent. With this
view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to
open the gates, letting her know that if she
again refused to comply, the Eledor should
answer with his head for her obstinacy. To
convince her that this was not an empty threat,
he brought his prisoner to an immediate trial.
The proceedings against him were as irregular
as the stratagem -was barbarous. Instead of
consulting the states of the' Empire, or remit-
ting the cause to any court, which, according
to the German constitution, might have legally
taken cognizance of the Eledor's crime, he sub-
jeAed the greaieft Prince in the Empire to the
jurifdidion of a court-martial, composed of
Spanish and Italian officers, and in which the
unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit inflrument for
any ad of violence, presided. This strange 1ay io.
tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of the
Empire which had been issued againit the pri-
foner, a sentence pronounced by the sole autho-
rity of the Emperor, and deflitute of every
legal formality which could render it valid;
but prefauming him to be thereby manifestly
convided of' treason and rebellion, the court-
martial condemned him to fuffer death by being
beheaded. ' This decree- was intimated to the
,!edor while amusing himself in playing at

B6do. IX. chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow.

, 147. prisoner. He paused for 'a moment, though
The Elec- without discovering any symptom either of

lanimity. "firprife or terror; and after taking notice of

the irregularity as well as injustice of the Em.
peror's proceedings; "It is easy, continued he,
to comprehend his scheme. I must die, because
Wittemberg will not surrender; and I shall lay
down my life with pleasure, if, by that facri-
fice_, I can preserve the dignity of my house,
and- transmit to my posterity the inheritance
which belongs to them. Would to God, that
this sentence rmay not affect my wife and chil-
dren more than it intimidates me! and that they,
for the fake of adding a few days to a life al-
ready too long, may not renounce honours and
territories which they were born to possess !"'
He then turned .to his antagonist , whom he
challenged to continue the game. He played
with his usual attention and ingenuity, and hav-
ing beat Ernest , expressed all the fatisfadtion
which is commonly felt on gaining such vito-
ries. After this he withdrew to his own apart-
ment, that he might employ the reft of his time
in such religious exercises as were proper in his
situation ".

IT was not with the fame indifference, or

composure, that the account of the Eledor's

* Thuan. i. 14z. 9 Struvii corpus, iogo.

dange'r was received in Wittemberg. - Sybilla, Book 5X-
who had supported with fach undaunted' forti- ix 47.
tude her hufband's misfortunes, while she ima-The distress

o ofhis fa.

gined that they could reach no farther than to di- mnily
minifl his power or territories, felt all her refolu-
tion fail as soon as his life was threatened. So-
licitous to save that, she despised every other
consideration ; and was willing to make any
sacrifice, in order to appease an 'incenfed con-
queror. t the fame time, the Duke of Cleves,
the Eledor of Brandenburgh, and Maurice, to
none of om Charles had communicated the
true motives of his violent proceedings againat
the Eletor, interceded warmly with him to
spare his life. The firlt was prompted to do so
merely by compassion for his sifter, and regard
for his brother-in-law. The two other dreaded
the universal reproach that they would incur,
if, after having boasted so often of the ample
security which the Emperor had promised them
with refped to their religion, the first effec of
their union with him should be the public exe-
cution of a Prince, who was justly held in re-
verence as the most zealous prote2or of the Pro-
teftant cause. MPaurice, in particular, foresaw
that he must become the objet of detestation to
the Saxons,, and could never hope to govern
them with tranquillity, if he were considered by
them as accessary to the death of his nearest

BOOK IX. kinsman,. in order that he might obtain [poTfer.

S547. sion of his dominions.

Hik treaty WHILE they, from such various motives, so.
with licited Charles, with the most earnest importu.
Charles,

..

by which nity, not to execuite the sentence; Sybilla, and
he olrrn-. his children, conjured the Eledtor, by letters
ders the.

eaorate, as well as messengers, to scruple at no concef.

sion that would extiicate him out of the present
danger, and deliver them from their fears and
anguish on his account. The Empr-or, peir
ceiving that the expedient which h ad tried
began to produce the effe'gt that he" Intended,
fell by degrees from his former rigour, and al.
lowed himself to soften into promi:es of cle-
mency and forgiveness , if the Elledtor would
shew himself worthy of his favour by submit-
ting to reasonable terms. The Eiedor, on whom,
the consideration of what he might fuffer himself
hlad made no imnpreffion, was melted by the tears,

bIayi9. of a wife whom he loved, and could not refiit the

intreaties of his family. In compliance with
their repeated folicitations, he. agreed to articles
of accommodation, which he would otherwise
have rejeaed with disdain. 1 he chief of them
were, that 'he flhould resign the Eledtoral dig.
*nity, as well for himself as for his pofteri.y,
into the Emperor's hands, to be disposed of en-
tirely at his pleasure; that he should instantly
put the Imperial troops in poffefiion of the cities

of Wittemberg and Gotha; that he should set BooK IX.
Albert of Brandenburgh at liberty without ran- xI47.
fom; that he ihould submit to the decrees of
the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in what-
ever reformation the' Emperor Thould make in
the constitution of that court; that he should
renounce all leagues againif the Emperor or
King of the Romans, and enter into no alliance
for the future, in which they were not compre-
hended.1 In return for these important concef-"
fions, the Emperor not only promised to spare
his life, but to fettle on him and his posterity
the city of Gotha and its territories, together
with an annual pension of fifty thousand florins
payable out of the revenues of the eledorate;
and likewise to grant him a fum in ready money
to be applied towards the discharge of his debts.
Even these articles of grace were clogged with an" remain,
the mortifying condition of his remaining the
Emperor's prisoner during the reft of his life ".
To the whole, Charles had fubjoined , that he
should submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points
in religion; but the Elecor, though he had
been persuaded to sacrifice all the objeds which
men commonly hold to be the dearest and most
valuable, was inflexible with regard to this
point; and neither threats nor intreaties could

'' Sleid. 427. Thuan. i. 14z. Du Monts Corps Di-

plom. iv. p.

x . 332

i~oo IX. prevail to, make him renounce what he deemed

I .47. to be truth, or persuade him to ad in oppofi.

tion to the di&ates of his conscience.

Mauriceput ~ As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out
in poffemoionf Wittemberg , the Emperor fulfillkd his en.
of the Elec- .
toral domi. gag~ements to Maurice; and in reward for his
nions. merit -in having deserted the' Protestant cause,

and having contributed with such success to.
·wards the dissolution of the Smalkaldick league,
he gave him poffeffion of that city, together
with all the other towns in the eledorate. It
was not without reluctance, however, that he
,made such a sacrifice; the extraordinary success
;of his arms had begun to operate, in its utual
manner, upon his ambitious mind, suggesting
new and vast projects for the aggrandizement of
his family, towards the accomplishment of which
,the retaining of Saxony would have been of the
aitmoft consequence. But as this scheme was
not then ripe for execution, he durst not, yet
venture to disclose it; nor would it have bedn
either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice,
at that junAure , by such a manifest violation
of all the promises, which had seduced him to
abandon his natural allies.

Negocia. THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was
tionswith still in arms; and though now left alone to
the Land-
grave, .maintain .the Protefiant cause, was neither a

feeble

feeble nor contemptible enemy.- His dominions BOOK IX.
Were of considerable extent; his fubjeds ani-- I47.
mated with zeal for the Reformation; and if he
could have held the Imperialists at bay for a
flhort time, he had much to hope from a party
whose strength was still unbroken, whose union
as well as vigour might return, and which had
reason to depend, with certainty, on being es-
fertually supported by the King of France..
The Landgrave thought not. of any thing so
bold or adventurous;; but being seized with the
fame confiernation which had taken poffeffion
of his associates, he was intent, only;, how to
procure favourable terms from the Emperor,
whom he viewed as a conqueror to whose will
there was a necessity of submitting. Maurice
encouraged this tame and pacifick spirit, by mag-
ntifying, on the one hand, the Emperor's power;
by boasting, on the other, of his own interest
with his vidorious ally; and. by representing
the advantageous conditions which he could not
fail of obtaining by his intercession for a friend,
whom he was so solicitous to save. Sometimes
the' Landgrave was induced to place such un-
bounded confidence in his promises, that he was
impatient to bring matters to a final accommo-
dation. On other occaiions, the Emperor's ex-
orbitant ambition, restrained neither by the
scruples of decency, nor the maxims of justice,
together with the recent and shocking proof

VOL. IIL. G

BooKIX. xwhich he had, given of ,this in' his treatment of
x. s47,. the Eledor of: Saxony, came so full into his

thoughts , and nmadei such a lively impression on.
them, thate he broke~ off abruptly the negocia.,
tions whicch he had begun; seeming to be con-
vinced that it was more prudent to depend for
safety on his. own arms -thajn. to confide in
Charles's; geierofity. But- this bold resolution,
which ,despair had fuggefied

. to an impatient

spirit, fretted by disappointments, was not of
I9ng contiriuance. Upon: a inore deliberate fur.-
Vey of the.. enemy's power, as well. as his own
yeaknefs, his, doubts and .fears returned upon,
him, and\ toge~ther with them the spirit of nego,
ciating, and the desire of accomnmodation.

The condi- MAURICE, and the Eledor of. Brandenburgh,
tions pre- a&ed as Miediators between .him and the Em-.
* ^^fcrlbed by , - -'1
; phe Em,- peror; and after all that the former had vaunt--
. eror. ed of his influence, the conditions prescribed to
S... the Landgrave were extremely rigorous., The

" articles with regard to his renouncing the league
of Smialkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's
authority, and submitting to the decrees of the
Imperial chamber, were| the fame which had
been imposed on the Eledor of Saxony._ Be-
sides these, he was required to surrender his per-.
son and territories to the Emperor; 'to implore
for pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred
and fifty thousand crowns towards defraying

The expences of the:: war ; to demoliffh the forti- BooK IX
fitations ofi all the towns in his dominions ex- ,,47o
dept 'one; to1 :oblige the garrison -which he
•plac'ed in it to take an oath of. fidelity to. the

:m-pei:or~': o iallow a free ;passage- through his
iterritories to the. Imperial troops 'atsl often as it
hkli:-be demahded'; to' deliver! up. all his artit-
lery and,- ammunition to: the Emperor; to set art
liberty., :'without ransom ,- ienry of Bruiafwick,
together with the: other prisoners. whom he had
taken during the war; and neither to take armrs
himself, nor to permit any of his fubj.eds to' serve
,againt the Emperor or his allies for the fu-

II

tu re

-

.

-

.. - i.

S'HE Landgrave ratified. these articles,. though To wliicih
-with the- utmost reludtance-, .as- they contained he fbmitzn
no stipulati-on with regard -to the manner in
-wh'ich he was to be treated, and: left .him en-
tirely at : the :Emperor's mericy. NecefTity, how-
ever, comp'etled him to give .his .assent. Charles,
-who had afftiimed' the haughty: and- imperious
;tone of a· :conqiueior, ever since 'tthe redu&ibn of
Saxony, insisted on an unconditional submission,
;and would permit nothing to be added to the
'terms-: which- he had prefcruibed, that could: in
any degree limit the iefs.-ofihiss powet, or re-
strain him from behaving as he saw rteet to-

" Sleid. 430. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.

BOOK IX:. wards a. Prince :whom he regardIed as absolutely

S547. at his disposal. But though he would not vouch,

Sfalfe .to .negociate:with the Landgrave, on such
affooting:of -]quality, as 'to fuffer..any article, to
.be iiferted:T among those which he, ,had1 didated
to:.him, that it-could .be considered as a formal
-Atipulation for. u the ,security :and -freedom :,of his
person ; he, or his ·ministers in his name, gave
the- lee or of ,Brandenburgh : and MIaurice fueHg
'full vfatisfatione with regard to' this point, that
they affuired the Landgrave that:,Charles would
behave to ,him ini:the fame way as he had dosne
to the Duke 6f ;W:urtemberg, and w~ould allow
him, whenever he had made his submission, to
* return to his own territories. U'pjn finding -the
- andrgrave .to be. still poffeffebd with his .formner
.suspicions. of the; -Emperor's intentions, and un-
wiling to trust. verbal or ambiguous declara-
tions', iin ai matter of such essential concern as
his -own liberty, they sent him a bond' signed by
them: both, : containing the most solemn obliga.
tions, that if; any violence whatffoever were of-
:fered to his person, during his:intgrview with
thel, Emperor - they would

, infttantly surrender

themselves to .his' sons , and remain in their
bands to be treated-.by them in the:fame manner
#s the Emperor fhbuld t t him.

,

", Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. . px. &3

THIS, together with the indispensable obligation BOOK IX.
ofperformming what wascontained in the articles of 154·7.
vihich he had accepted, removed his doubts andlie reirs
scruples, or made it necessary to get over them:perial court.
He repaired , for that purpose, to -the Imperial
camp at Hall in; Saxony, where a circumftan<ce
occurred which revived his suspicions and in-
creased his fears. Just as he was about to enter
the chamber of presence, in order to make his
publick submission to the Emperor, a copy of
the articles which he had approved of was put
into his hands, in order that he might ratify
them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived
that the Imperial ministers had added two new
artieles; one importing, that if any dispute
thould arise concerning the meaning of the for-
mer conditions, the Emperor ihould have the
right of putting what interpretation upon them
he thought most reasonable; the other , that
the Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly
to the decisions of the council of Trent. This
unworthy artifice, calculated to surprise him
into an approbation of articles, to which he
had not the most distant idea of assenting, by
proposing them to him at a time when his mind
was engrossed and difquieted with the thoughts
of that humbling ceremony which he had to
perform, filled the Landgrave with indignation,
and made him fly out into all those violent ex-
preffions of rage to which his temper was prones

Gg3

B'd,:IEX. With some fdic.u.~it , th'e E1edtariT of Branden.

1547. biwgh:and Mauries prevailedI .atIlengthj on .the

: Emperor's miiiers.::to dropthe- fopainer artic

..a
. u.a jusft, and- to explain, :the latter *in such a

mian4ier thtat he -could agree so..^ it, 'without
openily, renounjcing the Protetaht: reelgio, n. .

The man- ..,.THIS obftacle.being fuarmoupmted, the Land.
iier in which ; * *
the Empe- grave was,. impatient to fini a. ceremony which,
ror received how mortifying fpoever ; h,ad bteen declared ne-
1him' ceffary. towarids his obtaining pardon. Th?

Emperor was. seated on :a, nagnificent throne,
.wit(i all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded
P y-.a numerous train of the, Princes of the Exm
pire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick,
lately the .Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a,
sudden reverse of fortune a fpedator of his.
humiliation. The Landgrave was introduced
with great solemnity and, advancing towards
the throne, fell, upon his knees. His chancel.
10r, -who walked behind' him, immediately read,
by his mafter's command, a paper which con.
tained an, humble confeffion of the crime where-
of he bad. been guilty; an acknowledgment
that he had merited on that account the most
severe puniflhent; an absolute resignation of
himself and hiss dominions to be disposed of at
the Emperor's pleasure; a fabmiffive petition
for pardon, !his hopes of which were founded
entirely on the Emperor's clemency; and it

concluded with promises of behaving, -for the BooK 1X.
future,\like a fubjed, whose principles of loyalty 'i54'7
and obedience would-be confirmed, and would
even derive new force from th- sentiments of
gratitude which must hereafter fill and animate
his heart. While the chancellor was reading
*this abjed declaration, the eyes of all the spec-
tators were fixed .on the unfortunate Landgrave;
few could behold a Prince, so powerful as well
as high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture
of a supplicant, without being touched with
commiseration, and perceiving serious reflec-
tions arise in their minds upon the instability
and emptiness of human grandeur. The Em-
peror viewed the whole tranfadion with an
haughty unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profound silence himself, made a sign to one of
his secretaries to read his answer; the tenor of
which was, That though he might have justly
inflided on him the grievous punishment which
Bis crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his own
generosity, moved by the folicitations of several
Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and influ-
enced by his penitential acknowledgments,
he would not deal with him according to the
rigour of justice, and would fubjet him to no
penalty that was not specified in the articles
which he had already subscribed. The moment
the secretary had finished, Charles turned away
abruptly, without deigning to give the unhappy

Gg4

BooKI-IX. suppliant any sign of compassion or reconcile2

3547. ,ment. He.did not even desire him to rife from

his knees; which the Landgrave having ven.

: :tured to do unbidden, advanced towards the

.Emperor with an intention to kiss his hand,
flattering,himfelf, that his guilt being now fully
expiated, he might presume to take that liberty.
But the Elector of Br ndenburgh perceiving that
this familiarity would be offenfive to the Em-
peror, interposed, and desired the Landgrave to
go along with him an -MN1aurice to the Duke of
Alva's apartments in the castle.

HE was received and entertained by that

nobleman with the refpedt and courtesy due to
such a guest. But, after supper, while he was
engaged in play, the Duke took the Eledor
and Maurice aside, and communicated to them,
the Emperor's orders, that the Landgrave must
remain a priforier in that place under the cuf-

He is Ae-tody of a Spanish guard. As they had not
tai~ed a hitherto entertained the most distant furpicion
prisoner. of the Emperor's sincerity or reditude of in-

tention, their surprise was excessive, and their
indignation not inferior to it, on discovering
how greatly they had heen deceived themselves,
and how infamously abused, in having been made
the instruments of deceiving and ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to
arguments and to intreaties, in order to save

themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate BooK IX.
him out of the wretched situation into which he 1547.
had been betrayed by too great confidence in
them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflex-
ible, and pleaded the necessity of executing the
Emperor's commands. By this time it grew"
late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of
what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in which
he was entangled, prepared for departing, when
the fatal orders were intimated to him. He
was struck dumb at first with astonishment, but
after being silent a few moments, he broke out
into all the violent expressions, which horror at
injustice accompanied with fraud naturally fug-
gefts. He complained, he expoftulated, he ex-
claimed; sometimes inveighing against the Em-
peror's artifices as unworthy of a great and
generous Prince; sometimes censuring the cre-
dulity of his" friends in trusting to Charles's infi-
dious promises; sometimes charging them with
meanness in stooping to lend their assistance to-
wards the execution of such a perfidious and dif-
honourable scheme; and in the end he required
them to remember their engagements to his
children, and instantly to fulfil them. They,
after giving way for a little to the torrent of his
paflion, solemnly asserted their own innocence
and upright- intention in the whole tranfadion,
and encouraged him to hope, that, as loon as
they saw the Emperor, they would obtain re<

BO6K IX. dress of an injury, which affected their own

I547. honour , no less than it did his -liberty. At the

fame time, in order to sooth his rage and im.

.. patience-, MIVaurice. remained with him during

the night, in the apartment where he was con.
Sfined 13.

The Eleaor NEXT morning, the Eledor and Maurice ap.

"of aI en- plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the
aurice so. infamy to which they would be exposed through.
cJiilt ivain out. Germany, if the Landgrave were detained
berty. in custody; that they would not have advised,

nor would he himself have consented to an inter-
view, if they had fufpeaed that the loss of his
liberty was to be the consequence of his fubinif-
sion; that they were bound to procure his re.
lease, having plighted their faith to that effedt,
and engaged their own persons as sureties for his.
Charles, li:stened to their earnest remonftrances
with the utmost coolness. As he now stood no
longer in need of their services, they had the
mortification to find tha-t their former' obfequi-
oufnefs was forgotten, and little regard paid to
their intercession. He .was ignorant , he told

" them, of their particular or- private tranfadions

with the Landgrave-, ,nor was his conduA to be
regulated by these; though he knew well what
he himself had promised, which was not that the

" Sleid. 4~, Thuan. 1. iv. I47. Struv. Corp. Hi it

Germ. ii. Io5Z3.

Landgrave; fPLould- be exempt, from all restraint, BooK IXX
but that he fihould not be kept a prisoner du- .-47.
ring life "'. Having said this with a peremptory,
and; decisive tone, he put an end to the .con-
ference; and they feeing no probability, at ;that
time, of making any impression upon the Em-
peror, who seemed to have taken his resolution
deliberately , and tb be obstinately bent on ad-
hering to it, were obliged to acquaint the un-
fortunate prisoner with the ill success of their
endeavours .in his behalf. This disappointment

" According to several historians of great name, the

Emperor, in his treaty with the Landgrave, fripulated that he
would not detain him in any prison. But in executing
the deed, ' hich was written in the German tongue, the
Imperial miniffers fraudulently substituted the word ewiger,
instead of eniger, .and thus the treaty, in place of a piomife
that he fhould' not be- detained in any prison, contained only
an engagement that he should not be detained in perpetual
imprisonment. But authors, eminent for historical know-
ledge and critical accuracy, have called in question the truth
of this common story. The silence of Sleidan with regard
to it, as well as its not being mentioned in. the various me-
morials which he has published concerning the Landgrave's
imprisonment, greatly favour this opinion., But as several
books which contain the information necefiary towaris dif-
cuffing this point with accuracy, are written in the Ger-
man language, which I do not understand, I cannob pretend
to inquire into this matter with the famie precision, where-
with I have endeavoured to fettle some other controverted
fads. which have occurred in the course .of this history. See
Struv. Corp. z 052. Mloheim's Eccles. Hist. vol. ii. p. 1 61,
16 2. Engl. Edition.

BooI IX. threw him into a new and more violent tranfpodr

1 47. of rage. so that to prevent his proceeding to some

desperate extremity, the Eledor and Maurice
promised that they would not quit the- Emperor,
until, by the frequency and fervour of their imi-
portunity, they had extorted his consent to faet
him free. They accordirigy renewed their
folicitations a few days afterwards, but found
Charles more haughty and intraitable than be-!
fore, and were warned that if they touched again
upon a fubje9 so disagreeable, and with regard
to which he had determined to hear nothing far-
ther, he would instantly give orders to convey
the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the
Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to
serve him, they not only defifted, but left the
court, and as they did not chufe to meet the first
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning
the cause of their departure, they informed him
of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to
fulfil'all that he had promised to the Emperor,
as the most certain means of procuring a speedy
release.

his impa- WItATEVER violent emotions their abandon-
tie;iundering his cause in this manner occasioned , the

Landgrave's impatience to recover liberty made
him follow their advice. He paid the fum
which had been imposed on him, ordered his

fortreffes to be razed, aIpd renounced all allian- BOOK IX.
ces which could give offence. This prompt 154.7.
compliance with the will of the conqueror pro-
duced no effe&. He was still guarded with the
fame vigilant severity; and being carried about,
together with the degraded"Eledor of Saxony,
wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and
his triumph was each day renewed. The forti-
tude as well as equanimity, with which the
Eledor bore these repeated insults,- were not
more iremarkable than the Landgrave's fretful-
ness and impatience, His ative impetuous mind
could ill brook reftra~it; and reflection upon
the shameful artifices by which he had been
decQyed into that situation, as well as indigna-
tion at the injustice with which he was still
detained in it, drove him often to the wildest
excesses of passion.

THE people of the different cities, to whom The rigou

Charles thus wantonly exposed those illustrious °o ts E"
prisoners as a publick fpedacle, were sensibly asions in
touched with such an insult offered to the Ger- Gema"ny.
manick body, and murmured loudly at this in-
.decent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint, and
such as affeAed them more nearly. Charles pro-
ceeded to add oppression to insult, and arrogat-
ing to himself all the rights of a conqueror,
exercised them with the utmost rigour. He or-

BooiK IX d.ered his troops to. feijze the artillery and mill

3547. tary stores belonging ,to such as had been memr

bers -of the Smaikaldick league, and having col.
ledted upwards ;of five hundred pieces of can.
non-, a great riumber in that age, he sent part -of
them- into thie Low Countries , part into Italy,
aind.part-into Sphin, in order to spread by -this
means the fame- of his fuicefs , arid that they
rhight serve as moniuments of :his having sub.
-dwed a nation, hith-erto deemed irivincible. He
then levied-,' by his sole authority, large sums as
vwell upon those who ·hadferved him with fid'e
lity during-the war, as tupon such as had been in
arms aga.inst him ; upon the former , as their
contingehit towards a war, which having -bee&i
2indertaken, as he: pretended, for the common
be'nefit, "ought -to be carri-ed on at the common
charge; upon the latter, as a.-fine by way- of
punishment for their rebellion.' By these exac-
S-tions he amiaffed above one million fix hundred

thousand crowns , a Tfum which appeared pro-
digious in the frxteenth century. But fb gefne-
ral was the consternation which had seized the
-Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his vidtorious troops, that alli implicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at- the fame
time, these extraordinary stretches of power
greatly alarmed a p-bple, jealous of their privi-
leges, and habituated during several ages to
confider the Imperial authority as neither ex-

tensive nor foimida~ble. This discontent and B3ooKi IX,
refeatment, how industriously soever they con-

s 47.

cealed them , became universal; and the more
these passions were restrained: and kept down for
the present, the more likely were they to burRs
out foolt with additional- violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like Perdinand's

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub- e',roach-
jeds in Bohemia with fbill greater rigour. That the liberties
kingdom poffeffed privileges and immunities as of his nlo

hemian sub-

extensive as those of any nation in which the jeas.
feudal institutions were eftablilhed. The pre-
rogative of their Kings was extremely limited ,
and the crown itself elecive. Ferdinand , when
placed on the throne, had confirmed their liber-
ties with every solemnity prescribed, by their
excessive solicitude for the security of a conftitu-
tion of government to which they were extreme-
ly attached. He soon began, however, to be
weary of a jurifdidion so much circumscribed,
and to despise a sceptre which he could not
transmit to his posterity; and notwithstanding
all his former engagements , he attempted to
overturn the constitution from its foundations;
that ipftead of an elecive kingdom he miight
render it hereditary. But the Bohemians were
too high-fpirited tamely to relinquish privileges
which they had long enjoyed. At the fame
time , many. of them having embraced the

iBooi IX. dodrines.0 of the Reformers, the. feeds of which

S547. John Huss ,and Jerome of Prague. had planted

in their country about the beginning of the pre-
•ceding century, the desire of acquirin'g religious
liberty mingled itself with .their zeal for their
civil rights ; and these two kindred <paffions
heightening, as usual, each other's force, preci-
pitated them immediately into violent measures.
They had not only refused to serve their fove.
reign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the
Elecdor of Saxony, they had bound themselves,
by .a solemn association, to defend their ancient
constitution; and to persist, until they should
obtain such additional grants as they thought
neceTfary towards perfecing the present model
of their government, or rendering it more per-
manent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman
of diftindcion, to be their general; and raised
an army of thirty thousand men to enforce
their petitions. But either from the weakness of
their leader, or from the- dissensions in a great
unwieldy body, which, having united hastily,
was not thoroughly compadted, or from some
other unknown cause, the subsequent operations
of the Bohemians bore no proportion to the
zeal and ardour with which they took their,
fFrft resolutions. They fuffered themfeves to be
amused so lotig. with negociations and overtures
'of different kinds, that before they could enter

Saxony,

Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg was fought; Book I1X
the Eledor deprived of his dignity and terri- 1547.
tories, the Landgrave confined to close cufftody,
and the league of Smalkalde entirely dissipated.
The fame dread of the Emperor's power which
had seized the reft of the Germans , reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached
with a body of Imperial troops, they instantly
dispersed, thinking of nothing but how to atone
for their past guilt, and to acquire some hope
of forgiveness , by a prompt fubnmiffion. But
Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full of
that implacable resentment which inflames Mo-
narchs whose authority has been despised, was
not to-be mollified by the late repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious fubjeas to their
,duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intreaties
and tears of the citizens of Prague, who ap-
peared before him in the posture of fuppliants,
and implored for mercy. The sentence which
he .pronounced against them was rigorous to ex-
tremity; he abolished many of their privileges,
he abridged others, and new-modelled the con-
ftitution according to his pleasure. He con-
demned to death many of those who had been
most active in forming the late association against
him, and punished still a greater number with con-
fifcation of their goods, or perpetual baniniment,
He obliged all his fubjeas, of every condition,
to give up their arms to be deposited in forts

VoL. IIL H h

B3OOK IX. where he planted garrisons; and after disarming

1547. his people, he loaded them with new and exor-

bitant taxes. Thus by an ill conduded and
unfuccefsful effort to extend their privileges, the
Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative, when they intended to have
circumscribed it, but they almost annihilated
those liberties which they aimed at establishing
on a broader and more secure foundation '.

Diet held Bt THE Emperor, having now humbled, and,
Augsburgh r * *

as he imagined, subdued the independent and
stubborn spirit of the Germans by the terror of
arms and the rigour of punishment, held a diet
at Augfburgh, in order to compose finally the
controversies with regard to religion, which had
so long disturbed the Empire. He durst not,
however, trust the determination of a matter so
interesting to the free fiiffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds now were to fubjedion.
He entered the city at the head of his iSpanifh
troops, and assigned them quarters there. The
reft of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent
villages; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were fur-
* rounded by the fame army which had overcome
their countrymen. Immediately after his publick

" Sleid. 408. 4I9. 434. Thuan. 1. iv. 129. ixo. Struv.

Corp. ii.

entry, Charles gave a proof of the Violence Booi IX.
with which he intended to proceed. He took . :547.
poffeffion by force of the cathedral, together with
one of the principal churches; and his priests
having, by various ceremonies, purified them
from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to
have defiled them, they re-established with great
pomp the rites of the Romith worship ".

THE concourse of members to this diet was The E "mpe

S.* ror exhorts

extraordinar ; the importance of the affairs them to
concerning~ich it was to deliberate, added to Lubmit to
the fear of giving offence to the Emperor bythe en~ ral
an absence which lay open to mifconftru6ion,
brought together almost all the Priices, nobles,
and representatives of cities who had right to fit
in that assembly. The Fmperor , in the speech
with which he opened the meeting, called their
attention immediately to that point , which
seemed chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned
the fatal effets ps the religious dissensions which
had arisen in Germany, and taken notice of his
own unwearied endeavours to procure a general
council, which alone could provide a remedy
adequate to these evils, he exhorted them to
recognise its authority, and to fiand to the
award of an assembly, to which they had origi-

" Sleid. 43 . 437.

Hh2

BooK IX. nally appealed, as having the sole right of judg.

1547. ment in the cafe.

various re- BUT the council, to which Charles wished
volutions in
the council them to refer all their controversies, had, by

this time, undergone a violent change. The
fear and jealousy, with which the 'Emperor's first
success against the confederates of Smalkalde
had inspired the Pope, continued to increase.
Not satisfied wvith attempting to retard the pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recal
of his troops, Paul began to confider the Empe-
ror as an enemy, the weight of w\h , power he
mnuft soon feel, and against whom he could not
be too hasty in taking precautions. He foresaw
that the immediate effed of the Emperor's ac-
quiring absolute power in Germany, would be
to render him entirely master of all the decisions
of the council; if it Thould continue to meet in
Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Monarch,
so ambitious, to get the command of this for-
midable engine, which he might employ at plea-
sure to limit or overturn the papal authority.
As the only method of preventing this, he de-
termined to translate the council to some city
more immediately under his own jurifdidion,
and at a greater distance from the terror of the
Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence.
An incident fortunately occurred, which gave
this measure the appearance of being necessary.

One or two of the fathers of the council, toge- Booi IX.
ther with some of their domefticks, happening to is 47.
die suddenly, the phyficans, deceived by the
symptoms, or suborned by the Pope's legates,
pronounced the distemper to be infecious and
peffilential. Some of the prelates, struck with
a panick, retired; others were impatient to be
gone; and after a short consultation, the coun- March II'
cil was translated to Bologna, a city fubjed to Translated

f

. from Trent

the Pope. All the biifhops in the Imperial in-to Bologna.
terest warmly opposed this resolution: as taken
without necessity, and founded on false or frivo-
lous pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and
mdft of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's ex-
press command, remained at Trent; the reft,
to the number of thirty-four, accompanying the
legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced
in that very assembly, which had been called to
heal the divisions of Christendom ; the fathers
of Bologna inveighed against those who staid at
Trent, as contumacious and regardless of the
Pope's authority; while the others accused them
of being so far intimidated by the fears of ima-
ginary danger, as to remove to a place where
their consultations could prove of no service to-
wards re-eltablifhing peace and order in Ger.
many 7

" F. Paul, z48, &c. .

Hh3

SooiK IX. THE Emperor, at the fame time, employe.

I407. all his interest to procure the return of the coun,
symptoms cil to Trent. But Paul, who highly applauded
if difgufk . . .
between the his own sagacity in having taken a step which
Pope and put it out of Charles's power to acquire the di,-
mperor. reAion of that assembly, paid no regard to a,

request, the objeca of which was so extremely
obvious. The summer was consumed in fruit-.
Jess negoeiations with refpedt to this point, the
importunity of the one and the obstinacy of the
other daily increasing. At last an event hap,
pened which widened the breach irreparably,
and rendered the Pope utterly averse from lift.
ening to any proposal that came from the Em-
peror. Charles , as has been already observed,
had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Far-
pefe, the Pope's son, by refuting to grant hinm
the investiture of Parma and Placentia, that he
had watched ever since that time with all the
vigilance of resentment for an opportunity of
revenging that injury. He had endeavoured to
precipitate his father into open hostilities against
the Emperor , and had earnestly solicited .the
King of France to invade Italy. His hatred and
resentment extended to all those whom he knew
that the Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gon-
zaga, governor of Milan, with ill offices and
had encouraged Fiefco. in his attempt upon
the life of Andrew Doria, because both Gonzaga
an4 Doria poffeffed a great degree of the Ema,

peror's esteem and confidence. His malevolence BOOIK IX,
and secret intrigues were not unknown to the sa47.
Emperor, who could not be more desirous to
take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga and Doria
were to be employed as his inflruments in in-
sliding it. Farnese, by the profligacy of his
life, and by enormities of every kind, equal to
those committed by the worst tyrants who have
disgraced human nature , had rendered himself
so odious, that they thought any violence what-
ever might be attempted against him. They
soon found among his own fubjeds, persons who
were eager, and even deemed, it meritorious to-
lend their hands in such a service. As he, ani-
mated with the jealousy which usually poffeffes
petty sovereigns, had employed all the cruelty
and fraud, whereby they endeavour to supply
their defed of power, in order to humble and
extirpate the nobility fubjed to his government,
five noblemen of the greatest diftindion in Pla-The arram.
centia,. combined to avenge the injuries, which he ie's
they themselves had fuffered, as well as those ron.
which he had offered to their order. They
formed their plan in conjun&ion with Gonzaga;
but it remains uncertain whether he originally
suggested the scheme to them, or only approved
of what they proposed, and co-operated in carry-
ing it on. They concerted all the previous steps
with such foresight, conduded their intrigues.

H h 4

i Booi IX, with such secrecy, and displayed such courage

1547. in the execution of their design, that it may be

ranked among the most audacious deeds of that

sept. ls. nature mentioned in history. One body of the

conspirators surprised, at mid-day, the gates of
the citadel of Placentia where Farnese resided,
overpowered his guards, and murdered him.
Another party of them made themfe'lves masters
of the town, and called upon their fellow-citi-
zens to take arms, in order to re-affume their
liberty. The multitude ran towards the citadel,
from which three great guns,- a signal concerted
with Gonzaga, had been fired; and before they
could guess the cause or the authors of the tu-
mult, they saw the lifeless body of the tyranti
hanging by the heels from one of the windows
of the citadel. But so universally detestable had
he become, that not one expressed any sentiment
of concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or
discovered the least indignation at, this ignomi-
nious treatment of a sovereign Prince. The
exultation at the success of the conspiracy
was general, and all applauded the acors in it,
as the deliverers of their country. The body
was tumbled into the ditch that furrotnded the'
citadel, and exposed to the insults of the rab-
ble; the reft ,of the citizens returned to their
usual occupations, as if nothing extraordinary
had happened.

- BEFORE -next morning, a body of troops ar- BOOr IX,
riving from th;e .frontiers of the Milanese, where i54.7.
they had beenjpofted in exp'edation of the event, The Impe-
took poffeffion of the city in the Emperor's talke poe
name, and reinstated the inhabitants in the pof.ni(on of
session of 'their ancient privileges. Parma , which c
the Imperialists attempted likewise to surprise,
was saved by the vigilance and fidelity of the
officers whom Farnese had intrufted with the
command of the garrison. The death of a son
whom, notwithstanding his infamous vices, Paul
loved with an excess of -parental tenderness,
overwhelmed him with the deepest afflidion;
and the loss of a city of such consequence as
Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow. He
accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having
committed a cruel murder, in order to prepare
the way for an unjust usurpation, and immedi-
ately- demanded of: the Emperor fatisfadion- *for
both; for the former, by the punishment of Gon-"
zaga; for the latter, by the restitution of Placen-
tia to his grandson Odavio, its rightful owner.
But Charles, who, rather than quit a prize of
such value, was willing, not only to expose him-
selF to, the imputation of being accessary to the-
crime which had given an opportunity of seizing
it, but to bear ' the infamy, of defrauding his-
own fon-in-law of the inheritance which belong-
ed to him, eluded all his folicitations , and

Bo0. IX. determined to keep poffeffion of the city, toge.

^;47. ther with its territories "'

The Poe. TiIS resolution, flowing from an ambition to,
courts the rapacious, as to be restrained by no confidera.
allia, ce of

.

.

the Frenchtion either of decency or justice, transported
Kini.g and the Pope so far beyond his usual moderation and
the Vene-
tians. caution, that he was eager to take, arms against

the Emperor, in order to be avenged on the nour.
derers of his sorn, and to recover the inheritance
wrefled from his family. Conscious, however,
of his' own inability to contend with such an
enemy, he warmly solicited the French King and
the republick of Venice to join in an offenfive
1-eague agairift Charles. B3ut Henry was intent
at that time on other obje6ts. His ancient allies
the Scots, having been defeated by the English
in one of the greatest battles ever fought be-
tween there two rival nations, he was about to
fend a numerous body of veteran troops into
that country, as well to preserve it from being
conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a new
kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying
his son the Dauphin to the young Queen of
Scotland. An undertaking accompanied with
(uch manifest advantages, the success of which
appeared to be so certain, was not to be relin-

" F. Paul, z;7. Pellavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. 7I6.

Mem. de Ribier, 59. 67. Natalis Comitis Hifito lib. iii.
p. 64.

quifhed for the remote profped of benefit from Bomo IX,
an alliance depending upon the precarious 5s4.
life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing
at heart but the gratification of his own pri-
vate resentment, Instead, therefore, of ruth-
ing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry
amused the Pope with such general profef-
fions and promises, as. might keep him fromi
any thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate
his differences with the Emperor, but at the
fame time avoided any such engagement as
mnight occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a
war for which he was not prepared. The Ve-
netians, though much alarmed at feeing Pla-
centia in the hands of the Imperialists, imitated
the wary condud of the French King, as it
nearly resembled the spirit with which they
themselves usually carried on their negocia-
.ions ',.

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not The diet of

in his power to kindle immediately the flames ofAugsburgh petitions for
war, he did not forget the injuries, which he hee eturn,
was obliged for the present to endure; resent-, othe coun

. . cil to Trent.

ment fettled deeper in his mind, and became
more rancorous in proportion as he felt the dif-
ficulty of gratifying it. It was while these fen-

" Mem. de Ribier, ii. 6. 7 71 . 8 . 9. Paruta ritno

sdi Venez. 199. 203o Thuan. iv. 560.

BooK IX, timents _of enmity were in full force, and the

r147 desire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of

Augfburgh, by the Emperor's command, petition,
ed the Pope, in name of the whole Germanick
body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, :to return again to Trent, and to renew
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing .the members to
join in this request. Having observed a confi,
derable variety of sentiments among the Protest,
ants with refped to the fubmifiion which he had
required' to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether intradable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdic-
tion upon certain conditions, he employed all
his address in order to gain or to divide them..
He threatened and over-awed the Eledor Pala-
tine, a:weak Prince, and obnoxious.to vengeance
on account- of the assistance which he had given
to the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of
..procuring liberty for the Landgrave, together
with the formal confirmation of his own eledo-
ral dignity, overcame NMaurice's scruples , or
prevented him from opposing what he knew
would be agreeable to the Emperor. The Elec-
tor of Brandenburgh, less influenced by religi-
ous' zeal than any Prince of that age, was easily
induced to imitate their example, in.affenting to
all that the Emperor required. The deputies
of the cities remained still to be brought over.

They were more tenacious of their principles, BooK IX.
and though every thing that could operate either 1547.
on their hopes or fears was tried, the utmost
that they would promise was , to acknowledge the
jurifdidion of the council, if effecTual provision
were made for securing to the divines of all
parties free access to' that assembly, with entire
liberty of debate; and if all points in contro-
verfy were decided according to scripture and
the usage of the primitive church. But when
the memorial containing this declaration was
presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put
in practice a very extraordinary artifice. With-
out reading the paper, or taking any notice of
the conditions on which they had insisted, he
seemed to take it for granted that they had comrn- oa. 9.
plied with his demand, and gave thanks to the.
deputies for their full and unreserved fubmif-
sion to the decrees of the council. The de-
puties, though astonished at what they had
heard, did not attempt to set him right, both
parties being better pleased that the matter
should remain under this state of ambiguity,
than to push for an explanation, which must
have occasioned a dispute, and would have led,
perhaps, to a rupture".

HAVING obtained this seeming fubnmiffioiThe e Pope

from the members of the diet to the authority d'mnd th

•Y demand.

o F. Paul, 259. Sleid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. I~ .

Booir IX. of the council, Charles employed that as an

Is 47. argument to enforce their petition for its return

to Trent. But the Pope, from the fatisfadion
of mortifying the Emperor, as well as from his
own aversion to what was demanded, resolved,
without hesitation , that his petition should be
rejeted; though , in order to avoid the impu.
tation of being influenced wholly by resentment,
he had the address to throw it upon the fathers
at Bologna, to put a dired negative upon the
request. He referred to their consideration the
petition of the diet, and they, re'ady to confirm

Dec. so. by their assent whatever the legates were pleased

to didtate, declared that the council could not,
in consistence with its dignity , return to Trrent,
unless the prelates who, by remaining there, had
discovered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair
to Bologna, and join their brethren; and that,
even after their jundion, the council could not
renew its consultations with any profped of be.
nefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove
their intention of' obeying its future decrees to
be sincere, by yielding'immediate obedience to
those which it had already pafl "'.

The Empe- THIS answer was communicated to the Empe-
rorterorby the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted
against the
council of him to comply with demands which appeared to
IBologna.

n F. Paul 250. Pallav. ii. 49,

be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac- BOOK IX.
quainted with the duplicity of the Pope's cha- x 47.
rader than to be deceived by firch a gross arti-
fice; he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst
utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and,
therefore , overlooking, them as mere initru.
ments in the hand of another, he considered their
reply as a full discovery of the Pope's inten-
tions. As he could no longer hope to acquire
such an ascendant in the council as to render it
subservient to his own plan, he saw it to be ne-
ceffary that Paul should not have it in his power
to turn against him the authority of so venerable
an assembly. In order to prevent this, he sent I'48.
two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the January s,
presence of the legates, protested, That the
translation of the council to that place had been
unnecessary, and founded on false or frivolous
pretexts; that while it continued to meet there,
it ought to be deemed an unlawful and fchifma-
tical conventicle; that all its decisions ought of
course to be held as null and invalid; and that as
the Pope, together with the corrupt ecclefiafticks
who depended on him, had abandoned the care
of the church, the Emperor, as its protedor,
would employ all the power which God had
committed to him in order to preserve it from
those calamities with which it was threatened.
A few days after, the Imperial ambassador at
Rome demanded an audience.of the Pope, andJanuary a3'

Boo[ IX. in presence of all the Cardinals, as well as foreign

x 48. ministers, protested against the proceedings of

the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh
and difrefpedful ".

The Empe- IT was not long before Charles proceeded to
ror prepares whic bio
afyftem, to carry these threats , which greatly alarmed both
ferveasa the Pope and council at Bologna, into execu.
in atr.h tion. He let the diet know the ill success of his
many. endeavours to procure a favourable answer to

their petition, and that the Pope, equally re.
.gardlefs of their entreaties, and of his services
to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom
of debate and judgment, was not to be given
up, the profped of it was, at present, distant
and uncertain; that, in the mean time, Ger.
many was torn in pieces by religious dissensions,
the purity of the.faith corrupted, arid the minds
of the people difquieted with a multiplicity of
new opinions and controversies formerly un.
known among Christians; that, moved by the
duty which he owed to them as their sovereign,
and to the Church as its proteor , he had em-
ployed some divines, of known abilities and

" F. Paul, 264. Pallav. ' . Sleid. 446. Goldafti Conflit.

Imperial. i. 961.

learning,

'learning, to prepare a Tyfiem of dot.rine; to B.QpK iX
.which, all: hould conform, until a council,, fiich * i.48.
as they 'wifled for, could be convocated. This
system was cormpiled by Pflug, Helding, and
Agricola, of whom the two former -were :digni-
taries in -the Romish church, but, ernaelrkable
'for their pacifick and healing spirit;- thie'laft-was
a Protestant divine, furpeded,- not"witjhojut rea-
son, of having been gained by bribes and 4.pro-
mises, to betray or mislead his party- on this
occasion. The articles presented: to. the. diet of
Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred
an'd forty-one, in order to reconcile the .con'tend.
ing parties, served as a model for the;prefent
work. But as the Emperor's situation was much
changed since that time-, and he fouind it 'no
linger neceifary to manage the Protestants with
the fame delicacy as at that juncure, the con-
deilions in their favour we.re not now ft nume-
rous, hot did they extend to points of so much
confeqtuence. The treatise contained a cornm-
plete fyfieni of theology , conformable in anmoft
every article to the tenets of the- Rornifh hurch,
though expressed, for the most part, ji the
fofteft words, or in scriptural phrases, or in terms
of ftpdied ambiguity. Every dodrine, how-
ever, peculiar to Popery, was retained; 'and all
the rites, which the Protestants condemned as
inventions of men introduced into the worship

V0 . IlL

' i -

1TtoO-IX.' of Gody,: were enjoined.. With regard to two

1s4?. points, only, some relaxation of their rigour was,

granted-; and some latitude in pradice admit,
ted. Such ecclefiafticks as had married, and
woulc notprput away their wives, were allowed,
nevertheless, to perform all the fundions of their
sacred -office

; and those provinces which, had

been aceuftomed to partake of the cup, as well
as of the -bread in the sacrament of the Lord's
Supper,; were frill indulged the privilege of re.
ceiving both. Even these were declared to be
conceffidns" for the fake of peace, and granted
only -fora faf on, in compliance with the weak-
ness or. prejudices, of their countrymen".

This which THIS .fyfem of docrine, known afterwards
the nteim bY the name. of the Interim, because it contained
he lays be-temporary regulations, which were to continue
fore the no longei in force than until a free general

,py i-. council .could be held, the Emperor' presented

to the diet, with a pompous declaration of his
sincere: intention to re-establish tranquillity and
order in the church, as well as of his hopes that
their adopting these regulations would contri-
bute.greatly to bring about that desirable event.
It was read in presence., according to form. As,
*soon as" it was finished, the archbishop of Mentz,,

"3 E. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 6o. Sleid. 4s5. 497. Struv.

Corp. 10o4. GQldaft. Conftit. Imper. i. L I 8.

:president of the eledoral college, rose up hastily,, Boo IX,
::and having thanked the Emperor for his un.x s48.
hwearied and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the diet,
signified their approbation of' the system of
doarine which he had prepared, together with
their resolution of conforming to it in every par-
ticular. The whole assembly was, amazed at a
declaration so unprecedented and unconftitu-
tional, as well as at the Elector's presumption
in pretending to deliver the sense of the diet,
upon a point which had not hitherto been the
fubjet of consultation or debate. B ut not one
member had the courage to contradict what the
EledCor had said ; some being overawed byand extorts

* * their appro-

fear, others remaining silent through complai-bation of it.
fance. The Emperor held the archbifhop's de-
claration to be a full constitutional ratification
of- the Interim, and prepared to enforce the ob-
fervance of it, as a decree of the Empire*.

.IURING this diet, the wife and children' of the New ard

Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of Sa-itcitatiotns
xony, endeavoured to interest the members in be- or the
half of that unhappy Prince, who still languished d~.dave's
in confinement. But Charles, who did not chufe
to be brought under the necessity of rejecting
any request that came from such a respectable

a+ Sleid. 460. F. Paul, a73. Pallav. 6

Ii i

•3BooK IX. body, in order to p!revent their representations;

i'48. laid before the diet an account of his tranfac:

tions with the Landgrave, together with the'
motives wvhich had' at first induced him to detain
'that Prince in custody, and which rendered it"
prudent, as he alleged, to keep him still under
restraint. It was no easy matter to give any
'good reason for an tadion, incapable of being
justified. But he thought the most frivolous
pretexts might be produced in an assembly will-
ing to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so
much as to discover that it' saw his condut in its
true colours. His account of his own conduCt
,Was accordingly admitted to be fully fatisfaCory,
aind after Tome feeble intreaties that he w6uld
extend his clemency to his unfortunate prisoner,
the Landgrave's concerns were no more men-
tioned ".

IN order 'to counterbalance the unfavourable

impression which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles , as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his reftmerent, invested Mau-
rice in the eledoral dignity, with all the legal
formalities. The ceremony was performed,
:with extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so
near the apartment in which the degraded Elec-
tor was kept a prisoner, that he could view it

25 Sleid. 44.

from his Windows. Even this insult did not' BOOK IX..
ruffle his usual tranquillity'; and turning his 1548.
eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival re-
ceiving those ensigns of dignity of which he had
been stripped, without uttering one sentiment
unbecoming the fortitude which he had psre-
Served amidst all his calamities "'

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the. diet, The Interi

the Emperor ordered the Interim to be pubS.~ually dif

approved of

lifh.ed in the German as. well as Latin language. by Protest-
It met with the usual reception of conciliating an"ts an
schemes, when proposed to men heated with dif-
p,utation; both parties declaimed against it with
equal violence. The Protestants condemned it
as a system containing the grossest errors of
Popery, disguised with so little art, that it could
impose only on the most ignorant, or on those
who by wilfully shutting their eyes favoured the
deception. The Papifts inveighed against it, as
a work in which some doetrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly conceal-
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated
rather to deceive the unwary, than to inftru&:
the ignorant, or to 'reclaim such as were enemies
tihe truth. While the Lutheran divines fiercely

"ked it, on one hand,, the general of the Do-

Thuan. Hist. lib. v. I76. Struv. Corp. Io~ 4. Inve-.

ftitura Mauritii a Mammerano Lucemburgo defcripta ap.
Scardium, ii. 5o8.. li3

Bor:K ,. rninicans with' no leTs vehemence impuigned it

548. on the dther. But att Rome', as soon as the con-

tents of the Interim came to be known, the in-
dignation of the courtiers and ecclefiafticks rose
to the greatest height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the

?>

,. fakerdotal fundion, in preftuming, with the con-

currence of an assembly of laymen, to define
articles of faith, and to regulate modes of wor-
lhip. They compared this rash deed to that of
Uzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had
touched the ark of God; or to the bold at.
tempts of those Emperors, who had rendered
their memory detestable, by endeavouring to
* model the Christian church eccording to their
pleasure. "They even affeaed to find out a re-
semblance between the Emperor's condua and
that of Henry VII. and expressed their fear of
his imitating the example of that apostate, by
ufurping the title as well as jurifdiAion belong;
ing to the head of the church. All, therefore,
contended with one voice, that as the founda-
tions of .ecclesiastical authority were now shaken,
and the whole fabrick ready to be overturned by
a new enemy, some powerful method of de-
fence must be provided, and a vrigorous re

.

ance must be made, at the beginning, b
he grew too formidable to be opposed.

THE Pope, whole judgment was, improved BOOK IX.

by 'longer experience in great tranfaAions as 1 48.
well as by a more extensive observation of hu. The senti-

menits of

man affairs, viewed the matter with more acute the Pope
discernment, and derived comfort from ,the very with regard
circumstance which filled them with apprehen-t°i "
sion. He was astonished, that a Prince of such
superior sagacity as .the Emperor, ihould be so
intoxicated with a single viAory, as to0 imagine
that he might give law to mankind, and decide
even in those matters, with regard to which they
are most impatient of dominion. He saw that,
by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had .it in his
power to have oppressed the other, but that the
presumption of success had now inspired him
with the vain thought of his being able to do-
mineer over both. He foretold that a system
which all attacked, and none defended, could
not be of long duration; and that, for this rea-
son, there was no need of his interposing in
order to hasten its fall; for as soon as the
powerful hand which now upheld it was with-
drawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be
forgotten for ever"7.

THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered The Empne-

to. his resolution of carrying it into full execu-ror enforces

37 Sleid. 468; F. Paul, 271. 277. Pallav. ii. 64,

li4.

BOOK IX. tion. But- though the Eledor Palatine,. the

i54.8. Eledor .o'fif Brandenburgh ,-.'and I Maurice, infla.
with the enced by -the fame considerations .as formerly,
Interimi . - *

-

seemed -ready to . yield implicit obedience ,to
whatever,' hes fhqtiid :enjoin, he met not every-
where with a like obfequiious submission. John.
v1 arquis of Brandenburgh Anfpach, although he
had 'taken part with greatJzeal in the war against
the confederates of .Smatkalde, refused to ~re-
nounce. docrlrines which he held to be sacred;
and .reminding the .Emperor ..of the repeated
promifes.which, he had given his Proteefant allies
of allbwing them the free exercise of their reli-
gion, he claimed, in. consequence of these, to
be exempted from receiving the Interim. Some
other Princes, also, ventured, to mention the
fame fcrupies-, and to - plead the fame indul-
gence. But on this, as on other trying occa,
lions, the firmness of the Eledor of Saxony
was most distinguished , and merited the highest
praise. Charles, well. knowing .:the authority of
his example with all the Protestant party, la-
boured, with' the utmost earnestness, to gain his
approbation of the Interim, and by employing
sometimes promises of setting ,him at liberty,
sometimes threats of treating himn with greater
harshness, attempted alternately to work upon
his hopes and his fears. But he was alike re-
gardlefs of both. After having declared his
fixed belief in the dodrines of the Reformation

*,I cannot now , said he, in my old age , aban- BoOK :I
don the principles, for which I early contended; x s 48,
nor, in order to procure freedom during a few
declining years, will I betray that good cause,
on account of which I have fuffered so much, and
am still willing to fuffer. Better for me to en-
joy, in this solitude, the .esteem of ,virtuous men,
together with the approbation- of my own con-
science, than to return into the world, with the
imputation and-; guilt of apoftacy , to disgrace
and , embitter the remainder of my days." By
this magnanimous resolution, he set his country-
men a pattern of condutd, so very different from
that which the Emperor wished him to have ex-
hibited to them , that it drew upon .him fre.sh
marks of his displeasure.- The rigour. of his con-
finement was increased ; the number :of his ser-
vaints abridged; the Lutheran clergymen, who:
had hitherto been permitted to attend him, were
dismissed ; and even the books of devotion,
which had been. his chief consolation during a
tedious imprisonment, were taken from him".
The Landgrave of Hesse, his companion in-
misfortune, did not maintain the fame con-
ftancy. His patience and forbtifde were both
so much exhausted by the length of his confine-
ment, that,

, willing to purchase freedom at any

price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering not
only to approve of the Interim, but toyield ah

"SSleid. 46Z,

BOOK IX. unreserved £ubmiffion to his will in every other

.s548. particular. But Charles, who kne.w that what,

ever course the Landgrave might hold, neither
his example nor authority would ptevail on his
children or fubjets to receive the Interim, paid
no regard to his offers. He was kept confined
,as .ftrily as ever ; and while he. fuffered the
cruel mortification of having his conducl set. in
contrast to that of the Elector, he derived not
the smallest benefit from the mean step which
exposed him to ,such deserved cenfure"'.

The free- BUT it, was in the Imperial cities that Charles
citie rg. met with the most violent opposition to the In,
receiving. terim. These small commonwealths, the citi-
the Interim, zens of which were'accuftomed to liberty andh

independence, had embraced the doarines of
the Reformation when first published, with re-
markable eagerness; the bold spirit of innova,
tion being peculiarly suited to the genius of free
government. Among then , the Protestant
teachers had made the greatest number of pro-.
felytes. The most eminent divines of the party
were fettled there as pastors. By having ther di-
redions of the &hools and other seminaries of
learning, they had trained up fdifciples, as well
inftruded in the articles of their faith, as zeal-
ous to defend them. Such persons were not to

"* Sleid, 462.

be guided by example; or swayed by authority;
but1 having been taught to examine and to de-
cide in matters of controversy, thought that they
wxere both qualified and entitled to judge for
themselves. As soon .as the contents of the In.
terimr were known, they, with one voice joined
in refuting to admit ic. Augfburgh, Ulm, Straf-
burgh, Constance , Bremey, IMagdeburgh, toge-
ther with many other towns of less note, presented
remohftrances' to the Emperor, setting forth the
irregular and unconstitutional mnanner in which
the Interim had been enacted, and beseeching
him not to offer fiich violence to their consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of doctrine
and worship, which appeared to them repugnant
to the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles ,having prevailed on so many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of those
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved, if they could have been formed into
one body, lay to remote from each other, that it
was .easy to oppress them separately, before it was
possible for them to unite. BooKr '1K":

r54g3.

IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor Compellea

saw it to be requisite that his measures should be b IuImt.,
vigorous,' and executed with such rapidity as to
allow no time' for concerting any common plan
0of. opposition. Having laid down this maxim

30o

I OK.r lX as the rule of his prbceedings, his first attempE
.48.' was:<upon the city of Augfburgh, which, though

over-awed, by the presence of the Spanish troops,
he' knew to be as- much diffatisfied with the Inu,
terim as any:in the Empire. He ordered one
body of these troops to seize the gates; he post-
ed the reft in different quarters of the city; and

Aug. 3- assembling aH the burgesses in the town, he, by

his sole absolute authority, published a decree
abolishing their present form of government,
dissolving all their' corpora~tions and fraternities,
and nominating a small number of persons , in
whom he vested for the future the right of ad.
ministration. Each of the per-sons, thus chosen,

. took an. oath to observe the Interim. An ad ofi.

power, to unprecedented as well as arbitrary,
which excluded the body of the inhabitants from
any share in the government of their own com-
munity, and fubjedted them to men who had no
other merit than their servile devotion to the Em-.
peror's will, gave general disgust; but as they
durst not venture upon resistance, they were
obliged to submit in silence ". From Augfburgh,
in which he left a garrison, he proceeded to,
Ulm, and new modelling its government with
the fa~me violent hand, he seized such of their
pastors as refused to subscribe the Interim , com,
mnitted them to prison , and at his departure cars

° Sleid. 469,

ried them along with him in chains ". By this BooiK IX
.everity he not only .secured the. reception of I.x4 8.
the Interim in two of the most powerful cities,
but gave warning to the reft what such as con-
tinued refradory had to ,expect. The effect of
the example was as great as he - could have
wished, and many towns-, in order to save them-
selves from the like vengeance , found it necef-
fary to comply with what he enjoined. This
obedience, extorted .by the rigour of authori-
ty , produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the
law, as was barely fuxfficient to screen them from
punishment. Their preachers accompanied those
:ceremonies, the observation of which the4Interim
prescribed , with such an explication of their
tendency, as served rather to confirm than to
remove the scruples of their hearers with regard
to them.. The people , many of Whom had
grown,up to mature years since the establishment
of the reformed, religion, and had been accuf-
tomed to no other form of publick worship, be-
held the pompous pageantry of the popish ser-
vice. with .contempt or horror; and in most
places the Romish ecclefiaftics, who returned to
take poffeffion of their churches, could hardly
be protected from insult, or their ministrations
from interruption. Thus, notwithstanding the

" Sleid, 472.

bioow IX. apparent compliance of so many cities, , the in.

*1948. habitanits being accuftotned to freedom, sub.

mitted with reludtance to the power which. now
.-oppressed them. Their understanding as well
as inclination revolted against the dodlrines and
rites imposed on them; and though, for the
present, they. concealed their indignation and
2tefentment, it was. evident tlat these passions
could not always be 'kept under restraint, but
would break out at last in effects proportional
to their violence 3.

'The Pop,e : CHARLES, meanwhile , highly pleased with
dirfmiffe the having bended the ftubborn-fpirit of the Ger.
embed'at rnans to such general submission, departed for
Bologna. the Lo~t Countries, fully determined to compel

the cities , --which ,ftill:ftood out, to receive the In-
terim. He carried his two prisoners , the Eledor
of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse along with
him , either because he durst not leave them be·
hind him in Germany, or because he wished to
give his countrymen, the Flemings this illuftri-
ous proof of the success of his arms , and the
extent of his power. Before Charles arrived at

Sept. 17; Brussels he was informed that the Pope's le-

.gates at Bologna had dismissed the council by
an indefinite prorogation, and that. the prelates
assembled there had returned to their refpedive

SMin. de Ribier, ii. 2 8. Sleid. 49i.

countries. Necessity had driven the Pope into BooK IX,
this measure. By the secession of those who xS48.
had voted against the translation , together with
the departure of others, who grew weary of con-
tinuing in a place where they were not fuffered
to proceed to business; so few and such incon-
fiderable members remained, that the pompous
appellation of a General Council could not,
with decency , be bestowed any longer upon
them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve an
assembly which was become the objeA of con-
tempt, and exhibited to all Christendom a most
glaring. proof of the impotence of the Romish
See. But unavoidable as the measure was, it
lay open to be unfavourably interpreted , and
had the appearance of withdrawing the remedy
at the very time when those for whose recovery
it was provided, were prevailed on to acknow-
ledge its virtue, and to make trial of its efficacy.
Charles did not fail to put this confirudio'n
on his condud; and by an artful comparison of
his own efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's
scandalous inattention to a point so essential , he
endeavoured to render the Pontiff odious to all
zealous Catholicks. At the fame time, he com-
manded the Prelates of his fadion to remain at
Trent, that the Council might frill appear to
have a being, and might be ready,i whenever it

1OOK IX. was thought expedient, to resume its delibera.
- 5.48.:. tions for the good of the chi'rch '.

The Enpe. TH:E motive of Charles's journey to the Low
for receives * *

h eives

o Countries, beside gratifying his favourite passion

Philip in of travelling from -one part of his dominions to

ltoe ,oL another , was to receivePhilip his only son, who

cwa.s now inr the twenty-firft year of his age',
and whom he. had called thither , not only that
he might be -recognized by the States of- the
Netherlands las heir-apparent , but in - order to
facilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the ob.
ject of which , .and the reception it met with,
shall be hereafter- explained. - Philip, having
left the . government of Spain to Maximilian,
Ferdinand's eldest son, to whom the Emperor
had given - the Princess Mary his daughter in
marriage, embarked for Italy attended by a
numeerous retinue of .Spanish nobles '. ,The
squadron which escorted him, was commanded
by Andrew .Doria, who, notwithffanding his
advanced age :insisted on. the honour of per-
forming, in person, the fame duty to the, son,
,which he had often discharged towards the fa-

Nov. =<. ther, He landed safely at Genoa; from thence

he went .to- Milan, and proceeding through

I549" Germany

, arrived at the Imperial court in Bruf-

Aprl x. fels :The States of Brabant, in the first place,

53 Pallav. pb II. 72. 0 Ochoa, Carolea, 362.

and

and those of the other provinces in their order Boor IX:
acknowledged his right of fucceffidn in common I548.
form, and he took the customary oath to pre-
serve all their privileges inviolate ". In all
the towns of the Low countries through which

1

Philip passed, he was received with extraordi-
nary pomp. Nothing that could express the
refpe& of the people, or contribute to his
amusements was negleaed ; pageants, tourna-
ments, and publick fpedacles of every kind
were exhibited with that expensive magnificence
which commercial nations display, when, on
any occasion, they depart from their usual max-
ims of frugality. But amidst these scenes of
festivity and pleasure, Philip's natural severity
of temper was discernible. Youth itself could
not render him agreeable, nor his being a
candidate for power form him to courtesy. He
maintained a haughty reserve in his behaviour
and discovered such manifest partiality towards
his Spaniflh attendants, together with such an
avowed preference to the manners of their coun-
try, as highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave
rife to that antipathy, which afterwards occa-
fioned the revolution so fatal to him in that part
of his dominions 3'.

l Harsei annal. Brabant. 652.

' Mem. de Ribier, ii. 29. L'Evefque Mlem. du Card.

Granvelle , i. 21.

VOL. IIL

n k.

.OOK IX. CHARLES was long detained in the Nether,
Si$48. lands by a violent attack of the gout, which

returned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken to a great
P degree the vigour of his constitution, He, ne"

verthelefs, did not slacken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf.
burgh, after a long struggle, found it necessary
to give obedience; those of Constance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were compell.
ed by force not only to conform to the Interim
but 'to renounce their privileges as a free city,
to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of
Austria, and , as his vassals, to admit an Austrian
governor and garrison ". Magdeburgh, Bremen,
Hambtyrgh ,and Lubeck were the only Imperial
cities of note that still continued refradory.

37 Sleid. 474. 491.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME,
