THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND,

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King JA M E S VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW Of the SCOTCH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing O RI GI NA PAPFR .

IN TWO VOLUME S.
By 1 L L I A M R O B E RT S ON, D. D

VOLUME I.

L O N D N:
Printed tor A. MIL . A R in the Strand,

M I)C 1.X.

# PREFACE.

P REFACE.

I Deliver this book to the world with all the diffi-

dence and anxiety natural to an Author on publifn-

ing his irpf performance. The time I have employed,
and the pains I have taken, in order to render it
worthy of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, pru-
dent to conceal, till it be known whether that approba-
tion shall ever be bellowed upon it.

BuT as I have departed, in many inflances, from

former Hiflorians, as I lhave placed sacs in a diffirent
light, and have drawn charaters with new colours, I
ought to account for'this condu& to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on lwhich, at the distance of
two centuries, I prcfumle to contrade the tel tlimony of
cotcmporary, or of lcfs reiiote Hiflorians.

i-irE tranfacions in Mary's reign gave rife to two par--

tics, which were animated against each other with the
fiercest political hatred, embittered by religious zcal.
Each of thef produced HifCorians of contidcrable merit,
who adopted all their fcntimcnts, and defended all their
actions. Truth, however, was not the folc o)bjcq

A 2 of

of these Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and heated
by the part which they themselves had aded in the
scenes they describe, they wrote an apology for a sac-
tion rather than the history of their country. Succeeding
Historians have followed these guides almost im-
plicitly, and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
fentations. But as the fame paflions which inflam-
ed parties in that age have descended to their pof-
terity; as almost every event in Mary's reign has be-
come the objec of doubt or of dispute; the cager spirit
of controversy oon discovered that without ome evi-
dence more authentic and more impartial than that of
Historians, none of the points in queflion could be
decided with certainty. Records have therefore been
searched, original papers have been produced, and pub-
lick archives, as well as the repositories of private men,
have been ransacked by the zeal and curiosity of wri-
ters of different parties. The attention of Cecil to
colled whatever related to that period, in which he
ated o conspicuous a part, hath provided such an im-
mcnfc store of original papers for illufrating this part of
the English and Scotch hiltory, as are almost fufficicnt to
satisfy the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Robert
Cotton (whose library is now the property of the pub-

lic)

lie) made great and valuable additions to Cecl's col-
leOtion; and from this magazine, Digges, the compilers
of the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith, Hayncs, Sorbes, have
drawn most of the papers which they have printed.
No liflory of Scotland, that merits any degree of at-
tention, has appeared since these collections were pub-
lifhed. By consulting them, I have been enabled, in many
inflances, tocorred the inaccuracies of former Hiflorians,
to avoid their mistakes, and to detcct their mifrcprcfen--
tations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those indufirious Colledors, and after all they have
produced to light, much fill remained in darkness, un-
observcd or unpublished. It was my duty to search for
there, and I found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable Faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large colledion of
original papers relating to the afiairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
offices in England. Of all thece the Curators of that
library were pleased to allow me the perufll.

T11O U G 1

THOUGH the British Museum be not yet open to the

public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is well
known, procured me access to that Noble Colledion,
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and polified
nation.

THAT vast and curious colletion of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth which was made by Dr.
Sorbes, and of which he published only two volumes,
ha:ving been purchased, fincc his death, by the Lord Vir-
count Royfo, his Lordship was so good as to allow me
the ulf of fourteen Volumes in Quarto., containing that
part of them which is conncced with my subje't.

SiR Alexander Dick communicated to -ne a very va-

iuable collcdion of original papers in two large
Volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked witlh Archbithop Spotfwood's
hand ; and it appears from several paflages in his history
that lie had perused them witl great attention.

MR. Caldcrwood, an eminent Prefbytcrian Clergyman

of the lft century, compilcd an hiflory of Scotland from
tlic bcginnlin of the reign of James V. to the death of
James VI. in fix large Volumes; wherein he has in-
:rted many papers of consequence which are no where

A-4J~~~ -od~~Clfe

else to be found. A copy of this hiflory, which fill re-
mains in manuscript, in the pofeflion of the Church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend,
the Reverend Mr. George Wihdart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dairymple not only communicated to me

the papers which he has colleced relating to Gowrie's
conspiracy; but by explaining to me his fentimlents with
regard to that problematical pafage in the Scotch hiiory,
has enabled me to place that tranfaaion in a light whichi
difpells much of the darkness and confusion in which
it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the conduct and charater of Queen Mary
to be extremely differcnt frolm his own, colmmunicated
to me a Volume of manuscripts in his poisclJon, which
contains a great number of valuable papers copied from
the originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper Office,
by the late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius Profeioir oi
Church Hiiflory in the univcrflty of Edinburgh. 1 like-
wife received fromn him the original Rgifler of lctt ,
kept by the Regent Lennox during his adminifiration.

I

I have consulted all these papers as far as I thought

they could be of any use towards illutrating that period
of which I write the history. With what success I have
employed them to confirm what was already known,
to ascertain what was dubious, or to determine what was
contraverted, the public must judge.

I might easily have drawn from the different repofi-

tories to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the mofi
bulky collection of my predeceifors. But I have satisfied
myself with publishing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it necessary to ap-
peal as vouchers for my own veracity. None of these,
as far as I can recolle&, ever appeared in any former
collection.

I have added to the Appendix a Critical Difertation

concerninig the murder of Kig HHenry, and the genuilenefs
of the een's letters to Bothwell. The fads and
observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my
friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acutcncfs and induftly.

# BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTCH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK I.
Containing a review of the SCOTCH HiJlory previous to the

Death of JAMES V.
r-lT H E firlf ages of the Scotch history are dark and fabulous. Boo I.

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees, -----
and the events, which happened during their infancy ornations fabu-

early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not to be remem- an ob-
bered. The gross ignorance, which anciently covered all the North
of Europe, the continual migrations of its inhabitants; and the fre-
quent and destructive revolutions which these occasioned, render
it impofible to give any authentic account of the origin of the dif-
fercnt kingdolns now eftablifled there. Every thing beyond that
llort period, to which well attestcd annals reach, is obscure; all in-
mcnfe space is left for invention to occul), cach nation, with a va-
nity iieparable from human nature, hath filled tlat void with

Vol. 1. B3 events

BooK I. events calculated to display its own antiquity, and lustre. And his-

tory, which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often ft3
out with retailing ficions and absurdities.
oii;in of the TIIE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high, as any of

ct their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and tle traditions

of their bards, flill more unce;'tain, they reckon up a series of kings
Itveral ages before the birth of ChriSt; and give a particular detail
of the occurrences, which happened in their reigns. But with re-
gard to the Scots, as well as the other northern nations, we receive
the earlicfi accounts on which we can depend, not from their own,
A. D. Mq. but from the Roman authors. When the Romans, under Agricola,

firfi carried their arms into the northern parts of Britain, they
found it possessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people;
and having repulsed, rather than conquered them, they ereted a
strong wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed
the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif-
ficulty of defending such a distant frontier, contracted the limits of
A. D. z:2. the Roman province in Britain, by building a second wall, which

ran between Newcastle and Carlile. The ambition of ucceeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had abandoned; and
the country between the two walls was alternately under the domi-
nion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the beginning
of the fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians
obliged the Romans, in order to defend the centre of their empire,
to recal those legions, which guarded the frontier provinces; and at
that time they quitted all their conquefls in Britain.
A. I 42, THEIR long residence in the island had polished, in ome degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their inter-

¶ courfI

course with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of BJOK I.
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the me-
mory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Picts. The former, who are not mentioned by any
Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were pro-
bably a colony of the Celtae or Gauls; their affinity to whom ap-
pears from their language, their manners, and religious rites; circunm-
flances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than ei-
ther fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous
Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe the cmmnon accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves by degrees,
landed at last on the coafis opposite to that island, and fixed their
habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several ages,
carried on between them and the Pids. At length, Kenneth II. the A. D: 83,
fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fabulous au-
thors) obtained a complete victory over the Pids, and united under
one monarchy, the whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the
no them ocean. And his kingdom became known by its present
name, which it derived from a people who at first fettled there as
irangers, and remained long obscure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period, the hiflory of Scotland would merit tome Tiftory of

hSi'and pc.'-

attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our re- (uli.,ly olin
mote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with (hofic ffcurc
othelr nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almofi' an
equal obscurity over our more recent tranlactions. Tils was occn-
lioncd by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called in question

B z the

BOOK I. the independency of Scotland; pretending that that kingdom was

'~` held as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjeted to all the

conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to eablifh his claim, he
seized the public archives, he ransacked churches and monasteries,
and getting poffeflion, by force or fraud, of many historical monu-
ments, that tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried some of them into England, and commanded the
reft to be burned *. An universal oblivion of pafi tranfadions might
have been the effeEt of this fatal event, but some imperfect Chro-
nicles had escaped the rage of Edward ; foreign writers had recorded
some important faas relating to Scotland; and the traditions con-
cerning recent occurrences were frefl and worthy of credit. These
broken fragments, John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, colleced with a pious induflry, and from them picked
out materials, which he formed into a regular hiflory. His work
was received by his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copied in many mo-
nafteries, and the thread of the narrative was, by different monks,
continued thro' the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and HeEor Boethius published their
histories of Scotland, the former a fuccint and dry writer, the latter
a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work ; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance
of his tailc, and to the purity and vigour of his flyle, his history
might be placed on a level with the most admired compositions of
the ancients. But, inflead of rjecting the improbable tales of
Chronicle writers, he was at the uttnmoft pains to adorn them i and

* In cs, 1I.I:ty 552.

hath

hath cloathed with all the beauties and graces offiction, those le-Booc I.
gends, which formerly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE hi(tory of Scotland may properly be divided into four pe- Fbour remark-

able xras in

riods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to theche Scotch
reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquef of
the Pias, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accession of
James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and conjedure, and

ought to be totally neglcted, or be abandoned to the industry and
credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second pe-
riod, with a light, feeble at firfi, but gradually increasing; and the
events which then happened, may be slightly touched, but merit
no particular or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the history
of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in England, be-
cones more authentic: not only are events related, but their caufcs
and effc&s explained; the characters of the aors are displayed
the manners of the age described; the revolutions in the conflitu-
tion pointed out: and here every Scotfmran mould begin, not only
to read, but to study the hitfory of his country. During the fourth
1,criod, the affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of other
nations, its situation in the political slate of Europe was so import-
ant, its influence on the operations of the neighbouring kingdom
was so vifiblc, that its hiflory becomes an oblje of attention to So-
reigners, and without olec knowledge of the various and extracr--
dlinary revolutions which happened there, they cannot form a jl'l
notion either of the most illustrious events, or of the character ot
the mtult diflinguifhed pifonages in the ixteenth century.

TnlI

BOOK I. THE following history is confined to the last of there periods. To
Ai-wos give a view of the political state of the kingdom, during that which
A review of °
the third ara. immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. The

imperfec knowledge which firangers have of the affairs of Scotland,
and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have imbibed with regard
to the various revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from the
year 1286, to the year 542.

cRie of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
co]ceriing dancy of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
the indepen-
dencyofScot- a question of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
land. dered not as imperial and independant, but as feudatory to the other,

a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, and
every advantage which the dependant kingdom procured, muff have
been elteemed the concession of a Sovereign to his vaTfal. Accord-
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy
was agitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subject of serious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But
though the objects, which at that time warmed and interested both
nations exist no longer, a question which appeared so momentous
to our ancestors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninftructive
to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were early in the hands
of the Scotch Kings, who, as far back as the feudal customs can be

traced,

traced, held there poffeflions of the Kings of England, and did ho- BOOK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage, due only for the ter- - *
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vaflal, indepen-
dant in one capacity, and dependant in another *. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independant, though the
Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the valfals of the Kings
of France ; and, in consequence of their porffciions in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exact. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot-
land ; free and independant as Kings, but, as poffcfling English ter-
ritories, vaitals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
content with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by them into many small
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning Princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often subjected to the yoke of there formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of establish-

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history. Arpin fold the vi-

comtc of the city Bourges to Philip I. who did homage to the Count'of Sancerre for
a part of these lands, which held of that Nobleman, A. D. I oo. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own subjects, is to be met with in
the hiflories either of England or Scotland. Philip lc Bel abolifled this practi, ¢ irn
France, A. D. 1302. lienaut. Abrege Ch onol. Somewhat similar to this, is a char-
ter of the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. i53S, constituting James V. the Bailiffor Stew-
ard of that abbey, vetting in him all the powers which pertained to tllht office, and
requiring him to be anfweralble to the Abbot for his exercile of the fame. Arc/,.i
publ. Edin.

in
s -

BOOK I. ing new rights in that country. The first Kings of the Norman race,

LY.U buried with introducing their own laws and manners into the king-

dom which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves on
the throne which some of them poffefied by a very dubious title, were
as little anxious to acquire new authority, or to form new pretensions
in Scotland. An unexpected calamity that besel one of the Scotch Kings
firif encouraged the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependance. William King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Aln-
wick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from
him an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatest flrength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard . a generous Prince, solemnly
renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William from the
hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
AlexanderlII. near a century after, Edward I. availing himself of the
situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence in that king-
dom, which no Englifl Monarch before him ever pofcfled, and imi-
tating the interefed policy of Henry, rather than the magnanimity
of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Pretensions :f MAncRGlnT of Norway, Grandaughter of Alexander, and heir to

I;ruce ani if i-
iolcxamincd. iis Crown, did not long firvive him. The right of fuccefiion be--

longed to the defccndants of David Earl of Huntington, third son
of King David I. Among theSe, Robert Bruce, and Joln Baliol,
two illlirious compctitors for the Crown, appeared. Bruce was the
son of Iabel Earl I)Dvii's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson
of Margaret tihe cldlci daughltcr. According to the rules of fuccef-
lion vwhich a c nol(, cefllillthd, the riglt of Baliol was preferable,
and notvithliflailing Brncc's plca of lcing nearer in blood to Earl
David, 1Baliol's claim, as the rcprcllntative of Iis mother and grand-

miother

mother would be deemed inconteflable. But, in that age, the or- BooK I.
der of succession was not ascertained with the fame precision. The "
question appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. And
though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the laws of the
kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by a pow-
erful faction. Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both parties
agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the indepcndance of Scotland; and the nation, by its eagerness to
guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjeced to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scotland,
and the ambition of Competitors ready to faciice their country in
order to obtain even a dependant Crown, invited him first to seize,
and then to subjed the kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which
had been unwarily bellowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his
fehemes with the greater facility. Under pretext of examining the
question with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scots Ba-
rons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
liol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of.the Englilf
Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Scv.'I'Sigz or Lic'g' L.od.
This itep led to another till more important. As it was vain to pro-
nounce a sentence which he hadl not power to eecute, Ellard dc-
manied pofffiion of the kingdoml, that lie mliht b able to deliver
it to him wliofe right should be found prcl;frable. And fuicl was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient abition of the c(,i-
petitors, that both afl;'itcd to this til-ange !deandl, anld GCilhert (l

VOL. i. .: t mfra-

BoOK I. Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who refuted to fur-
---'-r - render the castles in his cuflody to the enemy of his country. Ed-

ward finding Baliol the most obsequious and the least formidable of
the two competitors, oon after gave judgment in his favour. Ba-
liol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and submitted
to every condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknow-
ledged was pleated to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independance of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully eftablified. But he began
too oon to assume the mafler; his new vafials, fierce and indepen-
dant, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the paflive spirit of Ba-
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vassal.
At that critical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous
ads of prowess, though his real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dom, is such as needs not the heightenings of fiction. He, almost
single, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce,
the grandson of him who flood in competition with Baliol, appeared
to affcrt his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country.
'he nobles, ashamed of their former baseness, and inraged at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. In
order to crufl him at once, the Englif Monarch entered Scotland,
at tl.e head. of a mighty army. Many battles were foLught, and the

N~I~~~~ Scots,

Scots, though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent BOOK I.
zeal with which the nobles contended for the independency of the
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number, and wealth of his fubjecs. And though the war con-
tinued with little intermission upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept poffefiion of the throne of Scotland, and ruled with
an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all diSputes between

contending nations, was employed to terminate this controvci fy, ni-
ther Edward nor the Scots seemed to diitruft the justice of their caue;
and both appealed to hifrory and records, and fi-om these produced,
in their own favour, such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwcr-
able. The letters and memorials addreeied by each party to the P c,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and often appealed
to as the common judge of all Christian Princes, are flill extant. The
fabulous tales of the early British history; the partial tefimony of ig-
norant Chroniclers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the proofs,
on which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland
and the homage, done by the Scotch Monarchs for their lands in
England, is preposterously supposed to imply the fubjeion of their
whole kingdom *. Ill founded, however, as their right was, the
Engliflh did not fail to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms ; while the Scots disclaimcd it with the utinoft
indignation. To this, we mull impute the fierce and implacable ha-
tred to each other, which long inflamed both. Their national an--
tipathics were excited, not only by the usual circumstances of frc-

.nldcrfon's Ilillorical Efly conccrni g l lic Iln.l!.l'cn : , ,'c,

C 2 (ucnt

BOOK I. quent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the English confidered

''"- the Scots as vassals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in

their turn, regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at enslaving
their country.

S ;oftl. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, the fame

State of the
kingdom form of government was eflablifhed in all the kingdoms of Europe.
when Bruce
heegan i i, And the furprifingfimilarity,in their constitution and laws, demonstrates

'ti that the nations which overturned the Roman empire, and erected

thefr kingdoms, though divided into different tribes, and distinguished
by different names, were originally the fame people. When we take
a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that stupendous and
singular fabric ereEted by them; the first objet that strikes us is the
King. And when we are told that he is the sole proprietor of all
the lands within his dominions, that all his fubjecs derive their pof-
sessions from him, and in return consecrate their lives to his service;
when we hear that all marks of difinCion, and titles of dignity, flow
from him as the only fountain of honour; when we behold the mofi
potent Peers, on their bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign,
and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a powerful, nay
an absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however, would be more raih,
or worse founded. The genius of the feudal government was purely
ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty, and with many ap-
pearances of despotic power, a feudal King was the molt limited of
all Princes.

rplinl of the BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer the
Feud:il Go-
vernmcnt,;nlld world, many of the northern nations fcem not to have been subjed
it, ;il(tocrati-
.i1 ;;cn :,, . to

to the government of kings ; and even where monarchical govern- BOOK I.
ment was eftabliflled, the prince poifeffed but little authority. A '
general rather than a king, his military command was extensive,
his civil jurifdicion almost nothing -. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his flandard $. These con-
quered not for their leader, but for themfe!ves; and being free in
their own country, renounced not their liberty when they acquired
new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient inhabitants
of the countries, which they subdued, but seizing the greater part
of their lands, they took their persons under protection. And the
difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it neceflary to be always
in a posture of defence, the form of government which they efta-
blifhed, was altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country. Their general
rill continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the conquered
lands were allotted to him; the remainder, under the name of bene-
ficia orfiefs, was divided amongst his principal officers. As the com-
mon safety required that there officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and should con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. These great officers,
again, parcelled out their lands among their followers, and annexed
the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was properly
the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominated,
military subordination was eflablifled, and the possession of land was
the pay which soldiers received for their personal service. In con-

C* Ca. lib. vi, c.23. t Tacit, de Mor. Gcnn. c. 7. 1 i. j Caf ibid.

felqunce

B30oo I. sequence of these notions, the pontlion of land was granted dur-
-~r---' ing pleasure only, and kings were eleaive. In other words, an

officer disagreeable to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the person who was most capable of conduding an army, was cho-
fen to command it. Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of
feudal government.

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal system had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the most considerable. Kings formerly elecive, were
then hereditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure, de-
scended fiom father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince,
made no alteration in the ariftocratical Ipirit of the feudal coniti-

Genernl cau- tution. The king, who at a distance, eemed to be invested with
nitcl,, the majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, to poisess none of
Sower of the these advantages, which befllow on monarchs their grandeur and
fcudal m1o-
narchi. authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a anding army;

and he enjoyed no proper jurifdi6tion.

Their revc- AT a time when pomp and splendor were unknown, even in
lLIC5 Sel
fmanl. the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received

little salary betides the fees and perquisites of their office; when
embassies to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
poted of soldiers who served without pay; it was not necetfary that
a king should possess a great revenue; nor did the condition of Eu-
rope, in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Commerce
made little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal government
was eflablilhed. Institutions, which had no other object but to
inspire a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to make
arms the only honourable profeflion, naturally discouraged the

comrnmer-

commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes imposed on BOOK I.
the different branches of commerce, were by consequence inconfi- "'""
derable, and the prince's treasury received little supply from a source,
which, among a trading people, flows with such abundance, and
is almost inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;
such a burthen would have appeared intolerable to men who re-
ceived their eates, as the reward of their valour, and who con-
fidered their service in the field as a full retribution for what they
pofied. The king's dcm2cfsis, or the portion of land which he
still retained in his own hands unalienated, furnished subsistence
to his court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of government '.
The only fated taxes which the feudal law obliged vaiials to pay
to the king, or to those of whom they held their lands, were three;
one when his eldest son was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married ; and a third in order to ransom him if he should
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides these, the king received the
feudal casualtics of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own valEals.
And, on ome extraordinary occasions, his fubjeCs granted him
an aid, which they diftinguifiled by the name of a bencvoleInce, in
order to declare that he received it not in consequence of any right,
but as a voluntary gift, flowing from their good-will +. All these
added together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that could excite
the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependance.

NoR could the king supply the defet of his revenues, by the Tl1y il:,l no

terror of his arms. Mercenary troops, and flanding armies were li'tnljdi"ig -
unknown as long as the feudal government sublisted in vigour.

* Craig. dc Fed. lib, i. Dicg. 1.. Du Calngc (Goil voc. Doninicuin.

i Dli Cangc voc. Auxiliun.

rn

Booic I. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and

- '
the fub-vaffals of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And

while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little discipline, was fuflicient for all the purposes both of the
security and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however,
far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any
people were, the more independant they became; and the fame
persons being both soldiers and fubjets, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their vitories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their own
people, as well as the fcouiges of mankind, were commonly, urder the
feudal conflitution, the mofl indulgent of all princes to their fubjecds,
because they flood moil in need of their afftance. A prince, whom
even war and victories did not render the mafler of his own army,
pofiefled no fliadow of military power during times of peace. His
disbanded soldiers mingled with his other fuljes s; not a ingle man
received pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard
was appointed to defend his person; and deflitute of that great in-
flrument of dominion a sanding army, the authority of the king
continued always feeble, and was often contemptible.

Thicl Jus- NOR were there the only circumfrances, which contributed to-
mitd. wards deprefiing the regal power. By the feudal lyitem, the king's

judicial authority was extemnely circumscribcd. At first, princes
fcem to have been the fuprcle judges of their people, and, in pcr-
son, heard and determined all controvercics anmong them. The mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity of causes loon made it neceflary to appoint judges, who, BooK I.
in the king's name, decided matters, that belonged to the royal
jurifdidion. But the Barbarians, who overran Europe, having
deflroyed most of the great cities, and the countries which they
seized being cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vaflals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protect from every injury; the adminiitration of
iuflice was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal
sentence became almol impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and
disorder of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a
degree almost incredible, and scarce compatible with the subsistence
of civil lociety. Every offender lheltered himself under the pro-
tection of ome powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to punih a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom *. In order

* A remarilabcl inflnnce of this occurs in the following hiftors, o late as the

year 1561. MRary, having appointed a court ofjutlice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were fumnoned to guard the per-
son, who was to act as judge, and to enable him to enforce his deciflons. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feblenefs of
the feudal government, dferve our notice.-" And bccauif it is nccclrry for tlh ex-
ecution ofher Highnefb' commandments, and service, that heir julice be well accom-
panied, and her authority ffficiently fortified, by the concrrence of a good power
of her faithful fubjefts -Therefore commands and charges all and fimdry Earls,
L.ords, Blrolns, Fre-eholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwellig withlin the
fad. counties, that they, and every one of theil, with their l ri, t'icn Is, Crvant;, ald
hlullold men, well bodin in feilr of w:;r in the lu 1 flll't.l'jii)s lni;l:,i, i ('.
coimplea.tly armed and providcdl,] and with twenty ,a\'; viu :., t ilct n ,l t. p, :';
',h w.,a-d witlh him to the borrolll of Iiblh'l, anl thl'c to remainhi d ;in thui

i' l fpj,.'e o' twenty da. s, and to rec ivce t lcll dileli',> .rd11 coinnmdiis, ; la.ii I.

" .' i'. ' l, 11 t l l illn o r SotoeIeign l..'l\t ": irlllct, '1t q] iL't iil- ()

tie ( ;il,,] ;

.1il t, lpll the tzlne i. exe''cution ndi r the t '

? II ' lIn g t;: it iii'. !1:),1 .1:,[
.... ', .." l..,il'.; liill, of Sc ,tlmnd, 1 ,.

'o1.. I. ) (J

BOOK I. to remedy these evils, many persons of diftintion were entrusted
------' with the administration of justice within their own territories.

But what we may presume was, at firif, only a temporary grant,
or a personal privilege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon con-
verted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of some
were erected into Baronies, those of others into Regalities. The
jurifdidion of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as the
name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried byjudges, whom the lord of the re-
gality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person within
his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a flop to
their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove the
cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he submitted
to a foreign jurifdidion . Thus almost every question, in which
any person, who resided on the lands of the nobles, was interested,
being determined by judges appointed by the nobles themselves,
their vassals were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, subjet
to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many small prin-
cipalities, almost independent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And the king was not on-
ly stripped of the authority annexed to the person of a supreme
judge, but his revenue suffered no fall diminution, by the loss
of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that age, due to
the person who adminiftred justice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

role towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea--

Ci i, lib. iii. Dicg. 7.

sure,

sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and by introducing BOK 1.
entails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and invention can
reach that end, to render their possessions unalienable and ever-
ladling. As they had full power to add to the inheritance transmit-
ted to them from their anceflors, but none to diminish it; time
alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual accefEons of wealth, and of dgnity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its courti, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowed ucceflively
into it. Whatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal nobles, likewise, poffefled in an ample manner. These
marks of diftindion are, in their own nature, either official or per-
fonal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illustrious characters, ought to be
appropriated to there. But the ton, however unworthy, could not
bear to be itripped of that appellation, by which his father had
been distinguished. His preifnmption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and added new lustre
to nobles already in pofiefion of too much power. Something more
audacious, and more extravagant fill remained. The supreme di-
redtion of all affairs, both civil and military, being committed to the
great officers of the crown, the fame and lafety of Princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of thcfi
oiticers. But such was the preposterous ambition of the nobles; and
bfo fuccelsful even their wildell attempts to a' Srantldi: e thlemfclvc,
that in all the kingdoms where the feuii.l illltitulions lpevailed,
m1nl of' tel offices were annexetl to ; 'cat flainilcs, an:d A

l, lie,

fiess, )b hereditary rihlit. A perlun, x1(,ic iniditilul l'iha\ r
eta'idcrl' lhimni coioJ u to hli i'ri2 o., 01' \Vll);O ii(i>, ,':\' e.\ sol'], d JlIli

1.) 2 ;,

BOOK I. to the contempt of the people, often held a place of power and trust,
-- --' of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord

Juflice General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Constable,
Earl Marflal, and High Admiral, were all hereditary; and in ma-
ny counties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and whose power so

great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor did
they want initruments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The great
hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than the court
of his Sovereign. The firong caflfes, in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the Sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of 2000
horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their pro-
per rank, these potent and haughty Barons were the rivals, rather
than the fulbjecs of their Prince. They often despised his orders,
insulted his person, and wrefled from him his crown. And the
history of Europe, during several ages, contains little else, but the
account of the wars and revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant
ambition.

BUT,

BUT, if the authority of the Barons far exceeded its proper Boox I.

bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm that the pove
ballance which ought to be preserved between a King and his greater i

scotland than

nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scotch nobles enjoyed, in any crher
common with those of other nations, all the means for extending kingdoni.
their authority which arise from the ariftocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they polfeffed advantages pe-
culiar to themselves; the accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumflances concurred with the spirit
of the conflitution to aggrandise them. To enumerate the nmoi Theparti(a-

ar cufe us

remarkable of these, will serve both to explain the political fate oftrhCaLU
the kingdom, and to illultrate many important occurrences, in the
period now under our review.

I. TE nature of their country was one cause of the power and The natmre ct

the CoGdIltt,

independance of the Scotch nobles. Level and open countries are
formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme magistrate
reaches with ease to the most distant corners, and when nature has
erected no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
are soon detected, and punished. Mountains, and fens, and rivers
set bounds to despotic power, and amidst these, is the natural feat
of freedom and independance. In such places, did the Scotch
nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to his own cafle,
a mutinous Baron could defy the power of his Sovereign; it being
impracticable to lead an army, thro' a barren country, to places,
almost inaccessible to a single man. The fame causes, which checked
the progrcfs of the Roman arms, and rendered all the efforts of
Edward I. abortive, often protedted the Scotch nobles, from the
vengeance of their Prince; and they owed their personal indepen-

dance,

BoOK I. dance, to those very mountains and marhes, which saved their
o<<rV country from being conquered.

The finall II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a little
number of
great cities. to increase the power of the nobles, and to weaken that of the

Prince. Where-ever numbers of men assemble together, order must
be established, and a regular form of government instituted, the
authority of the magistrate muff be recognized, and his decisions
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and subordination
take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in Poland, or
none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of any fort of police.
But under the feudal governments, commerce, the chief means of
aftlmbling mankind, was negie&ed; the nobles, in order to flrengtlh-
en their influence over their vafCals, resided among them, and fel-
dom appeared at court, where they found a superior, or dwelt in
cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich coun-
ties in the south lying open to the Englilh, no town situated there
could rife to be great or populous amidit continual inroads and
alarms; the residence of our monarchs was not fixed to any parti-
cular place; many parts of the country were barren and unculti-
vated; and in consequence of thee peculiar circumstances, added to
the general causes flowing from the nature of the feudal inflitutions,
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very inconsiderable.
The vasals of every Ba;on occupied a ditlinL portion of the king-
doml, and unmingled witl others, formed a separate and alnoit
independent iociety. Intlead of giving aid towards reducing to
obedience their seditious Chieftain, or ally whom he tool, under his
protedion, they were all in arms fur his defence, and obflruded the
operations of jurlicc to the utmoll. The prince as obliged to
colnnive at criminals, whom lie could not reach the n1blcs, con-

Icious

fcious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and the difficul- BOOK I.
ty of punishing almost ensured them of impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had no small effet The inftitu-

don of Clans.

in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations, which over- f"
ran Europe, were originally divided into many small tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquered, it
was natural for every chieftain to bestow a portion, in the first
place, upon those of his own tribe or family. These all held
their lands of him ; and as the iafety of each individual depended on
the general union, there small focicties clung together, and were
distinguished by ome common appellation, either patronymical, or
local, long before the introduction of firnames, or eci/ins armcri[l.
But when these became common, the descendants and relations of
every Chieftain aumed the fame name and arms with him; other
vasals were proud to imitate their example, and by degrees they
were communicated to all those who held of the fame uperior,
Thus clanlhips were formed; and in a generation or two, that
consanguinity which was, at first, in a great measure, imaginary,.
was believed to be real. An artificial union was converted into a
natural one; men willingly followed a leader, whom they regardcd
both as the superior of their lands, and the chief of their blood
and served him not only with the fidelity of vaflals, but with the
affection of friends. Jn the other feudal kingdoms, we may tub-
serve such unions as we have dcfcribed, imperfectly formed; but in
Scotland, whether they were the production of chance, or the es-
fct of policy, or introduced by the Irifll colony above-mentioned,
and fircngtheled by carefully prelcrving their genealogies both ge-
nulie alnd fablous, clanfhips were Universal. Such a confeidcr(lay
mighlt be overcome, it could not be broken ; alnd no change of n:n-i

iC rS3

BOOK I. ners, or of government, has been able, in some parts of the king-
~'T" dom, to dissolve associations which are founded upon prejudices so

natural to the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the
head of followers, who, counting that cause just and honourable
which their Chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person,
or of his fame ? Against such men, a King contended with great
disadvantage, and that cold service, which money purchases, or au-
thority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardor and zeal.

The small IV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned among
nuntlr oif thete causes of the grandeur of the Scotch nobles. Our annals reach

not back to the firit division of property in the kingdom; but lb
far as we can trace the matter, the original possessions of the nobles
feern to have been extensive. The ancient Thanes were the
equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the Earls and
Barons, who succeeded them, were matlers of territories no less
ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, afforded
settlements to a numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain many such
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
diminiifles, in proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble if di-
vided among a multitude; irrefiflible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly refcmble those of the
people, they are roufci by what they feel only, no b what they
apprehend ; and submit to many arbitrary and opprefivc aCts, be-
fore they take arms againflt their Sovereign. A finall body, on the
contrary, is more lsentible, and more impatient ; quick in diccrn-
ing, and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as fuiden,
as thofc of the other are tl\v. Ience piocedced the extrcme jec-

lousy,'

lousy, with which the Scotch nobles observed their monarchs, and BooK I.
the fierceness with which they opposed their incroachments. Even '------
the virtue of a Prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the
splendor of his vidories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their resistance, no less than his
unpopular descendent James III. Besides this, the near alliance of
the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the natural con-
sequence of their small number. And as consanguinity was, in
thoie ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman
interested themfclvcs in his quarrel, as a common caule, and every
contefL the king had, though with a ingle Baron, soon drew upon
him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. TosE natural connexions both with their equals, and with lTh,,I: e.i,,

their inferiors, the Scotch nobles strengthened by a device, whichid :.cnbt!i'"
if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more fiequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of profound peace, they
forimed ablociations, which when made with their equals, were called
lcguess of' 7l'utua/ dfi'nce ; and when with their inferiors, bo7nds o
i:(ircitz. By the former, the contracting parties bound themselves
mutually to af/ift each other, in all causes, and against all persons. By
the latter, protection was stipulated on the one hand, and fidelity
and personal service promised on the other S. Sclf-prefervation, it
is probable, forced men at first into these confederacics, and while
dif)rder and rapine were universal, while government was unfiettled,
and the autlority of laws little known or regarded, near neigh-
bours f;Lund it ncceflry to unite in this manner for their fccurity

* . . '.,!!. I..- . Ac 13. . 1555.
Vol-

B3oK I. and the weak were obliged to court the patronage of the Lftong.
~--'"'" By degrees, these associations became so many alliances offensive and

defensive againfi the throne; and as their obligation was held to be
more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to
our Kings, and contributed not a little to the power and independ-
ence of the nobility. In the reign of James II., William tle eighth
Earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the arls
ofCrawfurd, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the Lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and lo formidable was this combination to the King, that
he stabbed Douglas with his own hand, in order to difiblve it.
Th fquent VI. TE fiequent wars between England and Scotland proved

,nglin. another cause of augmenting the power of the nobles. Nature

has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river, alinol
every where fordable, divides them towards the eail; on the weft
they are separated by an imaginary line. The frnall revenues of
our Kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in
the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of their fubjeas
have permitted fucli a method of defence. The Barons, whole
esfates lay near the borders, confidered themselves as bound in ho-
nour and interest to repel the enemy. The 'ari'leJ:izps of the dif-
ferent ;,mzrch/cs, offices of great trust and dignity, were always be-
flowed on them. This gained them the leading of the warlike
counties in the south; and their vaflals, living in a late of perpetual
hofiility, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became more in-
ured to war than even the reft of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their chieftain in his mofl hardy and dangerous
entcrprizes. It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followcrs, that rendered the Douglafcs great. The nobles in the
aorthern and midland counties were often dutiful and obfcquious to

the

the crown, but our monarchs always found it impracicable to sub- BooK t.
due the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all '
our domestic quarrels, those, who could draw to their fide the
inhabitants of the southern counties, were sure of victory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the Lords who posiesed authority there,
were apt to forget the duty which they owed their Sovereign, and to
aspire beyond the rank of subjeCts.

VII. THE calamities which besel our Kings contributed more than The cucu

any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was any race ,.ill ,.'p
of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scotch. Of fix fuccefiive Princes, I1-"d ili -,l
from Robert III. to James V., nIot one died a natural death ; and
the minorities, during that time, were longer, and more frequent,
than ever happened in any other kingdom. From Robcrt Bruce
to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of these were cal-
led to the ltrone, while they were minors, and almost infants. Even
the most regular and belt established governments feel fenlibly the
pernicious efflc"s of a minority, and either become languid and in-
active, or are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions. But,
under the iperfect and ill adjulted fvftem of government in Scot-
land, these effects were frill more fatal; and the fierce and muti-
nous spirit of the nobles, unrltrained by the authority of a King,
scorned all subjection to the delegated juriflticion of a regent, or
to the feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority was
cilcumnlc.ibed within narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives (,f
the crown, naturally inconfidcrable, were reduced aill(t to no-
thing; alnd the arifocratical power gradlually roe unpon the ruins
of the onnrchical. Lcft tle personal power of a regent fhluld
en!)ile hillll to att with too mLuch vigour, te authority, alnnexd
to tat olic, was fomletilmcs rendered inlcolfidcrab), v bci;

1 2 (ii, idcl;

BOOK I. divided; or if a single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and
I---Y-j the heads of the more illustrious families, were seldom railed to

that dignity. It was often conferred upon men, who poffefiid little
influence, and excited no jealousy. They, conscious of their own
weakness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to per-
mit others; and in order to support their authority, which was de-
fiitute of real lrength, they endeavoured to gain the most power-
ful and aive Barons, by granting them pofiefiions and immunities,
which raised them to still greater power. When the King him-
self came to assume the reins of government, he found his reve-
nues wafted or alienated, the crown lands seized or given away,
and the nobles so accustomed o independence, that after the
fhruggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to
the fame Rate, in which they had been at the beginning of his mi-

Review of the nority, or to wretf from them what they had usurped during that
c" its fvocr-

tot,,i "to' timne. f we take a view of what happened to each of our Kings, who

ncbles uring as so unfortunate as to be placed in this ituation, the truth and im-
tach minoil-

~t,. portance of this observation will fully appear.
,-:-* Tiii minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dif-

turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the
aid of England, and on the support of some difafi-eted nobles
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which at
first attended his arms, obliged the young King to retire to France;
,nLl B3aliol took pofffeiion of the throne. A fimall body of the
nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled Prince, drove
Ealiol out of Scotland; and after an abllfcce of nine ears, David
returncel from France, and took the government of the kingdom
Anto his own ands. But nobles, whlo were thus ,wasing their
btold and trca'irc in dfcnce of the crown, had a right to the un-

d iflur'b. d

disturbed possession of their ancient privileges, and even ome title BOOK .
to arrogate new ones. It icems to have been a maxim, in that age,
that every leader might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquisitions were gained
by the nobles in that way; and to these the gratitude and liberality
of David added, by difltibuting, among such as adhered to him,
the vast pofleffions which fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his
enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rile above the
other nobles, in. the reign of his father, augmented both its power
and its property, during his minority.

JAMrES I. was seized by the Englihf, during the continuance oft4' ;l

a truce, and ungenerously detained a priloner, almost nineteen
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son.
Both these oblemen apired to the crown, and their unnatural am-
bition, if we may believe mofi of our hiforians, not only cut Iort
the days of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but prolonged
the captivity of James. They flattered themfclves, that they might
siep with less opposition into a throne, when almutl vacant; and
dreading the King's return, as the extindion of their authority,
and the end of their hopes, they carried on the ncgociations for
obtaining his liberty, with extreme remifnefs. At thc tilne time,
they negleced nothing that could either footli or bribe the nobles
to approve their fclcmrc. They slackened the reins of govcrnmcnt
they allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon; they luifered
the nmof irregular as of power, and even wanton inflances of o'-
prciion, to pals witl impunity; they dealt out the patrimol;y ol
the crown amiong thoi whoe enmity they ldreaded, or whote '1-
vour they had gained ; anedlredced the ryal authority, to at liate

C,!

BOOK I. of imbecillity, fiom which succeeding monarchs laboured in vain

to raise it.
Jam+es l. DURING the minority of James II., the administration of affairs

and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-
liam Crighton, and Sir A!exander Livingston. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the efedts of their conjunC authority, and each of them,
in order to strengthen himself, beflowed new power and privileges
upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ereded a fort of
independent principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his
valials to acknowledge any authority but his own, he created Knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military, aflumted
every enlign of royalty, but the title of King, and appeared in pub-
lic with a magnificence more than royal.
6D E. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom, during the

minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing the per-
lon of the young King, and by the ascendant which he acquired
over him, soon engrofied the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious projet of railing his family to the fame pitch of power and
grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he eff(cted it.
While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of government, and the
nobles became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and indepen-
dance. The power, which Boyd had been at to much pains to ac-
quire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his family,
according to the ate of favourites, was sudden and defl-udtiv ;
but upon its ruins, the famtily of IHamilton rolc, which loonl at-
tained the highcll rank in the kingdom.

As

As the milority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more BOOK I.

turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contending --v-
nobles, encouraged or protected either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themielves into more regular factions, and dif-
regarded more than ever the reflraints of order and authority. The
French had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their interest,
raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a native of
France, and a grandson of James II. But Alexander Lord Home,
the mol eminent of all the Scotch peers, who survivcd the fatal
battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during the first years
of his adminiftratio ; and the intrigues of the Qeen Dowager,
sifter of Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised his
authority, and rgardlcfs either of his threats, or his intreaties, pe-
remptorily reful(ed, two fevcral times, to enter England, to tie bor-
ders of which kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re-
peated inflanccs of contempt, the regent abandoned his troublesome
flation, and retiring to Fr.ance, preferred the tranquillity of a pri-
vate life, to an oflice dltitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglab Earl of Angus became lmatcr of the King's prfon, and
governed the kingdom in his namec. Many efforts were made to
deprive him of his uurped autiority. But the numerous val'als and
friends of his family adhercd to him, becauf hle divided with
them the power and emoluments of his office; the people reve.-
renced and lved the name of Douglas; without tlhe title of re-
gent, lie cxercilcd a fller and more absolute authority thian any
wlo had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but daIngerous
pre-eminence of the Dougllcs, Icilmcd to be rcflored.

T.->r

BOOK I. To these, and to many other causes, omitted or unobservcd by

us, did the Scotch nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon
power, of which instances occur, so frequently, in our history.
Nothing, however, demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the declension of the
feudal system in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the arms
or policy of Princes had, every where, haken, or laid it in ruins,
the foundations of that ancient fabric remained firm and untouched
in Scotland.

;The pow. of TIIF powers, which the feudal institutions vceted in the nobles,
tilc fcudail
i1tl),:c.iic l0oon1 became intolerable to all the Princes of Europe, who longed
icl.1'' 1 to posiess something more than a nominal and precarious authority.

Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of England,
Edward II. and some other weak Princes, into rafi ad premature
attempts againit the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
disappointed, or perished. Princes, of greater abilities, were con-
tent to mitigate evils which they could not cure; they fought oc-
cupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wa s;
and allowed their fierce courage to evaporate in foreignl expeditions,
which, if they brought no other advantage, fi;cured at leait do-
mefiic tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened the feudal go-

The attempts vernments for deftrudtion. Towards the end of the fifteenth cen-
=1, humble thel
nobI,, 'Ic- tury, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe at-
ill ]
,Jl i, tacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men of e-

Pl11hl nius then undertook with ficcelf, what their uinfkil fll prcdccfclil

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the mutt prolfound
and the moftl adventrous genius of that age, began, and in la finle
rcig, alimoof completed the Ifchec of tleir defluctio. The fitr
but concealed policy of Ilcnry V11. of Eil;al: d prodiiLcd the fi-mc

csla L

effet. The means, indeed, employed by there monarchs were BOOK I.
very different. The blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and .,
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which
wat-e the conftiution, but become not mortal till ofme distant pe-
riod. Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrcfled from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons by encouraging them to fell tleir
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in
the legislature unknown to their predeceifors. But while these great But the ncel,

co tia tl to

revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot- gather
land was intimately conneted, no alteration happened there; the ;oelnth,'l

cot1and,

King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com1-
mons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only retained
their ancient privileges and pofeflions, but daily made new acqui-
fitions.

Tins was not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or to OurIKigsc:,.

their vwant of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the ex- teocirc0t
orbitant ower of the nobles, and extremely follicitous to humble royal autho-
them. They did not however pofTefs means, sufficient fr accom-
plifiing that end. The resources of our monlarchs were few, and
the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the number of G, 1C
their followers, and the extent of their jurifdiciion, were the two mealn" to-
cliief cicumflatces which rendered the nobles formidable; in or1der (1
to countcraallance the one, anil to rcfr-ain the other, all ': r Kiii.':.
liai ccour,fc to tle fijmc cxpcdi:i:ots.

I, AMONG, nobles of a fierce co'urI:.-, and of tilnpolifKl)d in,1 -

unerr, lhrroutdcd witll vafihls bold and licentious, wholm thev' VI 1l

..

bIoi(nd 1)y itereftll and honour to proceWl, tli ce of
( ii:.i,

\ o.. J.

BOOK I. were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could
~ '--"-- seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-

rior orjudge, and their impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decisions of juflice, their quarrels were usually terminated by the
sword. The offended Baron assembled his vassals, and wafted the
lands, or shed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly *. Hence quar-
rels were transmitted from father to son, and under the name of
deadly feuds, subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated
rancour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than to
extinguilh these, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds of dif-
cord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered the
arifiocracy invincible, and which must at once have annihilated the
prerogative, was ffedually prevented. To the fame cause, our
Kings were indebted for the fuccels, with which they sometimes at-
tacked the most powerful chieftains. They employed private re-
-ynge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming against the

" The spirit of revenge was encouraged not only by the manners, but what is

more remarkable, by the laws of thole ages. If any person thought the prose-
ution of an injury offcred to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the
Salique laws permitted him publickly to dctift from dcmanding vengeance; but the
ifme laws, in order to punifi his cowardice, and want of affecaion to his family, dc-
p ivcd him of the right of fuccclion. Henaut. Abregd Chronol. p. 81. Among
the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular inflitution diflinguilied by the name of' bda-
,;,i i; a voluntary aifociation, the object whereof was the pcrfonal fccurity of
tliof who joined in it, and which the feblencfs of government at that time rn-
JdCrce nIcle ulliy. Among other regulations, whlich are contained in one of thofl
!'l, e:.tant, lthe fullowin d l\exs notice. " IL any aflciatc flhall itler cat or
dli!nk ithl a pcrltol who ha' 1.illed any melmbelr of te so-la it,7irm, 1nlelc in
tlie p ufc nce of tl e lin!,, thle llilh p, o( the Cunttt, and unrlcf, h cn prove that
1,i dil n1t lillk tlhe pel f0n, le him1 pty a great F ne."1 il:k DilTe:rt. Lpi)lllar.

person who had incurred their difpleafule, those rival families, which BooK I.
wifl'ied his fall, they rewarded their service, by haring among '--
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the body of the
nobles. Those, who were now the instruments of their Prince's
vengeance, became, in a short time, the objects of his fear. Hav-
ing acquired power and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their
turn, set up for independence; and though there might be a fluc-
tuation of power, and of property, though old families fell, and
new ones rose upon their ruins, the rights of the aristocracy re-
mained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration ofjuftice is one of the most powerful ties Extend the

between a King and his fubjedts, all our monarchs were at the ut- of t}he ing's
most pains to circumscribe the jurifdicion of the Barons, and toCO"rtS.
extend that of the crown. The external forms of subordination,
natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt. An appeal lay
from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first inflance, belonged to
the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the effect of ap-
peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The royal ju-
rifdidion was alloft confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demcfies, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed much autho-
rity, but possessed next to none. Our Kings were sensible of these
limitations, and bore them with impatience. But it was impofilble
to overturn, in a moment, what was so deeply rooted ; or to rip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had held o lon:g, and
wliich were wrought almoil into the fame o the feudal conflitu-
tioui. To accomplith tills, lowever, was an oljcct of uniform and
Iaxious attention to all our princes. James 1. led the way, here,
as well as i other inflances, towards a inure rCgli.r and pCri-t

I i police.

BOOK I. police. He made choice, among the estates of parliamentof a cer-
i'-V-" tain number of persons, whom he diftinguihed by the name of

Lords of Sefion, and appointed them to hold courts for deter-
mining civil causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their jurifdition
extended to all matters, which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of parliament, their
decisions were final. James II. obtained a law, annexing all rega-
lities, which should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring the
right ofjurifdiaion to be unalienable for the future. James III. im-
posed severe penalties upon those judges appointed by the Barons,
whose decisions fiould be found on a review to be unjust; and by
many other regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his
own court *. James IV, on pretence of remedying the inconve-
niencies arising from the short terms of the court of Seflon, ap-
pointed other judges called Lords of daily council. The Sicn
was an ambulatory court, and met seldom; the Daily council
was fixed, and fat confiantly at Edinburgh ; and though not corn-
poscd of members of parliament, the fame powers, which the Lords
of Session enjoyed, were vested in it. At last, James V. erected a
new ccurt, which itill fubfiftl, and which he named the Collge
r,' lii'ce, the judges or Senators of which were called Loras

of Council and Se//ion. This court, not only exercised the fame

iurifdidion which formerly belonged to the Seflion ad Daily
Council, but new rights were added. Privileges of great import-
ance were granted to its members, its forms were prescribcd, its
terms fixed, and regularity, power and splendor conferred upon it.
The persons conflitutcd jtdges in all there diffcrent courts, had, in

* Att 2* J16. A 9.6. f\. P.:. ). yA93. gA(. 9.
m P. P.t'P7.

many

many reFpeds, the advantage of those who presided in the courts BooK I.
of the Barons; they were more eminent for their kill in law, their ''-
rules of proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions more
confitent. Such judicatories became the objets of confidence,
and of veneration. Men willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their incroachments on the jurifdidions of the
nobles were popular, and for that reason successful. By devices of
a similar nature, the jurifdidion of the nobles in criminal causes was
reqrained, and the authority of the court of if;ziciazy extended.
The crown, in this particular, gaining infenlibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority; and the King, whose jurifdiCioi
once resembled that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign ,

camne

"* The moss perse& idea of the feudal system of government may be attained by

attending to the fiate of Germany, and to the hillory of France. In the former,
tle feudal inflitutions filli fiiblil with great igour ; and though altogether abo-
)i:hcd in the latter, the public records have been so carcfully prefeived, that the
French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, \vith more certainty and prcci-
lion, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and
revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all is
great Princes as vailds, holding of the emnperor. Tlcy ptefs all the feudal pri-
i' ges; t!ceir efis arc perpetual; their jurifdictlion within their own territorics, fe-
p.rate and eix:cnive; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and
annexed to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains many of the
prlerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and prctenfions are in-
numerable, and his power finall; his jurifdi(cion within his own demefnis, or h'-
i.itary countiics;, is compleat; beyond the bountds of there it is almilt Iliotlinir'.
Aid fT permnlllet are feudal principles, that although the fuitdal f)!cmn be ovcr-
tL:r:.ld inl :lllmoll every particular fl.tte in Germny, ani .lCilouth its Princes hs
all Ibclin abfhoitc, the oi igin:l feuldal constitution of the empire flill relnaiil,
.111i ila; peueliar to tha t flrm

i I ' IveCrllmlent, ldireC t all its op()i tiuns, ;id dr -

l' i il the' i i,

oll its Pll nc . r obf11 i t s wit h re ard to the limiie.

*, lli
iJ, iteiIi ,f lihe Kil under the .feudl l overClmlclt e, ;e greatly ill;;li atcd by xvb.t

Iti Ipprle ci

BOOK . came more and more to be confidered as the head of the commu-

'-- '"-'nity, and the supreme dispenser ofjuftice to his people. These ac-

quifitions of our Kings, however, though comparatively great, were
in reality inconsiderable; and notwithflanding all their efforts, the
feparatejurifditiohs of the nobles remained, many of them, in great
vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a distant and more
happy period.

F.ch of our BUT besides these methods of defending their prerogative,
K ings pursued
some plan and humbling the aristocracy, which may be confidered as com-
thi noblcs. mon to all our Princes, we fhlall find, by taking a review of

their reigns, that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce
to James V, had formed fbme particular system for depressing the
authority of the nobles, which was the object both of their jea-
lousy and terror. The conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satis-
fled with the accounts of their historians, muff be confidered as
flowing entirely from their resentment against particular noblemen;
and all their attempts to humble them, must be viewed as the sallies
of private paflion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though some of their aions may be imputed to

happened in France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of Charlemaigne
encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent jurifdicion. Nothing remained in
the hands of the crown ; all was sizcd by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the
throne, A D. 987, he kept ponfelion of his private patrimony the Cornmt of Paris,
andi all the jurifdi('tion, which the Kings his su(ccessors exercised for some time, wa.
within its territoriLS. There were only four towns in France, where he could
cllablillh G',;i'/ds Baili's, or royal judges ; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
liiCs Ibelonlged to tlie nobles. TIhc nmethoids to mwhil I the Flrcncll monarchs had
recoillIe for extlnding t it ii rifdic'tion xVcIe Cxactly imilar to those employed by
oii rl P lice;. ilciaLit's Ablreg, p. 617, &c. Dc L'Eifprit dCs Loix, Liv. .o
hcl. 20, &C.

tliofe

those palions, though the different genius of the men, the temper BOOK I.
of the times, and the fiate of the nation necessarily occasioned great '---''
variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceflive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uniformly the
fame. And the proje of reducing the power of the ariflocracy, some- This proved
times avowed, and pursued with vigour; sometimes concealed, or tbF treie"'f

the events i11
seemingly suspended; was never altogether abandoned. their rei,n

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert RobertBruce.

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him on
the throne. His gratitude and generosity bellowed on them the
lands of the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone greater
or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was subject, at
that time, in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the eflates of
most of the ancient Scotch nobles, granted them to his Englifi sub-
jets. Thele were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new maers. Ainidit such rapid changes, confusion was una-
voidable; and many pofleffed their lands by titles extremely lame,
During one of those truces between te two nations, occasioned ra-
ther by their being weary of war, than desirous of peace, Robert
formed a scheme for checking the growing power and wealth of the
nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to faew by what rights
they held their lands. They assembled accordingly, and the queflion
being put, they flarted up, at once, and drew their swords, B By
these, :aid they, we acquired our lands, and with there we will de-
fend them." Thie King, intimid!ated by their boldness, prudently
dropt the project. But io deeply did the nobles relent this attack
upon their order, that notwithllalding Robert's popular and fplen-
did viltucs, it occasioned a dangerous contfiiracy againf i his lik.

1DA s IL)

BOOK I. DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards a prisoner
David 11. in England, and involved in a continual war with Edward III, had

not leisure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
Robert II. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the military, than

the civil transactions of the reign of Robert II. Skirmishes and in-
roads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years of tranquillity,
they are altogether silent.
Rubert n. TIHE feeble administration of Robert III. muff likewise be pased

over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and of a frail and
sickly conflitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with active
and martial nobles, or to attempt wresting from them any of their
rights.
jamcs . T-THE civil tranfations in Scotland are better known since the

beginning of James I's reign, and a compleat series of our laws sup-
plics the defects of our historians. The Englith made ome amends
for their injustice in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by their e-
nerous care of his education. During his long residence in England,
he had an opportunity of observing the feudal fyflem in a more ad-
vanced state, and refined firom many of the imperfections which
still adhered to it, in his own kingdom. lie saw there nobles great,
but not indcpendant; a King powerful, though far rom ablolute;
he saw a rlll- adminilfiation of governCment ; wv i- laws enacted;
and a nation flouirifing and happy, bccaufc all ranks of men were
accufloml obcd cv tohem. Full of tlhci ideas, lie returned into his
native country, which prcfcntcd to him a very differclt ccne. The

royal

royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by being so BOOK II.
long delegated to regents. The ancient patrimony, and revenues of~'--~
the crown, were almost totally alienated. During his long absence,
the name of a King was little known, and less regarded. The li-
cence of many years had rendered the nobles independent. Uni-
versal anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed to the rapine
and oppression of the strong. In every corner !ome barbarous chief-
tain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the King, nor pitied the
people *.

JAMES was too wxife a Prince to employ open force to correc

such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
born it. He applied the gentler, and leis offensive remedy of laws
and ilatutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wile laws, tending
visibly to re-eflabli(i order, tranquillity, and jufice in the kingdom.
But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured to fccure thee bleflings
to his fubejes, he discovered his intention to recover thole polfef-
sions, of which the crown had been unjustly breaved ; and for that
purpose obtained an ad by which he was impowered to summon
those, who had obtained crown lands during the three lafi reigns, to
produce the rights by which they held them -. As this statute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which pasTd in a fubfe-
quent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By it, the

* A cotcmporary Manlkil writer dcl:ibc; thcre c.lam!its vc l i

iy ::;y, ii i ,

rude Ltin. In dibl)s illis, non crat Icx in Scoti,, tL qui!ibt p tcntioC ln jnO l,)
rcmn oppreit ; ct totiUn rCnl m fulit ununl lltinjin'in; li i; iia, (cprt'l.Ltioii,.:
i(ccndia, et ca cra maleficia renmanferunt impunit.i; ct] i iia ciiC.t

ti c.xt ' t l ni nv:,
it1i'i cxulavit. (.hartular. 1\urav. apud Inncs 1'.iiy), \Jl. i.p. ? 2,

I- At.. P. 42 .
VOL. I. C IG lrtc

Boo: II. leagues and combinations, which we have already described, and
'--v---' which rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, were de-

clared unlawful . Encouraged by this success in the beginning of
his enterprize, James's next ftep was still bolder and more deciiive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized, at once, his cousin
Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons ; the Earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other Peers and Barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was immediately recon-
ciled, except to Albany, and his sons, and Lennox. These were
tried by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is now un-
known. Their execution flruck the nobles with terror, and their
forfeiture added vaif poflefions to the crown. He leized, likewise,
the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different pretexts; and
that of Mar fell to him by inheritance, The patience and inadi-
vity of the nobles, while the King was proceeding lo rapidly to-
wards aggrandizing the crown, are amazing. The only obflruc-
lion he met with was from a flight infurrcntion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily fupprellcd.
The splendor and presence of a King, to which the nobles had been
long unaccufioed, inr pired reverence: James was a Prince of
:rlat abilitis, and conduled his operations with much prudence.
-Ie was in friendlip with England, and clofcly allied with the
French King: He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un-
usual security and happiness under his admiiiliration: And all his
2cq(tilition, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been gained
by attacks upon individuals ; were obtained by decilions of la ; and
lcii:g fo;unded on circiimlltanccs peculiar to the pcribns who sus-
it rcd, mIight excite imurmlkil rs n and pprllliOis, 1ult affrded no
,lo r,.l:ele pre text for a gencral relclin. It was not to with the

"
,'*~. 2,,, P, , i ? I,

nex:,t

next attempt which the King made. Encouraged by the fa- BOOK I.
cility with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a-'---'
measure that irritated the whole nobles, and which the event hews
either to have been entered into with too much precipitancy, or
to have been carried on with too much violence. The father of
George Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms againfl Robert III.
the King's father ; but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
restored by Robert Duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had exceeded his powlr, and that it was not competent to
any but the King himself to pardon treason, or to alienate lands an-
nexed to the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to
be void, and depriving Dunbar of the carldom. Many of the noblcs
held lands by no other right than what they derived from grants
of the two Dukes of Albany. Such a dccilion, though they had
reason to cxpect it in confequcoce of the flatute which the King had
obtained, occasioned a gencral alarm. Though :Dunbar was, at pre-
jenlt, the only vfurcr, the prccedent migtlt be extended, and their
titles to polfions, which they confidcrcd as tc rewards of their
valour, might be Iulbjccted to the review of courts of law, whose
forms of proceeding, and juriliiion, were in a martial ae little
known, and extremely odious, Terror and dilcontent lpread fal
upon this discovery of the King's intentions; the common (anger
callcl on the whole order to unitc, and to make one bold sand,
before tlhe wsere fLipcld plieccLmeal, and rcdlltcc to fnl te of po-
verty and inlignihtcance. Tihe prciva:;lce of l'hef fent;me::nts ainmol;
the nobles encouracgd a fciv (lec-;;at: Imci, tle ficlis or follo,.--
ers of those who lli been the iic Lilir; iIer the lKii":'- adi-
minll raltion, to (orm a coils}j .ircy ag:iinl )i. Ii Cl . TJlc fil'fl eil ('I-
tain ilntellience of this was lIroiCt lht i, \', ilc hi e ily iln lhs ca;iilt
Cbefore Rloxbrgh cafile. lie ci nl lot e ;l<c i'jlb' , to x.V !n

(~ 2, 1'

BooK II. he had given so many causes of disgust, but instantly difiniffed them
'-'-- " and their vaflals, and retiring toa monaflery near Perth, was oon after

murdered there, in the most cruel manner. All our historians mention,
with astonishment, thiscircumftance oftheKing's disbanding his army,
at a time, when it was so neceflary for his preservation. A King, fay
they, surrounded with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very nobles were the persons
whom he chiefly dreaded ; and it is evident, from this review of his
administration, that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expect defence, from their hands. It was the misfortune of
James, that his maxims and manners were too refined for the age
in which he lived. Happy ! had he reigned in a kingdom more
civilized; his love of peace, of jufiice, and of elegance, would
have rendered his schemes successful; and instead of his perifli-
ing because he had attempted too much, a grateful people would
have applauded and seconded his efforts to reform and to improve
them.
;IC: IT. CRICHTON, the most able man of those, who had the direction

of affairs during the minority of James II., had been the minister of
lames I. and well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobles. He did not relinquiff the design, and he endeavoured to
inspire his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to effct slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crichton
pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with the
fierccnefs peculiar to that age. William the sixth Earl of Douglas
was the firfl vistim to their barbarous policy. That young noble-
emain (as we have already obltrved) contemning the authority of
an infant Princc, almotl openly renounced his allcgiance, and as-
pirled to independency. Crichton, too high-fpiritcd to bear such

al

an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to justice so powerful BOOK II.
an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an interview in the '-v-'
ca/tle of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding these, murdered both
him and his brother. Crichton, however, gained little by this at
of treachery, which rendered him universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas was no less powerful, and no less formidable
to the cown. By forming the league which we already men-
tioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other Barons, he had united
againfl his Sovereign almost one half of his kingdom. But his
credulity led him into the famne fiare, which had been fatal to the
former Earl. Relying on the King's promises, who had now at-
tained to the years of manhood, and having obtained a safe conduCt
under the great eal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling caltle.
James urged him to abandon that dangerous confederacy into which
he had entered; the Earl obflinately refuted; " If you will not,
,, (itid the enraged monarch, drawing his dagger) this shall;" and
flabbed him to the heart. An ation so unworthy of a King filled
the nation with aftonithment, and with horror. The Earl's vassals
ran to arts with the utmost fury, and dragging the safe conduct,
which the King had granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they
marched towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to bc-
iicge the castle. An accommodation ensucd, on what terms is not
known. But the King'sjealoufy, nd the Earl's power and resent-
ment, prevented it from being of long continuance. Both took the
field, at the head of their armies, and met near Abercorn. That
of the Earl, compoted chiefly of borderers, was far upcrior to the
King's both in number, and in valour ; and a ingle battle inull,
in all probability, have decided whether the oule of Stewart or of
Douglas was henceforth to poflTcl the throne of Scotland. u it,
while his troops impatiently expeted the iglnal to cngi :g, the

Earl.

BOoK II. Earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton
'--r--- of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,

convinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or of
his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many ; and the Earl, defpiCed, or for-
faken by all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to
depend for his subsistence, on the friendship of the King of
England. The ruin of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which such an ex-
ample of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, secured the King,
for ome time, from opposition; and the royal authority remained
uncontrouled and almost absolute. James did not fufifr this favour-
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the content of par-
liament to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the aritfocracy, than were ever obtained
by any former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of there, not only all the vafi poffefions of the Earl of Dou-

glas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future alienations of
crown lands were declared to be void, and the King was irnpowered
to fcize them at pleasure, without any process or form of law, and
oblige the poffcfTors to refund whatever they had received from
them *. A dreadful instrument of opprelion in the hands of a
Prince.

ANo rS ir lawv prohilbited the wardenship of the marches to e

granted llhlc clitarily ; retlraincd, in fcvral iiiflanccs, the jtiriliidion
of that otice ; antl extcndced the authority of the King's courts -.

* A . 4r. r. 1.5 . i Iblid. &. 42.

BY

BY a third, it was ordained that no Rgality, or exclusive BOOK II.

right of administring justice within a man's own lands, should be '-- -'
granted in time to come, without the content of parliament ,
a condition, wvhich implied almost an express prohibition. Those
nobles who already pofflefed that great privilege, would naturally be
follicitous to prevent it from becoming common, by being bellowed
on many. Those, who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering diflindtion ; and both would
concur in rejccting the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth a, all new grants of hereditary offices were pro-

hibited, and thole obtailed since the death of the lait King were
revoked -.

EAtcIt of these fitutes undermined some of the great pillars, on

which the power of the aristocracy refted. During the remainder
of his reign, this Prince pursued the p'an which he had begun,
with the utmofi vigour; and lad not a sudden death, occasioncd
by the splinter of a cannon which burl near hlim at the siege of
Roxburgh, prevented his prcgrc'-, he wanted neither genius nor
courage to perfcLl it: and Scotland might, in all probability, have
been the first kingdom in Europe, which would have ien tlhe
fubvcrlion of the feudal yltcm.

JAMES III. ditcovere d no lcis eanlrncfs than his fatller or gran(d- ,, .it.

father to ILiumll c the nlolcs ; bt f.lr interior to cither of theml in
abilities and acddrtls, h]e aii, ltcdl a Iplal cexticliuly ilmpoliitic, and
]his reign' was dilalrlous, ,as well al, In d trak. al. (Under thie f l-
dal ovIrnmciints, tihe IIl)es w cc lnot olIy tl Kinls miniiers,

- ILil. A ct .
'. A,

A rt..i { r

,qllc~.

BOOK II. and poifeffed of all the great offices of power or of truf ; they were,
'--v-' likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce any but them

approached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
distance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and affetion
upon a few mean persons, of professions so dishonourable, as ought
to have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with
these, in his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amused himself with architecture, music, and other arts, which
were then little efetemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of these minions, with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than his negle In. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every man thought
himself injured, because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights of crown lands,
hereditary offices, regalities, and every other concession, which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and whlich had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves, ecret intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war, were the
cffccts of their reientment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious spirits, and incensed against James, who treated them
with the fame coldness as he did the other nobles, entered deeply
into all their cabals. The King detected their designs, before they
were ripe for execution, and seizing his two brothers, committed
the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The Earl of Mar, having
remonstrated with too much buldnefs against the King's conduc, was
murdered, if we may believe our hiflorians, by his commnnd. Al-
bany, apprchenfivc of the mfle late, madle iis efcpe out of the
caflc, and fled into lFrancc. Conccrn for the King's honour, or in-

dignation

dignation at his measures, were perhaps the motives,, which irft BooK I.
induced him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to -v-
favourites rendering him every day more odious to the nobles, the
profped of the advantages which might be derived from their ge-
neral disaffection, added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, oon inspired Albany
with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. le concluded a treaty
with Edward IV. of England, in which he aumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the afiiftance which was
promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound himself, so
soon as he was put in polfeffion of the kingdom, to swear fealty and
to do homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contrac a new one with England, and to fur-
render some of the strongest castles, and moit valuable counties il
Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke so basely purchased at the
price of his own honour, and the independency of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger of
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the afiftance of those
nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of them
were in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were impatient for any event, which
would restore their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took
the field, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-
lowers, but with a stronger difpofiion to redress their own grievan-
ces, than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed resolution of pu-
nifhing those minions, whose insolence they could no longer tolerate.
This resolution they executed, in the camp near Lawder, with a

" Abccrr. Mart. Atcli, v. ii. 413.
VOL. 1. IIT nlita:

BOOK I. military dispatch and rigour. Having previously concerted their plan,
'--'the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost the whole

Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered the apartment
of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites except one Ramsay,
whom they could not tear from the King, in whose arms he took
flielter, and without any form of trial hanged them inftautly over
a bridge. Among the mofl remarkable of those who had en-
grossed the King's affection, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a
Taylor, Leonard a Smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan a fen-
cing matter. So despicable a retinue discovers the capriciousness of
James's character, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles
when they beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such un-
worthy objecs.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under his

command, and difmifling it, ihut himself up in the castle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restorcd to him, and he seemed even to have regained his
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendship
was not of long duration. James, once more, abandoned himself
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lawder, did not deter others, from courting that dangerous
pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made
to take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retiring to
his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater multitude of nobles than
attended on the King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his
{irmer confederacy with Edward; the Earl of Angus openly nego-
ci:tcd that infamous treaty; other Barons were ready to concur with
it; and if the sudden death of Edward had not prevented Albany's
(.c :iYvng any aid fiom England, the Crown of Scotland would, pro-

bablv,

bably, have been the reward of this unworthy combination with BooK I.
the enemies of his country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning v--
in Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward, that he could
not reside there in safety, and flying first to England, and then to
France, he seems from that time to have taken no part in the as-
fairs of his native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the King
and his Ministers, multiplied the insults which they offered to the
nobles. A landing guard, a thing unknown under the feudal go-
vernments, and inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence with
which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles, was raised for the
King's defence, and the command of it given to Ramtay, lately
created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who so narrowly ecaped
when his companions were put to death at Lawder. And, as if
this precaution had not been sufficient, a proclamation was issued
forbidding any person to appear in arms within the precincts of the
court *; which, at a time, when no man of rank left his own house.
without a numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in effec-, de-
barring the nobles from all access to the King. James, at the fame
time, became fonder of retirement than ever; and funk in indolence,
or superstition, or attentive only to amusements, devolved his whole
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the mofl.
considerable nobles to take arms, and having pevfuadcd or obliged
the Duke of Rothfay, the King's eldest son, a youth of fifteen,
to et himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had discovered hiimfc!f
to be tso unworthy. Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and encountred them near B.:nnocklbtiin;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army of the nalc-

Fcrlreis, 3<)8.

II 2. coIatc;t

BOOIc I. contents was chiefly composed, soon put his troops to flight, and

__~_v_ he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immo-

derate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole conduct; but the characer of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant eems to be unjustly affixed to him by our hifto-
rians. His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken them;
and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers,
and their unnatural confederacies with England, were sufficient to
have disturbed a more vigorous adminitration, and to have rendered
unhappy a Prince of superior talents.

THE indignation, which many of the nobles expressed against the

conduct of the conspirators, together with the terror of the sentence
of excommunication which the Pope pronounced againfl them, ob-
liged them to use their victory with great moderation and humanity.
And being conscious how detestable the crime of imbruing their hands
in the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they endeavoured to regain
the good opinion of their countrymen, and to attone for their treat-
ment of the father, by their loyalty and duty towards the son.
James IV. They placed him instantly on the throne, and the whole king-

dom soon united in acknowledging his authority.

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an high

degree, all the passions which animate a young and noble mind.
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between the King and nobles seems almost entirely to have ceased.
lie envied not their splendor, because it contributed to the ornament
of his court; nor did he dread their power, which he confidered
as the security of his kingdom, not as an objec of terror to him-

self.

self. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper return of BOOK I.
duty and affetion, on theirs; and, in his war with England, he --
experienced how much a King beloved by his nobles is able to
perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the spirit of chi-
valry, rather than the profpedt of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition ; Iuch was the zeal of his fubjeds for
the King's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army, as
ever any of his ancestors had led upon English ground. But though
James himself formed no scheme dangerous or dtrimental to the
nob'es, his reign was diftinguifled by an event, extremely fatal to
them ; and one accidental blow humbled them more than all the
premeditated attacks of preceding Kings. In the rafl and unfor-
tunate battle ofFlowdcn, a brave nobility chose rather to die, than
to desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five el-
deft sons of nob'enmen, and an incredible number of Barons fell
with the King . The whole body of the nobles, long and fen-
sibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had then ascended
the throne, their consternation and feebleness would have afforded
him advantages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a year James V.

old; and though the office of regent was conferred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the King was al..
ready great; though he made many bold attempts to extend the
royal authority; though he put to death Lord Home, and banished
the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in the
kingdom, the aritfocracy loft no ground under his administration.

* Aber, ii. 54o.

A tran-

BOOK I. A itranger to the manners, the laws, and the language of the
'---- people whom he was called to rule, he aed, on some occasions,

rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of
Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own privileges, and contended
for the interest of their country, with a boldness, which convin-
ced him of their independency, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirteenth year,
the nobles agreed that he ihould assume the government, and that
eight persons should be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
advise and aflift him in the administration of public affairs. The
Earl of Angus, who was one of that number, did not long remain
sati fled with such divided power. He gained some of his col-
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. When the term
of his attendance expired, he fill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to ubmit, because none of them was in a condition
to dispute it. The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an aive and high-
spirited Prince submitted to the restraint, in which he was kept,
with great impatience. It ill suited his years, or diipofition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no refpedt; and to be deprived of all power. He could not, on some
occasions, conceal his indignation and resentment. Angus fore-
saw that he had much to dread from there, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make lure of his person. ames
was continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and confidents; many
eyes watched all his motions, and obisrved every flep lie took. But
the King's cagernefs to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance. IeI
elcapcd from Falkland, and fled to the caflic of Stirling, the rcli-
lence of the Quen his mother, and the only place of trengtlh in

the

the kingdom which was not in the hands of the Douglasses. The BOOK 1.
nobles, of whom ome were influenced by their hatred to Angus, ----
and others by their refped for the King, crowded to Stirling, and
his court was soon filled with persons of the greatest diftintion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpeced revolution, resolved,
at first, to make one bold push for recovering his authority, by
marching to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he wanted
either courage, or strength to execute this resolution. In a parlia-
ment held oon after, he and his adherents were attainted, and as-
ter escaping from many dangers, and enduring much misery, he
was at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JA1ES had now not only the name, but, though extremely young,

the full authority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince of that
age in gracefulness of person, or in vigour of mind. His under_
standing was good, and his heart warm; the former capable of
great improvement, and the latter susceptible of the best impref-
lions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who are called to
the throne in their infancy, his education had been neglected. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to infirucd him.
It was the interest of those who governed the kingdom, to prevent
him from knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in order
to divert him from business, gave him an early talle for such plea-
fures, as afterwards occupied and egrofled him more than be-
came a King. Accordingly, we discover in James all the features
of a great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent pal-
sions, implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of power, and
the utnoft rage at difalppointment. On the other, love to his
peoplc, zeal for the punifhlnent of private oppreltors, confidence

i n,

BOOK I. in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and affability of
----- behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their attempts to
humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more systematic, and pursued with greater conitancy and
fleddinefs, than that of any of his ancestors. And the influence of
the events in his reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
it neceffarv to explain his condut, at greater length, and to enter
into a more minute detail of his aions. He had penetration
enough to diCcover those defets in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The example of James I.
had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people,
and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The effeds of the violent nmeafres of James II.
convinced him, that the oppression of one great family is apt either
to excite the suspicion and resentment of the other nobles, or to en-
rich with its spoils some new family, which would oon adopt the
fame sentiments, and become equally formidable to the crown.
He saw, from the fatal end of James III. that negled was still more
intolerable to the nobles than oppreflion, and that the ministry of
new men and favourites was both dishonourable, and dangerous to a
Prince. At the fame time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not sufficient to counterbalance the power of the nobles, and
that without some new accession of firength, he could expect no
better success in the struggle than his ancestors. In this extremity,
he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they would both rclitf
his plan, and concur, with all their influence, in enabling him to

put

put it in execution. Under the feudal government, the church being BOOK I.
esteemed a third estate, had its representatives in parliament; the num- """--
ber of these was considerable, and they possessed great influence in
that assembly. The superstition of former kings, and the zeal of an
ignorant age, had bestowed upon ecclesiastics, a great proportion of
the national wealth, and the authority which they acquired by the
reverence of the people, was superior even to that which they de-
rived from their riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding their attention
to extend their usurpations, had neglecded Scotland as a ditfant and
poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers, which
they disputed with mor:- cor.fr'-able princes. The Scotch mo-
narchs had tlc folc riglt of rnomination to vacant bifhopricks and
abbeys *; and James naturally concluded, that men who expeded
preferment from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by pro-
moting his designs. Happily for hin, the nobles had not yet reco-
vered the blow given them at Flowden, and if wve may judge, either
from their conduct, or from the character given of them by Sir
Ralph Sadler the Englifl envoy in Scotland, they were men of little
genius, of no experience in business, and incapable of aing either
with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on the other
hand, were diflinguifled by their great abilities, and no less by their
ambition. Various causes of diguft had ariien between them and
the nobles, who despised their charaCter, and envied their powecr,
or their wealth. By acting in concert with the king, they not only
gratified him, but avenged themcflves, and hoped to aggrandifc their
own order, by depressing tlofe, who were their sole rivals. Secul

* Epil ' , ' . 107 2. ', .

1 1 .

XrUVL. . I
,

BooK I. of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with greater
(-^- boldness. In the first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of

Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a perlon, so far fupe-
rior to the other nobles in abilities, might create many obstacles,
which would retard, or render ineffeual all his schemes, he solemn-
ly swore, that he would never permit him to return into Scotland,
and, notwithfianding the repeated solicitations of the king of Eng-
land, le adhered to his vow with unrelenting obfiinacy. He then
proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Sterling; and
other castles, and to fill his magazines with arms and ammunition.
:Having taken these precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobles with the utmost coldness and reserve. Those offices,
which they were apt, from long poffifion, to confider as appropri-
ated to their order, were now bellowed on ecclefiatlics, who alone
pofTcffed the King's ear, and together with a few gentlemen of in-
ferior rank, to whom he had communicated his schemes, were
entrusted with the management of all public affairs. These mini-
lers were chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who oon
became the most eminent among them, was a man of superior ge-
nius. They served the King with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success. James no
longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no op-
portunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were ag-
gravated into real crimes, and punished with severity. Every accu-
fution againfl pcrfons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every trial proved
fatal to the pcrfon accused: the banifihing Hcpburn Earl of Bothwell,
for rcafons c trcmely frivolous, the beheading the Master of Iorbcs
without futicicnt cvidence of his guilt, aild the condemning Lady
Glarnis, a itler of tlhe Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of
witchcraft, of which even that credulous age belicvcd her innocent,

are

are nmonuments both of the King's hatred of the nobles, of the e- BooK 1.
verity of his government, and of the firetches he made towards '
absolute power. By these ats of authority, he tried the spirit of
the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his contempt for them, and added to the ardour and
boldness with which he pursued his plan. The nobles observed the
tendency of his schemes with concern, and with resentment; but
the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and the want of
a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures for their
defence, and impofiible to at with becoming vigour. James and
his counsellors, by a false Rep which they took, prefcnted to them,
at length, an advantage which they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted HenryVIII

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the re-
gular clergy. His system of Reformation ftisfied none of his sub-
jecds. Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far, others
murmured because he proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, and
the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formidable
to both. Henry was afraid that this general ditTatisfaction of his
people might encourage his enemies on the Continent to invade his
kingdom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted the
friendflip of the King of Scots, and endeavoured to cngage him i
an alliance againf England. He rcfolved, therefore, to difppoint
the eficcrs of their negoci:tions, by entering into a cloier union withl
his nephew, and for that purpose font amnllaflaloi-s into Scotl.nd,
to propose a personal interview with him at Yolk\. IL wv , plainly
J;!ncs's intcrcef to accept of this invitation; tlhe aliillincc f fb powecr-
1'ul a lly, the hi h honours which were promifi'd lim, aTi tie

I 2 JiKc!

BooK I. liberal subsidies he might have obtained, would have added no

--^ little dignity to his domestic government, and must have greatly

facilitated the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand,
a war with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he re-
jeted Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with all his
views. This would bring him to depend on his nobles; an army
could not be raised without their afltance: to call nobles incensed
againit their Prince into the field, was to unite liis enemies, to make
them eniible of their own strength, and to asTird them an opportu-
nity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ignorant
that all tefe confcquelnccs might follow a breach with England,
iftcned at tirfl to lenry's proposal, and contented to the interview
at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which mut have been
ellabliflhed on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken great pains
to infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religion,
and had frequently follicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the
usurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less dishonourable to
Princes, than grievous to their fubjets. The clergy had hitherto,
with great address, diverted the King from regarding these follici-
tations. But, in an amicable conference, Henry expected, and they
feared that James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced by
his arguments. They knew that the revenues of the church were
an alluring object to a Prince, who wanted money, and who loved
it; that their pride and ambition raised the indignation of the nobles;
that their indecent lives gave offence to the people; that the Protef-
tant opinions were spreading fast throughout the nation; and that
an universal defection from the established church, would be the
consequence of giving the smallest degree of encouragement to these
principles. For these reasons, they employed all their credit with
the King, and had recourse to every artifice and insinuation, in or-

der

der to .divert him from a journey, which muds have been so fatal BOOK I.
to their interef. They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by ~~~
magnifying the danger to which he would expose his person, by
venturing so far into England, without any security but the word
of a Prince, who having violated every thing venerable and sacred
in religion, was no longer to be trufled; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the ums which he might have received from Henry, they
offered an annual donative of 50,000 crowns; they promised to
contribute liberally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flattered him with the profpedt of immense riches, arising from the
forfeiture of persons, who were to be tried and condemned as he-
retics. Influenced by these considerations, James broke his agree-
ment with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had already
come to Yo.k; and that haughty and impatient Monarch resented
the affront, by declaring war against Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom. James Was obliged to have recourse
to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions. At his command,
they assembled their followers; but with the fame dispositions, which
animated their ancestors in the reign of James III., and with a full
resolution of imitating their example, by punishing those to whom
they imputed the grievances, of which they had reason to complain
and if the King's Miniflers had not been men of abilities, superior
to those of James III. and of considerable interefl even with their
enemies, who could not agree among themselves what vidtimsto
sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as remarkable as that
of Lawder, for the daring encroachments of the nobles on the pre-
rogative of the Prince. But though his ministers were saved by this
accident, the nobles had soon another opportunity of discovering to
the King, their difatisfadtion with his government, and their con-
tempt of his authority. Scarcity ofprovifions, and the rigour of the

foan

BOOK I. season having obliged the English army which had invaded Scot-

--- l--land, to retire, James imagined that he could attack them, with

great advantage, in their retreat ; but the nobles, with an obitinacy
and disdain, which greatly aggravated their disobedience, refused to
advance a ftep beyond the limits of their own country. Provoked
by this insult to himself, and suspicious of a new conspiracy against
his ministers, the King inflantly disbanded an army, which paid
fb little regard to his orders, and he returned abruptly into the
heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not brook such a

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rash, and his
despair upon a disappointment was excelEive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead of yield-
ing him the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had begun with
such circumRiances, as encouraged the insolence of his fubjets, and
cxpofed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain and
incffetual all his projects to humble the nobles had been, and
that, though in times of peace, a Prince may endeavour to depress
them, they will rife, during war, to their former importance and
dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation filled his bosom by
turns. The violence of these pafions altered his temper, and, per-
haps, impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and retired.
He seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up in profound
meditation, and through the night, he was diflurbed with those
visionary terrors, which make impreflion upon a weak understand-
ing only, or a dilordered fancy. In order to revive the Kiing's
lpirits, an inroad on the western borders was concerted by his
minifiers, who prevailed upon the Barons in the ncighhouring
provinces, to raise as many troops as. were thought neccfihay,

2;111d1

and to enter the enemy's country. But nothing could remove BOOK I.
the King's aversion for his nobility, or diminish his jealousy of - "'-
their power. He would not even entrult them with the com-
mand of the forces which they had assembled; that was reserved
for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
pofleffion of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
English, who happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
General produced an effect, to which, there is no parallel in hiflo-
ry. They overcame the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far inferior, without
flriking a ingle blow. No man was desirous of a vicory, which
would have been acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the English had the
choice of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almost every
perion of diftlincion, who was engaged in the expedition, remained
in their hands. This aftonifing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difafreion of the nobles, and a new discovery
of his own weaknels, and want of authority. Incapable of bear-
ing these repeated insults, and unable to revenge them, his filirit
funk altogether. The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded
to the furious transports of rage and indignation, which the firif
account of the rout of his army occasioned. All the violent palions,
which are the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind, and wafled
and confuilme, a youthful and vigorous constitution. Some authors
of that age impute is untimely death to poilui ; but the difcafls of
the mind, when they rite to an height, are often mortal; and the
known effcetLs of d(ilHppLoiinttent, rage, and indignation upon a an-
guine and impetuous tcmper, fufiicicntly account lbr his unhappy

at e,

BooK I. fate. " His death (ays Drummond) proveth his mind to have

v-.--' been railed to an high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die,

but could not digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfor-
tune, one of two things mutt have happened: either the vio-
lence of his temper would have engaged him openly to attack the
nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protector, and have derived the fame afiftance from him, which
the malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did from his daughter
Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been
the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, necessity might have ob-
liged him to accept of HIenry's offers, and be reconciled to his
nobles. In that event, the church would have fallen a sacrifice to
their union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have been
eitablifled by law, a great part of the temporalities of the church
would have been seized, and the friendship of the King and nobles
cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the ex-

orbitant ower of the nobles. If they were not attended with
success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were not
conducted with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have com-
bined againfi the Crown. Accidental events concurred with poli-
tical causes, in rendering the best concerted measures abortive. The
assassination of one King, the sudden death of another, and the fa-
tal despair of a third, contributed no less than its own natural strength,
to preserve the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST tliefe ruggles, the influence which our Kings poffeficd

an their parliaments, is a circumflance seemingly inexplicable, and
which merits particular attention. As tlhee assemblies were com-

pored

posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, must BOOK .
have didated all their decisions; but, instead of this, every King
found them obsequious to his will, ad obtained such laws, as he dinher Irfl,.-
esteemed necessary for extending his authority. All things were ence of the

Scotch Ii ings

conduded there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of our in Parliiminlt.
hiflorians, do we find an instance of any opposition formed againfl
the court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying
through the measures which were agreeable to the King. In
order to account for this singular fa't, it is necessary to enquire
into the origin and conflitution of Parliament.

TE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its opera- 'he rc.,f.cn

tions, produced the Ianme effedts in fall, as in great societies; and of it
the territory of a Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. lie poflefied the right of jurisdiCtion, but those, who de-
pended on him, being free men, and not slaves, could be tried by
their Peers only; and, therefore, his valiils were bound to attend
his courts, and to afift both in passing and executing his sentences.
When aflernbled, on there occalions, they eftabliiled, by mutual
consent, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of their small
society; and often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Su-
perior, as his neceifities required. Change now a single name:
in place of Baron, substitute King, and we behold a Parliament in
its firif rudiments, and observe the firfi exertions of those powers,
which its members now poftcfs as Judges, as Legislators, and a, dif-
penlcrs of the public revenues. Suitable to this ide:, are the
appellations of the Ki;C's Cou(l-t , and of the Ki^'s Grct
Counc/il, by which, Parliaments were alnciently dillinigiililcd ; aIn
luitablc to this, likcwilc, were the confiituclnt menllcrs of whkli

' D)u C.:ngc', V\( C'l:!.
VOL. 1 i it.

BOOK I. it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of

'--"' the King in chief were bound, by the condition of their tenure,

to attend and to affif in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a pri-
vilege, but a service. It was exated likewise of Bishops, Abbots,
and the greater ecclesiastics, who holding vat possessions of the Crown,
were deemed subject to the fame burden. Parliaments did not con-
tinue long in this slate. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a confi-
derable share of the public taxes were levied on them, the inhabi-
tan s grew into eflimation, and being enfrinchifed by the Sovereign, a
place in Parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of their
importance. But as it would have been absurd to confer such a
privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chute one or two of its citizens to ap-
pear in the name of the corporation; and the idea of roprefenta-
tion was firfi introduced in this manner. An innovation, still more
important, naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful; but as it is
impolfible to render property fixed and permanent, many of their
poffeflions came, gradually, and by various methods of alienation,
to be split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence arose the
diftindlion between the Gi-Craer and the Lejer Barons. The
firmer were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the
latter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both were
hiound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
(o give attendance in Parliament. To the lefier Barons, who formed
no inconiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance. Barons
)licetimc denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their right of
, lcAing, charters were obtained, containing an exemption from at-
icdancc ; and the anxicty, with which our anccflors endeavoured
· t.i !ct frGc from the obligation of fI;till in I'alial ent, is filrp.fll c

by

by that only, with which their poferity solicit to be admitted there. BooK 1.
In order to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to secure to '---'
the King a sufficient number of members in his great council, and
to save his vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient
was found out. The obligation to personal attendance was con-
tinued upon the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were
exempted, on condition of their electing, in each county, a certain
number of RpreJfitativcs, to appear in their name. Thus a
Parliament became compleat in all its members, and was composed
of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the flires, and of
Burgefles. As many causes contributed to bring government earlier
to perfection in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour of the
feudal inflitutions abated sooner ; and its def-eds were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other; England
led the way in all these changes, and Bes, and Knights of
the ilire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation, before they
were heard of in ours. Burgefles were firit admitted into the Scotch
Parliaments by Robert Bruce n

; and in the preamble to the laws . D. 3J,5

of Robert III. they are ranked among the corftituent members of
that afTembly. The Lesser Barons were indebted to James I. for a ,4,7.
statute excmpting them from personal attendance, and permitting
them to elect representatives; the exemption was eagerly laid hold
on, but the priviege was so little valued, that, except one or two
instances, it lay nlelected during 60 years; and James VI. fiii
obliged them to fend rcprclfcntatives regularly to Parliament -.

A Sco'rc(I Parliament, then, cnfillcd ancicntly of Great Bl ,nu.-
of lEcclclialics, and a few reprclentativcs of burroughs. Nor were

' ,bi'
\ (luI inh',\ 1. !'.

; ll' My: < I Br't .

A 11C,1 . il

[ 1 i) p. Ilil. <' I,!. 1

,
l'.s u,_ 5 .

K 2 tlcKt

BoOc I. these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed one
'-'---' assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And, in rude

ages, when the science of government was extremely imperfet,
among a martial people, unacquaintcd with the arts of peace, firan-
gers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and despising them,
Parliaments were not held in the fame eimation as at present; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which ty appeared, with
such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments were often hastily
afileblcd, and it was, probably, in the King's power, by the man-
ner in which he issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his mneafures. At a time when deeds of
violence were common, and the refraints of law and decency were
little regarded, no man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of Parliament,
were extremely few; even so late as the beginning of James VI.
reign -, they amounted only to fifty-three. The Ecclesiastics equal-
led them in number, and being devoted implicitly to the Crown,
for reasons which have been already explained, rendered all hopes
of vicory in any struggle desperate. Nor were the nobles them-

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have met in eparate houses;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the Englifl in all their customs, had pro-
bably an intention of introducing some considerable diflinEion between the Greater
and Lffi r Barons ill Sotland; at leaLt he determined that their conflltations fhoul.
not be carried on under the direction of the fame President; for by his law, A. D.

4? 7, it i provi.lCd, " that out of the Commilioncrs of all the fhircs fiall be chofcn
a wifc and expert man, called the Common Speaker of tle P:a liallent, who shall
plop Cle all and fundy needs andl catses, pertaining to the Commons in the Parlia-
ment or gclclal ctoncil." No Iclch Speaker, it Would seem, was ever chosen; and
by a ub!lucnt law the Chanccllor was deccared perpetual President of Parliament.

-} And.. Cll v i prcf., 4.

felvcs

selves so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent acas of Parlia- BOOK I:
ment favourable to the royal prerogative; conscious of their own- *
strength, and of the King's inability to carry these ats into execution
without their concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to contemn
them; and the flatute revoking the King's property, and annexing ali-
enated jurifditions to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and vio-
lated and depifed as often, is a' sanding proof of the impotence of
laws, when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are
sufficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings
acquired in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of
thlefe, a single circumstance, peculiar to the constitution of the
Scotch Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto
avoided, will abundantly explain this fat, seemingly o repugnant
to all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the confiitution

of our Parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of Lords of rticles. It was their business to prepare, and to
digest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament;
every motion for a new law was first made there, and approved or
rejected by them at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejected could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extraordi-
nary powers veiled in it, to the military genius of the ancient nobles;
too impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil business, too impe-
tuous to ofcrve the forms, or to enter into the details ncceifry in
conducLting it, they were glad to lay that burden upon a inall
number, while they thcmfelves had no other labour than imply
to liv, or to refutle their f-ianic'ti to the bills, which were pre-
tcnted to them. lThe Lords of Articls, then, nlot only directced

tle

BOOK I. the whole proceedings of Parliament, but possessed a negative be-
L Y¥_-. fore debate. That committee was chosen and conflituted in such

a manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole right of
nominating the Lords of Articles *. They came afterwards to be
elected by the Parliament, and confifled of an equal number out of
each eate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and eight Spi-
ritual Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and of the eight
great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclefiaflics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was icarce pofiible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgeflis as would unite in opposition to his mea-
fures. Capable either of influencing their election, or of gaining them
when elected, the King commonly found the Lords of Articles no
leis oblcquious to his will, than his own privy council, and by
means of his authority with them, he could put a negative upon

I appears fiomi authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be

held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of Articles were chosen and met on the
7th, five days before the afembling of Parliament. If they could be regulally
elected so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the
Prince alone pofilired the right of electing them. There are two different accounts
of the manner of their election at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the
Archbilhop of Glasgow, " We, accompanied vwth our nobility for the time, pall
" to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th day of
"' tils infrant, and elected the Lords Articulars." If we explain these words a -
cordiltg to si (I Gramlmar, we Ilmll conclude that the Q(Ocen herself cleed tlhem.
It is, however, more probable that Maiy l.meant to fay, that the nolles then p!c-
f{r t ith her, vi7. her pi ivy Ce)s, and otllers, cLs, it'd the Lo-rdis of Alticlcs.
Kelith's lill. of Scotland, p. 331. Th'1' other accoiunt i Lord R lthvc's, x\\ho cx-
1'1re1y atlilms that tlh te letn lerfci'cI ctle(i them. KeIith's Append. 126. Wle-
lc-r we embrace the one or( the otherl of theft opinions, is of no conf'tucence. If the
p:i y cC)uni llors and ntbles attinicinl tlhe culur t lad a light to, cle6L tle l.orl , ol
Articles, it wa15 ciI'lly advantage'ous or tlie Crown, ab if the Pilie a.d lt tlhe
^i '
J' zLc nom iniuni o l heIn.

Ii,

his Parliament before debate, as well as after it; and what may BOOK I.
ecem altogether incredible, the mofl limited Prince in Europe
acually poiTeiied, in one instance, a prerogative which the mo
absolute could never attain *.

To this account of the internal constitution of Scotland, it will State of Eu-

ropcat thb be-

not be improper to add a view of the political state of Europe at ciinilgofithe
that period, where the following history commences. A thorough 6()' century.

know-

H[AVING deduced the hillory of the committee of Lords of Articles, as low a-

the ubjcct of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to fomn-.
readers, to know the fbfequent variations in this singular institution, and the pS-
litical use which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments became more rume-
rous, and more considerable by the admiiion of the representatives of the Le/Ter
liarolls, the prefTrving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, like-
wifc, an object of greatr importance to our Kings. James VI. cn pretence, that
the Lords of Articles could not find leifre to confider the great multitude of
afTairs laid before them, obtained an a, appointing four persons to be named ot
of each eate, who fnould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parlia-
ment , to receive all supplications, &c. and rejecting what they thought frivolous,
fliould engross in a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of
Articles. No provision is made in the a for the choice of this seleCt body, and the
King would, of course, have claimed that privilege. In 633, when Charles I.
was beginning to introduce those innovations which gave so much offence to the na-
tion, he dreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that,
an artifice was made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the CrownI. The
''cmlporal Peers were appointcd to chlufe eight Bishops. and the Eilhops eight Pecis,
these sixteen Iet together, anid lcced eight Knights of the (fire, and ight lir-
gesTes, and to these the crown officers were added as tufual. It we can on1 ilrppl
tight persons of to numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were bco!t'e by
rhntt ime, attachled to the court, tlhec, it is obvious, would be the mnci wliomi

hc Bilops would chue, ;and of conelquence, the whole Lords of Articles \weti

* A't. 2z. P 159.1.

tlle

BOOK I. knowledge of that general fyflem, of which every kingdom in Eu-
Lt./"x., rope forms a part, is not less requisite towards underitanding the

history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and lawso The latter may enable us to comprehend domestic
occurrences and revolutions, but without the former, foreign tranf-
actions must be altogether mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may be placed in a
clear light; and where the bulk of historians have seen only the es-
fcet, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE fubvWrfion of the feudal government in France, and its de-

clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political slate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were
inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac-
quired firmnels and strength, by being united into a regular mo-
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and im-
portance. They meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged in
wars at a distance. Numerous armies were railed, and great taxes
impoled for their subsistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in constant pay ; that service grew to be honourable; and ca-
valry, in which the llrength of European armies had hitherto con-

the tools and creaturc. of the King. This practice, so inconsistent with liberty, wvas
aboliflhcd during the civil war; and the flatute of Jamcs VI. was repealed. Aftcr
the Refloration, Parlianments became more servile than ever. What was only a tem-
porary device, in he reign of Charles I. was, then, converted ito a l1anding law.
"' r my part,

f's the autho r si om whloom 1 have borrowed m:ny of thfe par-

.' tjcularl, I fliould have thought it less cI iminal in o1 lo tr efloi a llon 'liIam nt, to
" have openly bcflowd utipon the King a negati ve beore debate, than, in fill nli 1
' uinderhlad airtificial ma11n;1 , to betray their c)nflii llcts, and1 the natilon." l F'Ir.;
on Iltit. Antiq , 5. It is probmble, howev le, lrom a lettec of R;lndolph'; to Cecil
Io. Aug. 15(, pi;ntcd ill the Appendi,, that thlis P.arliamenllt 11ad (ome aipcar-
.. nccof alcicnt picelcdeC it to iillilfy thcilr un\vorliy iV cot dult. ,

lllcid,

fited, though proper enough for the short and voluntary excur- BOOK I.
sions of nobles who served at their own expence, were found to be '----'
unfit either for making, or defending any important conqueit.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new strength.
The division of that country into so many small ilates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate averSion for war, invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accustomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrels
by innocent and bloodless victories, were aonilled at the iglt of
real war; and as they could not refill the torrent, they suffered it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sip-
plied the want of strength ; and necefTity and felf-prefervation taught
that ingenious people the great secret of modern politics, and
shewed them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this happy device,
the liberty of Italy was preserved. The scales were poised by very
skilful hands; the fimalleft variations were attended to, and no Prince
was allowed long to retain any superiority, that could be dan-
gerous.

A SYSTEM of conduct, pursued with so much fuccels in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of powcr is founded o much upon
obvious realbning, and the situation of Europe rendered it lu ne-
cefiry, that it loon became a matter of chief attention to all xifL
politicians. Every flep any Prince took was observcd by a1l his
neighbours. Ambanliadors, a kind of honourable spies, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, rclidcd anoil conflantly at every

VOL. I, L di ..

BOOK I. different court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
<---^J gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with more

ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any power which rose
above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to take arms out
of policy and war, both in its commencement, and in its opera-
tions, was more an exercise of the judgement, than of the passions
of men. Almost every war in Europe became general, and the
most inconsiderable flates acquired importance, because they could
add weight to either scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year 5,

and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial crown in the year 1 51 9,
divided between them the strength and affections of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal jealousy,
or to the caprice of private palion, but was founded so much in
nature and true policy, that it subsisted between their posterity for
'everal ages; and, notwithstanding their present accidental and un-
natural union, must again revive. Charles succeeded to all the domi-
nions of the house of Auflria. No family had ever gained so much
by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind the
Austrian Princes rose, in a ihort time, from obscure Counts of Iapf-
bourg, to be Archdukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and
were in poflefion of the Imperial dignity by a fort of hereditary
right. Betides these territories in Germany, Charles was heir to
the Crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which belonged to
the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe; and he
drew from them, on many occasions, those immense fums, which
no people without trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain

furnithed

furnifed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose discipline he BooK I.
was indebted for all his conquefis. And at the fame time, by the - V
discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth was opened to him,
which all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust. These
advantages rendered Charles the first Prince in Europe; but he

ifhied to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an unexpected height
and vigour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the charadterifti:
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied.
In forming his schemes, he discovered all the subtlety and pene-
tration of Ferdinand his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obstinate and inflexible perseverance which has ever since been pe-
culiar to the Auflrian blood; and in executing them, he could em-
ploy the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian Ancestors.
His abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them would
have been inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity to man-
kind, and in order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of
Europe. His dominions were lets extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjedis were numercus, ative, and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their King. To Charles power was
the only objcd of desire, and he pursued it with an unweairied and
joyless indufiry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance with
his ambition, and though he neglcctcd ome advantages, which a
more fegmatic or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
adtive and intrepid courage supplied all his dcfctds, and checked or
dcfcatcd many of the Emperor's designs.

TII,- reft of Europe obfcrved all the motions of thef migllty
rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one tdlc, the Italians law

L 2 the

BOOK I. the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to avert
-.- . it, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often employed

with success. They endeavoured to divide the power of the two
contending Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union of fevcral
small flates, to counterpoile him, whole power became too great.
But, whlat they concerted with much wisdom. they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

with lets delicacy, but with a fironger hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the advantageous
situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immense
wealth, and absolute authority rendered him the natural guardian
of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with
cmulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely with either of them.
But lie was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the paflions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity and
recntment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and his
neighbours cafily found the way, by touching there, to force him
upon many rafli and inconfitlent enterprises. His reign was a per-
petual fries of blunders in politics, and while e eficcied him-
self the \ilitl Prince in Europe, lie was a coinfiant dprie to those,
who found it neccfhlary, and could submit to flatter him.

N tllis situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hithecrto walced

her friength il the quarrels between France and England, emerged
from her lbfcurity, took her flation il the fvflcm, and began to

have

have some influence upon the fate of distant nations. Icer afiiance Boole I
,was, frequently, of consequence to the contending parties, and the ----'
balance was often so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to
make it lean to either fide. The part assigned her was to divert
Henry from carrying his arms into the continent. That Prince,
having routed the French at Guinegat, and invefledTcrou:nne,
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James 1V.
in that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the
fame reason, Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Albany
to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the in-
terest of England, and would willingly have pcrfuadcd the Scot-
to revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new vwar
vith that kingdom. Ilenry and Francis having united not long
after against the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings, that
the Scots should continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
cffct of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to
cnmbarafs Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, lie
made great advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
MTlonarch, by eleCting him a Knight of the Goldenl Fleece, and by
osiering him a match in the Imperial family ; and in return for these
empty honours, lie demanded of him to renounce his alliance with
France, and to declare war againF England. But James, who
had much to lofc, and who could gain little by embracing the Em-
peror's proposals, rejeted them with decency, and keeping firm
to his ancient allies, left Ienry at full liberty to act upon the con-
tinent wvitlh Lis whole firetnlith.

ITI:NIRY limfelf b 1egn lCis reign, by ii'ating the cexa.mpl (,f

;Iis anc flors with rc't ' Ard to Scotland. 1 Ic held its power\ i fIlch c.x-
tremelC contempt, that lie was :t no p. Ins o gain its fbIitij1)ip; lut

Boor I. on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the an-
'----' t quated pretenions of the Crown of England to the sovereignty

over Scotland. But his own experience, and the example of his
enemies, gave him an higher idea of its importance. It was impof-
sib!e to defend an open and extensive frontier, against the incur-
sions of an aive and martial people. During any war on the con-
tinent, this obliged him to divide the firength of his kingdom. It
w.is necessary to maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England; and after all precautions, the Scotch borderers,
who were superior to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and desolation over
mnny counties. He fell, at last, upon the true secret of policy,
with reFpec to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little pe-
netration to discover, or too much pride to employ. The situation
of the country, and the bravery of the people made the conquest
of Scotland impoflible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to govern it. He
abandoned, therefore, the former design, and resolved to employ
the utmolt address in executing the latter. It had not yet become
honourable for one Prince to receive pay from another, under the
more decent name of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame ar-
guments have been good in courts, and of weight with ministers,
lactious leaders, and favourites. What were the arguments, by
which Henry brought over so many to his interest during the mi-
nority of James V. we know by the original warrants for re-
mitting considerable ums into Scotland, which are fill extint *
By a proper diflribution ofthefe, many persons of note were gained
to his party, and a faction which held secret corrcfpondcnce with
England, and received all its diredtions fiom thence, appears hence-

Burn. Iit. Rcf, v. i, p. 7.

forward

forward in all our domestic contefis. In the sequel of the history, BOOK I.
we hall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland. ~'-Y
His successors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
affairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their interefis
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention almost equal-
ly between them, and the authority, which he inherited in the one,
was not greater than that, which he acquired in the other.

T II E

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

O F
S C O T L h N D.

B O K IL.

A R Y Queen of Scots was born a few days before the BooK II
death of her father James V. The situation in which he left <----

the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profpe& of a irthof',ary,.
turbulent and disastrous reign. A war againfi England had been andftlateofthe
undertaken without necefflty, and carried on without success. Many kingdom
persons of the first rank had fallen into the hands of the English, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were Dtill prison-
ers at London. Among the reft of the nobles there was little union,
either in their views, or in their affections; and the religious dif-
putes, occalioned y the opinions of the reformers, growing every
day more violent, added to the rage of those faCtions which are na-
tural to a form of governmnclt nearly aritlocratical.

VoL. I. M Tn'

3ooK II. THE government ofa Queen was unknown in Scotland, and did
- · not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial people. The

government of an infant Queen was fill more detitute of real autho-
rity; and the profpea of a long and feeble minority invited to
faCtioI, by the hope of impunity. James had not even provided
the common remedy againf the difo:ders of a minority, by com-
mitting to proper persons the care of his daughter's education, and
the adminitlration of affairs in her name. Though he saw the
clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burn: into a
storm, he was so little able to difp-erfc them, or to defetnd his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that, in mere de-
fpair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and left
open to every Pretender, the office of Regent, which he could
not fix to his own fatisfadion.

r t ~:.,. ,f. CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years been confidered as
c .;1' l.- prime minifler, was the firil who claimed that high dignity; and
v,.cxy. in fpport of his pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he

himclif had forged in the name of the late King ; and without any
other right, instantly assumed the title of Regent. He hoped, by
the ailfance of the clergy, the countenance of France, the con-
nivance of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the whole Po,
pish fadcion, to hold by force, what he had seized on by fraud.
But Bcatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the
nation. Tliofe among the nobles who wished for a Reformation
in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered the eleva-
tion of a Churchman to the highest office of the kingdom as a de-
prciTion c tcmfelves. At their infligation, James Htamilton Earl

" S.ller's Lett. i6i.

of

of Arran, and next heir to the Q.een, rouzed himself from his BooK II.
inactivity, and was prevailed on to aspire to that flation, to which '--v-'
proximity of blood, and the practice of the kingdom gave him an
undoubted title. The nobles, who were alilembled for that pur- Far f A ra
pose, unanimously conferred on him the oice of regent; and the chosen Re-
public voice applauded their choice. gent.

No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and charac- Charater of

ter, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. Tle Cardinal Bcatou :
was by nature of immoderate ambition ; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew upon him friom
continual success. His high tfation in the church placed him in
the way of great employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
ell of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be above his merit.
As his own eminence was founded upon the power of the church
of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that fupeilition, and for
the ame reason an avowed enemy to the dotrinc of the Reformers.
Political motives alone determined him to support the on!e, or to op-
pose the other. IIis early application to public buiicls kept him
unacquainted with the learni) and controvcrlies of the age ; h1l gave
judgment, however, upon all the points in dilpute, with a prccipi-
tancy, violence, and rigour, which cotemporary hiilorians mnition
with indignation.

TlHE character of the Earl of Airan was, in alollo every thiing, of .-an,

the rverfe of the other's. le was neither inseted with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty : The love of ease extinguished the ormer,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the latter. Timidity
and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occasioncd
by his natural contlitution, and the other arifilng from a coniLioul-

MI z leis

BooK II. ness that his abilities were not equal to his station. With there dif-
'- -v-' positions, he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but his

public conduct was without courage, or dignity, or confifence.
The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence, the per-
petual tool of those, who found their advantage in pracifing upon
them. But as no other person could be set in opposition to the Car-
dinal, with any probability of success, the nation declared in his
favour with so general a content, that the artifices of his rival could
not withiland its united strength.

-r,,cc ,r THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffefilon of his new dig-
tjr:i xlll:lo nity, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave
i, 1 ooard to
ScoianJ. birth to events of the most fatal consequence to himself, and to

the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no longer
afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs against France;
and immediately conceived hopes of rendering this security perpe-
tual, by the marriage of Edward his only son with the young Queen
of Scots. He communicated his intention to the prisoners taken
at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the mean time, he
permitted them to return into Scotland, that, by their presence in
the Parliament which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in with his propo-
fals. A cause, entrusted to such able and zealous advocates, could
not well mis of coming to an happy ifiue. All those who feared
the cardinal, or who desired a change in religion, were fond of
an alliance, which afforded protection to the dodrine which they
had embraced, as well as to their own persons, against the rage of
that powerful and haughty I'rlate.

BuT

BUT Henry's rough and impatient .temper was incapable of im BOOK II.

proving this favourable conjunture. Address and delicacy in ma- II conduael
naging the fears, and follies, and interests of men, were arts with by himself.
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had formed
upon Scotland were obvious fiom the marriage which he had pro-
posed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to con-
ceal them. Instead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would oon have enabled him to recover,
he, at once, alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by demand-
ing that the Queen's person should be immediately committed to
his custody, and that the government of the kingdom should be
put in his hands during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions to Odious to the
a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejected, with ISnct, though

part ac-
indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with cepted by

. . . . them.

England, at the price of their own liberty. The Parliament of
Scotland, however, influenced by the nobles who returned from h 2.
England, desirous of peace with that kingdom, and delivered, by i5)3.
the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from any oppo-
fition to which lie might have given rife; consented to a treaty of
marriage and of union, but upon somewhat of a more equal foot-
ing. And after some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, bywhich his
ambalfador endeavoured to carry off the young Queen and Cardinal
Beatoun into England, IHenry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his ide, he consented that the
Queen should continue to reside in Scotland, and himfclf remain
excluded from any fiare in the government of the kingdom. On
the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into
England o soon as she attained the full age of ten years, andi in-

I.Intlly

BOOK II. fantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hofia-

C<- ' (gcs by Henry till he Queen's arrival at his court.

. oi.cd by Tiri: treaty was frill so manifestly of advantage to England, that
tile R

the Regent lot much of the public confidence by consenting to it.
The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate
oi}po l il? a.d improve this to the utmot. He complained loudly, that the

Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extinction of true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-
munJlcatcd heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient
kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descending into the igno-
mniious tfation of a dependent province ; and, in one hour, the
weakness or treachery of a single man surrendering every thing, for
which the Scotch nation had flruggled and fought, during o many
ages. These remonltrances of the Cardinal were not without efT'i:.
They were addressed to prejudices and paliions which are deeply
rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient ene-
mies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour, and
pride of independency, which, at the beginning of the prefint cen-
tury, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time,
induce the whole nation to declare againtf the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fulbjced to
the falme King, and governed by the ftme maxims, had conliderably
abated old anilmofities, and prepared both people for incorporating.
In the other, injuries were iill frefih, and the wounds on both fides
open ; and, in the warmth of refcntlment, it was natural to seek

revenge,

revenge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At the Union in BOOK II.
1707, the wildom of Parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints
of the nation were better founded, and urged with a zeal and una-
nimity, which it is neither juit, nor safe to disregard. The rage
of the people rose to such an height, that the English ambaffidor
could hardly be protected from their insults. The clergy contri-
buted a great umr towards preserving the church fiom the dominion
of a Prince whose fyflein of Reformation was so fatal to their
power. The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal, so lately,
in such a cruel manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to fe-
cond him, as the defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

ARGYLL, Huntly, Botinwell, and other powerful Barons openly He excites al-
declared against the alliance with England. By their aiflance, the ntoltth ahoi

By their as iltance, nation agamlt

Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her mother, til Englih.
and added to his party the splendor and authority of the royal name *.
He received, at the fame time, a more real accession to his strength,
by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose return
from France he had earnefily follicitcd. This young nobleman
was te hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton. I-le had ma-
ny claims upon the Regent, ad pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of the
pofeffon of his private fortune. The Cardinal flattered his va-
nity with the profpedt of nlrrying the Qiecn Dowager, and as-
feqced to treat him with so much fludied rpcd, that the Regent
became jealous of him as a rival in power.

TIis suspicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of Paiflcy,
who returned into Scotland some time before the Earl of Lennox,

* Keith's ill. of Scol. 30.

and

BOOK II. and aced in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother
'--,--" of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm partizan of

France, and a zealous defender of the etablifhed religion. He
took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working upon his fears.
The deSertion of the nobility, the difaffeation of the clergy, and the
rage of the people; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all represented with
aggravation, and with their most threatening aspet.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of the hostages approached, and
the Regent was iill undetermined in his own mind. He acted to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistency, which is peculiar
to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the chief
part in the conduct of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Cardinal, who
still continued to oppose it, an enemy to his country. On the 3d

Obliges the of September, he secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
Regent to re-
noulc^e t Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of England, and
f;c''ndi'p declared for the interests of France *
wi niin
l and.

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not spared the most

magnificent promises. He had offered to give the Princess Eliza-
beth in marriage to his eldest son, and to conflitute him King of
that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be less considerable
than he had imagined, the English monarch began to treat him

'" Sadler, 339, 356.

with

with little refped. The young Queen was now in the custody of BOOK II.
his enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more po-
pular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to
ele another Regent. The French King was ready to afford them
his protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the Engli(h, would
have united in their defence. In this ituation, the Regent could
not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve
the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himself into the arms of the party, which adhered to
France.

SOON after this surprising revolution in his political principles, the And to perife

Regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The pirit of fct Re-.
controversy was then new and warm; books of that kind were eagerly
read by men of every rank; the love of novelty, or the conviction of
truth, had led the Regent to express great eflcem for the writings
of the Reformers; and having, been powerfully supported by those
who had embraced their opinions, e, in order to gratify them, enter-
tained, in his own family, two of the most noted preachers of the Pro-
teflant doctrine, and, in his firIl Parliament, consented to an a, by
which the laity were permitted to read the scriptures in a language
which they underflood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, whlich had long impoledi on the
ignorance and credulity of mankind, were detcted and cxpofcd to
public ridicule; and under the countenance of the Regcnt, the PRfor-
mation made great advances. The Cardinal ohblfrved its pIrog-rels
with concern, and was at the util(it paiins to oblfrudi it. IIe re-

pr cliented to tlic rc et' nI t

lli ,'c.tt i &ijI'ticl cc in giv'i;

n g CilcoI agc-
mlcent to opinions, siu l;toIunabL i to L.liuO:'s prtenlliho1ls tliht his

\OL. I. Nr' ow'

BOOK II. own legitimacy depended upon the validity of a sentence of di-

vorce, founded on the Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to
be called in quefilon, he weakened his own title to the fucceflion,
and furnished his rival with the only argument, by which it
could be rendered doubtful *. These insinuations made a deep im-
pression on the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profped of
such imaginary dangers, was as much itartled as the Cardinal could
have wished; and his zeal for the Protestant religion was not long
proof against his fear. He publickly abjured the doctrine of the Re-
formers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and declared not only
for the political, but the religious opinions of his new confidents.

TIrF. Protestant doctrine did not susser much by his apollacy.

It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no difcou-
ragement or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed con-
sented to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necef-
Iary for the preservation of the established religion. The Reform-
ers were persecuted with all the cruelty, which superstition inspires
into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the punishment of its
enemies; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the pa-
tience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were con-
verted, than terrified by these spectacles.

* THE prctcnfions of the Earl of Lennox to the fuccefion were thus founded.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was manlied to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth,
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
pricfLnt Eail xVwa her grandson. The Regent was likewise the grandson of the
I'rinle( IMlauy. Iltt his father, being divorced from his second wife Elizabeth -omce,
nrar iedl Janet E;atoll tie lRl: ct' ; Iooiher. Icnno pretended that the sentence
of divorce was uiinjiil, and tli.ht tlie Rleient, biig born while Elizabeth IIomc wa3
(iiil alix , ougiht tu be conlidlrcd us ill.iiimnatc. Crawl'. 'ccr. 192.

Tlu ,

THE Cardinal, however, was now in possession of every thing BooK. II.

his ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re-Batoun en
gent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from groves the
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy forfeited the of affairr.
public esteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
the only thing which remained to embarafs him. He had made
uWe of that nobleman very successfully to work upon the Re-
gent's jealousy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of fch
an infirument, he was willing to be rid of him with decency.
Lennox soon began to fufped his intention; promises, flattery, and
refped were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubftan-
tial services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, instead of attaining power and dignity
himself, saw that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition puffed him
on to seek to be revenged on that cunning prelate, who, by fa-
crificing his interest, had so ungetneroufly purchased the Earl of
Arran's friendfiip. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and
declared for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, who added so much lustre to their
cause,

THE two factions which divided the kingdom were fill the fame,

without any alteration in their views or principles; but, by one of
thole firange revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they h:ld,
in the course of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The Recent
was at the head of the partizans of France and the defenders of
Popery, and Lennox in the fame flaion with the advocates fr tlhe
IEnglih alliance, and a reformation in religion. The one lbolred

,rr 2 to

BOOK II. to pull down his own work, which the other upheld with the fame
"--- ' hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the flart of the Cardinal's

adivity. -He surprised both him and the Regent by afudden march
to Edinburgh with a numerous army; and might easily have crushed
them, befbre they could prepare for their defence. But he was
weak enough to liften to proposals for an accommodation; and the
Cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such
a length, that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who served, as
is usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their own
expence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace, inflead of giv-
ing the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to
retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his
troops was cut in pieces, and the reft dispersed; and with the poor
remains of a ruined party, he must either have ubmittcd to the
conqueror, or have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach of an
Inglifh army had not brought him a hort relief.
,y i HITENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, with

which he had been treated, both by the Regent and Parliament of
Scotland, who, at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and strider confederacy with
France. The rigour of the season retarded for omne time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was destined for France, received orders to fail
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to join
them by land. Tlhe Regent and Cardinal little expedted such a vi-
fit. They lhad triflcd that the Frcnch war would find employment
(or all lcenry's uries a(nd, friom an unaccountable fccurity, were

wholly

wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of BOOK II.
Hartford, a name fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this -- --
army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above Leith. May3, 1544.
He was quickly mailer of that place; and marching directly to
Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plundering the
adjacent country, the richest, and moist open in Scotland, he set on
fire both these towns; and upon the approach of some troops ga-
thered together by the Regent, put his booty on board the fleet, and
with his land forces retired safely to the English borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion, con-
certed with little policy, carried on at great expence, and attended
with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest. of Scotland,
he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage he had pro-
posed, was fill in his view, he loft a great deal. Such a rough court-
ihip, as the Earl ofHuntly humorously called it, difgufled the whole
nation their aversion for the match grew into abhorrence; and ex-
afperated by o many indignities, the Scots were never, at any
period, more attached to France, or more alienated from Eng-
land.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Regent and French

King, continued a correspondence with England, which ruined his
own intercft, without promoting Henry's. Many of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their affidion to
him, rcfufed to concur in any design to favour the public enemy.
And after a few feeble and unfuccefsfil attempts to disturb the Re-
gcnt's adminifration, lhe was obliged to fly ior safety to the court
of England, whecrc lcnry rewarded frvices which he had the in-
clination, but not the power to perform, by giving him in mar-
riage his niece the Lady Margarct Douglas. This unhappy exile,

10 wCS, C E

BO)K II. however, was destined to be the father of a race of kings. He saw
t--v- his son Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the per-

petual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And,
from that time, his poilerity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.

A peace con- MEAN while hostilities were continued by both nations, but with
c uded.

little vigour on either fide. The historians of that age relate mi-
nutely the circumstances of several skirmishes and inroads, but they
were without any considerable effet, and at this distance of time
deserve no remembrance *. At last an end was put to this languish-

ing

* THOUGH this war was distinguished by no important or decisive aftion, it

was, however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There still remain two original
papers, which give us some idea of the miseries, to which the most fertile coun-
ties in the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and deflructive incursions of the
borderers. The firfl seems to be the report made to Henry by the Engllih war-
dens of the marches, for the year 1544, and contains their exploits fiom the 2d of
July, to the i7th of November. The account it gives of the different inroads, or
Fr ays, as they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the fum total of
mischief they did is thus computed:
Towns, towers, fedes, barnekyns, paryfle-churches, baflel-houfes cafl

down or burnt - - - - 192

Scots slain 403
Prisoners taken 816
Nolt, i. c. black cattle, taken - 10,386
Sheep - - 12,492
Nags and geldings - - 1,296

G oa ts - - 2 00

Bolls of corn - 850
Infight-gcar, i. c. houlhold furniture, not reckoned.

I'aync- ' Kate papers, 43

The

ing and inadive war, by a peace, in which England, France, and BooK II.
Scotland were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude the .---

June J546.

Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that
vengeance, which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England was of the
Jaft consequence to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing to
attack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and chose rather to purchase
Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave them
exposed to danger. By yielding ome things to the interest, and
more to the vanity of that haughty Prince; by fubmifion, flattery,
and address, he, in the end, prevailed to have the Scots included
in the peace agreed upon.

THE consternation occasioned by an event, which happened a The rnIrd

short time before the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more of rlate''u
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal eatoun had not used
his power with moderation, equal to the prudence by which he

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Eail of Hartford, between the

Sth and 23d of September, 545; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, razed, and deflroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,
Monasterics and Friar-houfcs - 7
Cafles, towers, and piles - I

Market towns - - - - - 5

Villages - - 24 3

Milns - - - , - - - - 3
Hlofpitals - - - 3

All there were cast down or burnt. T)ayncs 52. As the Scort were no Ic,; flill-
ful in the pra(ice of irregular war, x\\ may -uni he th: t m .agc which they
did in Eglld wV.s not incOl fiderabc; an1d that 1iLi-r riis were no less valtc' ill,
than tlhcjoi,/ys ot the Eglifli.

attai *etl

BOOK II attained it. Notwithstanding his great abilities, he had too
- ---- many of the paflions and prejudices of an angry leader of a

faction, to govern a divided people with temper. His resent-
ment against one party of the nobility, his insolence towards the
reft, his severity to the Reformers, and, above all, the barba-
rous and illegal execution of the famous George Wifhart, a man
of honourable birth, and of primitive fantity, wore out the pa-
tience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting to
gratify the public wish by his deftrudtion. Private revenge, in-
flamed and fandified by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied
this want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the Earl of Rothes,
had been treated by the Cardinal with injustice and contempt. It
was not the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. And as the profcffion of his adversary screened
him from the effets of what is called an honourable resentment,
he resolved to take that satisfaction, which he could not demand.
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the singular courage
and conduct with which he put it in execution excite wonder. The
Cardinal, at that time, retided in the catle of Saint Andrew's, which
he had fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of the age
had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town
at his devotion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In this situation, sixteen persons undertook to furprile his caflle,
and to affiafinate himself; and their success was equal to the bold-
ness of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized on the gate
i.y Z9,546'. of the cafle, which was iet open to the workmen who were en-

ployed in finihing the fortifications; and having placed fcntries at
the door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous
domncflics one by one, and tn!ing' them out of the caflle, they
Without nuoit, or tumult, or violence to any other pcron, delivered

their

their country, though by a moil unjustifiable ation, from an am- BOOK I.
bitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his '--v--
cruelty and cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the French The Regent

interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among a atitepts izl
great party in the nation, but when deprived of the genius and autho- thenurderer,
rity of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence. Nothing can
equal the consternation whicha blow so unexpected occasioned among
his adherents; while the Regent fccretly enjoyed an event, which
rid him of a rival, who had not only eclipsed his greatness, but al-
mofi extinguihed his power. Decency, however, the honour of
the church, the importunity of the Queen Dowager and her sac-
tion, his engagements with France, and, above all these, the desire
of recovering his eldest son, whom the Cardinal had detained for
some time at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who, to-
gether with the castle, had fallen into the hands of the confpira-
tors, induced him to take arms in order to revenge the death of a
man he hated.

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One

part of military science, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and im-
petuofity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for sieges,
as they were active in the field. An hundred and fifty men, which
was the greatest number the conspirators ever afSlmblcd, refilred
all the efforts of the Regent for five months *, in a place, which
a tingle battalion, with a few battering cannon, would now rc-

^* l.pil. Rcg. Scot. 2. 379.
VOL. . 0 duce

BooK II. duce in as many days. This tedious siege was concluded by a

'-y-' truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the conspirators an

absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament; and upon
obtaining these, they engaged to surrender the castle, and to set
his on at liberty.

Ir is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty.

On both fides, they fought only to amuse, and to gain time. The
Regent had applied to France for afiltance, and expeced soon to
have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lefly and
his associates were not at first incited to murder the Cardinal by
Henry, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him.
Notwithstanding the silence of cotemporary historians, there are
violent presumptions of the former; of the latter there is undoubted
certainty e. During the siege, the conspirators had received from
England upplies both of money and provisions; and as Henry was
preparing to renew his propositions concerning the marriage and
the union he had projeCted, and to second his negociations with a
numerous army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be in a
iituation, in which they would no longer need a pardon, but might
claim a reward.

TEE death of Henry blafled all these hopes. It happened in

the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater splendor than
true glory; bufling, though net ativc; opprcflivc in domciic go-
vernmcnt, and in orcign politics wild and irregular. But the vices
of this Prince Svere mIore beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of
others. IsIi rapaciouniclfs, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by
d.prcfinlg the ancient nobility, adll by adding new property and

* K'.ith1 , Co.

power

power to the Commons, laid the foundations of the Briti(h liberty. BOOK II,
His other passions contributed no less towards the downfal of Popery, -'
and the eflablifhment of religious freedom in the nation. His re-
fentment led him to abolish the power, and his covetousness to seize
the wealth of the church; and by withdrawing these supports,
made it cafy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole fabric
of fupcrftition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who had been alter-

nately his rival and his friend; but his fuccefbor Henry Ir. was not
neglectful of the French interest in Scotland. He sent a considerable Troop, .rii.
body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to the Regent's fo""m 1;'ii.
affiflance. By their long experience in the Italian and German
wars, the French had become as dextrous in the conduct of sieges,
as the Scots were ignorant ; and as the bo!dnefs and defoair of the
conspirators could not defend them againfl theirfuperior art, they
surrendered to Strozzi, after a short refiitance, who engaged, in the [Force the
name of the Kinog his master, for the security of their lives; and callrc of St

bo~~~

' *' - ~~~~~~~Andrew' to

as his prisoners transported them into France. The caftl itself, Iurrendcr.
the monument of Bcatoun's power and vanity, was dcmolilhed, in
obedience to the canon law, which, with admirable policy, de-
nounces its anathemas even against the houses in which the iacred
blood of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them to bc
laid in ruins *.

THE archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's was bcflowcd Iby the Rc-
gent upon his natural brother, John IHamilton Abbot of 'ailleyo

* Burn.It in.,( . Rtf. . 3

0? 2 'I't

BOOK II. THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.
e'ev breach Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direction of as-
vithF lnlarnd. fairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. conduted them-

selves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late mafler,
and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they had not
abilities or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their inva-

sion of Scotland occasioned, we shall flop to take notice of a cir-
cumftance unobserved by cotemporary historians, but extremely re-
markable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
which then prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son in the castle of St.
Andrew's; and as they needed the protection of the English, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering
to them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the Crown,
in the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dread-
ful profpe. And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell upon
a very extraordinary expedient. By an ad made of purpose, they
excluded " the Regent's eldest son from all right of succession,
* public or private, so long as he flould be detained a prisoner,

and substituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their
i seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to

the Regent ." Succeflion by hereditary right is an idea so ob-

vious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to make a breach
in it, but i cafes of extreme neceflity. Such a neceflity did the
Parliament difcovcr in the present situation. Hatred to England,
founded on the memory of past hofilitics, and heightened by the
Iinart of recent injtries, was the national patfion. This dictated

1Epiui. Rcg. Scot. 2. 350.

that

that uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal succession was BooK II.
so remarkably broken. The modern theories, which represent this --
right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to be violated
upon any consideration whatsoever, seem. to have been then alto-
gether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Hartford, now Duke Scotland in-

of Somerset, and Prote6tor of England, entered Scotland at the head ated by the
of 18,ooo men; and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 flips ap-
peared on the coast, to second his forces by land. The Scots had
for ome time observed this orm gathering, and were prepared
for it. Their army was almost double to that of the enemy, and
potted to the greatest advantage on a rising ground, above Muffel-
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Elke. Both these circum-
tfanccs alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, and
would willingly have extricated himself out of it, by a new over-
ture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable. But this mode-
ration was imputed to fear; and his proposals rejected with that
scorn, which the confidence of success inspires. And had the con-
dut of the Regent, who commanded the Scots army, been in anv
degree equal to his confidence, the defirudion of the English
mudt have been inevitable. They were in a ituation, precisely
similar to that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the
following century. The Scots had chosen their ground so well,
that it was impossible to force them to give battle; a few days had
cxhaufted the forage ard provision of a narrow country; the fleet
could only furnish a scanty and precarious subsistence; a retreat
therefore was neceilary; but dilgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
coanfcqucnccs of retreating.

ON!

BOOK II. ON both these occasions, the national heat and impetuosity of
~'-"~- " the Scots saved the English, and precipitated their own country in-
Battl of to the utmost danger. The undisciplined courage of the private
1 inkey.

men became impatient at the fight of an enemy. The General
was afraid of nothing, but that the English would escape from him
by flight; and leaving his advantageous ituation, he attacked the

S'ptembcr.o, Duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than his rafi-
13' ness deserved. The Proteaor had drawn up his troops on a gentle

eminence, and had now the advantage of ground on his fide. The
Scotch army consistcd almost intirely of infantry, whose chief wea-
pon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were very deep,
and their ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy in three
great bodies, and as they pasTed the river, were considerably ex-
posed to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the bay of Muf-
felburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The Englith cavalry,
flushed with an advantage which they had gained in a fkirmih
fume days before, began the attack with more impetuosity, than good
conduct. A body so firm and compaCt as the Scots, easily refitled
the impression of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off the
field. The English infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
wvere at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank from
4co foreign Fusiliers who served the enemy, and to their cannon
which were planted behind the infantry, on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and clofeneis of their order made it ipoflible
for the Scots to fland long in this filuation. The Earl of Angus,
who comlmanded the vangiur-d, cndeavoured to change his ground,
and tu retire towards the main body. But his friends unhappily nli-
took this motion for a light, and fell into cnflufion. At tlat very
inllLnUt, the brolken cvalr-y having rallied, returned to the charge
the foot purulcd the advantage they ad gained; the proflpc of

\ itory

vicory redoubled the ardor of both; and, in a moment, the rout BOOK IL
of the Scotch army became universal, and irretrievable. The en- ---"
counter in the field was not long, or bloody; but, in the pursuit,
the English discovered all the rage and fierceness, which national
antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal
injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great dirlance. All the three roads, by which the Scots
fled, were flrewed with spears and swords, and targets, and covered
with the bodies of the slain. Above o,oco men fell on this day,
one of the mofi fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken
prisoners, and among these some persons of difindion. And the
Protetor had it now in his power to become master of a kingdom,
out of which, not many hours before, he was almost obliged to
retire with infamy .

BUr

* The following pafTlge in a curious and rare journal of the Protector's expedi-

tion into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in commillion with Cecil,
as Judge Marlial of the army, and prilnted in 548, deserves our notice; as it gives
a juit idea of the military difclplic of the Scots at that time. '` But \xh~ t after
learned, fpccially touching their order, their armour, aind their manner as well f
going to offend, as o't ianlding to defend, I lha:ve tho,ght neccifani heire to utttlr.
llackbutters have they few or none, anll appoint their light moil commonly :;l\v:ln
a-foot. 'Ihey come to the field well ftrnifh all wl ith jack and Ikill, d,ic.;er .Ind
ibucklcr, and fvords all broad and thill, of exceeding good temnllpe, and utl .i.l1;ili
so made to illic, that as I never fiv

l nonl e II )

l )od, so think I it hard to dcc f tli..:

better. HE-reto every ma.n his pike, and a ret I.ilchc. wlralppc. tw.ice o t ii.
about his neck, not for cold, blut ior cun'ti. In l eih r

i rray t tlw.nis ;joitnl a 'ii.

the enemy, tIcy cling and tltillo 1 mar in the lore rank, lh'il 1 and

. l uiitl.!r tl -

,ether, \i~li llth th

ir ii :m,.,

bil ilt ifocu thcm, :nid t. ir f in

, r.

tis il thatll oldel so hard Ilt thcirl ic , Il inilhe' ll pil eel their Io ?()S uLl: s<,1i !-
del:;, tilh t, il lilty do ;af[i!l llllilcoverl, n l', 'c n \'. ll wilthlad tlet(). Sl.aint!-
ilj'I at dl'.Iice tl ty tllil l)tlo ldeis likewi l lo till tt'Chtlhlc , I};c lo e llinl.; well

nilt'.

BOOK II. BUT this victory, however great, was of no real utility; for
Thcir vinory want of skill, or of leisure, to improve it. Every new injury ren-
otle iihenht dered the Scots more averse from an union with England; and the

Protector neglected the only measure, which would have made it
neceflary for them to have given their content to it. He amused
himself in wafting the open country, and in taking or building
petty caflles; whereas by fortifying a few places which were ac-
ceflible by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to the Eng-
lifh, and, in a short time, the Scots muff either have accepted of
his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an improve-
ment of it, his victory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the command of
Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other effect but to precipi-
tate the Scots into new engagements with France. The situation
of the English court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse for the Duke
of Somerset's conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which occa-
sioned his tragical end, was already formed; and while he triumphed
in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and credit at home.
Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his vicory. At
this time, however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by which

nigh to knecling, sloop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with
both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of the pike against
their right foot, and the other againli the enemy breaft-high ; their followers crof-
sing their pile points with them forward ; and thus each with other so nigh as
fpacc and place will fser, through the whole ward, so thick, that as easily flall

1. are finger pilrce thog throh e fiint of an angry hedtge hog, as any encounter- the

front of thecir pikes." ()lthor cuiious particulars are foundil in this journal, fromr
whichl Sir Johll Ilaywalrd has borrowed hib account of this expedition.

Lite of E\dward VI. 279, c.

The lengthl of the Scots pike or fpc:r was appointced by Act. 4. P. 1,71. to
be fix ell ; i. e. eight'cn leet lix inches.

lie

he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his presence suspended, BOOK II.
for some time, its effeEt. The supreme power fill remained in his --v-'
hands, and he employed it to recover the opportunity, which he
had loft. A body of troops, by his command, seized and forti-
sied Haddingtoun, a place, which, on account of its distance from April, .4
the sea, and fiom any English garrison, could not be defended
without great expence and danger.

MEAN while the French gained more bv the defeat of their al- Sos
lies, than the English did by their victory. After the death of Scots imto:

closer union

Cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con- wlth Fr,,ac.
fiderable miare in the direction of affairs. She was warmly attached
by blood, and by inclination, to the French interest; and, i order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event which oc-
curred. The spirit and firength of the Scots were broken at Pinkey;
and in an aflembly of nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon
the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France,
and no profpec of safety appeared but in aifltance from thence.
But Henry II. being then at peace with England, the Queen repre-
sented that they could not expe& him to take part in their quarrel,
but upon views of personal advantage; and that without extraordi-
nary concessions in his favour, no aftfifance in proportion to tl:eir
present exigencies could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of tie QLecn. What toften
happens to individuals took place among the nobles in this conven-
tion; they were swayed entirely by their paflions, and in olcr t,)
gratify them, they defcrted their former princiils, and difricarl ld
their true interciL. In the violence of rcfclntmcnlt, tthey f rgot tlat
zeal for the independency of Scotland, which had prolmpted tlhem t o
rcjcct the prololitiols of lenry VIlI. and y otffrilg, vo(,llltl ily,

Vo.. I. . P :,
i.1

BooK II. their young Q een in marriage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II.
AAdto ofr and which was still more, by proposing to fend her immediately
tieir Queen into France to be educated at his court, they granted, out of a thirst
in marriage to
the Dauphin. of vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon any

consideration of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom
as Scotland, was a matter of no small consequence to France. Hen-
ry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scotch ambaffa-
dors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition.
Six thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of Monsieur
Defsc, afiitted by some of the best officers, who were formed in the
long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They served two cam-
paigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But
their exploits were not conliderable. The Scots soon became jea-
lous of their designs, and negledted to support them with proper
vigour; and the caution of the Engliflh, in ading wholly upon the
dcfcnfive, prevented them from attempting any enterprize of con-
lequence; and obliged them to exhaust their strength, in tedious
i ueges, undertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, how-
ever, were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the
Fngiillh to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender ieveral finall
forts, whiclh they poiTcfied in different parts of the kingdom.

-rUT the consequences of these operations of his troops were

(i5ll of greatcr imlportance to the French King. The diversion which
tlhey occationed enabled him to wreif Bo3ulogne out of the hands of
the IaEnlih ; and the influence of his army in Scotland obtained
the c(ncurrence of Parliamenllt ith the overtures made to him, by
tlie afcllmbly of nonlcs at Stirlii, concerning tlh QI een's marriage
witll the I)aupli, and her education at the court of France. In
vain dil a few patriots rclonfilrtc a;nliilL such extravagant con-

ceiltons,

cessions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of BOOK II.
France; and Henry, from an ally, railed to be mafler of the king-
dom; by which, the friendflhip of France became more fatal than That ptarpolty
the enmity of England ; and every thing was fondly given up to concluked.
the one, that had been bravely defended against the other. A point June 5, i54s.
of so much consequence was hastily decided, in a Parliament, as-
fembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the intrigues of the
Qeen Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resentment againfl
England had prepared a great party in the nation for such a ftep; the
French General and AmbafTador, by their liberality and promises,
gained over many more. The Regent himself was weak enough
to hloop to the offer of a pension from France, together with the title
of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A considerable majo-
rity declared for the treaty, and the interest of a faftion was preferred
before the honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this raflh and fatal refolutiol, the Maryv ent to

source of many calamities to themselves, and to their Sovereign, the 'ranced
French allowed them no time for reflection or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was iill in Scotland,
and without delay, convoyed the Qeen into France. Mary was
then fix years old, and by her education in that court, the politest,
but mol corrupted in Europe, she acquired every accomplish-
ment that could add to her charms as a woman, and contracted
many of those prejudices, which occasioned her misfortunes as
Queen.

IROMI the time that Mary w;as put in.t their linids, it was the

intercll of the French to fuff'cr tle uwar in c.:tl;nd to languil]. The
rccovcring of the 13oulonnoi, wvas the olbjet lenr y had molt at

)' a lcart

BOOK II. heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the
-V'--' attention and strength of the Engliih, whose domestic factions de-

prived both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour. The
government of England had undergone a great revolution. The
Duke of Somerset's power was acquired with too much violence, and
exercised with too little moderation, to be of long continuance. Many
good qualities, added to great love of his country, could not attone
for his ambition in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Almost
the whole nobles combined against him; and the Earl of Warwick,
no less ambitious, but more artful, conducted his measures with o
much dexterity, as to raise himself upon the ruins of his rival. With-
out the invidious name of Protector, he succeeded to all the power
and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and he quickly
found peace to be neccefary for the establishment of his new au-
thority, and the execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

IHENRY was no firanger to Warwick's situation, and improved
,1,d cd. his knowledge of it, to good purpose, in conducting the negocia-

tions for a general peace. He preifribed what terms he pleaitd to
the English Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advanta-

,arch 24, geous to that Monarch and his allies. England consented to restore
i5so. Boulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all preten-

sions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the
conquest of her country. A few finall forts, of which the Eng-
li(h troops had hitherto kept poffcion, were razed ; and peace be-
tween the two kingdoms was eflablifhled on its ancient founda-
tion.

Bor 1 the Britifll nations loft power, s well as reputation, by
tlhib unhappy uarrel. It was on both tidcs a war ofi ciulation and

rclent

resentment, rather than of intereit; and was carried on, under the BOOK II.
influence of national animofities, which were blind to all advan- ""'
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness, con-
duded it with more skill; and by dexterously availing themselves
of every circumflance which occurred, recovered possession of an
important territory which they had loft, and added to their mo-
narchy a new kingdom. The ambition of the English Minister
betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies bestowed on them the latter; their
own address and good policy merited both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the French The Scots be-

forces left Scotland, as much to their own fatisfaaion, as to that cfre icahlu.
of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the calling to their
afiiftance a people more powerful than themselves, was a danger-
ous expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, those
who had come over to protet the kingdom, taking upon them to
command in it; and on many occasions they repented the rash in-
vitation they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this difguf, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French xw-rc,
in that age, what they are in the present, one of the most po'ifhed
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expeditions
into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north, that their
manners have been remarkably incompatible with the manners of
every other peop'e. Barbarians are tenacious of their own cufltoms,
because they want knowledge and rafle to difover the rcafonablcnels
and propriety of cuitoms which differ from them. Nations, \hic
holl the fifi- rank in politcnict, are frequently no lcs tenacious
cut of pride. The Greeks were o in the anc;cnt world ; ;!nd the

L'C r tl it

BooK3 II. French are the fame in the modern. Full of themselves, and ac-
_-y-__ customed, by the imitation of their neighbours, to confider their

own modes as the standards of elegance, they scorn to disguise, or
to lay aside the distinguishing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them among others.
For this reason, the behaviour of their armies has, on every occa-
sion, been insupportable to firangers, and has always exposed them
to hatred, and often to destruction. In that age, they over-ran
Italy four several times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by
their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear the mofl difiant in-
finuation of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pre-
tensions of such assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were
soon visible; they seconded the French in their military operations
with the utmost coldness, and this secret disgust grew insensibly to a
degree of indignation that could hardly be restrained; and on occa-
sion of a very flight accident, broke out with fatal violence. A
private French soldier had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edin-
burgh : both nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence of their
countrymen. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and several ci-
tizens of diflindtion were killed in the fiay; and the French were
obliged to avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of the
city. Notwithfanding the ancient alliance of France and Scotland,
and the long intercourse of good offices between the two nations,
an avcrfion for the French took its rife, at this time, among the
Scots; the cffects whereof were deeply felt, and operated powerful-
ly through the subsequent period.

Progrcfs ofthe FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing has been said of
Rc ·/ r ati on ..

the state of religion. While the war with England continued, the

clergy

clergy had no leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were not BOOK II.
yet considerable enough to expect any thing more than connivance '--Y"
and impunity. The new doctrines were still in their infancy; but,
during this flort interval of tranquillity, they acquired firength,
and advanced, by large and firm freps, towards a full establish-
ment in the kingdom. The first preachers agailnf popery in Scot-
land, of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of Reformation was partial, and at
second hand; some of them had been educated in England; all
of them had borrowed their notions from the books published there;
and, in the firfi dawn of the new light, they did not venture many
Rfeps before their leaders. But, in a hort time, the dotrines and
writings of the foreign Reformers became generally known; the
inquisitive genius of the age preilzd forward in quest of truth; the
discovery of one error opened the way to others; the downfal of
one imposture drew many after it; the whole fabric, which igno-
rance and fuperfiition had erected in times of darkness, began to
totter; and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a daring
and ative leader to direc the attack. Such was the famous John
Knox, who, with better qualifications of learning, and more ex-
tenfivc views than any of his predecessors in Scotland, poiteied a
natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above fear. IIe-'cgan
his public ministry at St. Andrew's in the year 1 47, with that Luc-
cess, which always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence. In-
Itcad of anmuing himself with lopping the brances, lie firuck di-
retly at the root of Iopery, and attacked both the doctrine ani dif-
cipline of the cflablilhcd clur-clh, with a vehemence peculiar to
liinfelf, but admirably iitedto to temper and wishes of the

.A ;"i

BOOK II. AN adverfarv so formidable as Knox, would not have easily
~ --' escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and

progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at firIt,
he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while the
conspirators kept possession of it, preached publickly under their
protection. The great Revolution in England, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in Scotland.
Henry had loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Pope-
ry. The Ministers of his son Edward VI. cast them off altogether,
and established the Protestant religion upon almost the fame footing,
whereon it now flands in that kingdom. The influence of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy effets of ecclesiastical li-
berty, in the one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
du themselves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a distance from court; they
gained credit, as happens on the first publication of every new re-
ligion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen of greatest distinCtion, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they were no longer under the
necessity of acting with the fame reserve ; and with more security
and encouragement, they had likewise greater success. The means
of acquiring and spreading knowledge became more common, and
the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every day
bolder and more universal.

ItAPPIiL for the Reformation, this spirit was frill under ome

refiraint. It had not vet attained firmncfs and vigour, futlicicnt to
overturn a fyrvcm, founded on the dccpcft policy, and supported

by

by the most formidable power. Under the present circumstances, BOOK II.
any attempt towards action mull have been fatal to the Proteflant .--
docrines; and it is no small proof of the authority, as well as pene-
tration of the heads of the party, that they were able to restrain the
zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that critical and mature
juncture, when every flep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWHILE, their cause received reinforcement from two dif-

ferent quarters, whence they never could have expected it. The
ambition of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land hastened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scotland; and
by a singular disposition of Providence, the persons who opposed the
Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fiercefl zeal,
were made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY of Guise poffiefed the fame bold and aspiring spirit, which The Queen
diflinguifhed her family. But in her, it was softened by the fe- Dowage a.

pires to the

male charaaer, and accompanied with greater temper and address. office of Re-
Her brothers, in order to attain the high objets at which they aimed, gent.
ventured upon such daring measures, as suited their great courage.
Her designs upon the supreme power were concealed with the utmost
care, and advanced by address and refinements more natural to
her sex. By a dexterous application of those talents, lhe 1-ad ac-
quired a considerable influence on the councils of a nation, hi-
therto unacquainted with the government of women ; and without
the fiallcft right to any flare in the adminifiration of aiiirs, had
engrofied the chief dircction of them into her own hands. CBt ile
did not long ret fatified with the enjoyment of this prccarious
power, which the ficklencfs of the Regent, or the alitioii of those
who governed him, might so cafilv difiuib; anld Iean to fct

VOL. . . Q :

BoiK II. on foot new intrigues, with a dfign of undermining him, and of

--' opening to herself a way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her

brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and supported it with all
their credit at the court of France. The French King willingly
concurred in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland en-
trely under management, and in any future broil with England, to
turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

Ix order to arrive at the desired elevation, the QLeen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chute; either violently to wrest the
power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his con-
sent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and factious people,
the former was an uncertain and dangerous experiment. The latter
appeared to be no les impracticable. To persuade a man volunta-
rily to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a level with those,
above whom he was raised; and to be content with the second place,
where he hath held the first, may well pass for a wild and chime-
rical project. This, however, the Queen attempted; and the pru-
dence of the attempt was sufficiently justified by its success.

TIrE Regent's inconfancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his adminiftra-
tion, raised the prejudices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly fomented there
with much iduftry. All who wished for a change met with a
gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of difafsiElion was
nouriicd by uch hopes and promises, as, in every age, impoic
on the credulity of the factious. The favourers of the Reforma-

('(oahts tlxe
RtcIrlnclr. tion being the mot numerous and( spreading body of the Regent's

ecnmies, fie applied to them, with a particular attention; and the

gcntle--

gentleness of her dispositions, and fceming indifference to the re- BooR 11.
ligious points in dispute, made all her promises of protection and -'
indulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so great part of
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the Queen set out
for France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took oa. 0o.
along with her those noblemen, who possessed the greatesr power
and credit among their countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of an
elegant court, flattered by the civilities of the French King, and the
carefies of the house of Guise, and influenced by the feafonablc difl
tribution of a few favours, and the liberal promise of many more,
they were brought to approve of all the Qteen's pretensions.

WHILE (lie advanced by there flow but important steps, the Re-

gent either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or
negledted to provide against it. The first discovery of the train
which w as laid, came from two of his own confidents, Panter
Bishop of Ross, and Carnegie of Kinnaird, whom the Queen had
gained over to her interest, and then employed as the moi: proper
instruments for obtaining his content. The overture was made to
him in the name of the French King, enforced by proper threaten-
ings in order to work upon his natural timidity, and sweetened by
every promise that could reconcile him to a proposal i disagreeable.
On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title, -together
with a considerable pcnfion, the parliamcntary aclnowledgment of
his right of fucccflion to the Crown, and a public ratification of his
condu during his Regency, were offcrcd him. On the other
hand, the diiplcafliie of the French King, the power and popula-
rity of the Queen Dowager, the dilastcitiun or tc no,!les, with
the danger of an after-reckoning, were rcprCfLntcd in the)C rongerft
colou ir.

Ir

BOOK II. IT was not pofible to agree to a proposal o extraordinary and
' --~-v- unexpected without some previous firuggle; and had the Archbishop

of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and passive
spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have rejected it
with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and ambition
of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obftrucion to her views.
He was. lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the influ-
ence of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper counterballanced
several of the strongef passions in the human mind, and obtained
his consent to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.
Dec. Hal. AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty with so much ease,

the Qteen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate poffion of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that distemper, which
the ignorance of the Scotch physicians had pronounced to be in-
curable. This he owed to the assistance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
some useful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical
sciences, which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries. As a
pretender to atrology and magic, he was revered and consulted by
all Europe; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he was but little
known. The Archbishop, it is probable, confidered him as a power-
ful magician, when he applied to him for relief; but it was his know-
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his disease *.

* Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidered as an Aflrologcr than a

Philosopher; in his book De Geniluris, we find a calculation of the Archbiflop's
nativity, friom which he pretends both to have predicted his disease, and to have f-
fetcd his cure. lie received, from the Archbilllop, a reward of 80oo crowns. A
great fir1 i that age. De itaJia, p. 32.

' OG ET I PR

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbiflop recovered the en- BOOK II.

tire government of the Regent, and quickly determined him to re-
cal that dishonourable promise, which he had been educed by the
artifices of the Qeen to grant. However great her furprize and
indignation were, at this fresh inflance of his inconstancy, file was
obliged to dissemble, that the might have leisure to renew her in-
trigues with the Proteflants, whom he favoured and courted more
than ever; with the nobles, to whom he rendered herself agree-
able by various arts; and with the Regent himself, in order to
gain whom the employed every argument. But whatever impref-
sion her emiflaries might have made on the Regent, it was no easy
matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Archbishop. Under his
management, the negociations were spun out to a great length, and
his brother maintained his flation with that address and firmness,
which its importance so well merited. The universal defetion of
the nobles, the growing power of the Protetfants, who all adhered
to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated solicitations of the French
King, and, above all, the interposition of the young Queen, who
was now entering the twelfth year of her age, and claimed a right
of nominating whom he pleated to be Regent, obliged him, at Prevail on
last, to resign that high office, which he had held many years. He the Regent to

resign his of-

obtained for himself the fame terms of advantage, which had been ice.
formerly tfipulated.

Ir was in the Parliament which met on the oth of April, 1554, She obtains

that the Earl of Arran executed this extraordinary resignation; and the Regency,
at the fame time, Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the object of her withes. Thus, with their own
approbation, a woman, and a firanger was advanced to the fuprcine
authority over a fierce and turbulent people, who, seldom tublrit-

ted.

BooK II. ted, without relutance, to the legal and ancient government of
'-V--- their native Monarchs.

Reformation WHILE the Qeen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much
continues to towards the progress of the Reformation, by the protection which
make great
progels. she afforded it, from motives of ambition; the English Oueen,

by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons ative in
July 6, 553. promoting that cause. Mary ascended the throne of England,

on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married Philip II.
of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,
and the fierceness of that age, the added the private resentment of
her own, and of her mother's fuffcrings, with which fle loaded
the Reformed religion; and the peevishness and severity of her na-
tural temper carried the acrimony of all these passions to the ut-
most extreme. The cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds
of those tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach to human
nature. The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with
the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip was ob-
liged, on some occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings.
Many among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the doctrines
which they had taught; others fled from the storm. To the
greater part of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a secure
asylum; and not a few, out of choice or necessity, fled into Scot-
land. What they had seen and felt in England, did not abate the
warmth and zeal of their indignation against Popery. Their attacks
were bolder and more successful than ever; and their doctrines
made a rapid progress among all ranks of men.

TI-ESE docrines, calculated to rectify the opinions, and to reform
the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other effects;

but

but they soon began to operate with greater violence, and proved the BooK 1I.
occasion, not only of subverting the ellablifhed religion, but of ---V
shaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom. The causes . view of the

FOliticalcaiuifc

which facilitated the introduCtion of thee new opinions into Scot- \iilich con-
]and, and which dilleminated them so fast through the nation, me- tribted to-

-b~~~~~ °~v, arub that.

rit, on that account, a particular and careful inquiry. The Refor-
mation is one of the greatest events in the hiflory of mankind, and
in whatever point of light we view it, is instructive and intererfing.

THE revival of learning in the i5th and 6th centuries rouzed

the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been so long restrained, and venturing to
move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into every subjet, with
great boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the first objects which drew their
attention. Long before Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open, to
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the eftablified
fuperfiition. That subtle and refining people, satisfied with en-
joying those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to afiume the
dangerous character of Reformers, and concluded the knowledge of
trutl to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar minds must
be overawed and governed by popu:ar errors. But, animated witlh
a more noble and difinterefled zeal, the German Theologian boldly
crected the andard of truth, and upheld it with an unconquerable
intrepidity, which merits the admiration and gratitude of all fuc-
ceeding ages.

'I't L

BOOK II. THE occasion of Luther's being firif disgusted with the tenets of the
"--v--- Romish church, and how from a small rupture, the quarrel widened

into an irreparable breach, is known to every one who has been the
leafl conversant in history. From the heart of Germany, his opi-
nions spread, with aonithing rapidity, all over Europe; and where-
ever they came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-
founded system. The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
and the power and bigotry of the Austrian family, suppressed these
notions on their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of Eu-
rope. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by multiplied im-
positions, could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued
by the fame force ; and encouraged by ome Princes from piety,
and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble oppofi-
tion of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE fuperitition of Popery seems to have grown to the most ex-

travagant height, in those countries which are situated towards
the different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern cli-
mates, rendered them susceptible of the deepest imprefiions of super-
flitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less
favourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among the northern
nations. They knew little, and were disposed to believe every thing.
The most glaring absurdities did not flock their gross understand-
ings, and the most improbable fictions were received with implicit
afient and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land, was of the most bigotted and illiberal kind. Those dotrines
which are motl- apt to flock the human understanding, and those

legends

legends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the people BOOK II:
without any attempt to palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever--
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the
other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of superstition; for it is the nature of that spirit to observe no
bounds, in its refpedt and liberality towards those, whose character
it esteems sacred. The Scotch Kings early demonfli-ated how much
they were under its influence, by their vast additions co the immu-
nities and riches of the clergy. The profife piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, transferred almost the
whole crown-lands, which were at that time of great extent, into
the hands of ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his fucccffors. The spirit spread among all orders of
men, who daily loaded the prieflhood with new pofTefions. The
riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded the
juif proportion The Scotch clergy paid one half of every tax im-
posed on land; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age,
they would be loaded with any unequal hare of the burden, we
may conclude, that, by the time of the Reformation, little less than
one half of the property in the nation had fallen into the hands of
a focicty, which is always acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a confidcrablc part of their property cx-

tended their influence. Many cllatcs, throughout tc kingdom,
lild of the church ; church-lands were let in lease at an cafy
rent, and were policllcid by the younger ons, and dcfccndants of

VOL. I. the

BOOK II. the best families *. The connexion between flpcrior and va/al,
Y"NV between the landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave

rife to an union of great advantage to the church; and in estimating
the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as
well as the real amount of their revenues, must be attended to,
and taken into the account.

THIS extraordinary fihare in the national property was accom-

panied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the
kingdom. At a time, wh. the number of temporal Peers was
extremely finall, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs fldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclesiastics formed a
considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient rolls of
Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court mufl have been, in a great
measure, under their diretlion -.

THE reverence due to their sacred charater, which was often

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pith clergy are remarkable, both as caufcs and effects of that do-
minion, which they had acquired over the reil- of mankind. They
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither lulujet to the fame laws, nor tried by the iame
judges. Evcry guard, that religion could supply, was placed aro-ui
their pow:er, their pofcflions, and their persons ; and uidcavo,
were uscd, not without success, to reprcfent them all as equally
atcrcd.

>' Keith, 52I. Nut. t ) S 'J lif.
I of the Ch. oi'St, .49.

Ti

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable, BOOK II

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the reverence which
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a just taste, were altogether unknown ; in place of these, were
fubflituted studies, barbarous and uninitruaive; but as the eccle-
fiaftics alone were conversant in them, this procured them eleem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages, which
knew nothing. War was the sole profession of the nobles, and
hunting their chief amusement; they divided their time between
these ; and unacquainted witlh the arts, or unimproved by fciencc,
they disdained any employment foreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and addre', than bodily vigour.
Whereever the former were necessary, the clergy were entrusted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the trufl-. Almofl all
the high offices in civil government devolved, on this account, into
their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the first iubjeat in the
kingdom, both in dignity and in power. IFom the earliest ages
of the monarchy, to the death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four
persons had held that high office; and of these, forty-three had
been eccleiaftics . The Lords of Seflion were fuprme Judges in
all matters of civil rilght; and by the original constitution, the Pre-
sident and one half of the Senators in this court were churchmeln.

To all this vwe may add, the clergy being separatcd from the ref

of mankintd by the law of celibacy ; and undiilraccd by thof carcu,
and ulnincumlbcrcd \xith thofc burdens which occupy and opprecs
other men, tile intcr.it of their order Ibccame their only objcd, and
they were at full cifurc to purfulc it.

' Ciawl. ( )ic, (A St.ic.

R 2 III :

BOOK I. TI-IE nature of their funfion gave them access to all persons, and
---"--- at all seasons. They could employ all the motives of fear and of

hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate most powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the credulous;
they besieged the beds of the sick and of the dying. They suffered
few to go out of the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound with the Almighty
for their fins, by bestowing riches upon those, who called them-
selves his servants.

XII'rEN their own industry, or the superstition of mankind failed

of producing this el'ct, they had influence enough to call in the aid
of law. Whoever died iit/fatr, was presumed to have deflined his
imoveales to pious uses. The church took pofeffiion of them. The
chil,lren, the vise, the creditors of the crion deceased were often
excluded from any fiare in what was eecmed a sacred property .
As men are apt to trull to the continuance of life wih foolish con-
fidenc., and childlifily fun every thing, that forces them to think
Eos teir mortality, many die without fettlirg their aflairs by will;
andl the bold ufLrpation of ecclesiastics in this cafe, of which there
:'r-e frclquent vciiiges in our laws, though none in or hiilorians, may
be rckoncd among the molt plentiful sources of the wealth of the
church.

A'r the litme time, all matrimonial and tcfliamntary caules could

Ihe tiied only in the ipiritual courts, and by law\, \hiclh the clergy
thlciiilblcs ht srnd d. TplC , toa,

tbly

c\wich, the dccilion
of tll:cl coulrt:; \vcr enlorced(, added to their authority. A flcntciie

i Lfily o B1 it. Atil. . 7-1

'f

of excommunication was no lets formidable, than a sentence of out- BooK II.
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions, and against vari-'--
ous crimes: and betides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
Chrifrian privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men, or
as citizens. And the aid of the secular power concurred with the
superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church no
less deflruive than terrible.

To these general cuss, may ble attributed the irnmen2: growth

both of the wealth, and power of the Pop :il church; and without
entering into any more minute d tail, this lmay icrve to dil-ovcr the
foundations, on which a iti-tdture io ft upendous was erecctd.

BuT though the lai:y had cotrintibted, by their own fupcrfiition

and profuftl'efs, to raifl t he clergy from poverty and contempt to
richies and dignity, they began, by degrees, to tfel and to murmur
at their incroachments. No wonder lhanuty and artil nobles
should view the power and pofieiions of the church with envy;
and regard the lazy and inative clhara&cr f churcchmen wvith the
utmoi contempt. \TVlilc, t the lame time, the indecent and licen-
tious lives of the clergy gave great and jUl, cftL nce t thle pcop!,
and considerably abated the veneration, wlhiii they Swre accultomed
to yield to tlat order of mi-n.

IrENS r\1C:ll, ext!rcmlC

N

weea.. indolence, rol ir,,-o; r:lincC, ant,1 al'cv ,-

.al, the liv rel illjtiin ionl of' cli,)ucv, l .Ld coIl, irrc'd t) it.lt';iu ',

tilis corruption o' mor(),ls a. ,ng ti. ( r

I V, ' I , r!uic .i.i'r t )

lnuill upcili tlic l-ii'millill of tie c.'' ,' .<' : : ')

': i':. ("i. ,)'

to) c in'I'.l, 1 t, Alii

' t . ,

,1 thc 2'

J *'; - , .;i'. ,'" (,&Ii l' ;i '.'. iL , i' 1.1 )
'

. :1

BooiK I. open and scandalous dissolution of manners prevailed among the

' r-' Scotch clergy *. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public pomp,

which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage f his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son -; and, if we may
believe Knox, he publickly continued to the end of his days a cri-
minal correspondence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates teem not to have been more regular and exem-
plary than their Primate 1[.

MEN of fich characters ought, in reason, to have been alarmed

at the first clamours raised againf their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the ProtefRant preachers; but the Popish
ccclefiaiics, either out of pride or ignorance, negledted the propcr
methods for silencing them. Instead of reforming their lives, or
lifguifing their vices, they affcded to dcfpite the censures of the
people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and au-
ilerities, endeavoured to resemble the firfi propagators of Chriftia-
nlty, the Popifl clergy were compared to all thole persons, who

W* Vinzct. ap. Keith Append. 202, 205. Len. de Reb. Gcct. Scot. 232.

-1- The marriage antics fabfcribed with his own hand, in whvli he calls her
r,:y da',itir, are 1till cxtapt. Keith, p. 42.

A rcmarkable proof ( 1 thl dlilrtlunte manners of the clergy is found in the pub-

lic recordL. A greater number of Ictters of /lc/timit'ii. was granted during the
fitfl t liity years after the Relfrmatiol, t ian dining the whole period, that las
hatpllld lince t ti:t time. 'I'hcfb were oltained by the sons of the Popill clcr£y.
IThe cclclialic, wil werei allowed to ret.tin theiir bInclt c::, ia.iitcd liem t,
tiir chiill-dren; \who, x\\h ln thecy atcqlui d

wl .iIh,

we\\ dc\'fi, ! l :, the I.ftii (Ai

jile'liintcy n l t It'll ) l 1)1i1er I' ein pi i

tI l il similies. nll Lit'i'i C '.,1a''o'C

F, I,'

S u,t', I'y//o,/', we find lle v ial inlliccs of ich ali elnali,,s 'l

ei itt l) lind:,, by" the
P pllli icutinbents, to their natlural chidlin.

.11 ('

are mofi infamous, in history, for the enormity and scandal of BOOK ii.
their crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the eablifhed dodrines; instead of at-
tempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to
reason; they left them without any other support or recommenda-
tion, but the authority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues f pilgrimage, and the
merits of the laints, were the topics, on which they infitled in their
discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being lcft 1wholly
to Monks of the lowefl and molt illiterate orders, their compEoi-
tions were fill more wretched and contemptible, than the fubjccs
on which they infilled. While the Reformers were attended by
crowded and adlniring audiences, the Popish preachers were cither
universally deserted, or liflened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order to recover their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering fait of the people,
was equally imprudent, and unifcceirful, As many dorines of
their church had derived their credit, at firll, from the autlhority of',
false miracles, they now endeavoured to call in ihefe to their ail
But those lying wonders, vwhich were beheld with unlfui¥icious adni-
ration, or heard with implicit faith, in times of darkncls and of ilno-
rance, met with a very different reception, in a mlore cnilightcn. I
period. The vigilance of tle Reformers deteced thlei impn)oflur.,
ald exposed not only them, but the cause, which needed the aid
of flch artifices, to ridicule.

Spllft'v.' ooXl, ,A).

M

BOOK II. As the Popish ecclfiaftics became more and more the objecs of
'h---Jl hatred and of contempt, the discourses of the Reformers were liltened

to as so many calls to liberty; and betides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt dodrines, which had
perverted the nature of true Christianity; besides the zeal, which
they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of religion;
they gave rife also, among the Scotch nobles, to other views and
paflions. They hoped to flake off the yoke of ecclesiastical domi-
nion, which they had long felt to be oppreflivc, and which they
now discovered to be unchriflian. They expeced to recover pof-
fcfion of the church revenues, which they were now taught to
confider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a profusion no
less undifcerning-, than unbounded. They flattered themselves that
a check would be given to the pride and luxury of the clergy, who
would be obliged, henceforward, to confine themlelves within the
sphere, peculiar to their sacred charadter. An aversion for the efta-
blifhed church, which flowed from so many concurring causes, which
was railed by considerations of religion, and heightened by motives
of policy, Ifread fail through the nation, and excited a spirit, that
burtc out, at last, with irresistible violence.

RELIGIOUs considerations, alone, were sufficient to have rouzed

this ipirit. The points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and o
e{fctial to tlic nature of true Christianity, that they merited all the
zcal with which the Reformers contended in order to eftallifh them.
i'ut the Reformation having been reprcflntcd as the cfic't of folll
wild and cnlthlulijalic fireCzy in til c human mind, this attempt to
account or tlhe cagcrncis and zeal, wVith which our Ianccfl)wrs em-
braced and propagated the Protcllant doctrines, by taking a view of

t}il

tlhe o:itical motives, alo'e, which infltuicel them, anll by (Tew- Boor IL
ill,, I

how natu ra lly t hcf p[romptcd them to) at.':. viit l1 ucl a;dor, - --- '

w'i! not, p rlhaps, be cficcmc( i taI lnlCCtcllry digrcfilonl. \We now
return to til cu'li of the hifory.

T;r Qicczl's c'!caton to the oftIce of Rcenlt fecrns to have I-,

trz: ! r.'{ c, her, at fl, lbvlond the kown pru.lcnce, and miodc-
r;. ":; of her ch:ra.tcr. She li .jn her .laiini ratiosu,

tby con-

fQ',' i. ;1 a (; ci

, cb

u l. 1vcr,'.l ofqiecs of trul: aind of d it' ;

, -,p 1.cQ'^>1

which bth from the in..iitv of fi(aners; to tilclar, thief (.si- R ,".:. '

ces with vi goti, and .l' thce0nvv 1v iiWc tlheil }wpricrin i 'nt c.\ 'e
1, .. :h

,- . . " ,

. ! .,, '1-

amo!!ig tlItc a tivt':., i1 \lv i att Mended v iti 'o>)d ConicitiL"e C :

c j. l : ;1,

111ort was lLmal.e C o t.li, ma l crti tclt.c \vit tlc il '1clit oJ;
the public rcvc!-\ucb; illnot \',as anpointcd (;ovcrn;oro ( .'iliC;
aind Ru Iy loo red with tilc culltod( o' tlhl Great Seal, and tle
title f 'Vice C iLinccllor '. it as wi'rth the it ofil iiiinaio, t!hat

tlli' Icti't O:.

.:-l soili'ccs (,f tie o' r-atclC ' ('aill l]eC' and ail it oi,r't

dealt out au0), ' iLIral.'-'-. Bv thlic i Ol9.y CC Cci c tle
Qt ccn.to lia\ c Oi'i-t-cd al ' inlulIt both to tl'ir unll .i'l a:-Clinlgs, alnd to
ti'..ir c ',r:"':c; to the former, by iuilp oini:' tll unfit 1or tilji
1'i.ons, vlilh tic'ir alcclilors had filldi wilih so u'h dinl"'; to

tl, latter, b', iit-' l' nil:' tlhat thcv were tamel enol)l 'l not to c. : i-
plaia of an afiont, lcl, in lno itnnr acl woul have been t.'c-
ate.i wsith impunity.

\ III.r their i s w in

tlcii dilp oil.ion, al inilct hai lencd

,'whicl ill.tm .,l tiler a :i''ilien for I 'rt'nhii coLuncil:.; to tle Ili'llfl
di'".i'tC. Lve. r 1.nc the li.:l t tco)ltt.L 0[ tCvL'.l tilc hionllIs ol Va-

, 0- =; qI '.,in o. _ P? t^;,c':c, t',' French had lbeen arccutfomed to embarafs

--' ,

Th ;ii, a,.nd to divide. their lricngth by the fiulddn and formi-

d e':l' c i!':.:!;''i: ,"-; of tl r allis, the Scots. But, as thcfe inroads
v:,--: '-;-. :

:; -t, :-.1i w\vii aiy real advantage to Scotland, and cx-

v,!,;' ;', t . (i :' ';,I.'rus rc!intmlent of a powerful tncri
lhb ur, the

'p ''1'].- ','-', 5 '..'''Ii tlhmn iutrincrly, and ifcruped, any

(,- ! t!,, _ .

: . tn ...ii ..11 !. te

pll e

at t lhe

PCC of their owvn quict

a, ! ; -i,. T]c

T '."' .... t:>), v.i, XvJ wa dly introdLcilng into

t. ;.s

., , r ;' C

I d;-c-l thl . '<l :

.1
. , t he Scotch Iairccs of less

i': .)." .('.

c t,
t) 'i Fr: ',h 1,i,'. Clh. F'or tleir rcalcn.:, i I ir- ha-

.' O

7: ' rl ,i lo a

., r

.; it. 7 ili I?. s '?*c .ii , tkeat t1

Oe.'.i c !' Ir. : ...d xi ...i tw ke pa:-i L in her u!ian's qua;:-;cl, ia ns
C -.'K,:-c 1; . tiL'.)'.' to l cure, ill ,cott:ilan , theic il. LU Cc of forne
tr cl::, vich IC wou1d be more at his com11mnd tllhan , undiuiilined
arl\', L<. lv by nobl, ' wo \vere allrnoi inl-pc;-delt. In irofic.u-
ti.;n , f t.i s de'lin, but underl pretcnce of rclieving th;e noblc fr'om
the C":i'C-lcc and danr of dcIcnding tlhe borders, the Qccn Rengcnt

i
: .. i-'"led, in Parliament, to rcgicer the value of lands tl:hroul -,iort

j i:i-A.om) to lIliODfeC on tlheml a f'a! tax, alL to anl tba

r s'.'cnu to>v;:J . mxitniing a

ecsy ol rt:.E
0r t. ro;p?, in coni2ant

a L,,c?, C

I ·

}\'vv A si I tax upci '] v' the

'o' c.\'ee

" .of'

i,-

verinmenit Ilath introducCed into almofI (very pat of ir'yc, as i .-.

:.,'..-;, t that tim-n, anld icneed alto'ttlic, .i::;(lnii4Ulet withl the
..ee and' i,dlc.'lcndent Ii it of tli:.- l '
I e nment. "oti ,;

!.:ld 1e I;lC ihic .ili t a ' :1 'e i :roI and lmtx.v :;, iqitv, t:a. t -

C!,ru/1ti'! to -Irc:larv al :( , tl . c ( o ti', t; is . li

1'. l .C.'. , ( ,r hre

:': tie l''\1 (s

th' a'e o: .
tiley rcc.ic d 'Ct'Lino i(.,oll v il [ic I;L"'t3i1 i! '.d]: ~ 'ii.). ·'(i .

j .. i ('. el(: i cU!1;I

;t...jJ( !''. Z ')I;IR TI jl, T@) \. l
' -I

lw 1 c 1 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Cull c c 1 1
tr ;nb

manly and detcrmined boldncf, which' is natural to a free people, Booi II.
in a martial arrc. Alarmedt at a r monlrance delivered in L) flirm '--- -'
a tone, and supported by Il-ch formidablc numbers, the Qlcun pru-
dently aban;doicd a ichcmc, which fle found to be univerlally odi-
ous. As th Q:c hcrel waknown perfcc.ly to underland the
ci;rc'n limlacc andi tiemper of the nation, this imieafure was imputed
Xwhlo0v to the tf1,7vCion s of her forcir:n cuuntlllors; an>d the
Sco's t',rcc ready L projecd to t hetncU vion CXrT.ucS a.i'ai.
them.

T',? iFrench, inficad of c tinu'aihiIC, a i.l to "e ;.Tne.... i

T|Rc 1).!t1, ] r .''

i........ ii a

s S,' i, a l'hi i' :: :: ;.,

T];ev hd nov.' coise;-lcc0 3KLi1ii "

~pi, a. p ..

prevailed on the Qjcc 'i to rliu'c

;l' ' v \v'i

al 1, '

conliderable oliy of er ti.i- . In oder to (dcy'Ie iihn of thlis
aid, IIiryv taiI rccu!ic, as le p:cje'Ci J, to tuc i ..; a:i at-
Cteml tcd t) (cc ;c tl,; to :i;e , .

ii; t i; t, ? coli an iiad

fno :'i to (e d sie;u a I cc,, of:'' . r i'y's ch:iiai l tc, \',' J;o r
fron aniy 'ib:.uus

,

-ii i rn ( of' i'0 ..1' :. I. r' ix ht cii'$, xvxwa xlolhy
occt}'0it in ci-i.'-oJ il:in' to -,'..!"] i- r c, .l iublVL Ci3; the

blb .', hvio .\:; ':"..i by..: (~'

...v ('... I n \ b. , - "

'91 1^,

.li i.. .()

ti4C '..1

Ti.a'JihiS o~,t .

t'I I rc1' '). \. L .. Ic

lcii s

i i iii l l

p.'i.e ie il

d a'ieroc1 , ani unci .e e . .

sa i ; .t.ibi i ,,;iy

perluhlii)n, t;e I-;c e 1t ro L . : :

t ['9:i i, -.-1; , j-

\'itfl di', (I':ii.l ..

oC ta

?,i I:; ;'", ; ,.'

i c ''1 ;' red I'ir "

;'ei .,:. i.tl" ,::

.

.

'. .. m. 7

. . . ..d -

i ;. r-

' ,iil ' 'l ( i i

. l

[ . ,

p i .. i , i i , . . . . . . . .;,. .
...

t -'t i:.v ti.' , , tI .

...

I ' ,
-

Boo0K II. tional injury dissipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refo-
'--,-'-' lutions which they had so lately formed. War was determined, and

orders infintly given for raising a numerous army. But before
their foices could alfemblc, the ardor of their indignation had
time to cool, and the Englifll having discovered no intention to pufl
the war with vigour, the nobles relumed their pacific system, and
;56. resolved to stand altogethcr upon the defcnfive. They nmarchcd

to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incurfiors of the
enely, and hliaviin done wh:lt they thouaht fiflicient for the fifcty
and honour of their country, the Qcen could not induce them, ei-
ther by her itrcaeLcs, or her artifices, to advance another flcp.

\VXiILE the Scots perfitled in their inaacivity, D'Oyfel, the Com-

mander of the French troops, who poflificd entirely the confidence
of te Queen Regent, endeavoured, vi:h her connivance, to en-
,f-ie the two nations in lhofilities. Contrary to the orders of the
S ctcll Genelal, he marched over the Tweed with his own soldiers,
and invested Werk, a garrison of the Englifli. The Scots, inf-ead
of seconding llis attempt, were enraged at his prefuiiption. The
Q:e's pa:tiality towards France had long been suspected; but it
vwas now visible that lie wantonly fi.criFicd the peace and safety of
Scotland, to the interef of that ambitious and aiuming ally. Under
the feudal governments, it was in camps, tlhat fuibjeds were accufl-omedl
to ad'l-e ;S the b3hideli remonfirances to their Sovreins. vWhile arms
were i their hands, they felt their own s[reirgth ; and at that tinme
all thei rcprecl'ntations of grievances carricd the authority of com-
mandi . On tlii occalion, the itndignlation of the nobles broke out
with Lfch violence, that the (Qcii perceiving all attempts to en-
gage theml in aion to e vain, abruptly ilmillflid her army, and
retired with the utlnoft ilhamc andll di1;sllil havi1ng ilovercd the

ilpo -

impotence of her own authority, without eciLng, any tlling which BOOK II.
could be of advantage to France. -'--

IT is obiervab!e, that this firfl inflance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported y thol who avoured the
Reformation, and as ihe fiill needed them for a counterpoiie to
the Archlhilop of St. Andrew's, and the partiz;l:ns o-tic h)oicf of
I-amilon ; they were now treated by Iher wi'ihi .eat r-jlpei , ;1and
even admitted to no inconllilelable lhar iln her f-avou anid con-
silence. Kirkaldy o' Grange, and tlh otler ii'i;, con''ii.-
tors aainf Cardinal catoun were, about tlis timeh, recalled 1b her
from banihllinnt; and, through lier connivance, the Proteflaitl
preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, vwicil wvas of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by thIei inllances of the Qjeen's
moderation and iumanity, tlhe I'rotcfants abandoned te oflice of
remnoniftating to others; and the leaders of te oppofitc fiacion set
them the firit: example of difutiig the vwill of tlhir Sovercign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious her au-

thoritv was, while it depended on the poise of thele contrary cfi- ri.,.,,j !
tions, fle endeavoured to establish it on a broader anld m'rc iecu;: "-
foundation, by haflening the conclulion of her daughter's marriage
with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Qucen of Scots ten was, in
the blooml of youth ; ;iand conllerabce as the trlito' ics w\cic, v.aich
he would have added to tlhe I'rinc i mlon1rchy; there did not wv ii't
rcalfns to 1pcrtIuade ICllnr to (deCt it frrumi his firl pn (ot malrryil
her to his foIn. The 'CXinfltblc M¥-n' lno rclncy employdc. all is
interclc. to ldefiat an a!liance, which rclcdi d f) mulch lul tire i)

. til

BooK IT. the Princes of Lorrain. He represented the impofibility ofmaintain-
----' ing order and tranquillity among a turbulent people, during the ab-

fencc of their Sovereign; and for that reason, advised Henry to be-
flow the young Queen upon one of the Princes of the blood, who,
by efiding in Scotland, might preserve that kingdom an useful
ally to France, which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would be-
come a mutinous and ungovernable province *. But, at this time,
the Constable was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards, and the
Princes of Lorrain at the height of their glory; and their influence,
seconded by the charms of the young Queen, triumphed over the
prudent, but envious remonstrances of their rival.

)C ., THE French King accordingly applied to the Parliament of
'5s,5 Scotlandl, which appointed eight of its members 4- to rcprefcnt the

whole body of the nation, at the marria-c of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
characer, vwere folc of tlhe mofl avowed and zealous advocates
for he Reformation ; by which, ay be eflimated the degree of
riclih and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kiid um. The ii-ifru&ions of the a.;liament to those Cotm,.-i-
ionrs itill remain j, and do honour to the wifdnom and intcrity
of t iat aiikmbly. At the ame! time that they manicfibd a :udable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sovereign, with re-
fi'Ct 1o the airiclcs of tnarriage, thley employed every precaution
x'I:~,l, LiJci2'. could ""L.l, ,1or prclcrving the liberty a i '!:-

j '.'. ..' ; I; 1) of (.l ow t I

I illop 1

R

:,

1,

Iil ) (op of Or C k-

i , t:,. 1'. ; .. : 1 '
, . t.,,iil.l,, iJ l'l i : i.i., Lou l Sc io, thllc ,i,,r o'

', D...'d
C.

pendance of the nation, and for securing the fucceflion of the Crown BOOK II.
in the house of HIamilton.

WIT-r regard to each of these, the Scots obtained whatever fa- j'Cc: as.

tisfaction their fear or jealousy could demand. The young Q/ccn, i * ii:, ti.c
the Dauphin, and the King of France ratified every article, with"
the mofi fOlcmln oaths, and Confirmed them by dccds in form, under
thc;r hlands and eals. But on thle part of France, all this was one
contilued fcee of iudicd and elaolrate (Iccci. Z i'vio s to 'ife
public taniifcions with the 'cotch d.'putic, .: i-a hl been pcr-
iuadc;d to fulfcrie privat.l ti c;e dcei ccls ii.

. il, d ia-

lid ; 1ty v'hich, ifhe, faii:,i; thic cirs of ler o'l n b, ;od , coni:'cd
the kingdom of Scotland, vihli wh'l.'.cr inheritance or ,iOn
mitlt accrue to it,t upon the CTroVwn of Franc-, dC a.;--
ing all promilfcs to the contrary, which the cc.ility of icr aIfiirs,
and tie iolicitations of her fubjcis -adt c.:t:rtd, or mi '. cxI tcrt
fromn her, to be void and of no obligation :: it g ivcs us a pro-
per idea of the characcr of the FrIench court under Ilui ry I!. we
may ofcrvc that tle Ki:, himflclf, the K' .:r of the (.reat Seals,
the Duke of Guile, and the Cardinai of Lormain, wee ti: i icrins
enga'ged in conduclin g tils pclidious and di' honouraL, pr: ,':.
The Q!een oF Scots was thie only innocent acL(or in Ili.t ;.eenI of
iniquity. 1[cr youth, hler inexperience, ler CedIca i; in a .-
iei-n countrY, an. her (L.:re Uec to lecr unelu:' will, x\ ith evecry
impartial e lon, vidi' t

' e Lr l frUi ai i ni )t.ati :n ot l)l:inl (o1 ti.i'
account.

TIns infamnou g; ant, lIv w i.li .irvy cPf.:l .'cd tle inlcr Lii?! c..
ci her kinil(gdot upon llrangeu:., was co :ea!c .l1 ih the ntl::il c .'e:

* U(orp. Dip''unat. ll,. v. 21. .5!,, ; .;.

i. ' il

BooK II. from her fubjeas. They seem, however, not to have been un-
'-*v-' acquainted with the intention of the French to overturn the fettle-

ment of the succession in favour of the Duke of Chatelherault.
The zeal, with which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all
the measures of the Qjeen Regent, evidently proceeded from the
fears and suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this head *

Al TIE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and

April 14, d c)
,ess. the French, who had hitherto affe(ced to draw a veil over their de-

signs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions with-
out any diifguife. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the Daulphin fllould alTume the name of King of Scotland. This
they confidcree only as an honorary title; but the French laboured
to annex to it fime solid privilege, and power. They infifled that
the Dauphin's title should be publicly recognized ; that the (-Cr,':n
'Jtitri-mc7iwl ihonld be conferred plyon him; and that all the rights
pertaining to the husband of a Qieen Ihould be vefled in his person.
vB the laws of Scotland, a person who married an heiress kept pof-
fetiion of her eate during his own life, if ihe happened to die
without childien '. This was called the ccurfcy cf Scollzad. The
French aimed at applying this rule, wvhich takes place in private
inheritances, to tlc fucccfoon of the kingdomn; and that seems to
be ilmplied in tlcir demand of the (own :o;t!/r,;aial, a phrase
p'i' !iiar the Sc'itch iftorians, lnd which they halve neglected
to cx.liailn, A the F'renlch hlad rcafon to expect dificulties in carly-

'l,,utr ili:; iia.', tlhc T'l'cl(h fccm to Ilavi c liad fo)nc ilfi;fn of rc\'i\ i ni tlh Earl

({ i, ,(\'h: pi( ! ',i[':l: t0) tlc SLucccllionl, ill orier to iliti iitl. iil a]L nrin tle
J.',.K ,,1 tU l tcihl'ltil:. Iayncis, 215, 219. Sorb' s Colldt. vol. i. 189.
- I,, i xl,j. lib. ii. 5'.

i 0)t

ing through this meaftire, they began with founding the deputies BOOK II.
who were then at Paris. The Englilh, in the marriage articles ~v
betwe-n their Qeen and Philip of Spain, had let an example to the
age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner
should be admitted so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the
Scotch deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin, ex-
Iprefed tlhenmtlves with remarkable caution *. Their answer was
in the fame spirit, refpecful, but firm ; and discovered a fixed refolu-
tion of consenting to nothing, that tended to introduce any altera-
tion in the order of fucceflion to the Crown.

FOUR of the deputies + happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the efscH s
of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by the
emillaries of the house of Guile. The historians of all nations dil-
cover an amazing credulity with refpe to stories of this kind, which
are so well calculated to p!ease the malignity of some men, and to
gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all, that, in
every age, they have been swallowed without examination, and be-
lieved contrary to realbn. No wonder the Scots houlil cafily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such strong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own refcntment, and from the known
character of the Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
justice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human nature, it Iunll, how-
ever, be observed, that as we can difcovcr no motive, whiich could
induce any man to perpctrate such a crime, t) there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scots of that
aeC, influenced by national aiiiofitics 111d prejudices, were inca-

* Kcuii , A'\plnd. 2o.
li- lic liihop vl Or kne, the Eiarl of Rothlcs, the Eall ul' Ctllii:, aild Lold

Fl i ,l
i ; .

VOL. I. T pabilc

BOK II. pable of examining the circumstances of the cafe with calmness, or
'-.-' of judging concerning them with candour. All parties agreed in

believing the French to have been guilty of this detestable aion;
and it is ovious how much this tended to increase the aversion for
them, which was growing among ali ranks of men.

Tc RrOt NoTw TIISTANDING ttiC cold reception which their proposal

rvI;ls (1Q1 concerninl thle (C1 ;c-z Ir lL,,:ii'l inc with froml the Sco:ch de-
th.' \. ;ii ;-,-'c 'o
toar. nt it. putics, the Frenchl ventured to mlove it in Parliament. The par-

Nov. tiz. of t h O11.i OfI lamiiton, ifujlicious of their dcfigns upon

the iucceio.ln, o:;1) ):i1 it \wit.h rt',: zc!. 3Bt a party, \which tile
feeble an.l unlea.Ladv condL of their leader had bro'ilt undir much
diirenuta.l ion, was little able to withilalnd the in.iluciec of FIrance,
and the a (.lt'i- of tlic Q(icLn le4 cnt, fcondLd, on tlls occasion,
Lbv ,ci te niU:'lcro;: a:ic.c:ts (,f t l c1frmiooln.. I)ti s, that
anidil I'ri:;cic dr.!ie'd out tlle Flrench demailds in a less ofhnfive
>-C':, and thr\ew in it many limination-, as itemed to render them
oi' nt!! ConlelquCnce. Tiiei c;hlr ldcceived thi c Scots, or removed
t:i';' i",:;pliejs; and in c n oliance to tCC Q thee, licpaled l all at,
c...i,.'-rrlin, the G'cczi Mat/'..,''..l :; i:on the Dauphin ; and, with the
s.i. ;,;: ccdulityv, t-trifcd to tlc fil ril feurity of \ords and flatutcs,

;; .t i-te dangrclous encroachments of power '

'..i.:: . ; Tir-, concurrence of the Pi'oesiants, witil the Qleen Regent,
i,,," 1 in proati i'ng a meafnre so acccltable! to Fralcc, vwhile the Popish

cleray, nIl.ii' the in i llucc of tlie Atrchbisiop of St. Andrew's, op-
p,iL it xvlw'ith o I'uchII vi.ole'nce-, is one of those fiingular circu1m-

* 1'1, \ it- (,f' I'li.l Li i.; \ I1wcJ xilth he Iitt,)fl care, w\ith a view to gu.n'd

;.,: j C, l ol [lli ,'

b l tl l, l '

(, tl tt.i i.),[ I t he l) lc, itl t ,'cl)in l, on i!i.

.... ,i'z

, >.-,t. .c : '. 1 L n i-.+i. .! i

.): ) 1 . ,:1

u lc ',

ld \,

( n i.;,lIt. Kid th, 71. It is

|, ,i½
L

.1.t l.c 1.:!,. .' ] ti; .i ' 1 I. 'i ]l .I li, , ()I ic 1 til io.t i lli) t) I l. 1if ti li, i; ^ li

of liLcccf-

'5 .,'; alll, il']c, , il thi.,; lt.il Ie dl i/i, (,i { ill.it kIil , tl',u (':r, i l j \\;x \itlh v\i.1,.
! '.,! .'./ tlui ' i(lt.J1 , v..; .luidillh. [ Mclv. 17.

fltIanIC',

fiances, in the conduct of parties, for which this period is so re- Booi II.
markable. It may be ascribed, in fiomn degree, to the dextrous ---"
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of tliofe
who favoured the Reformation. The Protellants were, by this
time, alnmoit equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own irrength, they fubrmiteled with
impatience to that tyrannical autlhority, with which the acient
laws armed the ecclefiaiics against them. They longed to be ex-
ciiinpt. from this op!,reflive juiidiltion, and publickl to enjoy the
libe tv of proicfing thoti oplinions, and of xerciiThg that wor lip,
which itb reat a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the I)citv. This indulrence, to which the
whole weiglt of priufly authority was opnofed, there were oi.':
two ways ( f o(tainin. Either violence [t:ult exo;'t it fronl tie
reluc-ant Iand of thi Soei, or or y prudnct complia;nces, tlcy
might ecxpe it frlom her favour, or her r .tirtde. Tlhe former
is a expedient for the redircfs of grieva s, to wiich no nlatio
has rIcourie furdenlv ; and libjcds iiLdom v;cnt:.l'e upon rclitancc,
which is their last remedy, bult in caics of cxticn-.c nlccln'it. On
this occasion, the Reformlers \.iiic!y held tlhe oipoite cours!, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Qceen's deitgns, they hoped to me-
rit her protc&ion. This difpolition the Qeenl cincou;.:ic to the
utmost, and amuled them so artfully witl manl5, promni cs, anld fime
conceiiions, tlat, by their assistance, fie surmounted in

i arliaell nt

the fo:cc of a national, and pcrliaps a laudable jL'al.'u1I, which
vwould, oteriwile, have swaycd with tle greater 11uln1';rcr.

ANx :er Il :: circumlllancc con'ributcd fomewhiat to a:CTi re tihe Rc

gct ilci conficdlrab.l itl iuclacc in this l'arliamcnt. Ii & ;cotl:ald, i
tllc tbi]npricks, alnd thofei all)ty'; \ li conlcialt.1 I D'

a tit a(c, It i:
I;arl'iiniut, were ill the gii't of tl:c 'own : liro t 0:. e ,l - r

S ' c;c1c

I.
'1' accfeniljii

BOOK II. accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her own hands almost

' -' all those which became vacant, except such as were, to the great dif-

gust of the nation, befIowed upon foreigners. Among these, her bro-
ther the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and
Melrofs, two of the mofl wealthy foundations in the kingdom %.
By this conduc, he thinned the ecclesiastical bench t-, which was
entirely under the influence of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, and
by its numbers and authority hd great weight in the house, so as
to render any opposition it could give of little consequence.

TFE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one the nmoft powerful, and the other the molt popular leader of the
Protetlants, were appointed to carry the Crown and other ensigns
of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they were diverted by
the part they were called to adt, in a more interelling fccne, vwhich
now begins to open.

icthh si:c- BEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceiary to observe, that,

Cec,!s to c:
.vt,\ of oil the 7th of November, Mary of England finiflled her flort,

and inglorious reign. lIer fliler Elizabeth took pofiTffionl of
the throne without opposition ; and the Proteflant religion was,
once more, eflabliled by law in England. The acceflion ofa Qeen,
who, under very dificult circumstances, had given ftiong indica-
tions of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her
reign so illuflrious, attracted the eyes of all Europe. Among the
Scots, both parties observed her firif motions with the utmoit con-
cern, as they cafily forcfawh that (he would not remain long an in-
dififrent fpetator of their tranflitions.

Ifly, 202.

-t It lppcars f oirn the rolls oF tis P;lirllmcnt, which Lcfly calls a very full on,
tia;t only fccxn Lillhops and li.ticc Abbots were prfecnt.

1'¥. h' U n

UNDER many discouragements, and much opprefion, the Re- BooK II.

formation advanced towards a full eiablilfmcnt in Scotlad. All '-- --'
the low country, the nmof populous, ande, at that tine, tle im'i
warlike part of the ki gdonm, was deeply tin iLurl d 'itl the ro-
teftant opinions; and if the fame impretlions were not made ii t!hc
more difltnt counties, it was owingr to no want olCthi i:ace ;.i,..i-
tions among the people, but to tle scarcity of preaclhlrs, whoie mol
indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of thof)l, whlo defirc
their in ir-utions. Among a people bred to armii, and lbi pron: to nU-ii
tiny as the Scots; and in all age, when rCli )ous paLs:; .' Cl1_n
such firong po!cflon of the human mind, .a inUlvel a :. ...i i,
with so muchl violence; thle Ienceable and! regular icL: .;n,..i (: i .)
numerous a party is truly afon!iiin. 'Fr the de. , .
trick Hamilton, tl-e firfL whio fliff.red in Scotland ir tie Il rtcal'lnt
religion, thirty 'cars had claIfic, and during lCb io a iriod, no
violation of public order or tralnniillty ad proccee>' i L;I th
feet -; and thoulh rouzed and irrtatcd by tlie mnolt ci I':c c-. c::;.'
ofeccleilaflical tyranny, they did, ill no infl;l'.ic, t; .'i:rcg thli:
bounds of duty which tc law p rcfcrib- s to fC', s I. 'd s t5e
prudence of their own leaders, and te protcJtioln w\hih t11 '

6:::

Regent, fiom political motives, afibrdl ; , tIle, t ie m dsi L:;,!'.: o-
the Archbihoo of St. Andrew's encouraged tilis pacific (iilriiion.
That prelate, whoif private life cotemporary writers ta.x with grieat
irregularities --, governed the church, Ior 1tioe years, iwith a tm-
per and prudence, of which there are few cxam'its in that age.
But some time before the mceting of last Parliament, tle Arch-

* The murder ol' Cardli il lcatoun \.as oc(caf)in y privatr c r'e'cnc, and bc-

in, con tii vcl and (excuited by fix teien pecrlfui,, cL;lllo, ic, bCi in p; LlI
to the \'lolc 'rolcfi.il I pity,

I Knox. L;uchlai)n). K(.tiil, 2 8.

[) A;, r

BOOK II. bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which he had hither-

'to regulated his condut; and whether in spite to the Queen, who
had ecntered into Io close an union with the roteftants, or in com-
pliance with te importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the rage
of perse tion agoinft the Reformed ; sentenced to the flames an
acd priedt, who Ihad been convicted of ebracing the Protestant
(puiions ; and fiunmoned icvcial others, fufpeated of the famZ:c
crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which was ioon to
convcne at Edinbu-gh.

NoTr:\';G could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un-

exlpc'icd and ba.rbatrous execution, but the zeal, with which they
clnoufcd tlhe tdefnclce of a cafc, tliat now teicmcd devoted to dc-
Ilr.ionl. They h.Lt ii'c!i.lat rccol.irc to the QCeen Regent;
ar!d a- hle 'ucce', i: thie Parliamelit, whiich was tlicn about to meet,
lci'llICt (ion tlheir conlculIenceCC, fJihe int only fhlt

c! red tl;,mc from1

tsI im ei'ndins ilor:in, .but pcirmittcd theil the ercii of th re-
Ii'tio!, \witil lnl<r fictio tlci thn tlicy had hithert) cejoycd. ,ye-
tiilied v: h

;tlil sus
t e s nulre, by h liich tllc; hleld their re-

J

l,ious liDerty, the Plr. ftmits laboured to render their }oTiton of
it nilor c curice a[i iildepccii:i t. \ Vit'i tliis vi.: \', they detcitrminled
to petition the ParliIamen for lomc Igal prtcdionr, aginft: thc ex-
orbita nt ald (ilpprciivC jnll'ildiction of tie ccciefiaftical courts, whlich
by tlhei arbitrary me tU)d o; p.o'.ceilin:j, iolonded in the canon law,
were le to ,(,:l.i .._ :; tihe molt illhtot<in to hUlIanity, by axi:s
tl'c inI re): :)i to ].)ce. ,

. t thle ()Q cn, who) d:lcadd t i

cilC.'ts oi 3 tlii te l n

' , w(licatt.
iiuljo't, w\\ icll could not ail ,f

C. ' I ' ''' ' '

.* ' I

* :ln

L i t i :i ....o.':

~:,;:; i'. : ,!'^ i:'. p; v i;cd on tilc leaders o

til; O ii 1i xv,' r;* 1 m ' ,L i

n,-,,nilrs op c hle protection, to
t..-iL 1. . any anicati .)i to I'arlia iLnt, xvleue tlicr nLimlr;

11and

and influence would, in all probability, have procured them, if not BOOKl II.
the entire redress, at leafl, ome mitigation of their grievances. V"'

THEY applied to another afTembly, to a convocation of the Po- I

pish clergy, but with the fame ill frCCes, which lath al\ays at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, adr:fied to tl;t o;:Li- ,
men. To abandon ufrpcd power, to renounce Iucri';tivc erro., is
a sacrifice, which the viitue of individuis has, on I. ic oca :'is,
olfered to truth ; but fromi any ibcicty of mn11, 1-o I cil

o";-.: c::.r

be expecded. he corruptions of a cicv, rccom1 c:;. i, c (,;
minon utility, and jufi ihed lvy u!.. erfal pr,.l :Ie,

:.t ,:.', l Ks

ine bL: 1 rs, witho1t fl, or i, )or; andi I'.;.':i'?i .';, 'o ;:" .v j i;io-
ceeds fric: thlem'c el s, but is .!,::v; ,fjri-cl , i. o:i I.Un l1 L |):.
foreign hand. Suitable to thi uoilcii: a,.i iihi:',.':r f.:it, \'s
the belhavi.our o cthe convCcatin in the p'i-iL]t co;. ' .

CAll

thle dmanI s o t':c: t of

I o.lteflnts \we're ijeLe \t.ic i cC;lc' '' ; 'I c

the Popifi clcrgv, riar from e. dc veo., i: ;., by n;' }t.udA.;t cL'in.c-
iiOi7, to footi ano to recc:lile ilch a

sooierhc iy

t.oir . clm t

doct-ines o thir church, with reji-c t fUn:c .f

t: ,1 c vccp-,

tionabli articles, with a il-tied, os\'.m'wl

.i

.'C, v-.' of-
fence

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the ProtfiantS, f,-, be-
iian to fufpict fme c1iange in the Rcecint's d'oii01n too.\-,:.d inilno

T 'ouli joinlled witi tihem fr mat 7T;II'S iy il'i.c;'_, ;i':ld t ;: 1,

nS the) tco:nc

ivcl , ,' te ' t,O o' . .' 1

': 11m '

of culd cliel, but of a gov'' .

;''i i
:.;.:. il o,'icr 10 ',.--

~rl'(.;~,,,I0 , . { i,' <.!tl~. iI [[ ',

BOOK II. count for this, our hiflorians do little more than produce the trite

~~---' observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter the cha-
i559.

raaer, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no longer
preserved hler accustomed moderation, but, with an insolence usual
to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose afliflance he
had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity
of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the Queen's dil-
polition, that we muf search for the motives of her present con-
dut. Tlhefe were derived from another, and a more remote
fourcc, \hich, in order to clear the subsequent tranfadions, we
shall endcavour to open with some care,

oiilou;o TI1E ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc-
jll, :,oticf ccfsfui, than daring; but all their schemes were diRilnguithed bv

L:l:. being vast and unbounded. Strangers at the court of France, their

eminent qualities had raiscd them, in a short time, to an height of
power, superior to that of all other subjects, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direction.. No-
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained ; and to a near al-
liance with it, they were elevated by the marriage of the Q(ecn of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity, and to
render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they et on foot
her claim to the Crown of England, which was founded on pre-
tences not unplaulible.

T;ll tra;lical amours ani mlarriages of IIlnry VIII. are known

to all the world. lMoved by the crlices of his love, or of iis
rcl'feltmcnlt, that ilmpatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or

bclicadcil

beheaded four of the fix Qeens, whom he married. In order to BOOK II.
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by '--~-
At of Parliament; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistency which I559.
diltinguiffes his character, he, in his last will, whereby he was im-
powered to fettle the order of succession, called both of them to
the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward ; and, at the
fame time, passing by the posterity of his eldest sifter Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of succession to con-
tinue in the descendents of his younger filter, the Dutchess of
Suffolk.

IN consequence of this deltination, the validity whereof was ad-

mitted by the English, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her fiter Eliza-
beth, and rendered her poffeflion of it precarious and infectre. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen of fucl
eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears alarmed the court
of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many pretensions, occupied by a
rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Catholics, excluded
her from any legal right of succession. The impotent hatred- of
the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have
produced no sudden or formidable effect. The ardent and impetu-
ous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, go-
verned the court of France, was more dccifive, and more to be dreaded.
Infligated by them, IIcnry, soon after the death of Mary, pcr-Thcv per-

fuadc Mary
fualcdl his daughter-in-law and her huflband, to aflume the title ofto ln afi the

title oft O)'en
King andl Quccn of England. They alffcted to publifli this to of ,,glal.

VOL 1. U all

BooK I. all Europe. They used that flyle and appellation in public papers,
'-~' some of which ill remain *. The arms of England were en-
I559 '

graved on their coin and plate, and born by them on all occasions.
No preparations, however, were made to support this premature
and impolitic claim. Elizabeth was already feated on her throne;
flie pofrffend all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy,
whichi were ncclTary for maintaining that station. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The marine of France
had been utterly neleedd; and Scotland remained the only avenue,
Refoilv to iln- b v hich the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It

as on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined

to make their attack -; and, by using the name and preteniions of
the Scotch Queen, they hoped to rouze the English Catholics, for-
midable at that time for their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to the utmost againit Elizabeth, on account of the change which
fie had made in the national religion.

In order to IT was vain to expe the afiiflance of the Scotch Proteflants to
tii, ncccary dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe esteemed the guardian and
to check tlhe
Refolmation defender of the reformed faith. To break the power and reputa-
in Scoandl. tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, a necefilry

flep towards the invasion of England. With this the Princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their scheme. And as persecution was
the only method for suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or dicated by the despotic and fanguinaiy spirit of the Romish
superstition, this, in its utmost violence, they determined to em-
ploy. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other

"Andcrf. Diplorn. Scot. N". 68 & G64.
- Foibcs, Collcc. i. 253. 277.

leaders

leaders of the party, were marked out by them for immediate de- BooK II.
Iirudion *; and they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate
their followers. Inftrudions for this purpose were sent from I559
France to the Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious
Princess condemned a measure, which was equally violent and
impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, he had be come ac-
quainted with the eager and impatient temper of the nation; flie
well knew the power, the number, and popularity of the Pro-
teflant leaders; and had been a witness to the intrepid and un-
conquerable resolution which religious fervour coul inrpire. What,
then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to reitrain? If
it once broke loose, the authority of a Regent would be little ca-
pable to ubdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if, in order
to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
to the whole nation, irritated already at the exceflfive power which
the French poiscfled in the kingdom, and suspicious of all their
defidns. Amidst the fiock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the roteftant doctrine, it would be well if
the whole fabric of the established church were not haken, and
perhaps overturned from the foundation. These prudent remon-
firances made no impreflon on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
flexible in all their resolutions, they infifed on the full and rigor-
ous execution of their plan. Mary, pafionately devoted to the
interefls of France, and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her
own opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe-
cute their commands, with implicit fubmiflion ±; and, contrary

Sorbes . 152.
A Mclv. 4. MIcm dc C.alcl1;au. ;ip. jebb. vol. ii. 4.t6

U 2 to

BOOK IT. to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found policy, he

C-o.~-. became the infrurnent of exciting civil commotions in Scotland,

which ended with the ruin of the French power, and of the Po-
pish religion in that kingdom.

The Reent FROM the time of the Qeen's competition for the Regency
alters ier cun-
duatLh re- with the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popish clergy, under the di-
gard t're reftion of the Archbihfop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in

opposition to all her measures. Her firfl flep towards the execu-
tion of her new scheme, was to regain their favour. Nor was
this reconcilcment a matter of difficulty. The Popish eccleliaftics,
separated from the refl of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
bldeft and most successful invention of human policy; and com-
bined among themselves in the clofelt and moi: lacred union; have
been accuflomed, in every age, to sacrifice all private and particu-
lar pafiions to the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted,
on this occasion, with the prospect of triumphing over a faction,
whose encroachments they had long dreaded; and animated with
the hopes of re-eflablifiing their declining grandeur on a firmer
bais; they, at once, cancelled the memory of past injuries, and
engaged to second the Queen in all her attempts to check the pro-
grefs of the Reformation. The Qneen, being secure of their assisi-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convocation, by which
the principles of the Reformers were condemned; and at the fame
time, he iihed a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Eater, according to the Romifl ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake the Qeen's intentions,

the Protcftants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of

Loll loll,

Loudon, to expoflulate with her, concerning this change towards Book II.
severity, which their former fvices had little merited, and
which her reiterated pronmites gave them no reason to expect. She, 55
without difguif or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpating the Reformed religion out of the k ng dom. Ard, upon
their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly, but ho-
nest boldnes, he so far forgot her uluai moderation, as to utter a
sentiment, which, howsever apt those of royal condition may be to
entertain it, prudence flhould teach them to conceal with the ut-
mofl care. The promifs of Princes, fays lie, ought not to be too
carefully remembered, nor the performance of them exatled, un-
less it suits their own conveniency.

THE indignation, which betrayed the Qeen into this ralh ex- Summons

prefion, was nothing in compariion of that, with which he was t,,t,'I 'C.l
animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the Reformed lor 1i-r.
religion had been i::troduced into the town of Perth. At once, he
threw off the nifk, and commanded all the Piotctlant p.eachers in
the kingdom to be summoned to a court of juflice, which was to
be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protefants, who,
from their union, began, about this time, to be diftinguifhied by the
name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not intinida.ed
by this danger; and inflantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of all bleflings, the
knowledge of truth. At that time, there prevailed in Scotland,
with r-lpec't to cimii:;al trials, a cuflom, introduced, at firfl', by
the inflitutions of vaflliage and canflip, and tolerated, afterwards,
under a fel:l govrlnment; any person acculcd of a crime was ac-
companiud to the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends and ad-
herents, alfcmblcd for that purpose, from every corner of the king-

(doIll

BoOK II. dom. Authorized by this ancient practice, the Reformed convened,
c^--- in great numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The Queen

5J9 dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed,

and in order to prevent them from advancing, he empowered
John Erfine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the par-
ty, to promise, in her name, that she would put a flop to the in-
tended trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue advanced
no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, convinced himself of the Queen's
sincerity, served her with the utmost zeal. And the Proteflants,
averse from proceeding to any a of violence, liflened with plea-
flre to io pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from dificrcnt parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and retired
to th-ir own habitation.

Bcs a ro BUT, notwithflanding this solemn promise, the Queen, on the

Breahs a pro-
nmfe on .lhich tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been
t, had ic
lid. fuLmmoned, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of juflice

tcook place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconiftent with
that integrity which fliould prevail in all tranfadions between a So-
vereign and his people, the Queen forfeited the esteem and con-
fidence of the whole nation. The Protestants, shocked no less at
the indecency, with which fme violated the public sith, than at
the danger which threatened themfelvcs, prepared boldly for their
own defence. IErkine, enraged at having been made the inftru-
mcnt for deceiving his party, infla.nly' bandoncd Stirling, and rc-
p),.i,,l'; to Perth, adJed to the zeal of his afiociatcs, by his rcprc-
Icmtations of the Qicni's inflxible rcfolution to suppress their re-
lis ion.

w .~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~J]

TfE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his reprefen- BooK II.

tations. Knox, having been carried a prif;ner into France, to: .-

,

ther w;th the other persons taken in the cattle of St. Andrew's, toon -i lis .;i :,ns
made his escape out of that country ; and residing sometimes in a;: ¢',Cr1tion
England, fometimnes in Scotland, had, at lafl, been driven out of
both kingdoms by the rage of the Popish clergy, and was obliged
to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Frotefltants in Scotland; and, in compliance with their solicitations,
he set out for his native country, where he arrived a few days be-
fore the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried infanmly to Perth,
to Ihare with his brethren in the common danger, or to aiil them
in promoting the common cause. While their mindcs were in th.t
ferment, which the Qeen's perfidiousness and their own danger
occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangiue
against idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmolt rage. The
indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was
preparing to celebrate mars, and began to decorate the altar for
that purpose, precipitated them into immediate action. With tu-
multuary, but irrefiflible violence, they fell upon the churches in
that city, overturned the altar, defaced the pictures, broke in pieces
the imares; and proceeding next to the monaft ries, they, in a
few horn's, laid those fL!mptuous fabrics almost level with the ground.
This riotous insurrection was not the effect of any concert, or pre-
vious deliberation; censured by the reformed preachers, and pub-
lickly condemned by the persons of most power and credit with the
party, it must be regarded merely as an accidental eruption of po-
pular rage '.

* Knox, Iiili. 127, 8.

BUT

BooKI II. BUT to the Queen herself, these proceedings appeared in a very
'-- --' different light. Betides their manifest contempt for her authority,
The5 R5nt the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, which she
marches esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both these accounts, he de-
aga.nlt them.

termined to inflict the severest vengeance on the whole party. She
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scotch forces he could levy of a sudden, she marched
directly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the Protestant leaders, be-
fore they could assemble their followers, whom out of confidence in
her disingenuous promises they had rashly been induced to dismiss.
Intelligence of these preparations and menaces was oon conveyed
to Perth. The Proteflants would, gladly, have toothed the Queen,
by adlreffes both to herself, and to the persons of greatest credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, animated
with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so good a
cause, flocked, in such numbers, to Perth, that they not only fe-
curcd the town from danger, but were, within a few days, in a
condition to take the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced
with an army 7000 strong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to engage. The

Queen dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the ser-
vour of religion raised above the sense of fear, or of danger. The
Protestants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyll, and Prior of
St. Acndrew's, and omce other eminent persons of their party, still
ailhcring to the Qlcc ; and deflitute of their aid and council, dc-
clinedl hazni-inl an a(tion, the ill 'luccces of which might have
proved the ruin of their cause. The prolpedt of an accommoda-
tiou was for tlihcl raons lIighly acceptable to both fides, Argyll

and

and the Prior, who were the Queen's commiflioners for conduce- BOOK II.
ing the negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of recon- " .
ciling the contending factions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving 559
unexpectedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation,
augmented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord-, r lt. -,..
ingly concluded, in which it was flipulated, that both amies fmould d''l:
be alioanded, and the gacs of Perth iet open to the Qtccn ; that
iidcmnity should bc granted to the inhb.itants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurrction ; tlht no French garri on.
llhould be left in Perth, and no Frcnch fb'dicrs ifou!l approac
within threc miles of that placc; and tliat a Parliianact thould im-
mediately be held, in order to cmpee whatever dillrcznces might
flill remain .

TIIF Leaders of the Conlrcgaticln, difi Lrulfill of the QjOcc '

sincerity, and clnfible that conceiiions, flowing not from inclination,
but extortcd by the necessity of her affairs, could not long remain
in force, ente-red into a new aibcition, by which they bound tlhem- ?.I;v . ,
C.ives, on the si inflir :ement oi the pirefnt treaty, or on the leal
aprcarancc of duan"er to their religion, to rcaficnibl their filowc'rs,
;rid to take arms in dlence of vwhat they' eitemedl the cau!: cf
God, and of their country -.

TiIE (Qiccn, by ler conducE, dcmonflratcd these pre cautions to I:.,':,,c: iil

be the 1riult of no grounLdlces or unniiccliary fear. No luicu:Cr were'
tlhe Protestant forces difilitld, than i]e broke every articl' in tile
treaty. She intr'odluced lr'li trooips into Ierth, fined fme (A'
tJlC iihll iiiit, btnieilCd othlics, removed thle lagiflrates ciit (,of of-
ice, an,, on her lrttitilng to tirlinl, c left behllinld her a roilo

I :i i, ' . ]

| n> , 13;.
\V ! J. X. ,i

BOOK II. of 600 men, with orders to allow the exercise of no other religion
'---- ' than the Roman Catholic. The situation of Perth, a place at that

1559 time of fomne ftrcngth, and a town the inoft proper of any in the king-

dom for the ation of a garrilon, feeims to have allured the Qeen
to this unjftifiable, and ill-judgedl breach of public faith ; which
fle endeavoured to colour, by alledging that the body of men left
at Pertll was entirely como30fd of native Scots, though kept in pay
by the King of France.

TIIE Queen's fchene began graLdually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the reliion, hut the liberties of the king-
dom were threatened ; ail tliat t. e French troops were to be cm-
ployed as iftriuments fur fibduing tile Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. :art'ia as; tlhe geiius of the Scots then was,
the poverty of tlheir country made it ipoiible to keep their armks
ion,: allillmbled ; and even a very i'nall bod of rercular troops li i-lt
lave- pr-oved ftrmidble to the lnation, thou-h conliliig wholly of
soldiers. But, what number of French forces were then in Scot-
land, at iatilme, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having lIeft the kingdom in tih year 1 50, we cannot, with any
certainty, determine. C'temporary hilto ians often ielcc, willh
little judgment, tle circumllances which they tranlinit to poflerity;
and, with rc'c.ii to iliatcrs of the grcatef cLu'iolfty andl import-
ance, leave fuccecding ages altogether in the dark. VWe may con-
jcfture however, from fbmc paligCes in Buchanan, that the FrIench
and Scots in French pay, amounted at le.al to 300 men, under
the coIriltand (fr oll.

l )'(o)Oiil, a creature of the h1o .: of Guileb

.tn11 they were oiin atIgmCte( to a much more formidable num-
ber.,

THE Qeen, encouraged by having so considerable a body of well BOOK II.
disciplined troops at her command, and ilnfigated by the violent -

- i 1559.

counsels ofD'Oyfel, had ventured, as vwe have obfcrved, to violate the
treaty of Perth, and, by that rafi aion, once more threw te nation
into the most dangerous convulSions. The Earl of Argyll and Priorof Th1,,; rr-,tc-
St. Andrew's inftlantlydeferted acourt, where faith and honour seemed ' t ,~,
to be no longer regarded. The Barons from the neighbouring coun-
ties repaired to them, the preachers rouzed the people to arms, and
wherever they came, the aime violent opcrationl, wxlhich accident
had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged out of policy. The
enraged multitude was let loolc, and churches and monatierics, the
monuments of ccclelialic pride and luxury, were sacrificcd to tlheir
zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Qeen, without losing a mo-

ment, put her troops in motion ; but the zeal of the Congrega-
tion got thle lrlt, once more, ofher viilance and acTivity. In that
iwar..hlihc ac_, \lhe all men were ce omedlic( to arm;-, and on the
]eCil prospc' of dan2er were ready to run to them, the leaders of
the Protcti:.ts found o di!iiculty to raile ..n army. iou'i'h they
set out fom St. Andrew's with a l lcdcr train of an tunldred hortl,
crowds flocked to their fiandards from every corner of t country
through wlichl they marclhed, and btfor they rachlcld l'al' .l';1,
a village only ten miles distant, tihcv were able to nmic tle Qc

t cn
with fipcrior forcc %.

TIrE Q (cen l, flrprizcd at tie approaclh ,f fornidable a bo .',

1v.,lih \as drawn up by its le l
in fIch a lannlr, as adl.lcd

i' lle ), I.1 1.
X .': gc atly

BOOK II. greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again recourse to nego-

---' ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Pro-
1559' teftant religion, their zeal for which had at firt rouzed the leaders

'Ty ,- a at of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had
!, \ ail ;s rc- snow in view. They were animated with the warmest love of civil
l,?,, g:i- liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, fiom tle

attempts of the French forces; and these two passions mingling,
added reciprocally to each other's f-ength. Together with more
cnla.-'edl notions in religion, the Reformation filled the human mind
witih more liberal and generous fentiincnts concerning civil govern-
?ent. The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the powver
<if irilce. The implicit fubmiiion to all her decrees, wlich the
Rcrnisi Church cxacts, prepares and breaks tle mind for political ser-
vitl.Ic ; and tlhe doc-rines of the Reformers, by overturning the ctia-
llfilied ilvfL.m of filperfition, weakened the fil-rlme foundations of
civ.l tyvralny. hil,at bold spirit of enquiry, which led men to rejed
theological errors, accompanied them into other sciences, and dif-
c- vercd every vwhere tle fime manly zeal for truth. A new fiudy
introduced at the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of
Li.-rtv. Mcn became acquainted with the Grcelc and Rom:n au-
thlors, who dccribed exquilite models of free government, fr fu-
pericr to the inaccurate and opprefitvc ifyfem eablifhed by the
feudal law; and produced fucli illufirious examples of public vir-
tue, as wolnerfully fited both the circumstances, and spirit of that
:'IC. Many, among the nmoft eminent Reformers, were themselves
(on!fidlrablc mnafbrs in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly
:adopted the maxims and fpiit of the ancients, with regard to go-
veIrnnlllc t -. Tlhe n t
ol ardent love of liberty accompanied the Pro-

tcfallt

* l lX jxcc'Ilv. ,!i il i', om ,f mltin t p. ili.:, \\a;s l c occ:afin of KWi iox',
K[.Ii .,)

L'. 1''. <.j i
'-]i 'i" l~ c ( '/iliis'u l s ii ,/<* , '',l ,i . 1, u i ii n~ ~l l *. li. i~ *];

teflant i, ;;..', throughout all its progress; and wherever it was BooK II.
emil;,.: .. . ...:zedl an independent spirit, which rendered men at- "
tc':rive iu [* privieges as fubjedts, and jealous of the incroach- 59
m,t o; (, t -orvcreigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
Rei,,:t; .:; ,uclid generous sentiments concerning government
into t.ijc .;, .of tleir hearers, and the Scotch Barons, naturally
free and 1bxI, rere prompted to assert their rights with more free-
dom and bldnels than ever. Instead of obeying the Quccn RIe-
gent, wh!o had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de-
nianded not only the redress of their religious grievances, but as
a preliminarly toward fettling the nation, and securing its 1ib'ortiS,
requirebd the immediate expulion of the French troops ot of'S cet-
land. It was not in the Quecn's power to make i- iimportant a
concellonl, vii.hout the concurrence of the French Monarch ; and
as some time wais rcquilite in order to obtain that, ihe hoped,
during, tOinI iit,;val, to receive such reinforccments fioom France,
as wvould ini;'e the acconmpliiment of that dcfignl, whlich ile had
twice atuenptc i with unequal strength. Mean while, fle agreed
to a cfiion cf rms for eight days, and, before the expiration c 1
of tlicf, en-.L;<d to transport the French troops to the other ide
of the Fo::l;; and to fend commiflioners to St. Andrew's, who
should labour to bring all differences to accommodation. As fie
hoped, ,by means of the French troops, to overawe the Protelants
ini tlhe iouthern counties, the former article in tlie treaty was

of the ancictlt lw'cif.ltoli, which moldern cxpclrii'c has pio'.c to he ill fouictl ,
he' pliltiiitnC:., tlE cL'l. ioll ' W'Olitsli tt) the ti r('.ic ailthoity, I') he utterly tLe-
llr ltilvc of ;ood Lt)'vcrnlii Lclt. Ili: plin 'ii .:'l, :i tloliti-s, .niil tx:'m pltS V CL''C all
d(.iwO iro nI a:licu t xriltci;. Theii ;iinc ohLtrvtlioin miy be min..lc \\xitl Iti .la to
lltichlii's I)itiloguct, j)s' '/t' R di' iif ul Si/vs. It is louiiJd not oln tiL
llxinls tcof liudil, itut of inciLctint go(vciIrnmcil t.

illl .L i'. ,'

BoO II. punaually executed; the latter, having been inserted merely to

'---' amuse the Congregation, was no longer remembered.
1559.

A fccond trea- BY these reiterated and wanton inflances of perfidy, the Qieen
ty \iolaitd. loft all credit with her adversaries; and no fafcty appearing in any

other course, they again took arms with more inflamed refcntmcnt,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated c-
tween Forth and Tay. Perth alone remained fubjcLed to the info-
lence and exaaions of the garrison, which the (Qceen had left
there, and implored the aiiftance of the Congregation for tlher re-
lief. Thither they marched, and having, without effect, required
the Qpeen to evacuate the town in terms of the former teatv,
they prepared to besiege it in form. The Qucen employed the
Earl of I-untly and Lord Erskine to divert them from this enter-
prize. But her wonted artifices were of no avail; repeated o often,
they could deceive no longer; and without li{tening to them, the
IProteflants continued te fice, and soon obliged the garifon to
capitulate.

r,:-ei tm-hc! AFTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to fcie S!irling,
:' :L t: a place of some irclngtl, and, from its command of the only bridge

ilt over the Forth?, of great importance. But the leaders of the Con-

gre3gation, having intelligence of her dcflgn, pre;ente tie execu-
tiol of' it, 1mr

a liay mIrch thitlher, \i pri-t of lthir f;rcs. T

i l;:'lti:li¶a ts, h caltily att'.: 'cd to t c canuiL, fcet open to tlhicm tI c
[rates of' ticlr to\vn. Tlilcc li .

..: ;.!,-(

:W

. , witlh tile f'mc rapi-

dity, tyOw\ ud. l'l; 'li " '3,!,

- !\ i i '

t; () l"cn, on ti cir anpr)oacli.
abandoned xvith pitcc ka:ttio, . an;i r'Lthi'd tu i.iiL'.ar.

T i i 1:

THE Protelfant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the ar- BoOK I.

dour of Reformation, and the utmoit excesses of violence v; erc coni- -
mitted upon churches and monasterics. The former were fpoihdli 159.
of every decoration, wich was then elcmed sacred, the latter v.' erc
laid in riins. We' arc apt, at this dilance of time, to condemn
the furious zeal of the iReformers, and to regret the ov;i throw
of so many flately fabrics, the monuments of our anccllors :ag--
nificence, and among- tih noblc orinamen-cts of the linom.
Bat, aidfl: the violence of a Reforml;:ion, ca'rrid ('i ill oIpoil-
tion to lciA'l auioorlity, some ilrreLularities iere unLvoilil; iald
perllaps no one could have been pcrin'tci mere proper to allre
andt itcilclt the nmu;tit, or moiec ltal to t.c g-.iIndl ur ce l1e
cliabli!hcd clhurch. II'.evcrd aur ad il--nLlij t:c Iccl.-
tive errors o P'opery maly be, io;e ilnq liry an.d atte!tion are rui-
ilte towards diltove-iln tLhem. Tlhe abuifes andl corruptionis, \whlii
1had cre.t in:to tile public X orl'hiip of that churcli, lay imore openi
to obicirvan" n, alnd by firil;ng ti;e flenses, excited more u;livci-l
diguLt. Ulinder the long reign of ILiltn:fanfm, fupcrrition ilzcms to
hla\v cxIliau itc its talentit o nventon, t \;vh1c a uiicrfii ous
fi:lit fL izc:d Chniriltians, tlhcy were obliecd to iitate the It'ati':Ins
in the pomp iand lmargiilce of tleir ceiemoniics, and to borro'v
si oi themI the ornallents a decorations of' tihir templelcs. To the
pure and fli!ple woranlip of tle primitive Chrit'lians, there fucccided
a Ipecies of Iplenitid idolatry, nearly rccmblilgn tlioie pagan (.rigi-
nals, whence it lihd I.cii copied. The cont.ricty of luch olilir-
vances, to the fi,iiit o C' iilti.i ity, was aIm )ll tl e

l-fil; tiin ', in

the Romili ix c 'l:ii, v .''iC axvaLeild til iildig!l till of thle l-
formelrs, wilo atiil n iIo to tc ', the ditniici.atils i tl'he Old 'icila-

IlIent a.liiltl i .)lar .', in: ''ied t.hat tcv could not 'l c.avoIr .it
fiipprctfling tliem, \iti t miicl zu'l. No taillk coId be in',r- ;aC

oL': I

BooK II. ceptable to the multitude, than to overturn these feats of fuperfli-

. --,.. tion; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the man

whose hand was most adventrous and fuccefsfulin executing a work
cfteemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain this im-
petuous pirit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its sallies
were, they tended direcly to that end which they had in view;
for by demolifling the monasteries throughout the kingdom, and
letting at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it impoilble ever to re-edify the one, or to re-aficmble the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a circumfancc, which

does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far refrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed to any personal in-
fult, and not a ingle man fuffcred death *,

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which these

grcat revolutions were effected, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 3oo
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior of
St. Andrew's - ; with this inconsiderable force they advanced. Eut
wherever they came, the people joined them in a body; their army
was seldom less numerous than ooo men; the gates of every
town were thrown open to receive them and, without ftiiking a
:, ,2,,. linigle blow, they took polflion of the capital of the kingdom.

Tills rapid iand aonifhling fcccfs fecms to hare enlcouraged the
Rlcformelrs to extlnd t!)cir vie\\s, and to lilc in their demands.

.cfly, 2 j. i K itil, ) 1.

N"'o~.

Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration for their religion, BooK IT.
they now, openly, aimed at elablifling the Proteflant docrine on

155.

the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their
residence at Edinburgh; and, by their appointment, Knox and some
other preachers taking pofefiion of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed against the er-
rors of Popery, with such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gain-
ing, many protelytcs.

IN the mean time, the Qeccn, who hadt prudlcnetl given way

to a torrent which she could not relift, ob!erved, with pleaiure,
that it now bgan to fubfidc. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the expcnces of a camn-
paign protratlcd ft long beyond the usual time of fcrvice in that age,
had exhaufPed all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled with
their fucccfs, and concluding the work to be already done, retired
to their own haLitations. A Ifev, only, of the more zealous or
wealthvy Baraons remained witl their preachers at Edinburg,. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with little di;l;.:ul.., v'l.cvc;
was tranf'ated at Edinburgh, was i:,on known at Dunlb.r. And the
Queen, regulating her own conidud by the lituation 0i her nlavcr-
laries, artfully aimufed them with the pro! ,ct of an imlcLdialt
accommodation ; while, at the ifame time, iCe, by itlliudkl (.ly.;,
i)lun out the negociations for that pI.urpoti to llich a ICilh, that,
in the and, te party dw ilndcd to an incoIilkci'.l!c n :i;!ibC, alt,)
.; it-s peace had bIcc al ricadv rc-cdta!.illcd, i bcclc c clr ki: (f i:i-
t.-,ry (dii'iplinc. TI'lc 'C n

C , w'nl) a\tlched foiL !'>l : 1:1

ut'i'a t"n "',

advlai.ct, ulicXplclCllv, 1 v a ll w" lal i:l :1 ; tll \vli 1l
l.ar f, c s, aid 'l c.ril l;cuorc l'k i Lu:;:i, il.d til a '

VI o . . 1 ' I',

BOOK II. the utmost coniternation. The Protellants, weakened by the im-

559. prudent dispersion of their followers, durftnot encounter the French

troops in the open field ; and were even unable to defend an ill-
fortified town, against their afl'ults. Unwilling, however, to aban-
don the citizens to the teenl's mcrcy, they endcavoured, by facing
the enemies army, to gain time for colleting their own alociates,
But, the Qu(ecn, in spite of all their refillance, would have easily
ifrced her way into the town, if the fealonable conclusion of a
truce li.d n')t procured licr iadtifiio, without the eufion of
blood.
Athir. . t:., THEIR dangerous situation eaf1ly induced the Congregation to

liten to any overtures of peace ; and as the (tecn was lookiltn
daily for the arrival of a ftlong reinl(!ccitmcnt rom France, and ex-
pctc d great advant-.gs Jrom a ce!:tit,n of arms, le ailb agreed to
it upon no unqual conditions. Together with a fufpenlilho of hof-
tli!ice, fi:rom the 24th of J.'!y to the oth of Jalnuiry, it was fipu-
itcdi, in i
this tietr, at, on the cne hand, the Protef[ants ihould

:nlnc Edi:'burghl nlext rnr.'lin

g; remai n in dutiful fubellj ion

t, te government of the .c Reen t; abflain from all future
\ :lation of rcli ious houfcs; ;.nd give no interruption to te efta-
bliiChed clc;r', either in tlic ldilcharge of their funtiions, or in the
cnjoyment of their ben.-ficee. (On the other hand, the Oueec
a grccd to e;v no mt)!iclaton; to the preachers or profrtlbrs of the
i rotcllat lrcligio ; to allow no other form of worship in Edil-
bi gh bLut thl Rcftorn(ed; and to pe;lit the free and public exer-

ilc of it :1ll over tlhe, kinl{o,)i. The

r ( Cc hope d to toth

t he

'i'otcl';l;ats, by tlcec lihncr.d cociccflions in behall of telir rligion,

atil \c c !p ,
' :oll i; u .il.:i; tihir favourite plionl, to render tl inx

IlOr

more compliant with refpce to other articles, particularly the ex- BooK II.
pulfion of the French troops out of Scotland. The anxiety whlich ~_"-
the Queen expresscd for retaining this body of men, rendered them,
more and more, the objcds of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of thenm was therefore demanded a-new, and
with greater warmth; but the Qucen, taking advantage of the dif-
trefs of the advcric party, eluded the rcqlue:, and would conlent
to nothin more, than that a French garrilon fl ould not be irntro-
duccd into Edinburgh.

THR defpcrate rate of their affairs imposcd on tlec Congrgca-

tion the nccefity of agreing to tis article, lwhich, however, was
very far fin,, giving theim ftisfa.iion. \Vhatever apprechenfions
the Scots had conceived, from rtaiiiing the Frcncii f'Crccs in the
kingdom, were abundantly justified during the late commotion;s.
A fnmal body ofthoc troops, maintained in conflant pay, and ren-
dered formidabic ly rcg:uir dilcipiinc, lad cheked the progrcfs of
a martial people, thou li .Ill;n;. Ld wllh zcel' botli, for religioln a1d
liberty. The finallet: addition to their inumb er, a: a colitiderlable
one was daiiy expe ed, mi lit lr ove iat.il to " 1..>1c Iliv:.-, and
Scotland might be cxpofetl to t)Ih dai:rci oc tbc n! rc I:c&1', flrom
an independent kilgdom, to e mcan condition of a ruil.cc, an=
ilcKed to the empire of its powcrlfl ally.

1N 1order to proxvide aglail fl t. iimineClt C;aam t\, tihC ) 11C

of (C :iatcllecr;ault, and 1 ':arl ,)l I lr !,, iil i j'c'l, ':1 .

t l o:l lVi!-

inI tic trtce, dTlh'Cil :n i;:tcrvi\v \ui' tle

i. s'

'h1 ! ; ' 'r-
a.tii .L 'T'lecIc t\'o '() J ',111 , til, ' i,:i p(otLit all tl':t tii:c i;'

ee 0of tie u i, uYl aa the

'L . 1i1, \\CIc ti 1;!) (,1 L!

1i.1 t

I, \\i ;

1 .' L
n . I t he) tlc

2
, 1,.,

BOOK II. late commotions, and having access to observe more narrowly the
-5 dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke

which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-
fiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they profefl:d, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promised
to Ai-gll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were
appoit,:ed to meet with them, that if the Queen fould, with her
ulfual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse
to gratify the withes of the whole nation, by difmifming her French
troops, they would, then, inflantly join with their countrymen, in
compelling her to a measure, which the public safety, and the pre-
flivation of their liberties rendered neccfiary .
.;IY. ABzovT this time, died HIenry II. of France; just when he had

adopted a flvfem, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
woul,, in all probability, have restored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom -t. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain be an, viibly, to decline in favour, and the Confable
M[ontnorency, bv the afiflance of the Dutchess of Valentinois,
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his'nmaler, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed juflly to merit. That prudent Minister imputed the
infurreions in Scotland, wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardi-
nal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could not fail
of tranlporting, beyond all bounds of modcration, men, whofl
minds were pofTfccd xwith that jcalouly, which is inleparable from
tle love of civil liberty, or intiamed with that ardour which ac-

* Knox, t 1.- 1- Mo n.
4().

compa i es

companies religious zeal. And, in order to convince Henry, that Boo I.
he did not load his rivals with any groundless accusation, lie pre-

1559

vailed to have Melvili , a Scotch Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inlrucions to observe the
motions both of the Regent, and of her adversarics; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by
Mclvil's report.

DID history indulge herself in such speculations, it would be

amusing to

ig nquire what a different direction might have been tive

by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a diilrent
iiTue, Melvil's reort, wiich would have lct the con)idul o the
malecontents in the molt favourable light, might have coniOLc'_ d
the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatlenlt, and artfIil po-
licy, the progress of the Reformation might have been checked,
and Scotland brought to depend upon France. Pcrll;ps, by gaini
ing policljion of this avenue, the French might hiave made their
way into England, and, under colour of fpporting lTary's title to
the Crown, they might have rc-cflablilhcd the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, and defiroyed the liberties ofthat kingdom. But, into this
boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the hiitorian mull make no
excursions; to relate real occurrences, and to explain their real
causes and effedts, is his peculiar and only province.

TnE tragical and untimely death of the French Monarch put

an end to all moderate and pacific mcaf.res, with regard to Scot- I ,l, il'
land. The I)uke of GuCile, and the C(iadinal hls brotheri, tpo' n

ot I 'i ,tliC ,
the acccfiion of Francis II. a Prince void of geniius, alm without

* 'The Author of tc \mIonoir.

CX pc inc%

BoOK II. experience, assumed the chief direction of French affairs. Allied
'-- '- so nearly to the thione, by the marriage of their niece the Queen

of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of re-
gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not long
remain inactive in their hands. The ifme vast Ifhemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the former reign, were
again refurned; and they were enabled, by posiesing such ample
authority, to purfuc them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They behcld, with infinite regret, the progress of
the Protcfant religion in Scotland; and fcnfible what an unfur-
moulntl e obflacle it would prove to their dfigns, they bent all
their lircingth to check its growth, before it rose to any greater
height. For this purpole, they carried on their preparations, with
all pofiib!e expedition, and encouraged the Q!een their fifler, to
e>pect, in a short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as
the z:el of their adverfrics, however desperate, would not ven-
ture to opofe.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of thee:

violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of Fialnce, since the
death of Henry, or careless of providing againfl the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of their caulc, as
well as their perional afcty, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of tleir oIwn resolutions, they endeavoured to guard
againf division, and to cmcnt together more clofcly, l)y teriig
into a I ridlcr ond of conc;c,'lacy and mutual (deencc. Two pcr-
in; c)ciTJrrC-(l ill this tnlew afl ciatioil, v Iwo brollt a rc'.at ac-
C(''1i oii l(tl] o , r lpuLt itim an of, I w' t t he part',. 'llicf \\crc
the: )in c of Ciiatcllcrauil, aild lis elicrl: i)n the uI'rl of' Arran.
'] i> V Ll)ig iolmllani, liavinig rIclidcd loimc vcar l' ill n i .i l:, \
nl',ci\

110

he commanded the Scotch Guards, had imbibed the Protestant opi- BOOK II.
nions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth, L--
and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, with refpet 5
to the points in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that juncture, on the extindion of the
Iroteflant religion ; in order to accomplifl which, the utmol : ox-
ccfles of violence were commitecd. The church was suffered to
wreak its utnioft fury upon all who were fufpetcd of hercfy. Courts
cwere erecd, in different parts of France, to take cogni'ance of this
crime, and by their entences, fevcral persons of diidinclion wec:-
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inlire more universal terror, the rinccs of

Lorrain rcfolved to iflcs, for a sacrifice, ome person, whoec fall
milght convince all ranks of men, that neither ficendor of birt],
nor eminec e in flation, would exempt from punifhm!cnt, those
who f tou'di be guil;y of this unpardonab le tranfrcfion. Tie
Earl of Arran was the pcrlon dcftined to be the unhappy vidi n %
As he was allied to one throne, and the prcfiumtivc heir to al-
other; as he pofflTie( the firfl rank in his own country, and cnj cld
an honourable ftntion in Francec; his condemnation couild not fail of
making the delired inprefiion on the whole kingdom. But the
Cardinal of Lorrain, having let fall forme cxpri'ctros, which railed.
the Earl of Arran's suspicions of the dclign, he escapcd the intended
lblow, by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, rfentment, all prompted
himl to fcck revenge upon these pclrccuturs of liilfLelf and of the
religion which he profele(d ; and as lie p;i'd tlirolnh Ilorlaini
on hlis return to his native country, l'li/labctli, by Ihopec and

'* Thuian. lib. xxiv. 1p., . . ldi(. It'l. !]cu.

, o-

BoOK I. promises, inflamed those passions, and sent him back into Scotland,

--i--/ animated with the fame implacable aversion for France, ;which pof-

Earl of5Arral sessed a great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated
joins the I-ro- these sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who was
tcllants.

already extremely difgufled with the measures carrying on in Scot-
land; and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in
every inflance, by those about him, he now suffered himself to be
drawn from the Queen Regent and having joined the Congrega-
tion, was confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpet to him, this diftintion was merely nominal.

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and atuated the whole body of the Protestants, among whom, lie
pofliced that unbounded confidence, which his strenuous adhe-
rence to their interest, and his eminent abilities, fojuftly merited.
lie was the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
and as that amorous Monarch had left several others, a burden upon
the Crown, they were all destined for the church, where they
could be placed in flations of dignity and affluence. In confequencc
of this resolution, the priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred
upon James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became dif-
gufled with the indolence and retirement of a monastic life; and
lis enterpriiing genius called him forth, to act a principal part on
a more public and conspicuous theatre. The scene, in which he
appeared, reluircd talents of diffrent lkinds; and military virtue,
and political difccrnmcnt, were cqually nccciEary, in order to renier
hilm illniRrious. Til c lic poflcilti il n an eminent degree. To the

ml: qucflionac pcrlfonal blavr ,

iv e ail'cd grcat nLill in the

art of \war, and in every cntcrpri/c his :Ils were crovIwnd with
filtcccs. | si l taciy ;udl penletration ill civ il aftlhurs cllabled him,

,ailiilt

amidst the reeling and turbulance of facRions, to hold a prosperous BOOK II.
course. While his boldness in defence of the Reformation, toge- --
ther with the decency, and even severity of his manners, fcured 5
him the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, with-
out which, it was impoflible, in that age, to gain an acendant
over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dreaded the cnmitv

of a man, so capable to obfl'rua her designs. And as lhe could
not, with her utmost addrels, make the leafi impi-cfillo on his
fidelity to his associates, fie endeavoured to leflen his influence,
and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy and didltrut, by
insinuating that the ambition of the Prior apired beyond the con-
dition of a subjet, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown it-
self.

AN accusation so improbable, gained but little crcdit. And

whatever thoughts of this kind, the prcfumption of unexpuLted fuc-
cess, and his elevation to the highcfl dignity in the kiigdom, may
be alledged to have inspircd, at any fubfequcnt period, it is ccitaiii
that, at this juncture, he could form no such vail dcfign. To de-
throne a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no action, by which she could forfeit the
eiteem and affction of her fuljets; who could employ, in de-
fence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom, lmuch nmore power-
ful than her own; and to fulbfitlltc, in her place, a perl;, whuii
the illegitimacy of his birth, by the praclicc of all civili/cd nation-,
rendered incapable of any inic: itaiicc, cither public or pivate; \\;;:
a proje&, so chimerical, as the mofl cxt:lav:?ant ambition \oulIi
icarce entertain, and could never conceivc to bce I.l','ibble. T'I

VOL. 1. Z piromlliIt

BOOK II. promise, too, which the Prior made to Melvii, of residing con-
L ---,-' lantly in France, on condition the public grievances were icdref-
1559. fed ; the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Chatelherault

and his son, the presumptive heirs to the Crown; and the con-
currence of almoll the whole Scotch nobles, in promoting those
micaiures, by lwhich lie gave offince to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with
the imputation of which, the Qeecn endeavourcd, at that time, to
load him.
'r,-.tp: ,,I., TIE arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some

'ri;,' t;}c degree, for the loss which the Queen 1fbaiined by the defediorl of
J.C:ii. ' the Duke of Chatclherult. Thel were1, immediately, commanded

to fortiy Leith, in which place, on account of its comnnodious
llarbour, and its fitLationl in the ncihbourhood of Edinburgh, and
in the hear!t of a p eitiiul country, the Qeen resolved to fix the
head qouar tes of her o 'cignl forces. This unpopular mcafilre, b,y
the m ,ncr of exccuting it, was rendered ill more unpopular.
In order to bring the town entirely under their command, the
iFrencl t ned out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and
taiing poRl!iion of the houcs, which they had obliged them to
abandon, presented, to the view of the Scots, two objes equal-
ly irritating and ofilenive; on the one hand, a number of their
countrymen expelled their habitations by violence, and fwanderinl-
without any Citain abode; on tle other, a colony of oreigncrs,
tcttling, with their wives and children, in thl helart of Scotland,
gioVing ilito flrenlgth by daily rcilforcemcnts, and openly prepnr-
ii a y^,. to wviieh, withlout iomzic tilmely excitioln of nation)l;
lil i., tile v\w'l'lc i1ngd Im imuLt, of inccliity, lLtubit.

:'* 5I-l' xil, 54,

1T

IT was with the utmofi concern, that the Lords of the Con- BOOK II.
gregation beheld this bold and decisive fl-ep, taken by the Queen

b0 1559.

Regent: nor did they hesitate, a moment, whether they fimould em- T'c rotc-
ploy their whole itrength, in one generous effort, to rescue their ii:cainii
rcligion and liberty fiom impending detirudion. But, in order to t''.
jnutify tleir own conduci, and to throw the blame entirely on their
advcrtirics, they resolved to prcfcrve the appearances of decency and
rclfecc towards their superiors, and to have no rccourr to arms,
witlhout the mnof urgent and a pparenilt ln ity. They jo-ined, S.,it -.
with this view, in an addrcls to the Regent, epricnitini' in the
strongest terms, their dillatisfh.tion wih tle imeflics flc \was pa'-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jc'aoufi s 5oi i c
nation, by defiling fiom forti!ving Leith. The QcleCn, coIiiiou-so (
her present advantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of fri-!h
succours, was in no difpolition for lif)ing to ( idemands, utterly in-
consistent with lher views, and urged with that bold importunity,
which is io little acceptable to Princes.

T'IE fuilgeflions of her French Counl!llors c t!ti! ;tc., with- ';',.,; .

out dobt, to alienate her frill farthcr fom any L.''c'r.e of

,cccu.C - ': ',

modation. As the OQeen was ready; on all ; :: to

: ,ccvc: -.

an cxtr:ordinary defer;nce for the opinions of hecr Co',lit:'',in,
hcr brotlhes, rwho kncw her fecrct diLipprobati.n of the viu lcii.t
l1meafurcs they vcre drivin1g on, took cre to pl'aie nea, r lir f :c'i
persons, as betrayed her, by their infna;tions, into many aso;s
whlich hi e own unbifled ji dginciit wu tl1 l.vc Ii lil colndeCmn ed.
AnIl, as heir flicccf in the lrlent jlnkre, wlen all tliigs \V'C
hlfle!i;, t(ow. ;rds a crisis, drq-enldct en'i elyl on tlihe C.! un'> iirm,-
ondci, tluc rli;ces o rs Lorain d(1 not trFil v.; :) tov to jli ini! ,'e (4,
thlir ordi:i:r a;nts, but, in o(nder to addl the , tLcr xveiilt to

'" : tliir

BOOK II. their counsels, they called in aid the Ministers of religion; and, by
-'.--.-.- the authority of their sacred character, they hoped effectually to
1559. recommend to their fitter, that fyfdem of severity which they had

espoused *. With this view, but under the pretext of confound-
ing the Protestants by the skill of such able masers in controversy,
they appointed several French divines to reside in Scotland. At
the head of thefi, and with the character of legate from the Pope,
was Pelleve Bithop of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and
Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot, fcrviicly devoted to the house of
Guise, and a proper instrument fur rccommending or executing th
most outrageous meatures.

AMIDST the nolfe and danger of civil arms, there DoAors had

little opportunity to display their address in the use of their theologi-
cal weapons. But they gave no friall offence to the nation by one
of their ations. They persuaded the Queen to seize the church
of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ever ince the
late truce, in the hands of the Protestants; and having, by a new
and solemn consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution, with
which they supposed the profane ministrations of the Proteflants
to have defiled it, they, in direct contradiction to one article in
the late treaty, re-eftablithed there the rites of the Romifi church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt, with which
the Queen received their remonfRrancs, convinced the Lords of the
Congregation, that it was not only vain to expect any redress of
their grievances at her hands, but abfolutcly neccfary to take arm,
in their own defence.

* Lclly, 25r. C.illclnalu, ap. Jcbb. ol. lii. 16. 473.

Tilr.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every BOOK IL
eonfideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold --J

I'559.

flep without delay. It was but a fmnall part of the French auxili- Ti t.,!;c
aries which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith, though ::h'l, i1,itl.
advancing fast, were frill far from being compleat. Under these cir-
cumfances of disadvantage, they conceived it possible to furprize
the Qeen's party, and, by one ifdden and decisive blow, to pre-
vent all future bloodshed and contention. Full of thele expeca-
tions, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous
army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an adverlary, so vi-
gilant and attentive as the Queen Regent. With her usual aga-
city, fle both forclavv the danger, and took the only proper courle
to avoid it. Inflcad of keeping the field againfl enemies, upc-
rior in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour
of their courage, she retired into Leith, and determined paticnt-
ly to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfiniihed
as the fortifications of that town then were, le did not dread the
efforts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon, nor with
military flores, and utterly ignorant of the method o attacking any
place, fortified with more art than those ancient towers, ereded all
over the kingdom, in defence of private property against tile incur-
sions of banditti.

NOR did the Queen, mean while, neglect to have recourfc to

those arts, which fle had often employed, to weaken or divide
her adversarics. By private follicitations and promilcs, hfle flook
the fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By open reproach and
accufatioln, file laifted the reputation, and diminiluced the authori-
ty of others. lIcr emifilrics were every where work, and, not-
wvitlhfading thl zeal for religion and liberty, vwhicll then animated the

6 xat ion,

BooK I. nation, they seem to have laboured not without success. We
L-~-s" find Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints of the luke-

warm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread among his
party '. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a momen-
tary intermifiion, it soon blazed up with fresh vigour, and rose to
a greater height than ever.

r,i;', tc;i- THE Qecen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which
Inio:ilnce. lhe made to a newv rcmonftrance from the Lords of the Conlgrea-

tion. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more rctprc-
iented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the Frech
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other mcafures, which te--
conceived to be defiruitve to the peace and liberty of the king-
dom; and in this address, they ifoke in a firmer tone, and avowed,
more openly than ever, their rebolution of proceeding to the utioi:
extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous encroaci-
ments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so much
boldness, the Qucen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.
She pretended that he was not accountable to the confederate nobles
for any part of her conduct. And upon no representation of theirs,
\woulld ihe either abandon measures, which the deemed nccef-
i'.; or difnifs forces, l:ich fle found useful; or demoll a folr-
tific'.tion, which might prove of advantage. At the fiame time,
z,.L''. si Ze required them, on pain o treafun, to disband the forces whic

they had aflembled.

Tis; haughlty and( irpel impCous itilc founded harshly to Scotch nobles,
impatient, fiom their nationll characcr, of the flightclst appcarancc

Knox, iI'-'o

r

of injury; accuRtomed, even from their own Monarchs, to the moil BOOK Ii.
relpecful treatment; and pofeiling, under an ariftocratical fortn of -
government, such a liare of power as equalled, at all times, and
often controlled that of the Sovereign. They were sensible, at once,
of the indignity offired to themselves, and alarmed with this plain
declaration of the Queen's intentions; and as there now remained
but one lcep to take, they wanted neither public sprit nor rcfolution
to take it,

BuT, that they might not seem to depart from the eablliled J ',A;!:':-.

forms of the confitution, for which, even amidic their nmoll io- . ,;.
lent operations, men always retain the greatel reverence, thliy al- t:' , l
fenbled the whole Peers, Barons, and Repreiventatives of burroulhs
who adhered to their party. These formecd a convention, wlhi'.l ,;u'cr -:'i.
exceeded in number, and equalled in dignrity, thle ul meetings of
parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid before them th
declaration w ich the Queen had given in anfwcr to their rlmon-
firance ; reprcCcnited the unavoiable ruin, which the meafLrcs, fhc
therecil avowed an iiiticdl, \wouid bring upon the king.i.am; and
rcquii-in tleir direction with regard to the obedince d(lue to a! ald-
minifirntion so unulll and opprciive, they fubi;nitcd to tlhii- ic-
ciiion, a queliion, ne o f the molZ delicate and intcrefiing tl^; ca
pofilbly fall under the consideration ofiubjccs.

Tims afilcrbly proceeded( to decide, with no Ics d(lintlb, tlia:

unl ?iiiity. t- ft:i ers to tllofc :':'i;., w :ci l',t' ;.' T l',ti ' ; u

' -
ac'::aintCed w' itli tile a:ft', v\', :;Icl mVihkc a t 'I'c ill d(L '..t ' .:': ,:'l. i

1 )

mure i tted f'r action, thii id;i'oim ;:ca \\ }: j

c 1 . I.

to a conclifion, id Lring tlhecir d 'c; ' to t,- 't
it was the work but of one cay, to c:';cic air :. to ia,,'c ( i:t

11i''

Boor II. nice problem, concerning the behaviour of subjects towards a ruler
_L--'-- who abuses his power. But, however abrupt their proceedings
15 59' may appear, they were not destitute of solemnity. As the deter-

mination of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were called to affi
with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the whole or-
der, and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the precepts
and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjets not only
to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that authority,
which, in their hands, becomes an inftrutnent for defiroying those,
whom the Almighty ordained them to protect. The decision of
persons, revered so highly for their sacred charater, but more for
their zeal and their piety, had great weight.with the whole as-
fembly. Not satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying content, every person present was called in his turn to

'Ie' deprive declare his sentiments, and riling up in order, all gave their fuffra-
tlo
d '-sos ges without one diflenting voice, for depriving the Queen of the
Ri' ;llt. office of Regent, wlich she had exercised so much to the detri-

ment of the kingdom '.

The ights of THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the love of Ii-
thLil condit. berty, than to zeal for religion. In the at of deprivation, reli-

gious grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous in-
croachments of the Quecn upon the civil conflitution are produced,
by the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their condut
to have been not only just, but ncceiltry. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the fcizing and
fortifying towns in difilrcnt parts of the country; the promoting
hllrnlncrs to oiliccs of great power and dignity; the debating the

' Knlox, 184.

curlrent

current coin *; the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing of BOOK I.
new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king- 1559
dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated as of vio-
lence, are enumerated at great length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors to their monarchs, and the guardians and
defenders of the constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the King and.Qeen,
and with many expressions of duty and fubmiflion towards them,
they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience Should be given to her commands --.

VIOLENT as this action may appear, there wanted not principles

in the constitution, nor precedents in the history of Scotland, to
justify and to authorize it. Under the ariflocratical form of go-
vernment etablifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign
was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-

* The standard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the I6th of

James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold, when coined, produced o18 pounds
of current money. But under the Queen Regent's adiniiflation, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably encreafed,
produced 144 pounds current money. In 1529, a pound weight of silver, when
coined, produced 9 1. 2s.; but in i556, it produced 3 1. current money. Rud-
dim. Prxfat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotix, p. 8o, 81. from which, it appears that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether defi-
tute of foundation.

- M. Cafltlnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the Princes of Lor-

ri n with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his usual candor,
that the Scots declared war againll the Quccn Regent, rather fiom a defiic of
yindicating their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mem. 4.16,

\OL. I, A a fclves

BOOK II. selves petty Princes, possessing extenfivejurifdidions, almost indepen-
--^-- dent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in
1 559 every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to the

King. Hence the many infiances of the impotence of regal autho-
rity, which are to be found in the Scotch history., In every age,
the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of controuling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take the field
in defence of them, every error in adminiitration was observed,
every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indigna-
tion, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries,
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
fiflance, which fllook, or overturned his throne. Encouraged by
the spirit of the conflitution, and countenanced by the example of
their anccftors, the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this jundure, to inquire into the mal-adminirira-
tion of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country from be-
ing enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to exe-
cute flch a pernicious fchcme .

* The acn of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the Congregation to tle

seen Regent are still extant, Knox, 184. They difcovcr not only, that mafcuine
and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are re-
markable for a prccifion, and igour of exprefion, which we arc furprized to mect
with il n an agcfo impolificd. The fame obfcrvation may be made with rcfpcc to the
othler public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age may
renderi the compositions of authors by proftefion obfcuilc, or affc}Cl, or albfurd;
but tic la guag;c of bufillnc i; nearly the lame at all tinces; and whlcrcevr men think.
clearly, and arc thoroughly ilitlerdled, they cxpCrfs thcmii.ivcs with p rfpiCUity anll

T II E1

# BOOK III.

T H E
THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

B O O K III.

H E Lords of the Congregation soon found, that their zeal BOOK Ill
had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond ----'
their utmost ability to accomplifl. The French garrison, Thecn9re
despising their numerous, but iregular forces, refuted to surrender gation invol-

b

1 0f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ed in diflicul-

Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were they fuflici- tics.
ently skillful in the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
poflefed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accuf-
tomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were strangers to the
fatigues of a lonlg campaign, and loon became impatient of the
severe and conflant duty which a fiegc requires. The Queen's
cmifiaries, who found it cafy to mingle with their countrymen,
were at the utofl- pains to heighten their diiguft, which diifcovcrcd
itfclf at fuill in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion ol' the
want of money for paying the army, broke out into open mutilly

A a 2 The

BOOK III. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure from the unbridled

insolence of the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, interposing
1559.

too rashly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.
Discord, conflernation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the
Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with his usual timi-
dity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered ma-
nifeft symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in espousing such
a desperate cause.

Apply to Eli- IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse
ibt} for a- to Elizabeth, from whose protecion they could derive the only
!i:',:nce.

reasonable hopes of their success. Some of their more fgacious
leaders, having foreseen that the party might probably be involved
in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in any fucl
exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with the court of
England ~. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which the
Princes of Lorrain had formed againfl her Crown, was early f-nfilhe
of how much importance it would be, not only to check the
progress of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own influ-
ence in that kingdom -; and perceiving how effetually the pre-
sent insurrections would contribute to retard or defeat the schemes
formed against England, flie listened with pleasure to there ap-
plications of the malecontents, and gave them private aflurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph , an agent, extremely
proper for conducting any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scot-
land, and rididing secretly among the Lords of the Congregation,
observed and quickened their motions. Money seemed to be the
only thing they wanted at that time and it was owing to a season-

* Turn. llift. Ref. 3. Append, 278. Kith, Append. 21.
1ce Appcnd. I Kith,

Append. .
,

able

able remittance from England *, that the Scotch nobles had been BooK III.
enabled to take the field, and to advance towards Leith. But as
Elizabeth was diftrufiful of the Scots, and fludious to preserve 559
appearances with France, her fibfidies were bestowed at first with
extreme frugality. The subsistence of an army, and the expences
of a siege oon exhausted this penurious supply, to which the Lords
of the Congregation could make little addition from their own
funds; and the ruin and dispersion of the party must have inflantly
followed.

Is order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton was sent with She f'inJ

them a tinall

the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and caitle of umctfony,
Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatefl- im-
portance on the Scotch frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James
Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were employed to command
there, and were entrufled with a discretionary power of Lupplying
the Scotch malecontents, according to the exigency of their affairs.
From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns, but little to the ad-
vantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's infti- which is i-
gation, lay in wait for him on his return, dispersed his followers, tercepted.
wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpeced disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere despair, ome of the more zealous attempted to nifault Leith,
but the French beat them back with disgrace, sized their can-
non, and purluing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the
point of entering along with them. All the terror and confusion,
vIwhich the profped of pillage or of nmalacre can excite in a place

* Knox, 214. Keith, Appcn . 4,.

talkct

BOOK III. taken by orm, filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants
'--V-- fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces of the Con-

I559. gregation were irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's partizans

in the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles ven-
tured to face the enemy, who, after plundering ome houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city from this
dreadful alarm.

A SECOND kirmifh, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provisions which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all hatfe with a considerable body of their troops, and falling upon
the enemy between Refalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than
good conduct, were almof surrounded by a second party of French,
who advanced in order to support their own men. In this fitua-
tion, a retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots; but
a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of an enemy fupe-

Thcv retire rior in number, could not long be conduced with order. A finall
fromll leltil i11
confuiul;l. body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into

the uttofl confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of
the French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and firits of the Congregation

funk altogether. They did not think themlclves secure, even
within the walls of Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire
to sOme place at a greater diilance from the enemy. In vain did
the Prior of St. Andrew's and a few others oppose this cowardly
and ignominious flight. The dread of the preclcnt danger prevailed
over both the fielle of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-

li hlt

night, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and marched BOOK Ill.
without halting till they arrived at Stirling.

1559.

November 6.

DURING this last infurredion, the great body of the Scotch

nobles joined the Congregation. The Lords Seton and Borthwick
were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
affiled her in defending Leith . Bothwell openly favoured her
cause, but relided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly, con-
formable to the crafty policy which diftinguifles his characer,
amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had engaged
to afflft, with many fair promiis, but never joined them with a
single man T--. The Earl of Morton, a member of the Congrega-
tion, fluctuated in a late of irresolution, and did not a hearti-
ly for the common cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edin-
burgh catle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality, which
he eeemed becoming the dignity of his office; and having been en-
trufled by Parliament with the command of the principal fortress
in the kingdom, he relolved that neither faCtion fiould get it into
their hands.

A FEW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen M.lt½nl rce-

volb from the

fiftfered an irreparable lots by the defection of her principal Secre- Queen Dowa-
tarv, Villiam Maitland of Lethington. flis zeal for the Reformed re- ges.
ligion, together witl his warm remonfrances againit the violent mea-
furcs which the Qieen was carrying ol , exposed him o much to her
rfctltmecnt, and to that of her French Counfcllors, that he, fufpedt-
ing his life to be in danger, withdrew Iecretly fiom Leith, and fled
to the Lords of the Congregation ; and they, witl open arms, re-

* KEit, Append. 1. tI- Ibid. Appenl. 33. uIox, 2?:. 1 Knox 1,2.

ce ivecd

BooK III. ceived a convert, whose abilities added both strength and reputa--

C'-"--' tion to their cause. Maitland had early applied to public business

559 admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance with the li-

beral arts; and, at a time of life, when his countrymen of the
fame quality were following the pleasures of the chace, or serving
as adventurers in foreign armies, he was admitted into all the secrets
of the cabinet, and put upon a level with persons of the most con-
fummate experience in the management of affairs. He possessed,
in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which delights in pur-
suing bold designs, and was no less master of that political art and
dexterity which is necessary for carrying them on with success. But
these qualities were deeply tinctured with the neighbouring vices.
His address sometimes degenerated into cunning; his acutenels bor-
dered upon excess of subtlety and refinement; his invention, over
fertile, suggested to him, on some occasions, chimerical fyflems of
policy, little suitable to the genius of the age; and his enterprising
spirit engaged him in projects vast and splendid, but beyond his ut-
noft power to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever
faction they belong, mention him with an admiration, which no-
thing could have excited but the greatest superiority of penetration
and abilities.

THIE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, still re-
mained undaunted and ercct, and having mounted the pulpit, he
addressed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this difcourie arc

inserted

inserted in his history *, and afford a flriking example of the bold- BOOK I.
ness and freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well 5
as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics mos fitted to
influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what Tlie Lord, fs

course they should hold, now that their on resources were all , i;'
exhausted, and their destruction appeared to be unavoidable, with- ,,:,., li-
out foreign aid ; they turned their eyes once more to lEngland, and
resolved to implore the alfiitance of Elizabeth towards nfinlihin an
enterprize, in which they had o- fatally experienced their own weak-
nets, and the flren th of their adverlaries. Maitland, as the ofl
able negociator of the party, was employed in this embaNy. In Iis
absence, and during the inactive season of the year, it was agreed
to difmiis their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the time offervice ufiial in tliat agc
But, il order to preserve the counties mol- devoted to their interelt,
th: Prior of St. Andrew's, whtlh part of the leadelr, rctircd into Fits.
The Duke of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his rceflcnce at Ha-
milton. There was little need of Ml5.ilad's aldrect or eloqucnce
to induce Elizabeth to take h1s country under hcr prSothetion,. She
observed the prevalence of the French councils, and t:e prore!s of
their arms in Scotland, with great concern; and as fle well !brc-
saw the dangerous tendency of their Ifclmcns in that lkiilgoin, flac
had already come to a resolution with regard to the part she her-
fclf would adt, if their power there liould grow llill more formi
dable.

I' Kn.x, I9;.
VO. I.1- I

BOOK III. IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Council a full and dif-

L---~J tinct view of any important matter which might come before them,
iv5,ih it seems to have been the practice of Elizabeth's Minifers to pre-
io :-t.it parc menorials, in which they clearly stated the point under deli-

t.l. beration, laid down the grounds of the conduc, wh:ch they held

to he nmof reasonable, and proposed a method for carrying their
plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir Wil-
liam Cecil with his own hand, still remain * ; they are intitled,
" A flhort difcnTion of the wvighty matter of Scotland," and do
hon:our to the induflry and penetration of that great Minister. The
motives, w''imh determiued the QOeen to efpaoufe so armly the
defence of t e Coin;,regation, are rcprefenrted with perfpicuitv and
si'c ; and the consequences of iuffciing the French to eftablitf
thcmrelvcs in Scotland, are prcdiCted with great accuracy and difl
cernmlent.

IE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of natirc, that every society hath a right to deflnd itfclf,
not only from present dangers, but from such as may probably en-
sue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teaclh every Primce
to defend hitmfelf by the fame means, which his adverfj-ies employ
to distress hin. Upon these grounds, he eflablifhes the right of
England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French openly aimed. The
French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of Eng-
land. Hostilities had subsistcd between the two nations for manv cen-
turies. No treaty of peace, into which they entered, had ever been
cordial or finccrc. No good cficct was therefore to be cxpeccd fromn

' Ilurn. vol. iii. lAppciil. 2 3 . Keith, Alppcild. 21.

the

the peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted by present ne- BOOK III.
ceffity, would be negligently observed, and broken on the slightest --
pretences. In a very hort time, France would recover its former 559
opulence ; and though now drained of men and money by a tedious
and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a condition for aing,
and the restless and martial genius of the people would render action
necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that time had the en-
tire dircdtion of French afltirs, were animated with the moil vi-
ralent hatred against the English nation. They opeinly called in
question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth, and by advanc'ng
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of Scotland, flu-
died to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. Xith this view, they
had laboured to exclude the English from the treaty of Chateau
en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit his tiughter--in-
law to afumne te title and arms of Queen of England; and even
iTnce the conclulion of the peace, they had follicited at lRome, and
obtained a bull, declaring Elizabet!h's birth to be ilieitimzte. Ai-d
though the wik!'om ani ix:ieration of the Cot,l:blc _Iloitinollrecy
had, for so me time, ciheced th eir career, yet tcl'e rcfl ai .ts IeiSg
now removed by tle death of Iecnrv II. and the dilr'ice ;ofl L:i
Minificr, the utmofi excelces of violence cere to Lbe drei a.dl -l
their furious ambition, armed with fovcrign power. Sjtla.J is
the quarter, whence they can attack Engl.d wi'l niosl a n'[lvlto
A war on the borders of that country-, cxpo's Francc to nlo U.) sl ,
but one unfuiccefsful aion tliere may linzard the C('! ,\r, ai!
ovcrturn the ovcrnmeilt of Einll.lnll . n11 1(lirici! coi.tiCt, it is
childiflh to wait till the cefign; of an enemy be 1)ripe 1(r) exccitlio(,
The Scotch nioles, ftr tlheiri- lillln)l frts, I'.e I .rn oHlj'ied
to (Jtit tile field ; and fa froImn c'xlp liln: tii illvae(i rs ul tli .' ii-

J3 b, 2 b rie;,

BOOK III. berties, they behold the French power daily increasing, and must

at last cease from struggling any longer in a contest so unequal. The
' 559' 0

invading of England will immediately follow the redua ion of the
Scotch malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of
the French, Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart
of her own kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a diflance from England, and by supporting
the Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the
theatre of the war, to cruLr the designs of the Princes of Lorrain
in their inlfancy, and, by such an early and unexpeIed effort, to
expcl tle French out of tErtain, before their power had time to
tal:' root, anld row up to any formidable height. But as the mat-
tcr was of as m'.lch importance, as any which could fall under the
(ontsideration of an English Monarch, wifdoni and mature coutn-
iel were nceceliivy in the fir t place, and afterwards vigour and ex-
pcdition in conduc ; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a tinge
moimnt, might becolme unavoidable '

TIESE argu:ments produced their full effcc't upon Elizabeth, who

was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her Crown,
and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of her
fubjets. From there motives fie had aCted, in granting the Congre-
gation an early supply of money; and from the tame principles fie
determined, in their present exigency, to asord them more effedual
aid. Onie of Maitland's attendants was instantly iflpatched into
Scotland with the frongefll ailrances of her proteaion, and the
Lords of the Congregation were desired to etnd commiiiloners into

"* T'l]i' :rIImcnt: ; w\'ic-h the Scots employcil, in odlcr to obtliin llizLbetlh's Hill.-

ance, arc u d v

it i c:'t old c, ii ap r
ill ;1 ;ir l M itlani 's. Sec Appcldix, N'' .

England,

England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle the operations of the BOOK III.
campaign, with the Duke of Norfolk. 5*.

'559.

MFAN while, the Qeen Regent, from whom no motion of Tho Qurcl

the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the uccefs of''a, il
this ncgociation with the court of England, and forefawv how little "'P*- !'e':

. C ,.:ch tr:oeps

she would be able to resist the united effort of the two kingdoms. ag;,i:;.icmn.
For this reason she determined, if possible, to get the start of Eli-
zabeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their present dilbcrfed
and helpless situation, fie hoped to put an end to the war, before
the arrival of their English allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were ag-

mented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de Martigues,
with a thouflnd veteran foot, and ome cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. TIaving there crofled the Forth, they pro-
cceded along the coafi of Fife, dftroying and plundering, w ith ex-
ceffive outrage, the houses and lands of tl'ofc whom they cfltcened
their enemies. Fife was the mos popul)ous and powcrful county
in the kingdom, and mofr devoted to the Congreation, o who ha!d
hitherto drawn from thence their moft:onfidclcrable ifpplics, both
of men and provisions; and therefore, belides punilhing the difaf-
fetiion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the country, tle French pro-
posed to fcize and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave there a garrifni
fufiicent to bridle the mutinoub ifirit of the provilnce, and to keep
pofIfCioiin of a port situatcd on the main ocean.

* Kl ith, I i.

CUTr

BOOK III. BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's, Lord Ruthven,

'- - Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of the most active leaders of the

55 Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good co:dui:, a

service of the utmoll importance to their party. Having aflcmbled
fix hundred horse, they infested the French with continual incur-
sions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys of proviions,
cut off their fl-aggling parties, and so harafied them vith perpetu:l
alarms, that they prevented them for more than three weeks ln.i
advancing .
1 56. AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, was conlr-aincd to

retire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
along the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a f;t
:;llIary, 2. miles, when from an eminence they descricd a powerful fleet icre

ing its courfL up thle Firth of Forth. As they knew that the Marqis,
D'Elbeufwas, at thattime, preparing to ail for Scotland with a nume-
rous army, they hafily concluded thlat these hips belonged to him,
and gave way to the most immtoderate transports of joy, on the
profpeda of this long-expeed succour. Their great guns were al-
ready fired to welcome their fi-Lnds, and to itpread the tidings and
terror of their arrival among their enemies, when a fimall boat fi-ci
the opposite coast landed, and blasted their premature and short-livcd
triumph, by informing them, that it vwas the fleet of England which

'The Wr,:i: ,as M ifigIt, intended for the aid of the Congregation, and was ibon
llt't :~riyc., t O

o
th:raliiitaliceo to be foliowed by a formidable land army t.

Tlioro IourT hecr

r whole reign, Elizabeth waCs cautious, but ilc-
cilive; and by her pronlmititu icxccutiing hicr ircllutions, joiled

* ]lno.x, 202. ' ]K.no, 203.

to the deliberation with which (he formed them, her adminifration BOOK III.
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No -

I56o.

sooner did he determine to afford her protection to the Lords of
the Congregation, than they e:perienced the activity, as well as
the extent of her power. The fcaon of the year would not per-
mit her land army to take the field ; but left the French thould, in
the mean time, receive new reinforcements, ihe inflantly ordered a
frong squadron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems, by her
instructions to Winter her Admiral, to have been desirous of pre-
serving the appearances of fi-ienlihip towards the French ':-. Bu t tlhcfe
were only appearances; if any French fleet should attempt to land,
he was commanded to prevent it, by every at of hufility and
violence. It was the fiiht of this lilladron, vwhich occafionc at
firlf so much joy anmong the French, but which soon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the efLccts oe teir venc;cancc.
Apprehensive of beilng cut off from their COmpanionS on the onpo-
site flore, they retreated towards Sdtiling with the tmiolt prcciJl'ta-
tion, and, in a dreadful fcalon, and th roh roads altoPt impaflblc,
arrived at Lcith, larafcd and exhauflcd wii:h fati;ue F-.

TIl. Englifi fleet cal: anchor in the road of Leith, ad ccntti-

nuing in that station till the conclusion o peace, both prevented
the garrison of Leith fromI receiving succours of any kind, and cOn-
fiderably facilitated the operations of their own forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the Englilh fluadron, tlie Comifihn- ,

l ,- ,

l ,-

crs of the CongrCegatioln rcp.iircd to) IlEr\vick, anlld conclLdd( \v;tli(

t "
the duke of Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union withli ,li.- . .i...-.

* Keith, Appcndix '5. - Knox, 2c3.

L[ct'i,

BooK III. beth, which was of so great advantage to the cause. To give a

'-~
. check to the dangerous and rapid progress of the French arms in

Scotland, was the profefed dfign of the contractiing parties. In
order to tils, the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union of
their conntry with France; and to defend themselves to the uttcr-
moit againtl all attempts of conquefi; and for their afiftance, Eli-
zabeth promiled to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, wvlich
the Scots undcrtook to join with all their oirces; no placz in c.t-
land was to remain in the hands of the Englihl; whallvelr fould
be taken from the enemy was cither to be razed, or kept bv tl
Scots, at their choice ; if any invation should be made upon F.A,;-
land, the Scots were obliged to aflfi Elizabeth with part of th.ir
forces; and to alcertain their faithful ofcrvance of the treaty, tlv
bound themselves to deliver hofiages to Elizabeth, before the marci
of her army into Scotland ; in concluiion, the Scots made nlai-
protdiations of obedience and loyalty towards their own Queen, in
every thing not inconfiflent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country '.

The FnTlih TIE Englifi army, confiiting of fix thousand foot, and two
;ijl m
.1:;l, tloulfand horse, uner the command of Lord Grey of WVilton,

entered Scotland early in the spring. The members of the Congre-
gation assembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their new
allies; and having joined themi with great multitudes of their fol-
lowers, they advanced togetlcr towards Leith. The French were
little able to kccp tlc licld agailnft an enemy 1l much lfupcrior ,'.
number. A firong body of troops, defincd for their relief, l .i(
lately been fcattcrcd by a violent storm, and hiad cither perifhcil luI

] K J1.x, 217.

the

the coafs of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of BOOK III.
that kingdom '. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till
the Princes of Lorrain flould make good the magnificent promises
of assistance, with which they daily fed them; or till scarcity of
provisions ould confI'ain the Englifl to retire into their own
country. In order to haflen this latter event, they did not neglec
the usual, though barbarous precaution for diflreffing an invading
enemy, by burning and laying ware all the adjacent country t-
The zeal, however, of the nation frufrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards removing their opprefibrs, the people
produced their hidden flores to fuipport their friends; the neigh-
bouring counties supplied every thing eceiTiry, and far from want-
ing fubfifience, the English found, in their cilnp, all forts of pro-
visions, at a cheaper rate, than had for onlme time been knownl in
that part of the kingdom :.

ON tlic approach of the Englih arnmy, the Qnccn Rg-ent re-

tired into the calfle of Edinburgh. IIer icaltih was now in a d-
ciling llate, and her mind brol-kn and dc;ireiTd y tli mlisfor-
tones of her adTi.initration. 'o avoid the danger and 'i; :. of a
siege, lhe coimitted lhcifelf to the protedion of Lord IEriine. Tii:
nobleman fiill prefcrved his neutrality, and by lis iltc iy and love
of his country, merited equally tile ecem of' both parties. te
received tle Queen herflfl :vih the utnlofl hicnour and rlcll-,-
but took care to admit no fichl rctiit:, a.s ni ;, ndioicer liis ce: -
M:ueid of the caflic j.

Mclm. td Ca-l. 450. I I ', : .

"1 \Knox, ibid. 11 I lub (', x,

iC

'; . .. ., , I2
V;'L. 1. C c r V

BOOK III. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englifi invested

- -- Leith. The garrison, slut up within the town, was almost half
x56o.
pil 6. as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-

flinate defence protratcd the fge to a reat length. The circum-
itances of this liege, related by cotemporary historians, men with-
out knowledge and experience in the art of war, are often obifcure
and imperfect, and at this diflance of time are not considerable
enough to be entertaining.

AT firl- the French endeavoured to keep pofleffion of the

hlawk I1ill, a rising ground not far diflant from the town, but wcire
Apt5ild. beat from it with great fn:luhter, chiefly by the furious attack of

the Scotch cavalry. \V itin a few days, the French had thir
full reveinge; having sallied out with a ftong body, tihey cntcred
the Engliifl trcnches, broke their troops, nailedl part of their can-
non, and killed at least double the number thcmfclIvcs had ll in
the former flirNmiih. Nor were the English more fortunate in
ia ,,. an attempt which they made to take the place by aifault; they

were met with equal courage, and repuled with considerable losS.
From the detail of thef circumnilances by the writers of hat
agc, it is easy to obfcrivc the difrrcnt clhataaers of the Fecincl
and Fnlglifh troops. The sorner, trained to war, under te
active reigns of Francis I. and lenry II. defended tlhel elvcs not
only with the bravery, but with the Ikill of veterans. The latter,
who had beeln llore accufllioed to peace, fill prefered the in-
trepid and (ldefcrate valour peculiar to the nation, but dieeovalel
1c\v markl-s of military Cgnius, or of experience in the practice of
war. vcrv mis Vfortulne or dli ippoi: tment durig the liege mul
be imlputtcd to Imani:icl crrors ill colu. Te iefs of tle )--
fieecd in tllCir sally was o\Vwieg intircly to tle ieeclity 11and n 'clei ll.
of tle En 'liih: many of tlleir otlicers were ablcnt ; tlhir lLilicr:

I1.i t

had left their flations; and the trenches were almost without a Booi III.
guard. The ladders, which had been provided for the aflault, -
wanted a great deal of the necessary length ; and the troops employ-
ed in that service were ill supported. The trenches were opened,
at firif, in an improper place ; and as it was found expedient to
change tlhe ground, both time and labour were loftl. The weak-
niefs otheir own Generals, no less than the strength of the French
garrison, rendered the progress of the English wonderfully flow.
The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to extreme dif-
trefs, which the profpecL of relief made them bear with admirable
fortitude.

\VIiILE the hopes and courage of the French protraced theo

ficgc 1) far beyond expecl.tion, the Scotch malecontects were not
idle. By new aflociltions and confederacies, tlicy labourcd more
p-'cfl:ly to unlli their party. By publicly ratifying'- the treaty con-
cluded at er.\wick, they endcavourcd to render the alliance with
England firm and indiflbluble. Among the fulbcribcrs of these
papers, we find the Earl of lHuntly, and fume others whlo had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of tcir nicafrcs
Several of thclc Lords, partictllarly the Earl of iulntly, lill ad-
hered t t the Popifll church ; bt on this occafilln, neithcr thecir
religious fnCtimcn ts, nor tilcir formelr cautious miiims, werC re-
ga rd cd; the torrent of nat:onal rl'lntmcnlt and idiLi ;1nalioli a 0:iis
the Frencli hurried thecm on .

IlMrn. v'ol. iii. ', 7. 1,110x, 221.

'1 I t (

t1

, 1 '

c- c 1 pu r

)li,'

Ii

i 1j/:\

'c,Ol ,m.

, l l,

t'. : .'..l,

\hi l tIhe Citiul l bic:, 1ad lur til;i il;0 i ,l. IJ, JIJli.; 'i '

('1 ' iLi.

l i, j\
' Ic I1(c

C L z 1or

BOOK III. TIHE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than the cause of
' --v- i involving Scot'and in these calamities, under which it groaned at

I56o.

Pje6tl an.

that time, diCd during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever po-

c, irt"tr cf efled qualities more capable of rendering her administration illul-
J)ovager. trious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no les

le. address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and hu-

mane, without weakness; zealous for her religio:n, without bigotry;
a lover of jutlice, without rigour. One circumfance, however,
and that, too, the excels of a virtue, rather than any vice, poiolbnc
all there great qualitics, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interell of France, her na-
tie coLntrytl, and attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brother,

,' ih moi nllot: nd fs fiite departed, in order to gratify tlhc,

from every maxim, which her own widom or humanity woull
have approved. She outlived, in a grcat measure, that reputati -
and popularity, wiich had finoothed her way to the highell latn
in the kingdolm ; and many examples of falflood, and iome ofe fcve-
rity, in the latter part of her adminifcration, totally alienated fiom hle
the affeclions of a people, who lhad once placed in her an ur bounded
confidence. 3ut, cven by her enemlis, theic uljuftifiablc ad: 1:s
w ere imputed to the facility, not to te malignity of her natu ;
and while they taxed her brothers, and French counlillors, w>,
rafhncfs and cruelty ; they still allowed her the praift of prl-utdcc

tir thi., ailifinlg fromi the memoial mcintic(,nc by Bulrnct, lill. of the Rcluinlltii ,

: 1. iii. :8 , mi put,'oblifhcd by him p. 278'; tlhe ilnfiltltinils of I'.liZ/.)ictl t)o 1'.:.-

Iph lFLr ,'l,tlt, pit it yOnd i ill dlo.ilt, tlhat Ilm.ny zcalu ls l'.tlpill; I',,i:i '.r

' ;ali.il tL' \\ith F1'21,l.mld to C e ncic lfll y for prc l 'x i'l, tlil bciity :ind ill i ' i.-

cir :o- tl' the

1 ,i ;,,.',iln. Ii.l: i,
t1,5 '. itllly him fell b ,10 ,.1u .1 co C' i)Ioll '.l C \1 i;':

t i/.,tl tl \'.. lin:ilkt :, I cn- llhc mtin: . ll of the l'lplilll Irmil) nt Scutlllild, I 1. 1.
',ll' l'P.i1:., 2'1' , '' ..... "-. c ApT'..],d. N' 111.

and of lenity*. A few days before her death, fie defirc an inter- BOOK III.
view with the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other
chiefs of the Congregtion. To them fie lamented the fatal iue 1
of those violent councils, which he had been obliged to follow;
and, with the candour natural to a generous mind, confeflTd the
errors of her own aminiflration, and begged forgivenels of tholc,
to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time, fie warned
them, amidst their truggles for liberty, and the filock of arms,
not to lose fight of the loyalty and lubjcotion, iwhih was due to
their Sovereign -. The remainder of her time, flle employed in
religious meditations and cxercifcs. She even invited the attendance
of Willox, one of the 1no{ eminent among the 12 efrmed preachers,
listened to his infirucdions with revcrence and a:t:enion i, and pre-
pared for the approach of death with a decent fortitue.

NOTING could now save the French troops, liut p in Leith, ;T ivc-t, ',c

but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful 'l,,lca 1'ac.
army from the continent. The Princes ofLorrain anuscd 'teir aity
in Scotland, with continual expedatio -s of ile .itcr, and ha trtby
kept alive their hopes and their coura.ge. But at lai2, the fitntion
cf France, rather than the terror of tle li 7lilh ar;s, or tlhe i:?n-
ftranccs f the Scotch rnalecontcnlts, coiii ainicd tliem, thcQu3

: ;vitl

reluLtancc, to turn tl:ir thlouglts t' \.r.i-l; pnacijc couIcils. T-:
Protefla.ts in France were, at that tii, a party fi-,rniillc I r
their nuiber, aind Iiore by tle va!(;ur a:d cntcrtriiliil . ii {i,!; (,'
their leaders. Francis 11 h d treated tllm \i v.itl i Cxtci! li 'l-
and dilcovcrcd, by cvery fltp lie to(l:, a itti; .d rc'litio tt i r-
pate their reliion, and to ruil thole \w\ j pv:oteitd it. At the ',ru-

g Iiicli.i. ,2.-. t l2.lls, d ]cbur , . J'.. e- , 22. t U' , '

Itt'

BooK III. pcEt of this danger to themselves, and to their caule, the Proteflants

-- - were alarmed, but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed
i560. with resentment, they not only prepared for their own defence, but

resolved, by some bold action, to anticipate the schemes of their ene-
mies. And as the Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of
all the King's violent measures, they marked them out, to b the
first viCtims of their indignation. Ilence, and not friom a dif-
loyalty to the King, proceeded tile famous conspiracy of Ainboil;
and though the vigilance and good fortune of the Prinlces of Lo--
March 1 '

rain dilcovered and diiappointed that design, it was cafy to obfcrvc
new ftornms gathering in every province of the kingdom, and ready
to burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war. In thl;
situation, te ambition of the house of Lorrain was called (i-f f-rom
the thoughts of foreign conqucfis, to decfndc the honour and dig-
nity of tlie French crown ; and infread of tinding new reinbrce-
mcnts into Scotland, it became neccfiiry to withdraw the vctcra
t0oops allady cmployed in that kilngdom ;.

1. ,,:

n,-i- IN order to conduc an affair of so much importance and delicacy,

ti,, :l.
i t. thte )llnccs of Lorrain made choice of Mc11nluc ;iIhop of Valence,

and of the Sieur dce Randan. As both thcfe,, cfpccially the forilcr ,
were reckoned inferior to no pcrl;ns of thaLt age, in adi'ii alnd
political refinement ; Eli:abcth cppofed to them Anmb.lfindors of

jequal abilitis; Cecil her Prime iC linifcr, a in i perlaps (of t c

grca;telt capa-'ity who hial ever hell that olflcc aiind xi',,; i )c n
of( ( tcrltuIry, gro\vn old ill the art of' ncoL',c'ti' ; U.r'' tii'c il::--

c i ''\ !c\I onil rc s. T lc ili rl t or tli ic: i

2l2r oi iJ il t:,

! ,i

were ibon adjustcd by meni of 1 great dexter, ty in bu1icl
, ; and a'

* Lcfly, 224.

I.raic'e

France easily consented to withdraw those forces, which had been BooK III.
the chief occalion of the war; the other points in dispute, between --
that kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif- I56o.
ficult dilcufEion.

THE grievances of the Congrcgation, and their demands upon

their own Sovereigns for r-edr-cs, cmploycd longcr time, and re-
quircd to be treated with a morite li r hand. After so man.y
open attempts, carried on by comland of the King anid C(elCn,
in order to overturn tiec incilet coni itution, and to sup lrel.S t:he
rcligion which they had en:btraced, the Sciich nobles could i'ot
think tcmillcs fLclrc, without si.':: ia lome new barrier aginti
the future encroachmcnts ol real ower. Buit tle Ic.il tLns to-
wards accompli]iing this we're not l ovious The FI;nch allti-
facdors coafid-cred te entering inito any tLaty

; \'ii IlIjds, and xviti

rebels, as a condcIicnllou, uri;wolr-ly thlie d;iity of a Soli're
and their fIclruples on this licaJ nS: ht hla've pt a'n end to thll tc ii ,
if the impatience of both parties for peace lIadl not li:g j eld ai cx-
pedient, whvliclh fecilcd to provide for the iLeu-nitv o' the filc&t,
without derogatiln from the honoulr of the I'i: ce. 'T (,tl rilArtcoflih
nobles agreed, on this occaijon, to pal irom tlhe poiiit c-i r,1it a:1 '.
privilce, and to accept the crero of their rlieva.nce, as a atter
of sav our. \Whatevcr additio;nall icciritv tlicir a Lt r lci1.l
fafetv), or th.ei' eal lor pn'ilic i-rty, prompted tlell t)o ''a '.:1 ,,
\vas granted in the naC of rancis and Nlar?, a al of t' ,cii \~ .
favour and indulgencc. An\,d le1l c)i'cll'l(ns of this Ii iknl lli.
lletni pcllcario us, aid liaIlIc to rcti. ics by til e i e po'l . ,

\'ili,

liad malet them, lte rlnchi Am.ifaor aeed to ifit th1mi i:i
tlhc trc.Ity witli ..lisabetI , aind tIicwby to bind the K'ing and QIccI
in violabI to oblcrve them I:'N

'* Kti ~

ll , c,
, .

IN

BooK III. IN relating this transaction, cotemporary historians have con-

-6o founde.l the conceflions of Francis and Mary to their Scotch ub-

jes, with the treaty between France and England; the latter, be-
fides the ratification of former treaties between the two kingdoms,
and flipulations with regard to the time and manner of renovin
both armies out of Scotland, contained an article, to whiclh, as the
source of many imnportant events, we fliall often have occasion to
refer. The rigtt of Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, acknow-
ledged in the flrongefl terms ; and Francis and lMary olemnly en-
gage, either to assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
QtCen of England, in any time to cole.

IHoNOu.RA lLE as this article was for Elizabeth herfulf, tle cc,-

Cli:lonS the obtained for her llies the Scotch were no les adva:ti-
tI': ,'. geous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the namni c0

Francis and Mlry, that the French forces in Scotland should in-
f:ant'y be sent back into their own counT'r, and no for'iin troo s
tc hc;eafccr introduced into the ki:ngdo: , without the knowL' ' -
and consent of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith n ,
lDnbar ifoull immediately be razed, an l no lne for-t h crec'l
w\/t.ihot tLe per-miiiion of Parliamentl; tnt a Plarliament flouli he
lield oi the first day of Auu, and that :lntllmbly be d(.emcd las
v:i 1, in a!ll ref, cdt , as i! it had been c-lll y the exprct, co-1-
mnlldi'nc.t of tc King a.nd QiCen ; that, coiiolrmanlcl to tL': i' -

cict 1 1

'i. ': a;nd cuil oin otf the country, the Kinl and Q(1! I:')
i :.

1, dc'. v -, ; (i conci 't ,Ic ,i 'act, witlhoul t t c co:::l .
I '.:..

t .
( ; 1. .

that hereafter, the King and Queen should not advance foreigners BOOK III.
to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices of
Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues upon any ecclefiafic; that
an at of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and memory of all offences
committed since the sixth of March, 1558, hould be paifed in the
ensuing Parliament, and ratified by the King and Queen; that the
King and Queen should not, under colour of punishing any viola-
tion of their authority during that period, fek to deprive any of their
fubjets of the offices, benefices, or estates which they now held;
that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had
fuflained during the late infurreaions, flould be left entirely to
the cognizance of Parliament. With regard to religious contro-
verfies, the Ambassadors declared that they would not prefune to
decide, but permitted the Parliament, at their firt meeting, to ex-
amine the points in difference, and to represent their sense of them
to the King and Queen ".

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega- The effe-ts f

tion, by their courage and perfeverancc, condut an enterprize, it
which, at firlt, promised a very different issue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by e-
grees to great power; and being favoured by many fortunate in-
cidents, baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the
forces of a more considerable kingdom. The whole sovereign au-
thority was transferred, by this treaty, into the hands of the con-
gregation ; that limited prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto
poffffecd, was almost entirely annihilated; and the ariflocratical
power, lwhich always predominated in the Scotch government, be-

V\OL.~~: KIt,

l. j, c.e
VoL. I. I) d cmic

BOOK III. came supreme and incontroulable. By this treaty, too, the influ-

' -6 - ence of France, which had long been of much weight in the as-
J560'

fairs of Scotland, was greatly diminished, and not only were the
present incroachments of that ambitious ally refrained, but, by con-
federacy with England, protection was provided against any future
attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame time, the controver-
fies in religion being left to the consideration of Parliament, the
Protestants might reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was most
favourable to the opinions which they professed.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French

and English armies quitted Scotland.

A Parliament THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards
held the approaching Parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner

so extraordinary, at such a critical jundure, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with the utmost
anxiety.

A SCOTCH Parliament, suitable to the arilRocratical genius of the

government, was properly an assembly of the nobles. It was compofd
of Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners of burroughs,
who met altogether in one house. The Lesser Barons, though pol-
fefed of a right to be present, either in person, or by their repre-
fentatives, fcldom exerciscd it. The cxpence of attending, accord-
ing to the falhion of the times, with a numerous train of vials
and dependants; the inattention of the age to any legal or regulr
yfltcm of government; but, above all, the exorbitant authority f
the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into thcii own
hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to be alinofl n Icl-c-

te .

ted. It appears, from the ancient rolls, that during times of tran- BooK- III.
quillity, few commiflioners of burroughs, and almost none of the ----

1560.

lesser Barons appeared in Parliament. The ordinary administration
of government was abandoned without scruple or jealouiy, to the
King and to the nobles. But in extraordinary conjuncures, when
the struggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to
the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and lcetr Barons
were rouzed from their inactivity, and flood forth to vindicate the
rights of their country. The turbulent reign of James III. affords
examples in proof of this observation *. The public indignation
against the rash designs of that weak and ill-advifed Prince, brought
into Parliament, besides the nobles and prelates, a considerable num-
ber of the lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the firrf of August. The
universal pafflon for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned fpedators
of an assembly, whose ats were likely to prove decisive with refped
to both. From all corners of the kingdom, flocked in men, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause, which they had defended with their swords in the field.
Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there ap-
peared the representatives of almost the whole burroughs, and above
an hundred Barons, who, though of the lesser order, were Gentle-
men of the first rank and fortune in the nation -A.

THE Parliament was ready to enter on business with the utmofi
zeal, when a difficulty was flarted concerning the lawfulness of the

Keith, 147. -1 Ibid. 1I4.

)) d 2 meeting,

BOOK III. meeting. No Commiflioner appeared in the name of the Kino

6- -

o and Queen, and no signification of their content and approbation
j 56o.

was yet received. These were deemed, by many, essential to the
very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
this afembly was declared to be as valid, in all refpets, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express command of the King
and Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of most approved zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importance in the Scotch Parliament. The delibera-
tions of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with the most
unanimous and ative zeal. The at of oblivion; the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted with
supreme authority, was to be elected; and every other thing pre-
fcribed by the late treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it

ts procce- effectual, paifed without dispute or delay. The article of religion
;,¥?i. oith r- employed longer time, and was attended with greater difficulty. It
yri:~ to rei-
gion. was brought into Parliament, by a petition from those who had

adopted the principles of the Reformation. Mlany doctrines of the
Popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a disgrace to re-
ligion; its dicfipline had become corrupt and opprefive; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. Againfi all these,
the Proteflants remonfiratcd with the utmost severity of flile, which
indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their pernicious ten-
dency, could infpirc; and encouraged, by the number and zeal of
their friends, to improve fich a favourable juncture, they aimed
the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and besought the Parlia-

mient

ment to interpose their authority for reEtifying these multiplied BoOK III.
abuses *.

I56o.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the antient superstition,

were present in this Parliament. But during these vigorous pro-
ceedings of the Protestants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze,
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. They
esteemed it impossible to resist or divert that torrent of religious
zeal, which was frill in its full strength; they dreaded that their
opposition would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new
acs of violence; they hoped that the King and Queen would oon
be at leisure to put a flop to the career of their insolent fubjess,
and that after the rage and havock of the present storm, the former
tranquillity and order would be restored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the dodrine, and even
the power of the church, in order to ensure the fafcty of their own
persons, and to preserve the pollenlon of those revenues, which were
fill in their hands. From whatever motives they aed, their silence,
which was imputed to the confcioufiefs of a bad cause, afforded
matter of great triumph to the Protestants, and encouraged them
to proceed with more boldneif and alacrity -.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protestants; they, moreover,
gave the fandion of their approbation to a Confefion of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachers +, and composed, as
might be expected from such a performance in that age, on purpose
to expose the absurd tenets and pratices of the Romifhl church.

'* Knlo, 237d. 1 i. 253. Id. ibidl.

IJy

BOOK III. By another a, the jurifdidion of the ecclesiastical courts was abo-
----wl lifhed, and the causes, which formerly came under their cogni-

1 560 zance, transferred to the decisions of civil judges *. By a third statute,

the exercise of religious worship, according to the rites of the Ro-
mifh church, was prohibited. The manner in which the Parlia-
ment inforced the observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
assembly; the first tranfgrefiion fubjeied the offender to the for-
feiture of his goods, and to a corporal punifihment, at the discretion
of the judge ; banishment was the penalty of a second violation of
the law; and a third at of disobedience was declared to be capi-
tal j. Such firangers were men, at that time, to the spirit of tolera-
tion, and to the laws of humanity; and with such indecent haste
did the very persons, who had just escaped the rigour of eccleli-
aftical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of severity, of
which they themselves had so juilly complained.

With regard THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in a few days,
to the reve- the ancient system of religion, which had been established so many
nues of the
church. ages. In reforming the dotrine and discipline of the church, the

nobles kept pace with the ardor and expectations even of Knox him-
self. But their proceedings, with respect to these, were not more
rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when they
entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues. Among the
lay-members, ome were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expeCtation the wealthy benefices
which still remained untouched. The alteration in religion had as-
forded many of the dignified ecclefiaifics themselves, an opportunity
of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition of the mo-

* Keith, 152. - Knox, 254.

nafterics,

nafteries, having set the Monks at liberty from their confinement, BOOK IIl.
they inltantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and commonly be- --
took themselves to ome secular employment. The Abbot, if he
had been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Reforma-
tion from convicion, or so cunning as to epoufe them out of po-
licy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, except what
he allowed for the fubfirfence of a few superannuated Monks*, ap-
plied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made by the
Reformed teachers, for applying these revenues towards the main-
tenance of Ministers, the education of youth, and the support of the
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They op-
posed it with the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and who-
rity, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give no ear to such a dif-
agreeable demand . Zealous as the first Reformers were, and ani-
mated with a spirit superior to the low considerations of interest, they
beheld these early symptoms of felnfflnefs and avarice among their
adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox expressing the ut-
most enfibility of that contempt, with which they were treated by
many, from whom he expected a more generous concern for the
success of religion, and the honour of its Ministers +.

A DIFFICULTY hath been flarted with regard to the as f ile vaidit
this Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous in (t t! il';llit-

n wCelr i c' [

itself, and at this distance of time of no importance, is founded on quiiil.
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament was
permitted to take into consideration the slate of religion, and to fig-
nify their fclltimcents of it to thec King a::d Queen. lBit illlead of
prcfllntill their dcleircs to tllcjr Sover cit,1-, in the Iiumible form ofa

:l K[itlI, 4')(. Appcnld. oo, yi9 . l[ ['cc Appendl, N " IV. I 1i
K Ux, 2 y, 256.

BooK III. supplication or address, the Parliament converted them into o ma-

.60
6 ny ads; which, although they never received the royal assent, ob-

tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of laws.
In compliance with their injunctions, the established system of reli-
gion was every where overthrown, and that recommended by the
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of the
people overlooked or supplied any defect in the form of these ats
of Parliament, and rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the most regular or con-
ititutional aflembly. By these proceedings, it must, however, be
confessed, that the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the last
article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the powers
competent to fubjees. But when once men have been accustomed
to break through the common boundaries of fubjedion, and their
minds are inflamed with the passions, which civil war infoire, it is
mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their conducd by those rules,
which can be applied, only where government is in a slate of order
and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to employ such extraor-
dinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every thing
which can promote this great end; and the neceflity of the cafe, and
the importance of the object, justify any departure from the common
and established forms of the constitution.

IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the

Aeut h: e ordinary forms of bufincfs, it became necessary to lay the procced-
Parliament to ings of Parliament before the King and Queen. For this purpose,
J1rance.

Sir James Sandilands of Calder Lord St.John, was appointed to
repair to the court of France. After holding a course lo irregular,
the nobles had no reason to flatter thcmlelvcs that Francis and
Mary would ever approve their condut, or confirm it, by tlicir

royal

royal assent. The reception of their Ambassador was no other than BOOK III.
they might have expeced. He was treated by the King and Qieen 56o
with the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtaining the rati-
fication of the Parliament's proceedings. From the Princes of Lor-
rain and their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, which
it was natural for them to pour upon the party he represent-
ed -.

TriouGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le- nd to liza-

thington, the Ambafladors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their Pro- Le.'h
tetreis, met with a very different reception ; they were not more
successful in one part of the negociation intrudied to their care.
The Scots, enfible of the security which they derived from their-
union with England, were dceirous of rendering it indilioluble.
With this view, they empowered thef eminent leaders of their
party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that fcafonable and
cffic&ual aid whicll lhe had aiio;-dcd tlicnm, and at the fame time,
to befcccl her to rcnder the frictidli) bev-eeni tlhe natilns perpc-
tual, by condcifcclding to marry the Earl of A'rai, who', thoui;h
a fubiedt, vws nearly allied to the royal tmily o' Scotland, anJ,
after Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crovn1.

To the forlmer part of this commiifiion lizabcth liclenl wit' the

utmofi: atilfadioa, and cncoiuraged the cots, il any flut:c :,. -
gIency, to hlopc ior tlI coltinii.u c oft Ir god o (ficcs; x\v it ! C-
gard to the latter, hec dllo(vcrcd tliolc ilti;.ci ; to .. .li ;
adillcrcd throughou t lher w\1!c rIi. nl. Avc'fc Ioin.

t a' l'i^, 1s
Iubmle pretend through cllice, but l;lor proba out olf :lic, t: at

·L' :, ' . L l; ·L7

VOL. I. I
c ;,', iri-

/~

BOOK III. ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the throne; but
'r's^7 delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of power, she fa-

crificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown
to her own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of Arran
could not be attended with any such extraordinary advantage, as to
shake this resolution; fie declined it, therefore, but with many ex-
pressions of good-will towards the Scotch nation, and of refpedt for
Arran himself*.
Th d(-,Ith of TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diflinguifled by so many

icibll remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On

the 4th of December, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble confl;-
tution, and of a mean understanding. As he did not leave any
iilue by the QIlen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
tlhofe, wo,

l during the late commotions in Scotland, had taken

part with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty,
htd acquired an entire ascendant over her husband; and as fle tranf-
ferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Fran-
cis followed them implicitly in whatever trac they were pleased to
lead him. The power of France, under such direction, alarmed
the Scotch malecontcnts, with apprelienfions of danger, no left
formidable, than well founded. The intertine disorders which rag-
ed in France, and the seasonable interposition of England in be-
halfofthe Congregation, had hitherto prevented the Princes of Lor-
rain from carrying their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it was impoflible
that the commotions in France could be of long continuance, and
many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the

* Burn. 3. Appcnd. 308. Kcitl, 154, &c.

fut re,

fiture, fiom the affairs of Scotland. In either of these events, the BOOK III.
Scots would fland exposed to all the vengeance, which the resent- ' -6o
ment of the French court could inflit. The blow, however long sus-
pended, was unavoidable, and must fall at lafl with redoubled weight.
From this profpeA and expectation of danger, the Scots were de-
livered by te death of Francis; the ancient confederacy of the
two kingdoms had already been broken, and by this event, the only
bond of union which remained was dissolved. Catherine of Mc-
dicis, who during the minority of Charles IX. her second son, en-
grofled the entire diredtion of the French councils, was far from
any thoughts of vindicating the Scotch Queen's authority. Cathe-
rine and Mary had been rivals in power during the reign of Fran-
cis II. and had contended for the government of that weak and un-
experienced Prince; but as the charms of the wife easily triunml;Jcd
over the authority of the mother, Catherine could never forgive
such a disappointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now,
with a fccret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing scene, on which
her daughtcr in law was about to enter. MJiary, ocrwhellcted with a.I.v ,c:;;::
all the sorrow which ro fad a rverie of. fortune could ccclilon ,i':,t, .,
flighted by the Queen mother*; and forfakln by the tribe of courti-
ers, who appear only in the Ifun lhine of prolperlity, retired to Rlcis,
and there, in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indiintion.
Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to contrac their vi ws;
to turn them from foreign to donmeiic objcts; and instead of forlm-
ing vast projets with regard to Britain, found it neccflhry to think
of acquiring, and eftablihing an interet: with the new admnlli-
ilration.

* ;tI n aLt: . .. ( clc. 5-1 -

i C 2 '"

BOOK III. IT is impoflible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all

----i these accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among
560. the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give

firrnefs and stability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder cotelnporary hil-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence and invention
would utterly dcfpair *.

Fr '1,ln1eAnt ABOUT this time, the ProtcfPant church in Scotland began to as-
ot '!,,.,.:hci- fume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fandion of
;vrt ('1-r * [.h-
o.unmn.nt. public authority, and some fixed external policy bccame necefiTry

for the government and p:tef; va.tio of the infant society. The
model introduced by thl Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long eft ilitihed. The motives, which induced
them to depart so far from the ancient siftem, deserve to b cex-
plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited the indignatinr

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popifl fylfem: as this disgust at the vices of cc-
clefiaflics was soon transferrcd to their persons, and flifting fiom
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed ; the effests of the Reformation would naturally have
extended not only to the ldocrine, but to the government of ihe
Popifi church ; and the fmre spirit which abolilced the sorner,
would have ovcrturnd the latter. But, in Germany, England,

* KnIox, 259.

a211i

and the northern kingdoms, its operations were checked by the BooK. I1I.
power and policy of their Princes; and the ancient Episcopal ju- 16
rifdidion, under a few limitations, was still continued in those
churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be more conform-
able to the practice of the church, since Christianity became the
eftablfied religion of the Roman empire. The eccleliatical go-
vernment was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil; the first
not only borrowed its form, but derived its authority from the
latter; and the dioceses andju rifdicions of Patriarchs, Archbihops,
and Bishops, correfpondd with the division and coiiilitLtiionl of the
empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of the
government allowing fll scope to the genius (o the Rcforlnatiol,
all pre-eminence of order in the church was detl.oycd, ad, an
equality eitablifhed more suitable to the spirit of republicanl polcy.
The fiuation of the pri:nitive church fugefled the idea, and fir-
nifhed the model of the latter fyItem, which has ice becn called
Prfi\v'tria. The firfl Chriflians, opprcii:cd b continual ners.c-
tions, and obliged to hold their reli:<ious afileilli s by ficall, al d
in corners, were connteted with a forrn 0f oover-;:cnet c:;trenmly
simple. The influcnce of religion concurrcd, with thec 'nfc c:f: i;-
gcr, in extinguiliing anong them, the fi'it of amtrbtici, :nd in
preserving a parity of rank, tlhe effL of tl eir l' ring , a d the
cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whole i ci;ci were r,-
ceived, among the I'roteflants of tihat aje, wvithi i;cIciibic 1;1iJ:ni,-
sion, was the patrii and rcfrorer (o this lchicmc of cc'cleC.If, ,i
plicy. The church of G(eneva, formed u 1:dlcer is eye, aild by
lis dirction, was ciltclmcd the ol i perlest n11.vi (jl lo i ,eill-
melit; and 1(Kox, who, durin Ilis l-cli c l(ec ill tlat city, li; il!-
died and admired it, warmly rcotnllilcnde it to tile in,;itaiili of
!hi; countrynmen.

BOOK III. AMONG the Scotch nobles, some hated the persons, and other3

6--- ' coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolishing that

order of men, the former indulged their resentment, and the lat-
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed with the
most violent aversion to Popery, and approving of every scheme that
departed farthest from the practice of the Roifh church, were
delighted with a system, so admirably suited to their predominant
pafiion. While the friends of civil liberty beheld, with pleasure,
the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their on hands, that
fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their predecessors had reared
with so much art and industry; and flattered themselves, that l.v
lending their aid to strip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their exorbitant and op-
prefive jurifdicion. The new mode of government easily made its
way among men, thus prepared, by their various interests and als
lions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his fyflcm, Knox did not dee-

it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form *. Inficadn
of Bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in
different parts of the kingdom. These, as the name implies, weic
impowered to inspect the life and doctrine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the church, and
performed several other parts of the Epitcopal function. Their
jurifdition, however, extended to sacred things only; they claimedl
no feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the dignity, or re-
venues, of the foriner Biffops.

" SpotiwvoocJ, 158.

Ti-: ·

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial BOOK III.

duty could be committed, was Itill extremely small; they had em- ,-
braced the principles of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different provinces of the
kingdom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regular
classes or societies. The firfi General Assembly of the church, DCc:ITbr 2I 0
which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un-
formed society. The members were but few in number, and of
no considerable rank; no uniform or consistent rule seems to have
been observed in electing themn. From a great part of tlhe kindcom
no representatives appeared. In the name of fume entiec cotuntics,
but one person was present; while, in other places, a tinle town
or church ent everal members. A convention, lu feeble and irre-
gular, could possess no great authority ; and conscious of their own
weakness, the members put an end to their debates, without ven-
turing upon any dcifion of much importance 'i.

IN order to give greater f'rength and c;nfillencv to the TPcI'sy 156I

terian plan, Knox, with the ailiinc.ce cf his b:ethren, comrpolcd
the firif book of discipline, wxvich containls the model or platfurn of
the intended policy -. They preliented it to a cunvention of criates,
which was held in the beginning of this year. Whatever regulations J:i:uary i;.
were propoled with regard to ecclesiastic diiciplii.e and jurildi&ion,
would have easily obtained the finction of that aicnmbly; but a de-
sign to recover the atrimony of the chuIrch, which is there illi-
nuated, met v;;h a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy dilplay the advantages which would ac-

crue to the public, Iy a proper

applic
y a cation of cccleialtical revenlics.

* KuIil, 428. -1' Spotl\\ oud, 152.

TIL

BOOK III. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

-56Ai to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and to support

the poor. In vain did they even intermingle threatnings of the di-
vine displeasure, against the unjust detainers of what was appro-
priated to a sacred use. The nobles held fast the prey, which they
had seized; and betlowing upon the proposal, the name of a de-
vout imagination, they affedted to confider it, as a projed altoge-
ther visionary, and treated it with the utmost scorn .

']'hcQtecn in-

iSCdtoeturn Tiils convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's to repair
ino cotland. to the Qeen, and to invite her to return into her native coun-

try, and to assume the reins of government, which had been
too long committed to other hands. And though some of her
fubjels dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous conle-
qucnces with which it might be attended --, the bulk of them de-
fired it with so much ardour, that the invitation was given with the
greatcft appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman C?-
tholics got the start of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and lclly,
afterwards bishop of Rots, who was commiffloned ly them, ar-
rived before him, at the place of her residence . Lefly endeavoured
to ifule into the Qeen's mind suspicions of her Proteflant fujc( b,
and to pcrfuade h r to tirow herfclf entirely into the arms of thol
who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he inlfilled th;t
she illould land at Ablrdecln ; and as the Proteflant ldodrincs l.l
Imade no colnliicrablc ;rogl-cls ill that part of the kinldoii, l:c
gave her ailTrar-cc oi hlci:n joined, in a few days, by 20,_00 Illn'l;
and [ tttcrcI . her, that winih ull an aIn , t e(.II';iL re( lby lcr 1-.
(ence and authorlit', lbc nmiilt c1ily' overtItin the l cfo-i

e iw r 'ti l'Cii !,
befere it wva, firmly Icttle(d on its iouincltions.

K o;, 56. . c,, 1
l.C. N ' II :', .

I? :

BUT at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were not disposed to BOOK III.
liften to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de- -

1561.

fending themselves against Catherine of Medicis, whole insidious
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wished their
niece to take poifeflion of her kingdom, with as little difiurbance
as possible. The French officers, too, who had served in Scotland,
difiFvaded Mary from all violent meaSures; and, by representing the
power and number of the Proteflants to be irresistible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ the leading
men of that party as her Minifrers, than to provoke them, by a fruit-
less opposition, to become her enemies F. Hence proceeded the
confidence and affccion, with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was
received by the Qieen. His rprefentation of the llate of the king-
dom gained great credit; and Lcfly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of the estates was held in Maiy. The

arrival of an AmbalTador from France, seems to h lie the oc-
cafion of this meeting. He was ini'ruli to folitik the- c'.:,, to
renew their ancient alliance with France, to break tir new comi(cJ'-
racy with England, and to rlore the Popiill cccTic ':s t h the
poficnion of their revenues, and the exercilc of thei- Ii;:'!.ns. it is
no easy matter to form any conjcdure concerlninii t i: tnti ;:s of
the French court, in making thlcfe (ci; tro':Jiw~ary ,i!.i ii!-.iIcd p';-
positions. They were iejct)c cd xvith ti';,t ic(iir , . l:1! ] mlli ,lt \cll
have' been cxpcdLc firomI the ci.temr io;i 'l.

AMclv. 6. I x :(, - / 7.
VoL.I 1.f 1;

EOOK III. IN this Convention, the Proteflant clergy did not obtain a more
---- favourable audience than formerly, and their profped of recove i;,g
156 .

the patrimony of the church fliil remained as diflant and uncertin
as ever. But with regard to another point, they found the zeal
of the nob'es in no degree abated. The book of difiipline seemed
to require, that the monuments of Popery, which ill remained
in the kingdom, should be demolished . And, though neither
the faLme pretence of policy, nor thle fame ungovernable rage of ti
people, remained to juiiiy or ecufe this barbarous havock, the Con-
vention, confidering every religous fabric as a relic- of idolatry,
paiTd sentence upon them by an adt in form; and perlons, the llol
remarrkablc for the activity of their zeal, were appointed to put it
in executie:n. Ahbbics, cathedrals, churchcs, libraries, records, and
even the fecpu!chres of the dcad, perifihed in one coimmon ruin.
The first flori o popular infurredion, though impetuous and ir-
rcfiitible, had extended only to a few counties, and oon spent its
rage ; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated the de-
vafiation of every thing, venerable and magnificent, which had
ecaped its violence -.

rv, i,. is riN the mean tine, Mary was in no hafle to return into Scot-
tr, l-ri'u Ior land. Accuitomed- to the elegance, ledo, and gaiety of a p

lite court, fie still fondly lingered in France, the fcenc of all thec;L
enjoymenets, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarifin of hcr o.-
country, andl the turbulence o her lubicdts, wlhcli prfcilted hie:
vitl a very dififlcrent face of thligs. The iiplptienee, Iowever,
of )lIc po,le, tlic priilaiionsi of her uncles, but above all, tl.!
fludied and nmortifying , negleC, with wlicl flc v.was treated by te

S o0tf'A'o. 1, 15 .. *| Ibid. , ~
.

Queen Mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable BOOK III.
voyage *. But while fhee was preparing for it, there were sown -6
between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal jealousy and 5
discord, which imbittered the life, and shortened the days of the
Scotch Queen.

TrIE ratifcation of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the immediate ci;n of the
occasion of this fatal animosity ; the true causes of it lay much deeper. l:!,LI i'c-n

t cn her ad

Alnoft every article, in that treaty, had been executed by both par- Llizabeth.
ties, with a frupulous exac6ncs. The fortifications of Leith were
demolished, and the armies of France and England withdrawn with-
in the appointed time. The grievances of the Scotch malecontcnts
were redressed, and they had obtaiecd whatever they could de-
mand for their future cfcurity. With regard to all these, Mary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratifi-
cation of the treaty.

TirE sixth article remained the only source of contcft and diffi-

culty. No NMniller eer entered more decply into) the fchnees of
his Sovereiagn, or purfied tem with more c:xte:itv and success
than Cecil. In the con:duc of the neociatihn at Edinillurg, the
found underflanding of this abei politician proved r..'Iyv an1 over-
match for eiolnluc's rcfinements in intriauc, and arti'1i ilt,i.i'c the\
French Ambafihdors, not only to aclnowledge tlh.t tlh Crovwn (,f
. .- .land and Iielan d did of ri.lht blelona to Elizalbcth aL!nc', bit

lio to promlife, tat in all tilies to coInc, ; .? .

**ry !, .1 ab lil n

ar ., In
u'll, the titlcs, or bearing the arms l- t': )'e Illo ns.

u;-nlloelnc , Mbb. \!, ii. 4S.' .

F f 2 Ti

B-O;,o III. THE ratification of this article would have been of the mofi fa-

'----' tal consequence to Mary. The Crown of England was an objec

worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title
was efeemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the Engliih
themfelvcs, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and aive party, openly espoused this opinion ; and even the
Protcftants, who supported Elizabeth's throne, could not deny tlh
Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to
avail herfclf of all there advantages, could not, in the course of
things, be far difiant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring
this opportunity nearer than was expected. In thcfe circunmfances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that rank
which ihe had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes; the
zeal of her adherents muf have gradually cooled; and the might
have renounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
Engliih Crown.

NONE of these beneficial consequences escaped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had recourse to every thin,
by which he could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scotcih
Queen into a compliance with her demands. And if that Prin:-
ccfs had been so unadvilfd as to ratify the raflh concellions of lher
Ambaftidors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, vwhich, under her 1anlagemcllt, imufl havc turned to great
account. By fich a renunciation, the question, with regard to
the rih lt of fUccfilion, would have been left altogether opncl and
ilundci(dd; and, by means of that, IElizabcth might either have
kept her rival in pcrpetual anxicty and dependance, or, by tlhe aul-
thuoritv of lcr Parliament, hie might have broken in upon the order

([

of lineal fucceflion, and transferred the Crown to ome other de- BOOK III.
fcendant of the royal blood. The former conduct lhe observed
toward; Jaimes VI whom, during his whole reign, fie held in per-
petual fear and fubjedion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been employed againfl
Mary, whom, for many reasons, flie both envied and hated.

NOR was this flep beyond her power, unprecedented in the his-

tory, or inconlifent with the confititttion of England. Though
fuccefiion by hereditary right be an idca Io natural and so popular,
that it has been established n almol in every civilized nation, yet
England aords many memorable inlilanccs of deviations fiom tt
rule. The Crown of that kingdon having once been leized ,y
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and entcrprifing in
every age to imitate such an illufrious example of tirtunate am-
bition. From the time of William I. tle regular coaurl of de-
scent had seldom continued through three lfccceive reigns. Thois
Princes, whole intrigues or valour opened them a way to te
throne, called in the aiitlhority oi" the gret: council of ti nation
to confirm their dubious titles. I ence, pariamcinentaryv and here-
ditary right became in Engklalnd oi equal confideratien . Tat 'c -t
aflcmbly claimed and acltallv p()iil a powver ofi altercIr the
order of re-gal ficcitio ; alnd even lo late as l!enr VilL an a
of Parliament had authorized thiat capriciuls N.onarchll to ettlc tc
order of fucce!ii on at liis pl( afoLrc. 'ilh Engli, jcai)s c t ir
religious liberVt, and averiz lIon1 tihe , iiio: of tr.itge:, \v(,ld
liave clagerly adoptecl tl.ie paiili: i Sc)Vl, aildl

l niili'l

have bccii calily indl uced to cxclti.ic ti: ,-,col t1I line full tlhe
lihg!t of ficcccdiig to tle Crowni. Thf Icem to hlave l.,, !,,

', ": '
~

BOOK III. views of both Queens, and those were the difficulties which re-
`--"- tarded the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present quelfion to an amicable issue.
The indefinite and ambiguous cxpreffion, which Cecil had insertcd
into the treaty, might have been changed into one more limlited,
but more precise. And Mary, inRead of promiling to abflain fiom
bearing the title of Queen of England in all times to comle, milght
have engaged not to assume that title, during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful pofcrkity.

TiIs amendment, however, did not suit the views of either occ- ,

Thougl Mary had been obliged to fufiend,for omne time, the pre-
cution of her title to the Enll; Crown, Ihe had not, however re
linquifhed it. She dctermined to revive her cl'aim, on tna: fyiK "'c-
ife&L of ficcefs, and was unwillinc to bind herself, by a p 3:iz
engagetrnent, not to take advantag, e of any fuc1 fortunate occurrence
'Nor wvoul the alteration have been m;re acce.table to Ei'::.<i.,
who, by agreeing to it, wou! l have tacily rcciiizcd tbe ri i;l
of her rival to acend the throne after lier decc-ati. Lt nci;
the Scotch nor, Englifi Qecln durliL avow thcz ficret fciiiimcltis i:
their hc.'its. Any open dit:l overy of an! i'c intoltio t(o iliil:, t -c
tranuiliitty of En;iland, or to wrinc! tl^ ccpt . o'.t ! I-.'
bannti s, ni:,ht elavc proved Lt : to)y i' i

-' ; ,i (i :' ',-

sign to iltcr tI'c ol-det of ic.c nli n, andi t,) i.

L ' tl . (.

the Scotcl () .ccn, .would l:tvc c. !',l 1 !' . , ' to in' 1, ol I
dclcirve't ccr l(luri , anid hali e rai:l u, a'.Iill r n;.]'/ and !'i: j r-
o i cenemies. '.tildl, lIow v'cr careiilly conc:'ei, ur ;i; ul'li . (11'-.

-ii' i,

gliifed, were, in all probability, the real motives which determined BooK III.
the o; e Qleen to follicit, and the other to refuse the raificati:,)n of "

I561.

the treat/, in its orijinal frm; while neither had recourse to that
explication of it, which, to an heart unwarped by political interci:,
and sincerely desirous of union and concord, would have appeared
lb obvious and natural.

BUT thlu.;h considerations of interest: fiif: occasioned this rup-

ture betwe n the Bi'itii Q.cens, rivalnfip of another kind contri-
buted to widen the breach, and female jealousy increaled the vio-
lence of their poitical harled. Elizabcthl, with all thofi extacrdi-
nary q(alitic., by which he elualled or furpafld thloie of her fcx,
Vawho hiave merited the great. ll renown, id.covcrcd an admiration
of lhe; own perlon, to a degree, whlich Wmen of of rinary undcr-
antlin e it'er do not enrcrtai., or predlen l y cnielavolnr to con-
cel. IIr attention to d;ef., her fo!icitun:e to dil.a Iherr chanrms,
her love of 1atterv, were al cwcc ive. Nor cc tere cl wc:.!c
coii;,l )to that periol o lie, lwhen they are more ipa;'ronabic.l
Evei; in very advanuced yc:.r, the w. i'a x.n:n tl tha:, o- per-
ht-ips of allny a, thea \VO.C, t:'t' gar,1, Fd~ the rcn'.v ,fc

bau y, and gr ci .il -; O, e 1 ti 11 'V,
ca a'i.s, 'il ; t. iC c .n , (1:- a

tc' ! )" '

to co:).a;e nr:i! wt

; i tie c'cLU ) il ; a, it \ . ;:-

1-s.;,, .. :. c [o.lt b: : -O. 'ir '

, ': t i

,, '. 1ilitl c!.,'
jC,. it1

13 ' *}, ['*,.*^ iZ' «i.';lii ; i.!e t rl\; :

~ i .'1t, .? ' i !'_ i ils t 'ivt' l, ; y' Vi'!, [)1i11

illC t.' :. ':

, l 'l ) i 1

t..'I. i
s' l

;' (' ' I'IK . , \\'c !IC

apt t ; . . iir,;
' i t ul it l! lt. . ,0'. , * cod o .'!c i') '.,c

t !,. ' , , I.,. !i ;'l. .',

' - 7. (-. . , vo,. i'i.

t ,) . C' , '

ii

:

, 1'

j,,, 4

.. ';i: 'illi;I; ;..c Iilt. ;'
, i,.

,
.

,, ',t atJ!()i

;I Zxl/~c lc . "V

/'-
':c ,1

BoOK III. passions which they feel in common with the reft of mankind.

---' In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her fubfe-
I$1.

quent conduA towards Mary, we muit not always confider her as
a Queen, we must sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no flranger to Mary's difficulties with re-

fpeft to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,
to ratify it*. Mary, under various pretences, flill contrived to gain
time, and to elude the request. But while the one Queen folli-
cited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with art-
ful delay, they both fludied an extreme politeness of behaviour, and
loaded each other with professions of filerly love, with reciprocal de-
clarations of unchangeable eflecm and amity.

ii/.beth re- IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among Prince;,
i-i;lon'l' a tefe expressions of fi-iendfhip are commonly far diflant from the
:t co ndi C'

heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course lies aloln
the English coafn. In order to be safe from the insults of tle Eng-
lifli fleet, or in cafe of tempefluous weather, to secure a retreat
in the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand
of Elizabeth a safe conduct during her voyage. This requcfi,
which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant to another, Eli-
zabeth rcjectcd, in such a manner, as gave riic to no flight suspicion
of a (ldciln, ither to obfru the pafcge, or to intcrccpt the person
of the Scotch Quccn t1.
lx\T;11\ 1 LInS Tins ungenerous bhclaviour of Eliab.llh l' Il ry with in-

dignationl, but did not retard her dcpartuie from l;ra.c. Shl e.1

Ilill, J57, 16(, &c. ILl.1C.VIJ d .7. Sc il.
$NJ: l VI.

ac: --

accompanied to Calais, the place where fie embarked, in a manner BOOK III.
suitable to her dignity, as the Qeen of two powerful kingdoms. G
Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the most eminent
among the French nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who
secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
stance of magnificence and Aresec. After bidding adieu to her
mournin attendants, with a ad heart, and eyes bathed in tear-, Mary
lcfi' that kingdom, the short, ut only ene of her life, in which
fortune filed uon her. \While the French coil continued in
fight, fihe intently it, and nn ita, in a tllhughtful
pofiure, on that heightri of fortune fwhencCe lad fall n, and p:;c-
1igmn, per/haps, the dif''lilers and calli'.ics wh'ih i.nbeield th'v
remaindr of her days, fie ib cd oici, anl cri e ot " I'v.w.1

France! 1aI:ewel beloved country, nwhlich I finall never more b-

s' hold ! Even whenl the J il'ilfs oi: tllhe n 'lt 1.ld li 1 t];S l:: .i

f';cn licr view, ile would ncSih r rcl irc t ill '...''llj 1 nor t'.i_' ic,! ,
1.iet cm~: ..ndl..1; a. c.lI to Ic p-laced o;i t: :,

> Q,: t..-:.

waituCd tl't ri , h t

util('11 io idV, ce.

L:' n

i

I)otlhed her on thu occaion ) ; the 'dl',.. mle li v' d'. in the

ipht. In te 11oarnin:, ti' co 1 ot i'France v:i ',' l

I v.i2 w:.'. 'i::,

and sic contiiLi.cd to lied ihlr in 1 lt J yi. .'lv ,j.it.. s ':('' ~; ::;d

as In' as hM r evcs c uld dvii>n lt i i, to _t.i--

n. 1: t'.'

exu;relio::s of re.grt % i l l 1

. I;'i;. g' ; ,

1,' ixi .

,
' ;

Of '01It 'LS ,.)l .,

~ o t t, i

f wi ch s

li c
l d'v:;, a id ;fIt'l;ird u;!'l ! L '' - ; t

n ' t. ;.

thici 'cn cu'ars, I.tild'.n d l!'" v :,t I '.1 i' ? ?

i !J

I';,; ; .I -;
I n.

* toL , \ ], ;. ;. (.. . II, . .

l .. .

*1 g c
( : r

01.. I. (~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BoOr: I!I. !MARY was received by her fnljecs withl fihouts and acclama-
-'.-'I t'ion of joy ,, and with every drnonftration of welcome and rc-

gard. lEt as her arrival was uncxpecedd, and no suitable rel'.ra-
tion had Lecin made for it, they could not, with their utmost cef-
forts, ide from her the poverty of the country, and were obiid
to condut her to the palace of HIolyrood house with little poTn .
The Qi en, accufimncd fro her infancy to the utmost splendor
and m. uzificence, and fond of them, as was natural at her 'X,
coul' not h p o' Irving the change in her situation, and seemed to
Le iep ly a .it.l \i ilh it :.

T,,,

.

. '

, a,'. d.il an PAi! cc afcncl te throne at a un'Sure, wI;c .

i ,'-, c:. '' xl 1-0, i 'l \i.do:n in council, or more courage and ficddian
t.l!.ii I:.iL' TT

ci i"'c,:t ini..ii I circ1 th!e L'cils dCferate; Both were a-
lous, iie.cc, an-1 irrcunciieable. 'The absence of their Sov'rec.i::
lhad, acci -.ic

aomcd t noes tho il c:endency; and, durn3 .e i:te

cJnalotions, they had acqi:.ed (lc n icrc. as of .realieh, as t:.
c-o;c'rl vtci',it into te fcle of ariftocrc, wh iich ftcoo io; inl n;:.
oi any ccii on of concwr. The hi; ein had lon been ei.1;:u
the ovIrnolenl t of o

Cegnt, who c';eiiic a d(iclcic:tg uii'-

tio, attended with lilc

t ;utho it, <o.cd wh'ich inf'ircd ir.o ren.ot c! :
A slate ,f pure aarl ;-il ad i!'.:ai.ld cr i thle tv:o laic yearS, \'; ':-

1 5-t.

. *

LI' a

o cu t

. c t,

it 1 ( psc c council, v,' ti on t te po','..:, ',

cl 0 tihe imi a i. ;.Jo \'er;

( :nC'l,cnt *".

bA lcic,nltiok , lrj ,

L :-

,at;.!ilt..d \ vitih fttI (dill tion, iand lii 'nili t tiL illts (, ! i

,

anl, I;t!|ic, itlu sprca.l amnu(l: all raniL'.: ci mcni The iniii;-'n. i
Iran.lce, t!'; ,.

; ,;:t ;dil

o1e lI d);n, \'',s

a\'l.;'\,'n or
i .!',. .;.

The English, of enemies become confederates, had grown into PBOK III.
confidence with the nation, and gained an acendant over all its -~
councils. The Scotch Monarchs did not derive more splendor or
power from the fricndfhip of the former, than they had reason to
dread injury and diminution from the interposition of the latter.
Every consideration, whether of interefl, or of felf-prefcrvation, ob-
liged Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to
create the Prince perpetual diliculties, by fomenting the spirit of dif-
affection among the people.

IN tlls poftnlCr were the a:is of Sotln, e th nli-

ration fell into th hlLl:sS u a oun

, Qj'ccn, not in' :t n y>rS

of age, unacquainted withl t:n 'l.i.ners a1nd la.vs of hc;' co'.lntrl, a
firanger to her iu'bjc.ts, withcut expercince, wvithout allies, and al-
ioil witlout a friend.

0:, the other lhnd, in FMary's iilu:tion e Pol f1 :

r cictlln-

ll.ncc, which, thou, gh they did not bailinco ti; 'i. i:d.a't.',gcs,
contributed, llowever, to alleviate ti; and, v il iil 1a-
ns:l,'n-cnti, m)in,'t have pr odced grea c:. li :: L'j; , Ui-.c-
cuio:ned lfo on0 to the rclldcncc of ticir ic nncc, \w;:Ce int oi:'
dazzled by tlh novelty and iplcndor of t rei. al ,;'c;'i!'\C, [-lt i:'-
fiired witl a a nd reverence. PC.idcs tice 'L , c

J ' ro' :' !:

profit belowed b' the favour .fa I'rinlc, 1; I'', i ;;., '

:

.'iritv, and evenl lis i ,ilc., coisi.r I',.,,'

.,'hs \,, ;. .: . i.; I t L .

n .,r

i' c;,1a all coliners ol tl.c i.it '', ,_ ,'

".', :','..' ' ; i

) '

'i '

ditit av nd a'i- k ti.l t to r

t l ' :c. r,,- ', ! !';., , '

r!' .it-,

t o !t tile I'l m('ry (i ' '

,,,'

)
& ,'

boorK IT. h:ad attended her, began to fften and to polish tle rude manners

""~ J of the nation. Mary herfeif po lefl ic many ( f thlice qalfic:tioni,
1l 'I. 1 '

vli ra;lc affeti'ion, and procure e!eem. The beauty al1 gra-cc-

fuln' is ocf lhr pcrio.l drew univerial amniration, the ele,.-i' cl and
p,!litSenh.s of heI:r maininers commanll[l led general refpcct To 1! 't.
charms of licr own fcx, he added n-mny of t'.e accomrnlifi]niel:ts
of thie other. Thie progeis file had mliLlc in all tlc Arts a:: Sci-
e'iccs, \,li:h wcrc then el}e:enild nccen'iry or orn.imnta!, xv.'; f:r
b.''o d \vh:'.t iS cont i ' 'alv attal icd by Ir'l'ices. Andi all lier ohie l

J.~ '

p .p:c[ . 1i~"ii .; -'\'_'ra-\''b I' irn'i i,]cO

t coutla nd, :

otl

lctc) sc..

a! t:.:tl .
cjs \v: er .. ri'cLl rn ve: haiLd, a plitical co :r i)uli

}) i 1 I1 l o

l'.'c p;'cdiicd avc; di7 .i;'rcit illc oft iel ign; and
, i t ver- ;

V'/Hi . lp rtc, s ,c e

Ilnie \'Cot ,I ; o r tic, il!'.l,

. itl vt n.d L t

th ic , t l-. a..rince

dieat1 on i
th

t.1'1c

Cm Lt; ol:C trtit~L ~ n .

.

toC ae, brokeai
out in a n!'t' ll:.tl, inlln cC. (),. l il Sl i ,i a ;L.,

1'r a: ival, t

tl Qcsc ,

co I aIt;d ld it; t 'e ceiebroted iii t.

t,'pel (of her ptlace. A I l si i FtOll(ilr

1o th, occ.li,; ..i a f. ,

· ,,",,,'," ',,-r amn ie

t h'o i.iLi t:, \\d]. (j attcndcd i til e c( i *t; c,:n-

pllaii~t. .ndtn 1 a-t--11 r '; on toll \vcd The k;\ ,niiS i)

S ii()1 i i) ot. ---

tel.iliel

C eic

\ ih il!.dc il d alci te ; 1and, it' t}il It;icrr a i r.

u lk n d lc'vo.

li.. l g t (slnaltlv ittc olep(d, tle lhiticls enit,,t h .vuc l

,e, ee_ .
.

t s ic l' i ll~~~''
l uX ', '.

.rcat.~u the Jiretee \

o

th iat 1:

\

.',
¾'ne lior l priiweeCllcuv wouI iocr h

El

IT is impoflrL c, at this diitarice o' tinie, ani unler circum r.ances BooK II1.

so very different, to conceive theI violiene Of tIat e.l1 a'nim i opcl -

I~-o -

ry, which tlcn pTIfi'bd the nation. Ev',' io`L5iV

o:: '.-

Iion to t 2 PpiiL was cfel cj an adl' of apl'cy ,, and the tol -a-
tion o a !lhn1c ma:s ironii;, i.'cl to he tliore

'r2li able! £ t h

t 'e Ia-

tion thlan tlic ilvlilil jn o0 tc,l to'.l !'., .i'r11( niL': . L 'ir thC

infliuen c o1 tl2jlde op inims, I..nv ! | '~-c;', ,1i s'.v;.citl

.;l ..

.'o ',t:'!:-

to i o . Ij cro s

le n :; and, '"

. ! . .; ; . :.; t )

f . .: ;
So'crcot L ' ~ by arTui cnt), or to rcl i:., !"' . 1i.'l', o :c, \, ,uid

a r l L ',i r tT . .:;

r i i '

1,.

lmannlCi, . ilio cl al )::c she t .l)O 'lt. 'c

" ; ).: t, .

,' i, ir '. ' i . '

oi'r t . i C, \ .i' L'2;

'(.

i/,

s ( . nt c '

!, ta

o:,e ,h

o I ; -'

tMis itnlc o-vUS I rit ; hut i:i :'j 1- . I i',r..:'; ",, I'. ?A:

:

an' thec e :.' :.itios c,1 tile p''lL'es, (,'" .ot.l

. ,- tl:8 ''

t 1

B r do '1(cfLICs tlCie un i .'

:': ..

I _ . '
.,.r': '

1an } lUi0t2cd vc: s aie: t i1. '' .,

\t ....

'_

xu .

' ;. ,.;.',

a i noii-li hal d

'1 ,

;

Cn t) ibiU , '

tic, a;

.. ... .. [,:,

l! /

1h.Jit " c:1 iul,'I -. ' \'c,'.3

: t

-2) i,.

) '.' .

' " ' . '. it

£, ] I | . \ a !_ t~

'Il' I C X to ·

_ , . ' I' I

'

'

Viou o ),' .) 'i ['-] : h ' ; I \.'. oi

' ' 0;' l

;,
' , k*

iail

A1i ( ')c, n t0CC'. .nI 1 o , h
c , .

i ceh!: . "n'mw s. ~, | '

n n. !'- ',

\ ; .7!i

i-\ ' :

a

piti

" , c.;~ :in d'1

a l :' ."\ , r

'

I h.:.,-..i' _ '..' t 'i
. . -

BOOK III. gion. The Reformed doctrine, though established all over the
'--6- kingdom, had never received the countenance or andtion of royal
1561. t
Auti;ilZ 5. authority. Oil this occasion, the Queen declared any attempt to-

wards an alteration or subversion of it, to be a capital crinme*.

TIE Queen, conformable to the plan which had been conceirted
Shec emp-,lovs

r',- rt. in France, committed the adminitiration of affairs entirely to Pro-

:I',i/a'0 tetlants. I-er council was illed with the moftl eminent persons of
-J.'.. that party; not a tingle P'apili was admitted into any degree of con-

fidence -. The Prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lcthing-
toln fcemed to hold the filrl place in tile Q een's afldfion, and pot-
seied all thc power and rcpmlit.ion ofiavouri iiv fiilcr.s. IIcr choice
could nvt liave fillcn upon prions more accccolce to l.cr people.
And, by their prudent advice, the Qieen conlducd hcri f vwit'
to imuch modcration, and del'ircncc to the icnitci!ts of t!c ntioi!,
as could not fail of gaining tile affcdli'.n o? hicr luIjcis 1, the fiI:rm'L
foundation of a Prince's power, ani tlhe only gcn;;iiic sour-ce ,
hi happiness an( glory.

*',.: .... A COR DIAL recoIIC iielll e-lt wIh1 E "ii3Z'!Ctlli '.'.:as a-(otlci objedt o;

.L ,l,' - rcat imnortance to ,Tarv; and t. :l'.c .
an to ia.e had it

intclii at hea t, inll t l g-ni, o I ..i' io::'..ti , to accor.-
plih i uchl a deircabic co:,i.undil, yet n :\' cvc;': occutrrel to
widen,, rather than t(o cl. the bracl. ''1

ec l na ( ti- . es ol- ' ie.l--

i nL , l o\vcvcr:c lat ( liiii .c cLd ":-";o' , Li'. nL.-, ac I' .;::al. t,I,
w ';o '.1 l l : ptinpnd i'o o,: z'i, t,) (oIlli, ,: t ()e ci",'' \ .''"' i ':'' ,
.<~_oi .-.l, (iil :,t s. il, ;. i . t..l' .i'' .L .;' ;' ;

: '

. ;,], t (. )

( !! :i '

i"' l. ['

t: )

£
. i ,, aliltC ) <.'i 17' i lu'r.J '. >'L ,, tit Cf,: 1i;

i -.] , i .

i 1 1 :. . 1
,' , .',

be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court, Booi lIII.
with many ceremonious expreflions of regard for Ellzabeth . Boh __

i ~6i.

the Ambafaildors were received with tile utimof civility; and, on
each fide, th profeflonls of ki nss, as they were made with liteic
finccrity, were listened to with proportional credit.

BOTH were itruiced, however, with fmething mere tan mere

maiter of celenlony. Rando ph urged i'-lary, w'ith fh iuortti.-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinbu:h. ait ;dvoured to
airufe Eliz;,beth, by apologiin. for the diltorvv c; '.luJ of his
Mi-ress witl regard to that poi)t. Th miul ;ci 0 p aif-
fairs filce C Ir arrival in ScotialnJ, tl:e in:ortance oI t c qusiuc:ion ii
dil:utc, ad the at)fence of rmly nobwemsn, with \vihc ie..s
o(,li2_:dl i U: dccency to co'ifilt, svere the prtecnces fercicd in cxc:i
so r co:: !u t; the real caulc of it V.,:'-e tof, Vwhich L.
all i, bt, n: mentionced. In oric to extricate Icfeitlfcnt of tl. f!
difticul ties, into whliich the treaty of ldinurgrh :ad Cd ler, TIr,,
\ab L:ronU...lt to v:.'d a o.it, \'liC I',e i r-

hllslc(t ICv.c t:) , p.. SY i :,::.: .it:.:t. t :' lh ..-

-:ve up. She l;.l,,'ace v

'

vvilliri;iei s to 'ili;::iI a ry ri It to tiL t '. ? o '''i.' (
t 'i,2 i ,:i =li za~Lc th, and the iveb of !:, l,,.it; i, in l iit:;'
ofthl :-, i:e w:-r dclh:-rd nx

. . .
..' ; a.t o1:" 'ria; j-.

R]:A. SO\;NL: as i-.

jN '; p f. l l, . i .

.' . a. ,

, '1) t<: .-: ,

lUy pr-" 'i1 1 10.1i' 'lr i.,i iu1'H: , t!iili tI):'; -

vi I * -y; B's .j. il. '!i ,'

i
p ''"-.: -

o!'10 t'.~wi'i

t~!;ll0o, Oti''" C(,,i:O 'OC 11. c i
:((, : : .li VI.i i' il>-

(:mr? - .... ;, ' ,

,~c., . ~',<,~v : ', .i::, ll i~' ,t'::: ~::'':

',.~~~~~?.· l-

BooK III. which threw such lustre on her reign, we may observe, that he was
-----J tinctured with a jealouly of her right to the Crown, which oten

betrayed her into mean and ungenerous actions. The peculiarity
of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but diA not
infife this paflion. It dei'cended to her from Henry VII. her grand-
father, whom, in fveral features of his character, fle nearly rcfcl-
bled. Like him, she suffered the title by which fie hid th.e Cro;;wl
to remain ambigtlous and contrvrted, rather than submit it to) par--
liamentary diicuflion, or derive any adition to her riglit, from
such auth rity. Like him, ilie observed every pretender to the
iuccefiion, not only with that atention, which prudence irefclri:.;
)but with tt avrii.iil) \hi fuiic io inspir-e. The relClclt t i:-
c:citliitv xvith rtcard t the rit off liccctlion, ooerated f:r Eli.-
ltthl's a.llva t::tge, both on erL {Ub<Ll, and on her rivals. AmL. ,;
thel formlr, every loucr of his coat,,iy 'e'arded cr; l ii fe! as the t'c
IcLcurty of tle national tranqullity ; and cholec rather to acl'..-

i:. :ov, n. The Litter, ' ii.; iig \cc el i , '
p. ndtC;Cc, and obligcd to .e.it. lhr. 'he manlier in which ib,. r-
c. ivcd this ill-tcrinc'i propc.il of tie Scotch uIccn, was no ol t.'l

t l ...

n k hav ble" e.'q'-ive.. ie,. Je:-i jed it i a )pcrento.
a t'.',

i;i l ]m "v cxpic :ois of a icout:o: ;.evCr to erlnit a pa :int .i

mtlch dlicacy to b) to uc l.
c l ;.: t i ,. /\;:';r ' i. ts (i';nc1 , t ; tQ .;; '. h r pi,.'c en'rlv ar'v iut ) r i.-

*'.;.!,I!' t '

. s

. ...

.

'; n;" t..'

('i :,

', ; .a. 1 t.n1. .

'...... -

( '.1; : L':i;S (., ',. i" /, ! . :

' [ i

t: , . ;

'' :. i i ' (

''( ! " 1

V,' ';t t'; , : : ' . '; t " ., ' t' Ii£o; [o ! C t','tli .,) . '
, :

was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at every public BOOK IILI
solemnity; on this occasion, most of these were contrived to be repre- .-6
fentations of the vengeance which the Almighty hath inflicted upon
idolaters . Even while they fludied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her subjes could not refrain from testifying their abhor-
rence of that religion which she profelfed.

To restore the regular adminifrration ofjuftice, and to reform the Refrains the

licle o the

internal police of the country, became the next objec of the Queen's bordercry.
care. The laws enacted for preservation of public order, and the
security of private property, were nearly the fame in Scotland, as
in every other civilized country. Put the nature of the Scotch
constitution, the impotence of regal authority, the exorbitant power
of the nobles, the violence of fadcion, and the fierce manners of
the people, rendered the execution of these laws feeble, disorder-
ly, and partial. In the counties which border on Englind, this
defet was mofl apparent; and the consequences of it mofl fen-
sibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to iduftry, averse from la-
bour, and unacquainted with the arts of peace, fubfifled intirely
by spoil and pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans, com-
mitted these excefies not only with impunity, but even withl ho-
nour. During the unsettled ilate of the kingdom from the death
of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unufital heighlt
and the inroads and rapine of these freebooters were become
no less intolerable to their own countrymen, than to the TE, -
lifb. To refr-ain and punifil tlheef outrages, was an ation equally
popular in both kingdoms. Thc Prior of St. An)rew's was
the person chosen for this important frvice, ad extraordi-

* Kciith, I S.
VoL,. I. 1I nary

BooK III. nary powers, together with the title of the Queen's lieutenant,

were veited in him for this purpose.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accustomed to re-

gular government, than the preparations made on this occasion.
They were such as might be expected in the rudest and meft im-
perfect slate of society. The freeholders of eleven several coun-
ties, with all their followers compleatly armed, were summoned to
aflift the Lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
recfmbled a military expedition, rather than the progress of a court
ofjutiice . The Prior executed his commifiion with such vigour
and prudence, as acquired him a great increase of reputation and
popularity among his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti sus-
iered the punishment due to their crimes; and, by the ipartial
:and rigorous adminifitation of justice, order and tranquillity were
rceiored to that part of the kingdom.

The rn;pis DURING the abfcnce of the Prior of St. Andrew's, the leaders
atmin, mt ie of the Popiffi faction eem to have taken ome fleps towards infi-
int vom et
into favor nutatin themselves into the Qucen's favour and confidence . Bt
with Lea.

the Archbiihop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable perfoul in the
party for abilities and political address, was received with little favour
at court; and whatever fccret partiality the Queen might have to-
wards thofc who profcffed the fame religion with herself, fle dii-
covered no inclination, at that time, to take the administration of
afflirs out of those hands, to which ihe had already committed it.

TiE cold reception of the archbishop of St. Andrew's was owing
to his connction with the houfc of Hamilton ; from which tc

* Keith, 18. - Ibid. 203.

Q5u".n

Queen was much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal BOOK III.
could never forgive the zeal, with which the Duke of Chatelhe- ' 6'
rault and his son the Earl of Arran had espoused the cause of the
Congregation. Princes seldom view their successors without jealousy
and difiruft. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in ower. All these causes concurred in in-
fufiil into the Quecn's mind an averlion for that family. The
Duke, indulging his love of retirement, lived at a distance from
co.rt, without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour. And
though the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry te QuOeen,
he, by a most unpardonable at of imprudence, was the oiilv noble-
man of diflinction who opposed Mary's enljoying the exercise of ler
religion; and by rafily entering a public protestation againfi it, cn-
tirely forfeited her favotur . At tle fame time, the Iordid pa.l1-
mony of his father obliged him either to hide himself in ome re-
tirement, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as rif
Prince of the blood, or his high pretenions as suitor to the QueeCn -I-.
Itis love, inflamed by dia.ppointtcnt', ani !is ispaticce, exa!nec-
rated by ncglct, preyed gradually on lhis rcaln ; :..id, after imany
extravagancies, broke out at lait in un-ovcr:aL!, ficnv.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of Eltrs was hd lic: ;;'.:: -

chiefly on account of ecclcefiatical afflirs. The afnci',lv ol: tlhe
church, which fat at the fimel time, pre'cntced a lpCtiti(;n, l.c'.! in-
ing many demands witlh rcfLpe to t he iipprcIfin ji (of r',lr,, tl)

nlcouiragilng the l'rotcftant rli ion, and tlhe pi'o)viii' fr, the tl 1 .oe -
tcnanlcc of the clergy 5J5. '1he lafl, as a In tter d( i'It in ui:Lt-
ancc, a11d the fTcps tl toak al tOai it d(ICrvc to b t.lacd.

K'.ithl, 2pr, 291. Kliox, 2'8u. } luill, 196. 11';. . I ,.

II l l
T l(;I

BOOK III. TIoUGH the number of Protestant preachers was now confi-

6~ - derably increased, many more were fill needed, in every corner of

1561

A ncv r1i- the kingdomn. No legal provision having been made for them,
^>l:t":,,, they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fubfiflence from
cci'nin; t ,c
"cv".!r'. f the benevolence of their people. To fuffcr the Ministers of an
the CiiLIlI.

ef-ablifhed church to continue in this irate of indigency and depen-
dence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of reli-
gion, and to the maxims of found policy; and would have juili-
sied all the imputations of avarice, with which the Reformation
was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popiil
church were the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three lait years, the tlate of these was great-
ly altered. A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other heads
of religious houfcs, had, either from a sense of duty, or from views
of intereif, renoulnced the errors of Popery; and, notwitlhfanding
this change in their ftntiments, they retained their ancient revenues.
Almost the whole order of Bifihops, and several of the other dignita-
ries, li'l adhered to the Romili superstition ; and though debarred
from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy the temporalities
of their benefices. Some laymen, efpccially those who had been
active in promoting the Reformation, had, under various pretences,
and amidst the licence of civil wars, got into their hands poflefons,
which belonged to the church. And thus, before any part of the
ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be applied towards the main-
tenance of the Proteflant Miniflers, many different intercfs were
to be adjufled; many claims to be examtinedi; ald the prcjutices
and paflions of tlie two contending parties recuired the application
of a delicate land. After much contention, the following p 1n l w.is
approved by a m:ajority of voices, and( acquiF(eed in even by the '(o-
pifll clergy thicmfclves. An exad account of the value of ccclc.

ft -l.

fiafllcal benefices throughout the kingdom was appointed to be BOOK III.
taken. The present incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, "
were allowed to keep poficfon: two thirds of their whole reve- 56
nue were reserved for their own use, the rcmainder was annexed
to the Crown ; and out of that, the Quccn undertook to assign a
sufficient maintelnance for the Protef.ant clergy

As most of the Bil shos and fcvcral of the other dignitaries were

fiill firmly attached to the Iopifhi rcligion, the extirpation of the
whole order, rather than an at of ifch extraoirinary indulgence,
mIight h;av been exp csted fiom the zcal of the preachers, and from
the iplirit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles ob'ltrued the operation of those, which
were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealith,
two paliiuns extremely iop0olite, concurred in determining the Pro-
tefiant leade,-s to fll in with this plan, which deviated f mailnifcefly
from the maxims, by vlh they hwiad hitherto rgulatcd their con-
dud.

IF the Refirmcls had been allowed to at without coiltroul,

and to vcl '!i dii fi.,ii1:S in thel ci trch, the immecfe rc", cites
annexed to ccccizelLi:i ul d;iitc;i couldl not, \'itll any coo;ur of
juflicc, lave bcen retained by thlose in vh'elc hands thc-, nw \ce;
but mui citherl have bcc;I (i;ti .atcl tln(g tlCe Protcsit (i l'rv
who pr -formcd a;l rcli ii. utit c.- ( -

,
r iImuL 1c t,e il to thle Qiccn

from( tl)e bouit-v otf vl ( : ;a: Iclo;:, the ,rea

tr ;-art of thertl was

originally derived. Tlc 1Urtm ', o()'vi'v' t litatble to t he

t ali'ou;
spirit of many amoln tc pe oplec, ,a.; atildct witlt mailaoiii'id (da-

l;cith, IAppl, i. 1 5. I , 194.

ger.

BOOK III. ger. The Popish ecclefiatlics had acquired a nare in the national

-~^-J property, which far exceeded the proportion, that was consistent
156I. -ie nobles were decer-

with the happincfs of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter-
mined to guard againif this evil, by preventing those vast pofeif-
sions from ever returning into the hands of the church. Nor was
the latter, which exposed the constitution to more imminent ha-
zard, to be avoided with less care. Even that circumnfcribed pie-
rogative, which the Scotch Kings pofiflfed, was the ojct of jca-
lousy to the nobles. If they had allowed the Crown to fcize the
spoils of the church, such an increase of power must have ftl-
lowed that acceilion of property, as would have railed the royal atI-
tholriv above controul, and have rendered the moll limited Prince
in Europe the nmolo absolute and indepen:dent. The reign of IIci-
iy VIII. preFencd a recent and alarming example of this nature.
Tlhe wealth, which flowed in upon that Prince, friom the funpr;i-
sion of the monalleries, not only changed the maxims of his .--
vcrnmnct, but the temper of his mind; and lie who had iornicF-
ly flllnitted to his Parliaments, and courtcd his people, di.Lic,
froni tlhat time, to tle former, withi ilntolerable inliolcce; ant
tyrannized over te latter with unprecedented ifverity. And if hiis
policy had not ccn extremiely fort-qfihtcd, if lie had

i not flquan-

dered what he acquired, with a profuiion equal to his rapaciotui
net;, and which defeatcd his all iionl , lie might have eftiblilci
dcfpoti1in in Engtland, on a a.s so 1.:oad and llrong, as all the
efforlts of the fubiccts would neveCr IaveC eC al) tao flake. 1n Scot-
land, iwh re the rich's o' tle clKryv lire as gi cat a propotion to
the wcalti of te Li ngolm, tli aqniiii, of chnlri-lanlds w;ltd
havcbc ie.Cn of 1l10 lels imlnlr ttaicc tli-A '.lii, an i lo lL'; .itil Lt
the aritlocracy. Thie nobleb, i_-r tllis icalun, gnaiel ; .:il;i [ f': h

;:1

an increase of the royal power, and thereby fccured their own BOOK III.
independence.

I561.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for the interef of

their order. The re-uniting the pofTfions of the church to the
Crown, or the befow\ing them on the Protellant clcr[, would
have been a atal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fiaud or
violence, seized part of theie revenues, and to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their ecclcfiatical charaler. Biut
as the plan, which was proposecd, gave fomle lndtion to tir ufuir-
pations, they promoted it with their utmolf iniflcnce. The c Po;pi
eccleiaftics, thoutgh the lopping off a third cf their I '.C!lics w..s
by no means agreeable to them, conienllte, under tlir jrclcnt cr-
cumft'nces, to iacriice a part of tlier poiCftiionl-, in oi'dcr to pir-
chace the fLcu. e ciovmn it of the remaiinder anid after decinin
the w.ljle irrLcove.l'jbly !ft, tl,'c conlilerid vl hat'cive tihey could
retrieCv as to much gain. aliy of tli anlceclt dirgitaris were
men of nole bI.i'th a.id as they no longer enertailned hi-pcs of'
recforinll tlle P .()o, tll ' wi ti -o'v1n el .1o , rath r
than the Cro:wn, or tile IPrutc'ant c' Icr-y, to hle enricield v.it; tlie
spoils of the chul;ch Tiey coI:iived, Io; this reast; , at til o c. -
croachments of thie nob!es; tliey even a;i.!ci thcir ava:' re and ,iO-
lcnc; tlhey 'd'l t out lt te pi. lony of the clurch anion g t!i:il ovr n
rleations, and by gra iting j;'us ainl irt. tilal lcalcs io J; a .l
tithes, gave, to the ultmoft of theiri pov.er, i;.mll colour of lccal prc.-
:(i;i1io, to li at w.s f'rm cr! 1r u,

C ll llrj:'itio)l. IMn vvlieLco ('1

,ftch alicl .uiati 's lill rill : '. 'i'iie ; .irilt':;, witli tihc concurlre c
of tIec incullbcnts dii!,' cxtcnil. t ll t
i- r croaelmcll cLt, and ;1a-

K ;i|h!), 5c'7. ,;i(' .,
; 75.

( it. ly

BOOK III. dually stripped the ecclefiafics of their richest and most valuable pof-

*-J6- sessions. Even that third part, which was given up in order to silence
1561.
5 s6* the clamours of the Protellant clergy, and to be some equivalent to

the Crown for its claims, amounted to no considerable fum. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially by those who
had embraced the Reformation, were almost universally remitted.
Others, by producing fraudulent rentals; by estimating the corn, and
other payments in kind, at an under value ; and, by the connivance
of collecors; greatly diminished the charge against themselves :
and the nobles had much reason to be satisfied with advice, which,
at so small expence, secured to them such val poffcfions.

The Prote- NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gainers ly this new
fiint Clei or regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal,

than to extinguish avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they
had swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all their
remonfirances. The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll,
the Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the moif zealous leaders of
the Congregation, were appointed to afign, or, as it was called, to
,tod)ify their stipends. An hundred merks Scotch was the allowance
which their liberality afforded to the generality of Minifecrs. To
a few three hundred merks were granted . Alout twenty-four
thousand pounds Scotch appears to have been the whole fum al-
lotted for the maintenance f a national church cflablifcd by la11,
and eftccmcd, throughout the kinrdom, tlle tlrue chllrch of Cod l
Even this fum was paid with little cxa. iJ s, and thl . liiltlcrs were
kept in the lalme poverty and dpiendance :,s l-rrncrly.

< Kl itli, Appcld. s88. Spots. 183. -1 Knox, 3.I. : K it, Appcn. i;

T~u

THE gen'tleness of the Queen's adminiRration, and the elegance B3OK III.
of her court, had mitigated, in ome degree, the ferocity of the I- '

562.

nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness and humanity; Difrcnfions
while, at the fame time, her presence and authority were a check anoleg th
to their faaious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a state of order and
tranquillity was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not
be of long continuance; and this year became remarkable for the
moif violent eruptions of intefline discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobles of Scotland, a Monarch,

could possess little authority, and exercise no extensive or rigorous ju-
rifdition. The interfering of interest, the unsettled state of property,
the frequency of public commotions, and the fierceness of their own
manners, owed, among the great families, the feeds of many
quarrels and contentions. These, as we have already observed,
were decided not by law, but by violence. The offended Baron,
without having recourse to the Monarch, or acknowledging his fu-
perior authority, assembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with his eflate and ho-
nours, every nobleman tranfinitted some hereditary feud to his pole-
rity, who were bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with
the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a dissention had fubfiled between the house of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions *. Both the Earl of Arran and
Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their

* Kith, 215,l
VOL. I. I i follovw-

Boox III. followers quarrelled frequently in the streets of Edinburgh, and

" -6 excited dangerous tumults in that city. At laIt, the mediation
r.!-,.-. of their friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcile-

ment, but an unfortunate one to both these noblemen*.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and with the utmost

terror and confusion, confeTed first to him, and then to the Prior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direcAion of as-
fairs, Bothwell and his kinsmen the -Iamiltons, had conspired to
murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the Queen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
fipplanted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that place at
the helm, which he imagined to be due to himself, as first Prince of
the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late commotions, was no
lets exasperated against him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the fran-
tic and disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impossible,
amidf the contradiction of hiltorians, and the defeivenefs of re-
cords, positively to determine. Among men inflamed with resent-
ment, and impatient for revenge, rash expreflions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed; and on that founda-
tion, Arran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fuperftruc-
ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their guilt
with the utmost confidence. But the known characters of the men,
and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the probability
of the accusation, and abundantly justify the conduct of the Queen's

* Knox, 305.

Milni-

Ministers, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring- BOOK I.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender the .---'
fProng castle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time I562.
of his resigning the office of Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly againfl the Prior of St. An- The Earl of
drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more Huntly's en-

mity to the

tragical events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one Queen's Mll-
of the nobles who conspired againfl James III. and who railed his
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great hare in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince t. By his bounty, great acceflios or
wealth and power were added to a family, already opulent and power-
ful. On the death of that Monarch, Alexander the next Earl, be-
ing appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth,
left the other nobles to contend for offices at court and retiring
to the north, where his estate and influence lay, resided there, in a
kind of princely independence, The nobles in that part of the king-
dom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dangerous neigh-
bour, but were unable to prevent his encroachments. Some o
his rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued by open f,:rce.
His estate far exceeded that of any other subjed, and hisJipe'io-
rities and jurifdiions extended over many of the northern coun-
ties. With power and pofieffions so immense, under two long and
feeble minorities, and amidfl the shock of civil commotions, te E Is
of Huntly might have indulged the most elevated hopes. But happily
for the Crown, an aive and entcrprifing spirit was not the cla-
rateriftic of that family, and whatever olijctt their ambition mignilt
have in view, they cholc rather to acquire it by political audrcl,
than to fiize it openly, and lby f'c of armls.

l Knox, '."7, 30'. Keitl, '.'. -I C .it'vf. 0 t i; 1l <
I. 5 .

I i 2 1x:

BOOK Ill. THE conduct of George the present Earl, during the late commo-
' -' tions, had been perfectly suitable to the character of the family, in that

1562.

age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the success of the Lords of
the Congregation was uncertain, he assisted the Queen Regent in
her attempts to crush them. When their affairs put on a better
aspect, he pretended to join them, but never heartily favoured their
cause. He was courted and feared by each of the contending
parties; both connived at his encroachments in the north ; and, by
artifice and force, which he well knew how to employ alternately,
and in their proper places, he added every day to the exorbitant
power and wealth which he possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the utmost jealousy and concern, and con-
fidered him as a rival, who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zal for the Popish religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased
the misunderstanding occasioned by rival(hip in power. The Queen
having determined to reward the services of the Prior of St. An-
drew's, by creating him an Earl, he made choice of Mar, as the
place whence he hould take his title; and, that he might be bet-
ter able to support his new honour, bestowed upon him, at the
Pebruary o1. fame time, the lands of that name. These were part of the royal

demesnes *, but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for feve-
ral years, to keep poffflion of them . On this occasion, the
Earl not only complained, with some reason, of the loss which he
sustained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a
formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might

* Crawf. Peer. 297. -1 Buch. 334.

be

be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vassals to shake BOOK II1.
off his yoke.

1562.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and confirmed June 27.

Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and Lord
Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the fireets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with
armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dan-
geroufly wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates seized both the
offenders, and the Qeen commanded them to be flritly confined.
Under any regular government, such a breach of public peace and
order would expose the person offending, to certain punifliment.
At this time, ome severity was necessary, in order to vindicate the
Qeen's authority from an insult, the mofl heinous which had been
offered to it, since her return into Scotland. But in an age accuf-
tomed to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her
power in ordering them to be kept in cuflody, was deemed an ad
of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each party began to con-
vene their vassals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf-
trate the decisions of justice *. Mean while, Gordon made his
escape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfhire, complained
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated. And as
all the Queen's actions were, at this juncture, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment, which Huntly
had conceived againif that nobleman.

AT the very time when there pafions fermented, with the utmost
violence, in the minds of the Earl of Huntly and his family, the Auguf2 3.

- Kcith, 223.

(en

BooKe III. Queen happened to set out on a progress into the northern parts of

Ic62 the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and Mor-

ton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The presence of
the Qeen, in a country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised, for many years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the Qeen was en-
tirely under the direction of Mar, all her ations were more apt to
be misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a thousand cir-
cumfIances could not but occur to awaken Huntly's jealousy, to of.
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
of so many violent passions, ome eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the commission with abundance of dex-
terity, to ooth the Qeen, and to intercede for pardon to their on.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should again deliver
himself into the hands of justice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by the Queen to
enter himself prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised like-
wife to obey that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was,
at that time, Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity, and the
place in which he appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the ha-
tred of the Gordons against him.
.11mb \'r I. IMEAN time, Sir John Gordon et out towards Stirling; but iln-

flcad of performing his promise to the Qcuen, made his cfcapc
from his guards, and returned to take the command of his follow-
cis, who wcre rifiig in arms, all over the north. These were

(d tlined

defined to second and improve the blow, by which his father pro- BooK III.
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait-
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place for perpetrating
this horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the executing of it
was wonderfully prevented, by ome of those unforeseen accidents,
which so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate
the hearts of aflafsins *. His own house at Strathbogie was the lafl
and most convenient scene, appointed for committing the intended
violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen heard of young
Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refusing, in the first transports
of her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by that fortu-
nate exprefflon of her resentment, saved her Ministers from una-
voidable deflrution -.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipitated T.kes trms

ac'aif te

Huntly into open rebellion. As the Queen was entirely under the it

" ie.

direction of his rivals, it was impossible to work their ruin, without
violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign. On her ar-
rival at Inverness, the commanding officer in the catle, by Hunt-
ly's order, fihut the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge
in the town, which was open and defenceless; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers +. The
utmost consternation seized the Queen, who was attended by a
very slender train. She every moment expeced the approach of the
rebels, and rome flips were already ordered into the river to fe-
cure her cfcapc. The loyalty of the Monrocs, Frazers, Mackin-
tofies, and some neighbouring clans, who took arms in her de-
fence, saved her from this danger. By their assistance, fle even

* Keith, 230. f- Knox, 318. : Crawf. Offices of State, 87, 88.

I forced

BOOK III. forced the castle to surrender, and inflicted on the Governor the
_ 'c ' punishment which his insolence deserved.
I562.

THIS open at of disobedience was the occasion of a measure

more galling to Huntly than any the Queen had hitherto taken.
Lord Erskine, having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,
Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time Mary con-
ferred upon him the title of the Earl of Murray, with the estate
annexed to that dignity, which had been in the possession of the
Earl of Huntly since the year I548 *. From this he concluded
that his family was devoted to destruction; and dreading to be
stripped, piecemeal, of these possessions, which, in reward of their
services, the gratitude of the Crown had bestowed on himself, or
his anceflors, he no longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance
of the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Inflead of yield-
ing those places of flrength, which Mary required him to furren-
der, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which he
despatched to take poffeflion of them -; and he himself, advancing
with a considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place
the Queen was now returned, filled her finall court with the utmof
consternation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom he could
confide +. In order to form the appearance of an army, he was
obliged to call in the assistance of the neighbouring nobles; but as
most of these either favoured Huntly's designs, or flood in awe of
his power, from them no cordial or effectual service could be ex-
peaed.

* Crawf. Peer. 359. t Knox, 319. t Kcith, 237.

W T'

WITH these troops, Murray, who could gain nothing by de- BOOK IIT.
lay, marched briflly towards the enemy. He found them at I^

1562.

Corrichie, ported to great advantage; he commanded his north- oaobcr :.
ern afibciates inflantly to begin the attack; but on the firif motion
of the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs; and Hunt-
ly's followers, throwing aide their fpcars, and breaking their ranks,
drew their swords, and rufcd forward to the pursuit. It was rTc ::,! .

I 'v l'c 'l

then, that Murray gave proof both of Rlcady courage, and of pru- -iui-. .
dent condut. He stood irllovcablc, on a riing ground, with th
ilball but tufty body of ILis adihercnllt, who prcflntini tlhcir icari;
to the enemy, received thein with a etermlined lref;1CiiO!, lw.ich
they little expecded. The lighilaind broad fi-ord is net a v;'on
fit to encounter the Scotclh Ipar. In every civil conll:otion, the
fupcririitv of the latter has bee]n evidnt, and has a..'as; decie
the contel. On this occaiion, tile irrgular attacki ci -litlH '
troops was cafily rcpulfc:d by Murray's firml battalion. Befre they
recovered firomt the colnful:on occalioncd by this unforclcn rfillt-
ailce, thoe wvlho had begunl te iLi:t, willing t) r .in tlicir crc-
dit with the victorios party, fell uonl theml, andii comilceatcd the
rout. Hluntly himf!lf, wlho ;was c::tricmcy Crpul lnt, vas tr'odc
r 0 111 t. i

1r 'lt1

to death in the purlfuit. I Ils sons, Sir Jhiln and tAdam, were takenl,
and Mlurray returned in tritimph to Aberdeen with his prifoncrs.

Trlc tlial of men taken in a:ctal rcbelliuon a.l tj: l heir . yvc-

rlcien was extremely (lolt. Thir:c days af'cr 'c bi.tL;, . ic
Jolihn Gordon was bclileadd at Aierdee. I is lbrot'r A\dac
was pardoned on account (' lis

Ot. I.r (;ord ordo , w lo had

beeln privy to lis la thl r's J *i ;w:, \:v, i (e.i i:i tile tiil1, al ld up-
on trill found guilty of tr i'n ; ait, tol'uh the (clccl 's cllclncy,
tlic ,unilmllilCt was remitted. l'lTi lil'l Parliament tprcc ced ;.j'ait :

Vol.. I. I: this

BcooI III. tils great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and reduced their
-- - 52. power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

1502.

IN

* This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the most intricate and mnf-

terious p.iftgesl il the Scotch history. As it was a traniifltion purely domestic, and
in which the lEngliflh were little interetied, few original papers concerning it have
been foundll ii Cecil's Collection, tle great forchoufe of vidence and information
v.it h regard to the affairs of tlis period.

Iluchanan fllpp ,'s Mary to have fnormed a design, about this time, of defthoying

r t'i,'.l-, andk of Clempli)ilg tihe power of the laill of IHuntly for this purpose. BLt
li a'-eCounlit of thi.; , holl' atio .itctll alrpeCr to le {o vuidl of trltlh, and even of pro-
bald :ity, a; to d. civ Xe nCllo feri'is xamination. t that time, llary wanted p,wer,
nld !iemsn to lhaIi, had no iiilinati n to cormnit any at o rio!lnce upon her bio-
ti.sr.

T'\wo( (oihl- I1rh:l'o.li. have been advancel, in orLdLr to explain tis; matter ; blt
t',-y ai Lar to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Qeen's journey to the north was

;l'hlae concerted by Murray, iln ordir to ruin thc Earl of Huntlv. I. Huntly had
refid, at colurt ahlftl e.\r ince the Q()eCn's rtni. Keiti, ;'. Append. r75,
':C. T''i.:. \was th' , proper p:ace ill \whichi to lave seizC.d hlin. To attack him in
A, lcnfhile, the feat of his pov.'er, an. i: the midll of his xa.llI, was a pro-
kLn (claly a;bfiirLdl andl hnz.arLdous. 2. 'I h Qecn ''wa.s lnot accompanil e with a
i, mdy of toop-, capable of attemptin in any thiig against Iunt ly L'v violence; her
tra.in \v:s at moi' numerous, tllan was t ul,d in times ot)f rcatefi tran'lillit . Keith
9'-3' . 3. Tlre remain to ori'i,' l leter. v,.itl rL2ard to tillis conftir,cy, ()iie

IromI Randolph the En',liiti Rilident, acnd another f-rol MaIitland, boti dires'd

to tL cil. 1lt.'v tailk tt I Ilintly's imeaftlrc as; tntorioully treafonabli. Randllpi:
ment'iui:, lii.; rvc Ited attcLtmpt, to al ifiniilteC M\urray, &ct. No llint i;s niven of any
pI'[ \'i: l; lhlition, fOciIed by IMr's linilllcrs ,

ti o ruin ) Itntly and ii;

i m lily.

1ltd :a,', h(uh dielilun 'vLr LillLid, it \wa; l.andiolph''s duty to hae d(iltcI.oied it .

is \\;,thil laiiland hl.\t: laboured to coilceal it from the EIglifh Secretary. J<.il;
2q90, .S Z.

1I. ' '

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most important event of BOOK III.

this year, it would have been improper to interrupt tl:e narrative, T
by taking notice of leflcr tranfadtions, which may ow be related
with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of funimcr, Mary, who was desirous of cn- , i;,t:,...,

tering into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with Eli- l;'..r.n I -
znbeth, employed Maitlaind to delire a prfonal interviewv with her, . -, ij-

'lbmcwhcre in the north of England. As this p'opoil could not "°'

be rejected with decency, the time, the place, and the circumf'tan-
ces of the meeting were instantly agreed upon. CBut iiizablth was
lp-udcent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival, who
outfllone hcreit;, so far, in beauty, and gracefullefs of pcr>!n ; and
lwho excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of infinuati)ll an d ad-

II. To fippnof that the arl of ltltly had llid any plall for feizilg tile (Q ccng

nn hl er MiliiiLcr' , fc'nms to be no lcfs improiba.lc. . ( iOn !c c s alriil

ing a concerted plan. 4. The illi con liJrable v C1l11 ;

f ',l fGLbinittcd

to the Qlecn, and found ftircty to obey he c-lommandil Iil, . 1ad t li
Earl )been pr-cvinluly dctclrmiinc to rie in arnm;e niiiit tie (ciiLc, onr

tt Ii'

hecr Mil~ilcLrs, ith is piwobabllie on il anc ini~parc l it tom:, hli plii i. lot.

I io ,
h1n would they hIve doleItcd liliii ill lli ninnor.

Si olan. 4 '

h :I ctnWi c! 111, psn~: <,s' li': F,.A;~ sto bmittc,1

For th

l fe rcafoln;, e ate, onl t' e li t , in.li.':tt l tli '. ] of

i3.n:'ny

itiil 1 y

( dl liltl.'al t illt 'lii) li ots ll ii ,ii!' 1 i la ii' o ( ln ,!ll ; ,rl 1, tll t,'

.;i,~1

1;.;id, we \\lO c itt i l l l c \i

l the ! ; ,

-d;i- - i t';r I ,! , ;:' ,t!, i I'

| 1

(Lit of r i lttllciit, \ illot Iil itht.l. I m,1

: v h ;111) 1 1 !I.. ti .[ ,I i 'l:, .. , i.-
bhll,m.

I; k j US1.

BOOK III. dress. Under pretence of being confined to London, by the atten-

-.--.' tion which he was obliged to give to the civil wars in France,ffe put

off the interview for that season *, and prevented her fubjeCs from
feeing the Scotch Queen, the charms of whose appearance, and be-
haviour, fte envied, and had sone reason to dread.

June 2. DURING this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In
I>Ucl ber 2;.

D berz5. both these meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the poverty

and dependance of the church ; and many murmurs against the
negligence or avarice of those, who ihad been appointed to collect,
and to diilributc the finall fund, appropriated for the maintenance
of preachers {. A petition, craving redress of their grievances,
was prcfcnted to the Qeen ; but without any effcct. Tlere was
no realun to cxpc't that MlIry would diicover any forwardness to
gi-ant the reqciris of such iupplicants. And as her Miniflers, thoughi
all muno zealous Protercants, were themselves growing rich on the
inheritance of the church, they were equally regardlcfs of the in-
digence and demands of their brethren.

iMARY had now continued above two years in a slate of widow.-

I:1\-,i.,tc.is hood. Her gentle admilniration had ecured the hLarts of her iubl
,it'C(* '.tCC jects, who were impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown

i. to descend in the right line fromn their ancient Monarchs. She her-

self was the mofl amiable womian of the age, and the fame of her
accomplifiinents, together with the favourablc circumfiancc of
her having one kingdom already in her poflicfion, and the pro-
pcl: of nmotuting the tirone of another, prompted lmany it-
ferent r'inccs to ijllicit an alliance so illul-irious. Scotlanld, by
its situation, threw o0 much weight and power into wlhatcvr

* IK.tilt, 216. , 31 , 3.

{;.
i,

scale it fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's de- BOOK III.
termination. And no event in that age excitcd stronger politi-
cal fears and jealousies; none intcrefled more deeply the passions of' 563.
several Princes, or gave rife to more contradictory intrigues, than
the marriagc of the Scotch Q5ecen.

THE, Princes of the house of Austria remembered what vast shle i si;c;-
projects the French had founded on their former alliance with the tHi b ''lirc'-

~~~~~~~' - c~~~~ent 'rPrices.

Qteen of Scots and though the unexpeccte death, firit of -Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered thcfe f-om taking cffct, yet if
Mary should again make choice of a husband among the French
Princes, the fame dfi;,gs might be reviewed and pruecuted wti
better fuccef£.

IN order to prevent this, te Emperor entered into a negocia- I-; .,,. ,.

tion with the Cardi;a l of Lo)rrain, who liad propod to marry the i:I. ic:..,,
Sco1tch Qjeen to the Arc!hdule Charles, Ferdinand's third son.
The matter was communticated to Mary; and wnclvil, who, at that
time, attended the Eled r Palatine, was conlmanded to inquire in-
to the character and situation of the Archduke *.

PHILIP II. though no lds apprelhcnfive of Mary's falling once :-> Ton C-:-

more into the hands of France, citvic ihis uncle Fdlti!nand the' ' 11
acquilition of so important a prize; and as his own inlatil)lc am-
bition grafprcd .it all t!:c kingdoml t Jfiti'opc, he emiloIcd h.; a-
bafla:dor t the I'rench c urt, to ,l icit ter i'inces ol Lorrain in be-

half of his ion Do)n C.'1 '-,. at t 1 I ', til lieilr of all thc ex-
tenlivc dolninWioIs, which belonged to the Sp.nlifli monarchy t'-.

* MIlv. 6( , 6,. ,cith, 23<(. '.c :\i|' t'(l. N'' VII.

Citllcln. 1 0 1. AddiiL. dc LAiIr. 5l1, 5'', .

C ' uIi:,RIN E

130K III. CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the mar-

riage of the Scotch Queen to any of the Aufrian Princes, which

i563.
', ;lice Duke would have added so much to the power and pretensions of that

ambitious race. Her jealoufv of the Princes of Lorrain rendered
her no lets averse from an alliance, which, by securing them the
protection of the Emperor or King of Sain, wold give new bold-
lincf to their enterprising fpi'iit, and enable them to iet the po:wcr
of the Crown, which they alr:' ,la rivalled, at open dceanc . An,
as (he waS asiaid that thef splendid propolfls of tlhe Aufir-an i-..
mily would dazzle the young Q( ecn, flhe inilantly dilpatched Caf-
telna'i into Scotland, to o-r -hr in tnmrriage tle Duke of Anjon,
the lbrothe:c of lher fornele hit;and, wlio sion aftcr lmounted tih
thrne l' Fr"ance .

. \IARY attentively weighd the pretcnfile:s of io many riva>.
:,Ji, ..( ]i,- Tle Archdulce had little to recommend him, but his high birth.

-: iL. Theos exa-mple of Henry VIII. was a warning againfl contr;lCi! a;.

inrinage wiil the brother of her foirmer hulhand ; nor could siel
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a r.nk inferior to that,

lwhich flie hald ftrmcrly lhcl.l in that kingdomn. She liencd tlherc-

fore, with partiality, to the Spanilh propositions 4., and tlhc propc
of such vast power and dominions flattered the ambition of a you;n
and aspiring Prinilccs.

TTI r- i: evl.ral circlltmaiiccs, however, concurred to divert Mar,
froml any tloulghts of a foreign alliance.

'tT lil l of tliTf was the midr(Cr of ler unicl tli I). ( I'
(;iik:. Thle viclence and ambition u tat nobcleman had involv).

' CaslI.llm. ,1()1.

i i

his country in a civil war; which was condued with furious ani- BooK HII.
mofity and various fucccfs. At last the Duke laid siege to Orleans, '-- -'
the bul.vark of the Protestant cause; and he had reduced that city 5 J
to the lafi extremity, when he was affiiilated by the frantic zeal
of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Qieen of Scots. The
young Duke was a minor. And the Cardinal, though subtle and
intriguing, wanted that undaunited and clterprifing courage, which
rendered the ambition of his brother o iformliable. Catherine, in-
stead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering the prctenfions of
her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying the o, and in
disappointing the other. In this situation, and without ihch a nr'O-
tector, it became nliccefliy tor ,Nary to coitraCt 11u vicsv, alnd to
proceed wvith caution ; and swhatever oprpcl i (tf advanta:e .i ' t
allu:e her, Ihc could venture up): no d(angerous or d1 jiutfii inca-
iurc.

TlE feccind circumfiance, hl:ich weeighed witl MTary, was te T;:-.' , oc

opinion of thl .CCIcc of EnI ' d. The mani: cf tle C. :tch'"
(Qccn intercl'cd ELiizabch imore dceply ta-i a:'/ (ol :r Prince;
and (h observcd all her dclieicrations concrni!i' it

"vl ti'he il

anx io1s5 attCnti0c . She herlUlf l'cms early to ha uve a

'.;It a ref)-

l1tionl of liv!i Linni arrltl, and file dil:ove L.d no lina, l i::cil:ati,i
to impotf te' faine la1.v on the ( oQscn of Scots. Sh h: d 1:ac.:1i-;
expcr cncc.l what ille ic i',ht be m:iiide of Mry's nowacr and! pretil-
lionIs, to ;.\clad her d( iiii[liolns, and to (liiurb hlIer nolLiiiOn of t},e
Crovwn. Tc death ofl ir1anc:l; Il. had happily ,i'..:ic l !her ft ,m
tlis w,', wich lice de rnin(l to guatld ;a;;t ir u the ll/t;.,
with tlhe till,: care. td ;,- the A il

i '.:' t

P'inces, tlie avowed and bi-otted piat. ; ( C

te Ct! ; ic Ii' rl! -.
tion, made hler, in a particular Ina.lilcr, hc,lJ tlheir l,.;iuoctLlilo.cl,

lc

Bci, III. she inftruted Randolph, to remlonftrate, in the firongefl terms,
'"~.--J against any alliance with the:u; and to acquaint MIary, that as ile

1563.

herself would confider such a match to be a breach of the personal
friendship, in which they were so happily united; so the Englith
nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that confederacy which
now subsisted between the two kingdoms. That, in order to irc-
cfrvc their own religion and liberties, they would, in all probabi-
lity, take some itep prejudicial to her right of fuccefiion, whichi, ..
tle well knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to iiiva.i-
datc, antd et aside. This threatening was accomlpanied with a
promiil, but expressed in vry ambiiguous terms, that if Mi.-
ry's choice of a uiband fiLould prove agreeable to the Englifhl
nation, Elizabeth would app-int proper perl)ns to examine iher ttl:
to te fucccfiion, and, if wceli foundcd, command it to be publickl',
rcagnizcd. She observcd , howevcr, a lmyiacrious filencc conccil-
inr' the perlon, on whom flhe wifled the choice of tile Scotch
(.1cen to fall. The revealing of t if Lccret was refered flr i o:c
iLiture negociation. Mealn while fle threw out sonec obiCulie int;,
tiiat a native of Britain, cr one not of princlly rank, would be: i,
ifafeil and mnofl inoffel.lvc choice *. An advice, offered vwitli ifc'
an air of fupriority and commaind, nortified, no doubt, the nii
of the Scotch Qicen. But, under her prclent circumfanccs, i.
was obliged to bear this indignite. Dcllitute of all foreign afific.,
and intent upon tlie Englillh flcccilion, the great 0obccct oCf 'i ;
\viilcs and almbition!, it became ncI e'J i to court a rival, wh,
witiout lmanliltl imprllenceC, file coull not venture to oncni,.

Til;: inclin:,ation of her own fubjcs w;s anclir1i, anlId t '.:

,,,,111 .

1I~, lcaft conliderable circuml llance, which ca led for lary's att:eni)
( 1,'.1, ) i1, '! ,.

~, K.itE, 2.1 ?, 245.

at this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the fatal experl- Boo: III.
ment of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great ""

1563.

Prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown hould be firengthened by new domi-
nions, or alliances, tley foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be itretched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her aid, to-
wards obflructing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy
for them to seize the person of their Sovereign. By the afliftance of
the Englith fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign Prince
to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an inconsiderable
party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the los of the Earl of Hunt-
ly, could give no obftrution to their designs. To what violent ex-
tremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke might have been
carried, is manifest from the tranfafions both previous, and sub-
sequent to the present period.

FCR these reasons, Mary laid afidc, at that time, all thoughts of

a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her o-wn ambition,
in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to qiet tle fears
of her own fubjeds.

THE Parliament met this year, for the firi tilme, finicc thle ,..

Qeen's return into Scotland. Mary's admil)r:i m Ju.l ithcrta
been extremely popular. Icr Alinielrs p:l.!'cl t 1 Con idcecc
of tle nation. And, by confcquencc, the proccc iinl of tlat afnll-
hly were condudtcd wxith pcrtc'tl iinni itv. 't e ,',tt t.lr

It .r]

dloin of Murray to the Prior of St. A 't: ; \\'.. c:,;', i:
L'.d

\'L. 1. L I .i

To I. II.Earl of Tl.ntly, and fveral of his vafls and dependants were at-
---~-- ta:inted: tlhe attinder againll Kirkaldv of Grange, and iome of

:13 ls accom rliccs in the murder of Cadinal Beatoun, was reverted -:
the a of olivimnl, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the ro'. Lianion. Fut iIarv', whlo hadi determined never to ratify
that trcatv, took care that this flndtion fhoull not be deemed any
acknowled.gmcnt of its validity; fie granted her consent merely i;i
condefcecnfiun to the Lords in Parliament, who, on their knees, be-

)ul'iit her to al'ay the jcalouiles and aprchenfions of her fubjcds,
by1 iuh a racious law -.

,No attempt w''as madte, i this Parliiment, to procure the Q2necnl's

',.*'it to the latvs cfta:liling the Protelfhnt reli5ilon. lr Mi-
i i:lcr-s, thlogh zealou s

Iroti ts thermetlves, were a are t lht this

could lnot be ur,ed witliout mani l danger and imprudence. She
inid confinted, thlrolih their influence, to tolerate and proteCc th e
reformed doctrine. They had even prevailed on her to impri Afn
h.i1nd prosiCUte theC Ar-libiit.op of St. Andrew's, and P'ior of Vihi':-
horln, for cclcb'ti nimas contrary to her proclaat'n i'. r

,- ,.

ihowever, was fti!l pafio: tcly devoted to th Romith i fi;ierlt; :.
Thou gh, from political motives, fie had granted a temporary i-
duigencc to opinions, which flei difipprovcd, there were i:.o ,rou,;nd
to hope that she would agree to cflabii m or pcru-ctuity. lTh
imoderationi of tliofe whlo profefied it, was the bed' m-thod for r;-
ccneiling the Qeeccn to the l'rotcfi-ant religion. Timle lmiUt :a;:' -
licr lbiotry. Ielr prejudices might wear off

it radalv, and at ..

i1ec miih t yield to the willies of her people, vhat ti:cir importali,,
or ti:ci;r v iolice could 1nevr have extorted. Many laIvs of ilmpll'; :

-; EKiaiK, '*I0.rtw. 18 S\ t

KtIW
i.

* .3 '112,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~n~'

ince were to be proposed in Parliament; and to defeat all thcfe, by .oo. IIL
such a fruitless and ill-timed application to the Queen, would have '~

~1 '

1 *563.

been equally inurious to individuals, and detrimental t the
public.

THiE z7al of te Proteflant clergy was (leaf to all thfea confide- v.i' ir,':.s,

rations of policy. E:agcr and impatient, it broo!kcd no dca!. Se-
vere a!nd inflexible, it would conc'ellcnd to no compiainces. Ther
Icadin menl ofthat order inlfi cd, that this on ;ortl ity of clbliihz
iig reli;ion by law, was not to be ncglcetd. They pronounced the
mi:oderitonl of the courtiers, aoflacy; and their cndcav'ou:'r to -,:.
tlhe QCeen, they reclkoned criminal aini 1irvile. Kic;x e;-'l c e-
nounccd the fi-eindllili of the Earl of Murray, as a man devote
to Mar.'y, and it blindly zealous for her frvicc, as to becccric rcgard--
leit3 of tlofe ohbies which e liad hitherto elctllclmd moltt ifcrcd.
ThiV r! :LtureC, wichl is a lron proof of li\7nrray's sinccire attach-
me;r: t the QLeen at tliat period, contilied abov a vcr and an

Tr i pireacers bel:,- dim'apointcd by tlhe men in w,.'n, t!o.:,

placC the rcataLi conlie ncc, g w vC it to their ndii:tion in:
tleli- pTulpi:;. Thel cc'cl(i more lo Icly tL!la ever, viih dc .:,l-
rations again2 idolatry; witil d:i ml p;rcgcs eoncern g tlle (');jc'n'I
n:rriagc with a fe: 'incr; nd w\'.'ithi bitter ,;' re'''roa:: nl.xi ll' tli' .L;
\vh<o, fro: intreflt d lnoi','.', L .l ,L .red tha';t caui., .'l ' ,'
o(nce reckllncd it their honiour to ')h . TIte 'C o, i!' ikl

;

tl.cf:l v c iciient d cclamaltio :, v.?,ieh ';c': we i .wi', I a

, .:,! ril::.

f ncoc' than prudent, procc'.d to. rli anns d u:>iuelsli; 'i, .
:K. i x

L 1 ? ::-

Bbox ItL lence. During the Queen's absence, on aprogrefs into he weft,

6-"'' mars continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy-rood-houfe.
Au ua:. The multitude of those, who openly retorted thither, gave great

offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from the re-
ftraint, which the royal preence imposed, assembled in a riotous
manner, interrupted the service, and filled those who were preternt,
with the utmost consternation. Two of the ringleaders in this tu-
mnult were fcized, and a day appointed for their trial *

;,:-1 t,'ed n KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of there persons laudable, and their
tlic,0.,,''4it' condu&t meritorious, confidered them as sufferers in a good cause;
uotj9tr S. and in order to screen them fiom danger, he ifued circular letters,

requiring all who professed the true religion, or were concerned
for the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh on the day of
trial, and by their presence, to comfort and assist their diflrcfied
brethren A. One of these letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
aflemble the fubjeds without the authority of the Sovereign, was
construed to be treason, and a resolution was taken to prosecute

Dccm Knox for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily for him,
D1cem. 15.,

his judges were not only zealous Protestants, but the very men, who,
during the late commotions, had openly refilled, and set at defiance
the Queen's authority. It was under precedents, drawn from their
own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor
would it have been an easy matter for these Counsellors to have found
outa diflintion, by which they could censure him, without condemn-
ing thcmfelvcs. After a long hearing, he was unanimously acquit-
ed. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and President of the Court of Seflion,
a zealous Papifl, heartily concurred with the other Counsellors in

A' knox, 33- -j Ibid. 2-i.

txi3s

this decision '; a remarkable fadt, which .shows the unsettled flte to jl
of government in that age; the low condition to which regal autho- ~~
rity was then funk; and the impunity with which fubjeds might
invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held sacred.

THE marriage of the Scotch Qu een continued still to be the i564.
objet of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while Ncgo:iations

witlh regard to

file wished to direct Mary, treated her with a difgufRful reserve; the Queer's
though she kept her, without necefity, in a tate of fufpence;
and hinted often at the person, whom file defined to be her hus-
band, without direcly 7mentioning his name; yet Mary framed
all her actions to express such a prudent refpet for the English
Qeen, that foreign Princes began to imagine she had given herfclf
up implicitly to her dirediun . The profped of this union alarmed
Catherine of Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleafilre, all
along, in doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though, oon as-
ter the Duake of Guise's death, he had put upon her a mofl mor-
tifying indignity, by flopping the payment of her dowry, by depriv-
ing her fubje the Duke ofChatelherault of his pcnfion, and by be-
stowin;g the command of the Scotch Guards on a Frenchman $;
she resolved, however, to prevent this dangerous conjunction of the
British Queens. For this purpose, fie now employed all her art
to appease Mary lj, to whom fihc had given so many causes of of-
fence. The arrears of her dowry were intfantly paid ; more punc-
tual remittances were promised for the future; and offers made, not
only to restore, but to extend the privileges of the Scotch ation
in France. It was cafy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of
this sudden change; he well knew the character of her mother-

Knox 343. -- Kith, 2 . J. 2.
2 Sec Appendix, N VLf.

ili~

BooK III. in-law, and laid little stress upon profffions of fiiendfliip, which

-^561' came from a Princess of such a fal.C and unfeeling heart.

THE negociation with England, relative to the marriage, suffered

no interruption, from this application of the French Queen. As
Mary, in compliance to her fubjets, and pressed by the fronge.
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth wav
obliged to break that unaccountable silence, which he had hitlhr-

MXarch. to affected. The secret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Ro-
;;.,:.1 tl bert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared to be the ha,-
i., ;ola ,ill pY man, whom he had chosen to be the husband of a Queen, courtd

bllid by so many Princes K

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were remarkable in tlhe

choice of her Ministers; in distinguishing her favourites, thof great
qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cnafi
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capacity Ir
bufhlefs, their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to whichl
alone fihe attended, in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty i
gracefulness of person, poliflied manners, and courtly addilrfs, weic
the accomplifihments on which file belowevd her favour. She aAci
in the one cafe with the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, the dii-
covered the weakness of a woman. To this Liccfler owed hii;
grandcur. Though remarkable ncitler for eminence in virtue, nor
ilupriority of abilities, tle Qieen's parti:lity difiinuini:cd hlin o:l
every occasion. She railed Iim to the highefl lionours, flIc bc--
Ilowecd on imn tlhe most important employment,l and nanifcic.l
an aflction so disproportionate to his merit, that, in the opi;i)v:i

J Kith, 251j

(d

of that age, it could be accounted for only by the power of planetary BOOK III.
influence -

1564.

Ti:E high spirit of the Scotch QLeen could not well bear the Mar oci-

fi-1t overture of a match with a fu, jed. Her own rank, the fplen- d thb.
dor of her- former marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of
i'f manly powerful Princes, roudci- into her thoughts, and made
her li Tlibly feel hoxw umbling and diiefipLful Liizabeth's pro-
poifa was. She diitrmtbled, Ihowever, with te English Refiin t;
and ,i:,ou-li ithe declared, iln fir. trurnls, what a (deCraation file
would ('ceci this al.;ance, \iil]C l)rol]tllt along with it no advan-
tage, that could julaitv lhch ncgIle t of her own dignity, fc menn-
tioned thie arli of Leicelic, nttwvithllfaiidir, in t.erms i'ill of re-
sped -.

ELJZABETTI, wle mny pref.ine, did not wvii that the popofal r';7:'! c s

should be received in anv eter rmanner. After the extraordinary '"L; '"

li,

marks flie had i'.'n cf ifr o,'n attachment to Leicester, and while i

,

he was i;i i? tc very- i''lt of f'IIvou)r, it is not prlobTlqe ihe could
think crii .:'lnv c;i' m' : .ein

P ; i1 nn

ion al' l:>;er. '.xwas not her aim

to perlu-ade, t.et onl : to an'A, te' ';-. . Almost three years '\\-cr
elapsed since . ier rtirn irnto Scola d ; ald tho'lrh solicitcd b her
fubjcds, an1 couirtd by thc rea.t:: t Pi-i ces in Europ, file had
hitherto been p,1evnted flol n:;marryl 'i,, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabethl . Ai di if, at ti;'; tnc, tlhe jF.i1g!li1h (!e cn could iha;.
enlglgcd I, l r'y to lifl'n to ler pr'oi ;'l iln -avour us jLeicefler l her

)power uv cr tl. ce-.ttr (.' f It.-.;:ov.'n woul e l 1her

t. 1:.-

trad the nc c' ia'tion at ''': ir'; and by I c'i' i 'I-r rival unmar-
ried, she x oouIld have rendlcdI the lroticlt ol her fuccfiion lefb

! .

ac

ccitallze to tlhe n'
i ill.

, C',,lmdtn~ , 5,t|). 1. I7,Atli, ., .*. . ,
j v. 11), '.

I L;,i-;L.~~~~~~~~~~ T.LC'J

BOOK III. LEICESTER's own situation was extremely delicate; and emba-

6-·- raffing. To gain possession of the most amiable woman of the
564. age, to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to

mount the throne of an anc'ent kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a fubje&, much more considerable than him. He saw
all these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
impression on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst
not venture on the most distant discovery of his sentiments, or
take any ftep towards facilitating his acquisition of objects so wor-
thy of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

she was at no pains to conceal *, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scot-
land. Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her resolution
to lead a tingle life, and his being born her own subjet, would have
hindred her from chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
and Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence of her assec-
tion would at length triumph both over the maxims of policy, and
the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then, to
conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scotch Queen to be a
projet for his deftrution; and he imputed it to the malice of Ce-
cil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him honour, intended
to ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen, who dreaded
its success; liflened to by another, who was ecretly determincd

* Mclv. 93, 94. . Ibid. ioh.

.g alin}

ga , B

2i; and scarce desire, by;he man himself, whose interest and BOOK. III.

zpputation i.t was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could not, -
under so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought to a for-
tunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to aft
with equal diflinulation. The former, notwithstanding her fears
of losing Leicetfer, solicited warmly in his behalf. The latter, though
she began about this time to cafl her eyes upon another fubjedt of
England, did not, at once, venture finally to reject Elizabeth's fa-
vourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts, rvary, enter-
was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldet son of the Earl of Lennox. ti'ns tlh'ot-t

of rn3rll

That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re- Lord LD:uliy.
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for
twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's moil
dangerous rival in her claim upon the English fuccefflon. She was
the daughter of Margaret, the eldest fiter of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Angus, whom that Queen married after tle death of her
huiband Jlames IV. In that age, the right and order offuccefilon
was not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at prefcnt. Time, and
the dcifion of almost every cafe that can pofibly happen, have
at last introduced certainty into a mnttcr, which, naturally, is
subject to all the va iety, arising fom the caprice of lawyers,
guided hy obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox,
though bo:n of a econd marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grandaiglhtcr of Margaret. This was not the only advantage
over lMai ic h y

.ich Lady Lennox enjoyed. She was lborn in Eng-

land, and by a maxim of law in that cotntry, witl regard to
pvate it i
critances, ( hoever is not born ill Lngland, or at lit

VoL. I. 1 m 01

Boor III. of parents, who, at the time of his birth, were in the obedi-

ence of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in
the kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer, pro-
duced in a treatise, which he published at this time, and endea-
voured to apply it to the right of fucceffon to the Crown. In a
private cause, these pretexts might have given rife to a long and
doubtful litigation ; where a Crown was at fake, such nice disputes
and subtleties were to be avoided with the utmost care. If Darn-
ly should happen to contract an alliance with any of the powerful
families in England, or fiould publickly profess the Proteflant re-
ligion, these plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to
prove fatal to the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papid.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly
correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year 562 -,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into custody by
Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret correfpon-
dence with the Scotch Queen.

FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,

which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, the entered
into a fill closer connexion with the Earl of Lennox , and invited

P.l;7:.>eth fe- him to return into Scotland. This he endeavoured to conceal fromn
wci'/tli'y' Elizabeth ; but a tranfation of so much importance did not efcapc

the notice of that discerning Princess. She observed, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly with her views,
concerning Scotch affairs. She was pleated to fee the pride of

Carte, IliLt. of Eag. vol. iii. 422. -- Camd, 389. 1 I. 396.

I the

the Scotch Queen sloop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a ub- BOOK III
jet to her bed. Darnly was in no Situation to excite her jealousy, 1564
or her fears. His father's eflate lay in England, and by means of
this pledge, he hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her own
hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which he
had planned out, if her recommendation of Leicefer had been
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no subjea of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permiflion of both Sove-
reigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her
licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together with it,
(he gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and cause to
Mary's friendship and protection *. But, at the fame time, as it
was her manner to involve all her transactions with regard to Scot-
land, in ome degree of perplexity and contradiction; he warned
Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal to herself,
as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient animosity be-
tween him and the house of Hamilton.

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her an

angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a total interruption
of all correspondence between the two Queens . Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; flhe both dreaded the effec's of Elizabeth's re-
fentment, and suffered, by being deprived of a free intercourse with
England, where her Ambalnadors had, all along, carried on, with

* Kcith, 255, 268. t Ibid. 253. Mv. 83.

M Il 2 1tC

BbOK III. some success, secret negociations, which increased the number of
"564." her partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In order to

remove the causes of the present difficulty, Melvil was ent ex-
press to the court of England. He found it no difficult matter to
bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the appearance,
but not the confidence of friendship, which was all that had subsisted,
for some time, between the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's profefions of love to Mary,

and Melvil's replies in name of his Mistress, were made in the lan-
guage of the warmest and most cordial fiiendhfip. But what Mel-
vil truly observes, with refpec to Elizabeth, may be extended
without injuflice to both Queens. " There was neither plain
dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation, envy and
fear *."

Lennox ar- LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence which he had
rives in Scot- obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen, not
land.

only with the refped due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-
mour of his son's marriage to the Queen began to spread over the
kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him, as
the father of their future Master. The Duke of Chatelherault was
the first to take the alarm. -He confidered Lennox, as the ancient
and hereditary enemy of the houfc of Hamilton ; and, in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of hiiinelf and his friends. But the Queen in-
terpofcd her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and employed

Mdlvil, 104.

rl l

all her influence to bring about an accommodation of their differ- Bo K II.
ences ,

1564.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendihip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop A.

AFTER these preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call a meet- ecember,

ing of Parliament. The at of forfeiture pasTed against Lennox in
the year 1545, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the
honours and estate of his ancestors ++

THE ecclefiaflical tranfaions of this year were not considerable. June
In the Affembliesof the church, the fame complaints of the increate Decem. 25.

The Clergy

of idolatry, the fame representations concerning the poverty of the fufpiciols of
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen made to these, tle forl'oP-
and her promises of redress, were more satisfying to the Protestants, ry.
than any they had hitherto obtained [. But, notwithflanding
these declarations in their favour, they could not help harbouring
many fufpicons concerning Mary's designs against their religion.
She had never once conefnted to hear any preacher of the reformed
doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigoted attachment to
the Romish faith. The genius of that superstition, averse, at all
times, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and unrelenting.
Mary had given her friends on the Continent repeated afluranccs of

' Kith, 2.9, Id. I 8. Not. (/). ' Sce Appcndix, N" IX.

11 1d, 533, 539.

Iher

BooK III. her resolution to re-eRfablifh the Catholic church.*. She had inn

----J duftrioufly avoided every opportunity of ratifying the as of Par-
564. liament 1560, in favour of the Reformation. Even the protection,

which ever since her return, file had afforded the Protefant religion,
was merely temporary, and declared by her own proclamation to
be of force, only " till he should take some final order in the
matter of religion ." The vigilant zeal of the preachers was in-
attentive to none of these circumstances. The coldness of their
principal leaders, who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the
court, added to their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they esteemed suitable to the necef-
fity of the times, and which the Qieen reckoned ifirefped-ful, and
insolent. In a meeting of the General Affcmbly, Maitland pub-
lickly accused Knox of teaching seditious doctrine, concerning the
rights of fubjeAs to resist those Sovereigns, who trespass against the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
justify what he had taught. And upon this general dotrine of re-
fifance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in its appl cation
to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably displays
the talents and character of both the disputants; the acuteness of
the former, embelliflied with learning, but prone to subtlety; the
vigorous understanding of the latter, delighting in bold fentiinents,
and superior to all fear t.

6 Two years had already been consumed, in fruitless ncgociations

DiVlll;,ltidn concerning the marriage of the Scotch Queen. Mary had full Ici-
btof

l olli..i- sure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza-

ry, ith re- beth's proceedings, with refpc- to that affair. But, in order to let
g;.d to h1' the real intentions of the Englillh Quen in a clear light, and to biinr

* Carte, vol. iii 415. t Kith, 504, 510. -- Knox, 3,19.

her

her to Come explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at !aft, in- BOOK III.
timated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of fuccefion to

1565.

the Crown of England were publickly acknowledged, she was ready February .
to yield to the solicitations of his Mlif-tefs in behalf of Leiceler .
Nothing could be farther than this from the mind and intention of
Elizabeth. The right of fiucceflion was a myflery, which, dur-
ing her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched, and unex-
plained. She had promiled, however, when lie first began to in-
terell herself in the marriane of the Scotch Qiecn, all that wa now
demanded. How to retreat with decency, how to elude her for-
mer offer, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

TIE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained permission to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrafiment. From the time of Melvil's embafly, Lady Lennox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no
firanger to the ambitions hopes, with which that young nobleman
flattered himielf. She had received repeated advices, from her Mi-
nifters, of the fcntiients, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour -. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his stirring out
of London. In the prefcnt cojun(tec, llowever, nothing could
be of more advan,:i ; to her, than Darnly's journey into Scotland.
She had already brougLt one aor upon the flage, wvhb, under her
management, had, for a long time, amused the Scotch Qieen. She
hoped, no less ablblu:ely, to diret the motions of Darnly, who was
likcwife her ubjedt; and again to involve MIary in all the tediolts
intricacies of negociation. Thcfe motives de crmineld trliziabcth and
her Minifcers to yield to the solicitations of Lady Lennox.

* Keith, 269). i 1i. 259, 2.61, 266.

uP

BOOK III. ' But this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Such

56 unexpeced events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at

Darnly ar- some times, really produced by that pafion. An affair, which had
rives in cot- been the objet of so many political intrigues, and had moved and

interested so many Princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking
of two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the firic
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and gracefulness of person,
he surpassed all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in thole
arts, which add ease and elegance to external form, and which en-

G:ins the able it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age,
(.Ceen'5heart. and of a temper, to feel the full power of these accomplishments.

The impression which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
Ibuary '3. from the time of the:r first interview. The whole business of the

court was to amuse, and entertain this illufirious gue ft ; and in
all there scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were alto-
gether superficial and fliowy, appeared to great advantage. His
conquest of the Queen's heart became compleat. And inclination
now prompted her to conclude a marriage, the firl thoughts of
which had been suggested by considerations merely political.

ELIZABETI contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

increase the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnly's arrival
in Scotland, file, in return to that mefiage, whereby Mary had fig-
nified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an anf'ver, ill
such terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue A. She promised, if the Scotch Queen's marriage with Lci-
ccfter should take place, to advance him to great honours; but
with regard to her title to the Englifl fucccflion, she would nei-
ther fuffcr any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit

' Knox, 369. ' K cilh, 270. Appcnd. 158,

£.

.t to be publicly recognized, till she herself hould declare her BOOK III.
resolution never to marry. Mary, notwithstanding Elizabeth's for- -
mer promises, had reason to expea every thing contained in this 1565-
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear, with patience,
such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery,
with which, under the veil of friendship, he had been so long
abused. She burst into tears of indignation, and expressed, with
the utmost bitterness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her *.

THE natural effec of this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which he pursued her own scheme. Blinded by re-
fentmcnt, as well as by love, she observed no defeas in the man,
whom lhe had chosen; and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impatience, natural to
those paflions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Qeen, the canon law

made it necessary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the cele-
bration of the marriage. For this purpose, the early set on foot a
negociation with the court of Rome -.

SIE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the consent of The French

the French King and his mother. Iaving communicated her de- cO'thcTi;' :.t'
sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau
the French Ambaflador, she employed him, as the most proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other
argulmcnt; to this purpofc, Caftlelnan mnctioncd IMary's attachment
to )Darnl, lwhiclh e c rclpcitcd to he so violent and deep-rooted,

* lKithl, ApipcJnd, 15. ;(.'nl. 3(96.
VoL. I. N that

BooK III. that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match *.
u-.--~6 Nor were the French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's

55 passion. Her pride would never sloop to an alliance with a fubjecl

of France. By this choice, they were delivered from the appre-
henfion of a match with any of the AufIrian Princes, as well as the
danger of too close an union with Elizabeth. And as Darnly pro-
sessed the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigotted schemes
which that court had adopted.
Darnly if- W ILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a

e' b:era l
ofthncobs, measure which she had so much at heart; Darnly, and his father,

by their behaviour, were railing up enemies at home, to obfli ui
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, dilcovered no
great compass of abilities, or political wisdom ; and appears to have
been a man of weak understanding, and violent passions. Darnly
was not superior to his father in underflanding, and all his paflions
were flill more impetuous -. To these, he added that insolence,
which the advantage of external form, when accompanied with no
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the tueen's
favour, he began already to aftume the haughtines of a King, and
to put on that imperious air, which majesty itself can scarce render
tolerable.

p.rticul:l'y IT was by the advice, or at least with the conSent of Murray, and
M""u -.v. his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland and yet,

no looner (lid he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, thanl he
began to enter into ecret cabals with those noblemen, lwho weC;
known to be avowed ene(nmies to Murray, and witl regard to rc-
ligion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery j. Daruly, ftili

* Cafcln. 46.t. 1 KIitlh, 272, 273. Knox, 37. , 274. 11 . 2,

Xsor;(

more imprudent, allowed some rash expreflinns concerning these fa- BOOK III.
vours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to 565

565.
escape him .

Bur, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

THEi low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed hlim The ,,,' .t

in a flation, in which le ought naturally to have re:,ained un-

% U"''i

known to posterity. But what fortune called him to a-, and
to suser in Scotland, obliges hifiory to dccnd from its dignity,
and to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician
in Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontcfe Ambaifa-
dor into Scotland, gained admifilon into the Queen's family, by
his skill in music. His servile condition had taught him suppleness
of fpiri, and insinuating manners. He quickly crept into the
Queen's favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at
that time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now bcgan to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and conllequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
pectants, who have an extreme sagacity in diecovering the paths,
which lead most dirc2ily to success, applicd to him. I'is reconm-
mendations vcerc observed to have great influence over the Queen,
and lie grew to be confiJered, not only as a favourite, but as a
Minifler. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, lwhich always
attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
2,dlic, on the contrary, to dilplay the whole cxtent of his favour.

'* Ki(itl, 2-4.

?',' n J Jc

BOOK III. He affeced to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in pub-

6-y- lic. He equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjets, in rich-
65' nets of dress, and in the number of his attendants. Hle discovered,

in all his behaviour, that afiuming insolence, with which unme-
rited prosperity inSpires an ignoble mind. It was with the utmofi
.indignation that the nobles beheld the power; it was with the u-
most difficulty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Qcen's preicnce they could not forbear treat-
ing him with marks of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power
aione, which exasperatcd the Scots. They confidered him, and not
without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Proteltant religion,
and fufpeed that he held, for this purpose, a ecret correfpondencc
with the court of Rome *.
DnrnI'scon- IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of

lnetion wliti this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on his vanity,

and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was em-
ployed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, towards
eftablilhing him more firmly in her affections -. But whatever be-
nefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not counterbalance
the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exposed, on
account of his familiarity with such an upf(art.

TiioucGi Darnly daily made progress in the Queen's affection,

the conducded herself, however, with such prudent rclfrve, as to
impose on Randolph the Englii Relident, a man otherwise fhrcwj
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that he
entertained not the leat suspicion of the intrigue which was carry-

Bulchan. 340. Mclv, 7, ) Id. 1 lr.

Il^!

ing on; and gave hi, court repeated afurances, that the Scotch BOOK III.
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly '. In the midst of his -
security, Mary despatched Maitland to signify her intention to Eli-
zabeth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage with Darnly.
This embafly was the first thing, which opened tle eyes of Ran-
dolph.

ELIZABETH affected the greatest furprize at this sudden refolu- April s.

otizaStcc Q de~

tion of the Scotch Qcen, but without reason. The train was l.iaest tide.:
laid by herfeif, and she had no cause to wonder when it took es- ,hc Ku.-,<l
fe£. She expressid, at the fame time, her dilapprobation of the Darlly.
match, in the firongeft terms; and pretended to foresee many dan-
gers and inconveniencies arising from it, to both kingdoms. But
this, too, was mere affedation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impof-ible fie could make
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interest into Britain, which Elizabeth had so jufily dreaded, was en-
tirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
sessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident, from all these circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprc-
henfions of danger could not pofiibly be serious; and that, in all
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more of
grimace than of reality -.

Keith, 273. and Append. 159

t Even the Historians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the Scotch

QCeen with a fbje&t was fr from being difagreeabic to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 37 g
Buchan. 9. Cafielnau, who, at that time, was well acIiiaintcd with the in-
trigues of both the litillf courts, arCerts, and upon grounds of great probabilit,
that the Imatch was vholly Elizabeth's own work ; and that fie rejoiced at the ac
i(omplilllhmet of it, Cafllcl. 4(j2 ,. Lappetls lioill tll e let terL her own Ainb.lll -
!rs. IKeith, 280, 28Y.

»r l·ir

BooK III. THERE were not wanting, however, political motives of much

'I---' weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of

great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obtruEt with a weakness,
that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the elevation of her
character. Betides, the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the
great object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her diffatisfaCion
with Mary's conduEt, the hoped to alarm that party in Scotland,
which was attached to the Englihf interest, and to encourage ich
of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly to oppose
it. The feeds of discord would, by this means, be scattered through
that kingdom. InteRtine commotions might arise. Amidst these,
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes, to which the
union of her people might have prompted her. She herself wv,uld
become the umpire between her, and her contending ubjeds. And
England might look on, with security, while a fiorm, which he
had raised, wafted the only kingdom, which could poflibly disturb
its peace.
,I-.y i. IN prosecution of this scheme, (lhe laid before her Privy Coun-

cil the message from the Scotch Queen, and consulted themi with
regard to the answer she should return. Their deterni ation, it
is cafy to conceive, was peif:cdly conormable to her c:.ct view',
They drew up a rcmonarance againfl the intended ni.L,, full of
the imaginary dangers, with which that event thrc .-ned the king--
dom -. Nor did fle think it enough, to figigy her difllpproba-

;cdThlrog- tion of the neafurL, either by Mai.tlanid, Mary's AlAib^ttldor-, or

~ iroron to ob-
i!,t it. by Randolph, her own Rcfident iln cotlad ; in order to add more

dignity to the farce which flie chole to a, fle appointed Sir Ni-

* liKith, 274. cc AppClld. N X.

ci)c(l i,

cholas Throgmorton her Ambalfador Extraordinary. She com-BooK II.
manded him to declare, in the strongest terms, her diffatisfadion '-
with the fep which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame 165.
time, to produce the determination of the Privy Council, as an evi-
dence that the sentiments of the nation were not different from her
own. Not long after, he confined Lady Lennox as a prisoner,
firfi in her own house, and then ent her to the Tower .

INrTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival of

the English Ambassador. In the firt traniports of her indignation,
Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any ncafurcs wth Elizabethl
and tent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmorton, to
return infantly to the English court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after being amused so long to so little purpose;
after being fooled, and imposed on so groifly by her e'alive
artifices; fle was now resolved to gratify her own inclination,
and to ask no other conient, but that of her own iubjets, in the
choice of an husband. IMitland, with his usual iagacity, foresaw
all the eCs of such a rash and angry metage, and ventured ra-
ther to incur the difpleaiure of his Miirefs, by disobeying her con--
mands, than to be made the intrirment of tearing asunder, o
violently, the few remaining tics, which ill linked together the two
Qecns f-.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the Englifil Ambafador with rcfped ; jufified her own condu& with
decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, fle aflfctcd a won-
dierful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the nmealur ; and vcen
pretended, out of complailince, towards her, to put off the con-

' Kith, App end . i.,i. I I. 160.
2, lummation

BOOK III. tunumation of the marriage for some months *. It is probable,

,-56 however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the profpeC

of gaining the content of her own fubjeds, were the real motives
of this delay.

Mr.uiav'tS Tiis consent Mary laboured with the utmost indufiry to obtain.
'cri to The Earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, whote con-

currence was of the greatest importance; but fie had reason to fcru
that it would not be procured without extreme difficulty. From the
time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
Qteen's affections began gradually to be etranged from him. Darn-
ly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, combined againl: him.
hsis ambitious spirit could not brook this diminution of his power,
which his former services had so little merited. HIe retired into
the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom lie was unable
to contend . The return of the Earl of Bothwell, his avowed
enemy, who had been accused of a design upon his life, and who
had resided for ome time in foreign countries, obliged him to at-
tend to his own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could persuade
him to a reconcilement withl that nobleman. ITe infiled on lavin:r
him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durfl not appear in opposition
to a man, who came to the place of trial, attended by 5o to
his followers on horseback. Hie was once more conllrained to lea'c
the kingdom ; but, ,by the Quieen's command, the ientencc of out-
)awrvy, which is incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced
againil him 4..

K1,citi, Ap'n. ix . S. 1 I2. ?72, 27.,. Appj nd, 159
t Il, ibid. 160.

BUT Mary, sensible of how much importance it was, to gain a sub- BOOK III.
jed so powerful and so popular as the Earl ofMurray, invited him back -''" -'

1565.

to court, and received him with many demonfirations of refped and ,ay 8.
confidence. At last fle desired him to set an example to her other sub-
Jets by subscribing a paper, containing a formal approbation of her
marriage with Darnly. Murray had many reasons to hesitate, and even
to withhold his aent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Qteen, but discovered, on every occasion, a rooted avcr-
lion to his person. By consenting to his elevation to the throne,
he would give him such an acceflion of dignity and power, as no
man willingly befows on an enemy. The unhappy confcquinces
which might follow upon a breach witli England were, likewile, of
conilderable weight with Mlurray. lic had always openly prefer-
red a confederacy with England, before the ancient alliance with
France. By his means chiefly, this change in the fem of Intion-
al politics had been brought about. A league with England had
been efiablifiled; and he could not think of iacrificing, to a rash
and youthful patlion, an alliance of lo much utility to tle kingdom;
and which, he and the other nobles wxee bound, y every obliga-
tion, to maintain '. Nor was tie interefi of religion forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though fur:ounded by Protest t Co' nfcillo;e,
had found means to hold a dangerous corrcfponidcncc with forcijn
Catholics. She had even courted the Pope's protcctio:), whlo litd
lent her a subsidy of Sooo crowns -j. Though Mtlrlav had hitler-
to endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the recbrn:ed clIergy, andi to
fct the Queen's condul in the nmot favourible lii t, y t 1JILT o(li-
ftinatc adhereince to her own rcli; ion, cou!ll nit liii ,u allariil
him, and by her rclolulLion to nntiry a lapit, tile ou ,y l (,c ul'

> KItihl, 1(,). 1] d. ;3. 7civ. ii..
Vo01. I. () o rcclaim--

BOOK II[. reclaiming her, which remained, was for ever cut off. Each of these

- - considerations had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-

mined him to decline complying, at that time, with the Queen's
request.

May 14. THE convention of nobles, which was assembled a few days
AiCo;:ofhi- after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen. Many
nobles ap- of them, without hesitation, expressed their approbation of the in-
pr o es of tlhe
mlarriabe. tended match ; but as others were Ilartled at the fame dangers which

had alarmed Mvurray, or were influenced by his example, to refu:e
their content, another Convention was appointed at Perth, in order
to deliberate more fully concerning this matter *.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition fihe had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclination,
produced their usual effet on her heart, they confirmed her passion,
and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age imputed an
affection, so excessive, to the influence of witchcraft -. It was ow-
ing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible power of youth
and beauty, over a young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy
with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen, and the
applause of many among her subjects, his natural haughtincfs and
insolence became insupportable, and he could no longer bear advice,
far less contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be the fiuft
person who informed him that Mary, in order to tooth Elizabeth,
had delayed, for some time, creating him Duke of Albany, he,
in a frcnzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to flab him l .

* Keith, 83. Knox, 373. l Kith, 283. :I Ibid. Append. IGc.

It required all Mary's attention, to prevent his falling under that BOOK III.
contempt, to which such behaviour deservedly exposed him. -6-

I565.
IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address more re- Mary'saddrcs

in gaining her

markably displayed. Love sharpened her invention, and made her fubjsa,.
study every method of gaining her fubjeds. Many of the nobles
ile won by her caresses, and more by her promises. On some ile
beosowed lands, to others fie gave new titles of honour . She
even condescended to court the Protefiant clergy. And having in-
vited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, e declared, in
firong terms, her resolution to prote&l their religion, expreiffd her
willingness to be present at a conference upon the points in doc-
trine which were disputed between the Proteiants and Papifls, and
went so far as to fiow some deiire to hear such of their preachers,
as were most remarkable for moderation . By these arts, the Oueen
gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unlcfs their jealousy be
raised by repeated injuries, arc always ready to view tle ations of
their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his aflociates were plinly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a rain, ofher
displeasure at the intended match ; fle treat:d Lady Lennox wiih o
much rigour ; hfie wrote to the Scotch Q Lcen iln such' nrf1o tenIs;
hic recalled the Earl of Lennox and his oin in such a peremptory
i:lmner, anld with such fevcrc dcnunci.tions of hr v'Cen enc' , if
they prel'clmccl to difb'y K j tll.it ;'11 tl.c lk cp d'i.,r;s ( ' 'lion
fully pcrfialccd tilln' of h It inccrity. This belief fortifltid their
froplcs x ithi rc elkct to the nll ittch , .nidLi cn c .[l .d
() ln te'nl t) opn-

' KLihth , 2'-. ; I i'[lux, 373. Xi', 2.25, ",''.

() () 2 pole

BOOK I. pose it. They began with forming among themselves bonds of con-
'6-- - ffederacy a d mutual defence; they entered into a secret corrcfpon-

565. dence with the Englifi Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's a-

fiflance, when it should become needful *; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger, as might counter-
balance the influence of those arts, which the Queen had em-
ployed.
Scheics of BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both

ar.; ~- parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit-

g..i1 l:1 ca l o-
thji. able to the fpiriit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,

whichl le imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate to
get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to afafiinate him,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on hrs
part, despairing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
lhal, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of Ar-
gyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a
prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this Convention

might have been attended with consequences extremely tragical; but
both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those againift whom they were formed. VMurray, being warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court, who fill favoured
his interest, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary,
receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fide(s, of guilt, and inflamned with refcntmcnt,
it was impossible they could either forget the violence, whicl thclin.

'' KIith, 289 , 22, ;S.

sic!

selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against them. BOOK III.
All hope of reconcilement was at an end fiom that moment, and --
their mutual enmity burst out with every ffmptom of implacable 15
hatred *'

ON

T The reality of thefc two oppofitc confpiraciks has given occasion to many- dlifputts,

and mtuch contradicfion. Some deny that any dfign was formed against the life
of Mulray; others call in qucllioi the truth of the conspiracy agaiinft Darnly. There
fein, however, to be good reasons for believing both; thlouh the Zcl and credu-
lity of party-writers have added to each, many exaigeratedl circulmlanccs. 'I he
following arguments render it probabl, that iome violence was intended against
M urray.

i. TlL i pofitivcly asSritcd Iy B ri -hian, 341. 2. The En li il Rufent writ 3 to

Cecil, tat MIurray was afitredll informed that a 'fin \\as lid to murkr hliin
at Pcrth, anJd defctlibes te manlne iln vlic this plot was to have been execiuted.
K]eitl, 2-7. -. iMtr himsel conflaatly and p liekly atliriltd, tt fch a
decign was formed againill1 is lif. Keih, A. , . And tiu ),;h iht wa',s clled upon
by the tten to bring leaIl ceidence of lis altsltion, an:l a itfc collndt o: lred
him, whnile he came to court for that put i pll,.. Ibid. Yet whoever conlicfldrs lr-
ray's situation, and thl fpiiit o t. wlio rit lcd ill conrt at that tilme, mwi f arce
deem it any proof of his guilt, that lie did not eh.ufL to ril k lis perulon f!i.h f-
curity. 4. The frios pafions of Darnlc, the ficrcenel; t

cf i. rcf in m!i t, s.v;tch

fcrnpled at no vioe!nce, andthe ni thlle aii , render the imptatio of £tch
a crilme lss improb.ble.

II. That Murray a n his ai, tes icls had r-cfolx'ed to fizc Darnl 's pcIlonl prer-s

i. From the exprf; tc'C\iolv oft M'lh il, 12. J:hI'm,e; l,, p 3 r,

2an.t J;I)X,

p. 377, afiLt-, but without ;reaon, to iprifect thli s l:s 1; i ic runloull. 2.
qcleflioln waSs put to Randlollp, xshlther the (;(l\c'-loi- ( ol aiJic' \,ollt cl . i'Ce
Li(nniox andl hi; ftn, if they welt C rric1

i r liliars to>lI tat pi.t,'. Jl': I l: iiv

flcws, tl;t ulic fi(ch d Lfin w.!; in hllid, ;a :lndolllh did not disc g e it, t..

the a :fwer w'lich he ae. lx', 79o. , ''l ic p Il iit 'liO, \\ih \hich l c

()?,'c'n' ictil'ed, ,qrin t i' l',i:t , hle g,:i '' [k'1 ITi:, I/ldll (li 'l t, ai'e ll)(!llj

, dl II ,'
Ra::' lpi, ,")1. 4. A i.ea, pait, o the i',,i!h n,,bl,,, and imong tlie ti, : '.;' -

.(

BOOK III. ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, (he summoned her vassals by
'-- --' proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither in
Mary um- arms, for the protedion of her person against her foreign and do-
mios her vas- meftic enemies . She was obeyed with all the promptness and
fails to take
arms against alacrity, with which fubje(ts run to defend a mild and popular ad-
Murray ministration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great mea-

of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the design, afTert the reality
of the conspiracy. Good, vol. ii. 358.

All thefc crcumflances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both confpira-

cies. But we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from public records,
falls fiort, on both fides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph,
in their accounts of the confiphlcy against Murray, differ widely in almost every
circuniitance. The accounts of the attempt upon Daruly, are not more confiltent.
Ttlclvil alledgcs, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
into England; the propofa made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fay;,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Anrev's, and Darnly to Castle Camp-
bell. The I.ords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have
been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine thcQ ueen in Lochleven durinr
life, and to usurp the government. To elieve, implicitly, w h:atevcr they find in
an ancient paper, is a flly to which Antiquaries are liable. lBt ancient papers
often contain nothing more than the sanders of a party, and the lie of the day.
The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of tiis ind ; it is plainly ranco-
rous, and written in the very heat of fation. MIany things are airted in it,
evidently faltle, or exaggerated. Iet Mi-rr andt his coinederates ce as ambitious
as we C'n fuppore, they must have had fin pcncils, andl plaln ib! ones too, be-
tfol they coold veilture to i)ptifon their Sovireign fur li., .nd to feizc tihe reini
of government; but, at that ti i.i, the Qcen's ctindiu had. ai.tE,-cd ino colou-:bl,:
cx,'.ti' for pioceedin, lo fLch

; L tcmi;ks. it i, likcx\ile, i lmarka!le, that in all

the pi nclin:;lihns ai:infi lurray, of which so anyll) ale pl'ifhed in Keilth, A p-
p',i l<ici; &c. . litler the violent attempt tup om l)anl, nor that which he is -
ledgd to have formed againll the (tiecn her-self, ale cx cr one mc 'nitioed.

* IKith, .'9;.

si I'c

sure to Murray, who had direded her adminifration with great BooK III.
prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obliterated

I565.

the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient of con-
tradition, and apt to confider those who dilputed her will, as ene-
mies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight of
her vengeance. For this purpose, flie summoned him to appear before July 19
her upon a ihort warning, to anfwver to such things as hould be laid
to his charge *. At this very time, Murray, and the Lords who ad-
hered to him, were afcmbled at Stirling, to deliberate what course
they should hold, in such a difficult conjundurc. But the current of
popular favour ran so strongly against them; ani, notwithfand-
ing tome fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation, such a
general dilpofition to gratify the Qccn, in a matter which so near-
ly concerncd her, that, without cominig to any other conclusion,
than to implore the Queen of England's protcdtion, they put an end
to their inefiedual consultations, and returned every man to his
own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of her enemies weakness, the

confluence of her fubjC s from all corners of te kingdonl,
afforded M\ary an agrceable proof of her ovn firength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous iituation, fl: determined to bring
to a period, an aftair, which had 1t long egrc:ffd her heart, and
occupied her attention. On the 2 9th July, fIe married Ienry Cc!lcbr.lteT
'tewart Lord Darnlv. The cerenmony was perforedlil in the Qicer 's :': \"' Li'
chapel, according to the rites of tlie ltoinifi church ; the l'ope's
Lul, diftcntlfilng with their irn:' ria c, 1having bc n re cvionflv o(l-
taiined J-. She iltLlcil, at thle ln:1 ti;,i', prodlllations, conferrin

* IKilt, A/\)lcl, ICLI. c:. I- l. j07.

1 the

BOOK III. the title of King of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that

-T 1 -6 henceforth all writs at law hould run in the joint names of King

and Queen *. Nothing can be' a stronger proof of the violence of
Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last ftep.
Whether fle had any right to chufe a husband, without consent of
Parliament, was, in that age, a matter of ftome dispute t-; that he
had no right to confer upon him, by her private authority, the title
and dignity of King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise her
husband to be the Mafler of her people, seens to be beyond all
doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not, how-
ever, the gift of the Q2ueen, but of the nation; and the consent of
Parliament was obtained, before he ventured to alTume it. Darn-
ly's condition, as a fubjecO, rendered it Itill more neceffiuy to have
the concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour. Such a
iolent and unprecedented stretch of prerogative, as the substituting
a proclamation in place of an act of Parliament, might have jufily
alarmed the nation. But the QLcln polcited b cntirely the confi-
dence of her fubjets, that, notwithftalding all the clamours of
the malecontents, no tymptoms of general discontent appeared on
that account.

EvEN amiidl that scene ofjoy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not ufficr the couric of her vengeance
a -ainft the malecontcnt nobles to be interrupted. Threce days at-
tcr the m:'lriagc, Murray was again rummnoncl to court, under
the Itvcrcil -c.lnalti,, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour cf
jil icc to(!) place, and ihe was (dccI11rCd ;I out laV 5:J. At the lam1C
time, the Q()un let at liberty Lord (Gurlon, who cvcr tince lis

An!e.Jci (t, i. 3,. S.;c Appead. N" XI. t- luc il.t .1. .I. :ih, 3,
3 i,.

iltlit r'';

father's infurreltion in the year 1562, had been detained a rifoer ; Book Ill.
she recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con- ~--
cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and he permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The firJt, and last of thcfe,
were among the most powerful fubje'ts in the kingdonm, and all
of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whon they
efleemed the enemy of their families, and the author of their own
fuflfrings. This common hatred became the foundation of thel
ftriteft union with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. IMurray himself confidered this confederacy witl
his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication than any :csi:,ri
fie had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

TIHE ialccontents liad not yet openly taken up arms . 13ut thle 1::Li.- ..

Queen having ordered her fuiijces to march againflt them, they -were . ..:, :.
driven to the last extremity. They found themfclvcs unable, hiw- ali' '1
ever, to mnake he1ad apgainll the nun:erouis forces, which larv
had aflcmbled ; and fled into Argyll, ire, in cxpctlation of aid
from Elizabeth, to whom they had sec, :ly dcfpat.hcd a Ilmllengcr,
in order to implore her imnmediate afi nce F-.

IMEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to censiar.aF Mlarv, by a L, .:.:: ;.:.
new declaration cflher ditgufit at her conductd. TSe bamcd both .,., ,

'' Aitcl' t'.i si tiitlc5f conifultatloin at Sil]i;Sn , t1.c LoiL' cir'-l ) t',il ,\' in

h uioi.s. KIitlh, 32-1. t\nll.iv \vs fill t St. An1d'c'' on July 22. K('il, ) .,
;y tlie piI(cs oft rcl cz.'l ;, ipp)intcitl hi tli ill,litl,ints a the o i'i el t (t)t:l-
ti::, A nu tl: .. it ,p c. l' thl.lt the' Qt ilx 'i's iFitcin i.)] .

\\i.. ID ,tI' ilii File, the

co ltl i,, \\'i1ich l llll',it , lI tllc , lK il .l vx, ;nd ,th r clni,,', ,,i In n.ild c n,71 ir,

lidiil. I<L lih, t>. IcKir (li",lit into tle v 11, I<.i!'. ., l .\ 'll. i li[i c!]
.ci.tdin, man t!i' i, ilOLl rciXij.vo)ii x\ is alici'lI. ktitil, i .

-| Keilh, 312. I|n x, ,'
V',l T1 1. .

Book III. her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which he

--- -- had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,
I565. whom fle fiill called her fubjeds, to return into England. And at

the lame time, fie warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whole
behaviour she represented to be not only innocent, but laudable.
This imcfilge, it mortifying to the pride of the Queen, and so full of
contempt for her husband, was rendered fRill more insupportable, by
the pettlallt and fucy demeanour of Tamworth, the person who
delivered it -!. lMary vindicated lher own condu wit'l warmtlh,
but with gat iLrh'ngch of rcalob, and rejeced the intcrcefflon in be-
halF of -I'r!av, not vwithout igns ot' relentment at Elizabeth's pre-
ten ingi to intermedidle in the internal government of her king-
dom -.

EC2r did not, on that account, intermit in the leail the ardo'.r,

with which flhe pursued Miurray and his adherents +. They now
appeared openly in arms; and having received a inall fupp!y
in money fiomn Elizabeth jj, were endelaourilng to raise thcir fil-
lowers in the wecfern coun ties. But Mary's vigilance hindcrL(d
them fromt afiembling in any coniliderable boiy. All her military
operations, at tat time, were concerted with wisdom, cxecuted
with vigour, andi attended witlh lfcccfs. In order to encoura';
her troops, ile hcrfelf marched along with them, rode with loaded

:* Clind 39S. -1- Kcitli, Appcnd. go.

! TChe moI confli crablc ptc fn;:; hio joil>cl Mrtrr:iy, W\vC tle Dkc .

(wf ('i i

hu.n ti', the '(.r']:; (of Ar'yll, (Cllei ll, uoti .;V2 L~urJ; J;o\\ l :wdii () iifc

i '

...

i.::.<itd: (;,.s n;mc, (ii, ininicliiiUliL h.

, I:lnii5, ai ii c

;,

IiJL , ' , D

i 'i .i ;',
l'm'r;'l.,'.', (ol'pt >llcl'-, ;a .l thec T t or <t J, 'licur. ](1 'x, 3.,2.

1 plil.! ,

piflols , and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for- Booi IIL.
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible resolution,
which, together with their superiority in number, deterred the 55
malecontents froma facing them in the field; but having artfully
passed the Qeen's army, they marched with the utmost precipita-
tion to Edliburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of
that citv to arms. The Quecn did not susser them to remain long ,.I:?; r3.
utiimnoleltcd ; and, on her ppoc, tey were orced to abandon
that place, and retire in confusion towards the western borders --

As it was unccrtain, for fomc thi;c, vhat rout tlihy had talcn, T'rcl, :-

. -.

Mary eCplo,)1oedt that inltcrval in pro vidinL for the scc iriy cf the I "i
couitics ill the heal't of theic .i:.' She fc ized the pIlaCCs
ficrit'o, wilich bicc:<r^ to ti'he r:l:; 1 and obliged the coni1'er-
alel i.....os ,i toio, j" 'res waiaF ,]

fii U._ il' i f! iccd, to j}o;/ in al-

'.iC i or

t( er d,,ncC 1. Ii i ti; l ,l, tliC co n .try hc-

tG\t;... L'ul '- .;cs, \wl...-'-. t:'" rc' ,..'; the:cn \ .;'e, I)i;;'il;n SIc! - re-

tr_.;;'i, tt'>5' hi~. ';. l.-r- t i." het}c Qi.= n, ."'", '' evzr, pl.cC

wlK;':c t ,' ,:;.;t . , s:l ' ' .; ';. P.",,

aCId cn!t'i'i.. v:.;..)li: ov cr-

tur , to. 'Ia . .

tl- ; ;

l, r;st

.'5 ;-.V
) , ~'''{ '

the n-^ ^.a.

., it;, .' ;. ..'; n t.'4 ,r ;- - .

. ;~" ;

V . _, ii:,. .U ',i
L ic I t P \\ i :\ . t'' ii 1!i.

To .

:or i],iiL ;. ,

!:, ,©i ! . '

, . ,

, . ;.

.i

: ,

' "1,,' . '*, 1 i' .,. . 4-' i ,

.'
s';.
, 1 "

,r~ ~ ~ ~ ~ i,. .

'
j

10ooK Itl. zabeth herself treated them with extreme neglen2. She had fully

-6'. gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such discord and

jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long ditfract
and weaken Mary's councils. IIer business now, was to save appeai-
ances, and to justify herfelfto the Ministers of France and Spain, who
accued her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues.
The expedient flie contrived for her vindication, itrongly displays
her own charader, and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Murray, and Iamil-
ton Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugitives
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that welcome recep-
tion which was due to men, who, out of confidence in her prolnics
had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
fa, our of an audience, until they had meanly consented to acknow-
ledge, in the presence of the French and Spanill Ambaflado,-s,
that Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to take arnms
No fuoncr did they make this declaration, than fie astonished themn
wvilh this reply, " You have declared the truth; I am far from t-L-
ting an example of rebellion to my own fubjeds, by countcnancin:-
tlolc who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treason, of which
you have been guilty, is detetfable; and as traitors I banih you
friom my pretenlce ''." Notwithilanding this scene of farce and of
falfliood, so dihonourable to all the persons who ated a part in it,
l;lizabctlh permitted the nalecontents peaceably to reside in her
donilionss, supplicd them iecretly with money, and renewcdl he:
,i>itlatiolus w\ith the Scotch Quecin in their favour -.

1Mc:v. 12, -I Ki:ox, 39.

Ti"

THE advantage he had gained over them did not satisfy Mary; flle BOOK III.

resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which ihe dread- v-
ed, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With this view, 156 5
fle called a meeting of Parliament; and in order that a sentence of
forfei;ure might be legally pronounced against the banified Lords,
fihe summoned them, by public proclamation, to appear before it *. Deccmb:r i

TrE Dke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-

tained a separate pardon ; but not without diiicultv, as the King
violently opposed it. Ile was obliged, however, to leave teic king-
dom, and to rfide for onme time in France .

TiiE numerous fbrces vwIch .Lryv brolught i;to the field, the

vigcur with whic !he aced, and the len'trh of time he kept
theml in irms, reicimb'.e the cir-lts of a Piine with revenues much
miore c:.nildcra,ll' tinIl Lii,: wich she pofiflcd. But armies
were tnei l'vi;! anl m!t.'ined by a Frince, at finall cha-ge.
The vz.i7l' fll.'. i hi' s

i 1 crio,-, a d the fulcrior attended the

Monarch, at ii oi-'\'i CXnc,'-cc. Si: hunrcd lorilnme;n, i;owever,
and three cc.-;i:s of f ';,

o bci;Jcs lher G(ards, receied rIc-

gular Ipan firo: tc, c

h' - ncr rdin ar,' cli"r', tog -

t -ir

with t';he , '., 1:, ' .. 'i r i . ii ' exlm lei'. a

treaibr'. v, , ": :.

n'un !.v

n ~

I .: rich. Ill tils cxiency, ,ux-

ny devic= x',. :' i. 'i uoun ') r

; i g t i-cy. liines w(re lc-

viel o; ith so'. o b i . '. '.', , i' t'Ir , iid

Zl di lc', v,; l!

\Vei i'it.' .i
(, .,' ' ,. ;.- i 'j ti 'i'':!,i'; ' ..: t.'. Oi,t: /in t ruil ua' l t.; ' , v. :

~ii ~iLtl : tili' l !. '();1 ',l;' ti l ;,lt', l1" l '!;; a . a ;!('L s;i

iw as '. i..! .!' wi .

.n ·' ' 'on ,:' .
'. ,' i '.

li ni ' c.'';^ .l c ;..l1.: C; (1;'!. ;b i / ! . ' '. y ;-* i-- .rl.

BooK III. to delays, and flarted difficulties, in order to avoid it. These Mary

" ""^ construcd to be as of avowed disobedience, and infl'antly com-

3 mitted several of them to prison. But this severity did not sub-

due the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the in-
habitants. The Queen was obliged to beflow upon the city, the
.fipcab'ority of the town of Leith, in return for which file obtained
a considerable fum of money *. The thirds of cccleliallical be-
nefices proved another iource, whence the Qcen derived fonlc
supply. About this time, we find the ProtcRfant clergy complainl-
ing more bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is pro-
bable, exhaufled a great part of that fund, which was approiri-
ated for their maintenance -.
Chulrchl as- T'lE Affeniblies of the church were not unconcerned fpt-c.

tors of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the D]ectlr>,
June 24. fivcral o the male ontent nobles were prefcnt, and fcsm
to have 1aid great influence o thllr deciions. The hli'h flrainl i
wb hich the Afienblly a.d!icfld the Qeicen, can be imputed only to
thole rears and jealoulics, wiit regard to religion, which they e-
deavoured to infuse! into the nition. The afiembly complaincJ,
with foie bittcrnc, of the op whaich had been put to the pro-
grcis of the Refoimation I) the Que n's arrival in Scotland; the-
required not only the total fupprlilion of thePopiil worship tlhrcngi-
out tle kinb!:i:n, but even in thli: lcn's own (hapel ; and l,1-
J. cs tle l' c1 ta !.fL n t: c f the 'rotcflant i li- , tlh y .

.inlliLi that iacvly L.crt

~llo1 1 llii5ly embrace it. 'h r.

,t, tel' lin'l ,;cli!' .1 i l, iAplicJ! , tl:lt 1.: t c'[ r ] cr

< OIiK

. :,', i-

',

h i-' i,t,. l l, \,)i.i '-rIliit l1cr t) i (tic {:,ie: a tic,. Tl ,::;
wodl{ld 1.: c'. ci' rcpiti-ch l 1icr lbr a c.(ni c, \v'l lil proccLL l I :t.

11' 1\iLC N, 3

O ' c' i

c L, 27.

<t'

, JU .

i bI.ii, l.vi'

ldi:k, cnlr, h,
.7.

no inward conl.i&'ilcon; the latter would susser by the offncc, which BooK II.
her apoI;fcy mun: give to the Kin, of France, and her other allies --"i-
on the continent ',

Ir is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the Qucenl's

affairs, during this year, began to work tome change in favour of
her religion. The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caihls, openly
attendlied maas; flie hellfif afforded tlhe Catuiics a more avowcd
protcdiion than fornmerly; and, by ller pcnlimiioni, fuin" o te an-
tient Monks ventured to preach publiciy to the people --.

K* Kloy, 374, 376, 1 9 3'-

i II ;

# BOOK IV.

THE
T H E
A S T 0 Y

O F
S C O T A N D*

BOOK 0 IV

13ooi. IV. A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached,
- v"766. r Mary and her Ministers were employed in deliberating

,{66.
:;, ' .ih concerning the course which it was moit proper to hold
1 ,~l.i"!;o1- with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to
itJ'! nvib.!. let no bounds to the rigour of juflice. The nalecontents had la-

boured to defeat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her
paflions in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a party,
whoe friendship she had been obliged to court, while fie held
their principles in abhorrence ; and they were firmly attached to a
ival, whom iLe had good reason both to fear and to hate.

1BUT, on the other hand, fevcral weighty considerations might be

urged . Thle noblemen, whose fate was in ffpencc,, were lamonr tile
nol powervil ihbjcdts in the kingdom; their wealth g!-cat, their cIn-
neli(ons cxtcnlivc; and their adlllcrenlts lnumerous. They were

1Y

now at mercy, the objeds of compaflon, and suing for pardon with BOOK IV.
the most humble fubmifilon.

j566.

IN those circumfiances, an ac of clemency would exalt the

QUeen's charader, and appear no les splendid among foreigners,
than acceptable to her own fubjetts. Mary herself, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives,
fromn various quarters. Morton, Rutllen, Maitland, and all who
had been mcmbers of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-uffcrers; nor neglcd-
ful of their ffictv, which they eeemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pofilfeed the Queen's con-
idence, ficoindcd their solicitations. And Murray, having sloopcd
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous offecur-
in-, his protedion againfl the King, whose diipleafure lie had late-
ly incurred, seconded the intercefiions of his other friends, with
tlie whole of his influence *. The interpolition of Sir Nicholas
Thrognorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's ArnbalLidor in
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more wight than all these,
and attended with more fucccis. Throlgmorton, cut of enmity to
Cecil, had decp!y embarked in all the intrig'ecs iwhi were caicd
on at the Enrlifli coutrt, in order to ullddermine the powclr aLd cl;.1it
of that Miniiicr. lie epoulbd fi)r this reatln, the caule of ti;,
Scoctch (Qicen, towards w lole title and pi-ctc ifolis tlie otllcr x \.s
known to bcar little favour; and ventured in te tprcl t critical iInc-
ture, to write a letter to M ar , cu iitaii', tlic \11 A ji l lut.:rV ad-
vices witl -regard to her condlu . 1 Ic rcconnadLcd tlle ardL ;-

MJ'li, 2.

il
\OL. I. (.) q i1'

BooK IV. ing of the Earl of Murray and his alociates, as a meafire no Ief
--- - pirutdelt, than popular. An ac ion of this nature, fays he, the pure

effc L of your M:ijc:'v's gcnerofity, will fprcad the fame of your le-
1litv and inoderation, and engage the Englilh to look towards your
acchfiiol to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with de-
fie. By the fame means, a pcrfie harmony will be rcftorcd
among your own fublijts, who, if any rupture flould happen wit
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
amency cannot fil of inspiring '.

Sic r,-), 1,c TIFSE prudlent remonstrances of Throgmorton, to which hi;
tU, t,:: tli, Z. ci'tI tation Iob- '.viitom, an il kllI)wn nttl chment to the (Q een, ad{dd

.. ' ''.at authorii, ntmade a deep einpreiion on her i'rit. 1-ler cour-

tiers cultivated tis on, :and prevailed on her, not-

vitia.hnding tle 'King's

inex .,I tcmnper, to facrificc her own pr:i

vatc rclentnecnt to the intercefieon of her if;ubjcs, and the wiihcs
of her f:riends . \Vi.ih this view, the Parliament, whilhl had been
called to m:et on tlhe th of Februar5, was rorogued to te 7th of
A'ril . ; And i:l tlhe mean tilme, fle was busy in conflring the
manne r andl f;orm in which ie filould extend her favour to the
Lor!ids ,nwo were un:er dii lacC.

T(roucn lMarvy discovered, on tlis occasion, a mind naturally

tr, ., .. i* - rone to iumI.:iL\ , and cnapal l i e
o ,Livint ed, h, ow-

, ec , firnm n! to r;'c tlc inli ee, I 'ii was fatally employ ,

1~ ...

'
.

' ie*,;,~ i~tA t?~? c't,_ .; tlTiu a,(l'[.,lc te(liloliuii. About.tl s t{Ini lc

I. . ;,,'

: i:. }x.;m 'c:s :i'

,c:: --n t:/tclt ctl;, t v, ,i: cn.yu,,~, a
u 'vcd i wt,

.* 1. :L, .t - .. 1 25. , . . . . ;.

Cl C'[11Oi" '.

cermcony alone; he congratulated tie Qjcen oil her 1Larriage, BoOK IV.
and invested the King with the ensigns of the ordcr of St. Michael. -

6.

The inftlruitions of te latter related to inatters of more import-
ance, and produced greater eife'ls c .

AN interview between Charles IX. and his fiflr the Quen of

Spain had been often proposed ; and after nmasiy oflacles arising
from the interference of political interePt, was at last atppointed at
B3ayonne. Catherine of Mledicis accompanied her lon ; the Duke of
Alva attended his M7ifreis. LAmidil the fccncs of public pomp
and plcafure, which fectned to be the file occupation cf bo:h courts,
a feme was formed and meafurcs concerted, for extcrnlinltinG
the Hugonots in France, the Protc:ants in the lo'.v countiks, and
for lupprefliin tlic -eformation thou u al Euro pe-{. The
active policy of Pope Pius IV. and the 'l of the Cardinal of Lor-
rai;, colnfirmed-l and cncotiraogd cdiofition, ) fui-able to the
genius of tilh Romifli riion, anld I beneficiel to t on'i
order.

Ir ,as a an ccount of ti,' 1'lv l.'uc \ i;ic tt ' FrenchiI e-nvo

bro un ht to I 1\ry, c,0on -i K h:';"', at t.Lc 1.'1me t;' ', ai the i; alc o'

thie Nil.' oi r'!;nce, and tbl' C.rdin;. l 1 -.'!,li: , r''t t .- r,', c t:e
leaders c' the I rotflants in tEcr iin ;-don to p.'.';r aid Lvo'i:' , al

the \very tiw llcn the Ctholl I' ':c were conibi;, i toci.
F1rov that se, i1 all the countric; et ..i .

P t)I':R'.' i a f.Iccie:' (s r.llb. rc! < , , rc .'I , ' f.)r tu' n '

poftli)on it tails (l t];e h;eart. C ')lll'2i v. irvi .! )i'

.i.tu ..;.
into tlie ll illii l '!a c 1ara tCr, an . ; i.; lnlt;. ti bl liT l '. pci i I ' ;,:,.}

Q
iI 'i

1 (~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~iI0

BOOK IV. observation of many successive ages; it arrived at lait toa degree of

-, perfeftion, which no former fyflem of fupelrfition had ever attained.

There is no power in the understanding, and no paflion in the heart,
to which it does not present objeas, adapted to rouse, and to inte-
reft them. Neither the love of pleasure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had ecured them fiom the dominion of
bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers, were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar
to ccclefiaftics; and Kings and Miniiers thought themfclves bound,
in ccnfcicnce, to extirpate the I'roteflant doctrine. Mary herself
was deeply tincured with all the prejudices of Popery; a paflion-
ate attachment to that fuiperflition is visible in every part of her clia-
racter, and runs through all the scenes of her life: fhle was de-
voted, too, with the utmost ubmition to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomcd, from her infancy, to liflen
to all their advices, with a filial reifpct. The prospect of rcto:-in.
the public exerci!e (of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing with her uncles, and the h 'pcs of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, wvhom the present situation of her affairs in England made
it necefi ry to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confidera-
tions which had formerly weighed with her. She infantly joincd
the confederacy, which had been formed for the dcftiruiion of [ihe
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her conduct, xwith
regard to lMurray and his adilerents ".

To this ftal rfolttion may be imputed all the fu!bftqucnt ca-

lunitics of lary s life. Eiver fuice her return into Scolnlw, for-
1tllle il;y be lIidl to have 1V . Cl propitious to hcr, ra-l1icr th!n .iadvclrt;
aldl if lieC-r irofiLcity dd not li( to any gre-at heiglt, it had, how-

:cc AppcniJix, NI. 'XIV.

CVC1',

:ever, suffered no considerable interruption. - A thick and fettled Booc IV.
cloud of adverfitv, with few gleams of hope, and none of real en- ---.
jovrnent, covers the remainder of her days. 66

THE effects of the new fyficm, which Mary had adopted, were , Pri;nlment
soon visible. The time of the prorogation of ParJiament was short- ctid ,t at.

tiint the exil-

ened; and by a new proclamation, the 2th of March was fixed ed ob!es.
for its meeting *. MNar rcfolved, without any further delay, to
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the fame time,
determined to tke ome ileps towards the re-eflablifhment of the
Romish religion in Scotland +. The Lords of the Articles wc:e
chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufiiief which was to come bCefreC
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Queen coald
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin o Murray and
his party Itenmed now inevitable, and the danger of the Rcftrmcd
Church imminent, wshen an event unc^; e;uly happened, which

Kith, 326.

- It is not on the authority of Knox alun c, th.t \v ecl-za",, tl,a

Q Cnccn \ith the

decfii n of rc-eftabliniing the Roman Cathlolh rcli, ion. I, iil..1, afrts that
the altars, which ihould h:.c bt n c'c[tcd in ti : chl (ii h of St. (;i!cs \e c 1 :,l s::iy
pro\i uc, . 74. i. M rIy hc_ ;-f, in . !tIter , ) i.' li"- h; p of (i a ow her Ain -
bnflLador ii France, alkno'cdigcs, " th t tht i t i lii.:;nclt, IC i iled t, i:
(lone some ,qool, with rcfpc t to ntq)ihl; t' oi1l i ''ii." Kc;th. .3:. ? 'I-
Syirittel Lord:, i.e. the ('Nid't c e' *ie'it-' !- i~!, 1h la. authirity, rcftimcd 1', i

..i-

(i'nt plicc in tlhat afL.mli',. i j d. 4 ,'. I . l j)JnJ. tlec ,;lu_,.d ,

a :' I,,
to; ,..,

i L· Po 1: 1

}
k c ,1L

Keith, ArpFen. . 4- ...

:e . .'.

:.i: ! L' c-let'r i il ! itLr t |.':i; t '

tiCe h ii'.',i!n, il,iJ. ;xnil il.iJ.,!.i tll.h I. v :

." :, j e 1';: 1::: 1 i
f .;i l I11i, \, i )

,llh. ile ,l it, (;oi>. o,1, .i. -. j c. '1.t '.\v... .,1, h

i .) w zi: i1i1 i!h J [>5 t ;e \. it-

Iith ( p. of ; (,<i (,)\v \\'.it l e

1 .1ii.]; t,' xlil ; I, i.: .1/., ''. . ,i/ ,,

' ..' !i ,. ;'h.,t

ti.e (P 'ed it,1 ll i ht a

l e . i"I ui e , in 1mi:. lui ii.!ie'it, i i imt ile

l', i l.: i!-

me;t of tile C'.,tIl hc ei atli

l ,, lt h.e

. th ;i . tM. .' t s

ia olohi., J'

t>t,.
vLl ii. o ;.

Liv'd

BooK IV. saved both. If we regard either te barbarity of that age, when
T T 6 such ads of violence were common, or the mean condition of the
15 5 6.

An pvent- unhappy person who suffered, the event is little remarkable; but if
ed thc con-
sii,.cygl'ii;i we reflect upon the circumfances with which it was attended, or
kizoi. upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely me-

morable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with

great care.

Parn'v ons DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited that sudden and
f:ictiol. violent passion which railed him to the throne. But the qualities

of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his prfon. Of a
weak undcrdtanding, and without experience, conceited at the fame
time of his own abilitis, and acribing his extraordinary success en-
tirely to his dilinguified merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impreflion on such a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
his imperious and ungovenable spirit. All her attention to place
about him pe;fonls capable of directing his conduct, could not prc-
fcLTvc hiUal f1roml rafl aind imprudcnt actions'. Fond of all the amlnie-
:r.cn!., anid even prone to all the vccs of youth, he became, by
tcc rrcc s, carcleks of her pcri, an, a rangcr to her compan!v
To a scwoman. afind a ccxn, finch behaviour v:as intolerable. Th.'
lov cr sec lhad stoopcd to rail: himi, is beliaviour appeared te
iore u encl'rous ad c rimial. And ii proportion to the trenntli
of iicr firll a, i ,ciiun, was thlw vil,'.ci ne itcl \\'hich her diilppni tcd
)p~ti ~ n] ow ( ;pc ;:l'd. A fl : min; 'i s tr tli r th
marriag e, ti ll -

ii3f c c; ' rcls le("'an to 1,- '''i ,r,'c-,. _lie c ' ava? ncc of Dar;I
1v'. :;;! ii ,)n gave 'irU to t!el's-. Mlis'c:al of 'bh in, lJtisfi:d \With tiia:

r'-,!. ; c\ }<, lyc' , l1y \\,hi.h l qir .1.' t1' c 'rl'cn' c1l h 1]im the tilt!c
i.' King, ;mied tdniittci l'i i to a ill.ii i, tlc .imini llration, lie de-

:: c;',._ [. \otil. '. I?...

...l. I

manded the Crown Matrimonial with mol insolent importunity *. BooK IV.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was beyond her power, .--
and that the authority of Parliament must be interposed to bellow 5
it, he wanted either underfianding to comprehend, or temper to
admit so just a defence; and often renewed and urged his re-
quell.

Rrzio, whom the King had at first taken into great confidence, s;,?,,s R-

did not humour him in thelc follies. Bvy t'hi, he incurcd Henry's , o, lc
difpleafuire; and as it was ipoflible for Mary to behave towards
her husband with the fame affitlion, which diftiiiguified the firl
and happy ldays of their union, he imuted this coldncs, iiot to
his own behaviour, whnich lhad oi well merited it, ut to tie i;,'i-
nuations of Rizio. Mary ' own conduiL confirmed andi iren.tien-
ed tl'ic frifpicions. She treated this firang.er with a familiaritv, ar:
admitted him to a fiare in 1hr confidence, to vhicl neither his firl
condition, nor the oce f]e hiad lately be'owed uon him, grav
him any title. tie ,,was perpetually in lher i-c'ncc, i.ttrmcd;Lic.i
in every buiLneis, and, together with a fw Lv'.nou;c-, was the
companion of all her private amusements. The hauLty fQ-iit of
Darnly culd not bear the iitrfer-ence ofielch an ilpf'L.t And iin-
patient cf any delay, and unreflraiincd by ay .;i-le, Ih in'lanly
reiflved to et rid of' Iim by violence.

ATr the f;lmc time, aothcr jdci,

w>iLh took its riL- from vr i

difi c'cri t oi' . iAcs, v'as carryi!:; on ;<'ai: i;ll to I e

iic ' liz:o. :i - , '

tI)lii ,

iLlut2l'Cll, ,i:' il., ;\

t ,'.l 1' V, Oc, t'. :

t. c ( ;.lei1Vc's i.

il all s£o: eCr coIi1O tio1m tiy jY V;I .1i I /1 11i' 1
::\'iti1 I" -

BOOK IV. ray, though in the late infurredion they had deserted him, for va-

-6~- rious reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,

and during the minority of the present Earl, acted as Chief of the
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw that Murray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped, by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himself neceflary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expectations. The King's
headstrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The Queen
could not help dirtrufting men who had been so long and so inti-
mately connected with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to
those Counsellors who complied wilh all her inclinations. The re-
turn ofthat nobleman and his followers was therefore the only event
which could reflore Morton, Maitland, and their afTociates to their
former accndant over the Qecen's councils. For this reason, no-
thing could e more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray with all
his interei, as nwr !le mr active if-uirncnt in promoting the
ineafures which were concerted for the ruin of that nobleman.
This officiots zeal complleavcd the dii;,ull which the nob!es had
conceivd agannr him, aitn iilulicd tlm with thouglts of ven-
geance, in no wis uite

lua to jultice, to humanity, or to their own
dignity.

XVn:l re

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the King corn- BooK IV.
municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, 1 66

1566.

and implored his afliftance, and that of his friends, towards the hey corn-
execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to them "c lTn ":dc
than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages they would li,,i.
reap, by the concurrence of such an associate Their own private
revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an aft of obedi-
ence to the King; and they did not despair of obtaining the refo-
ration of their banished friends, and fecuritv for the P otefant re-
ligion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than raih, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every possible precaution for their own safety. Th y did not, in the
mean time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man in that intriguing age, in all the arts of in-
iinuation and address, took the young Prince under his management.
He wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to obtain the Ma-
trimonial Crown. lie represented Rizio's credit with the Queen
to be the chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand.
This minion, alone, he Laid, poilefed her confidence; and out of
complaifancc to him, her fubjets, her nobility, and even her hus-
band, were excluded firom any participation of her feci'et councils.
Under the appearance of a confidence merely political, lie infi-
nuated, and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of another
and more criminal nature might be concealed *. Such various and

compli-

* (O)' ;il ll lhifiori.ns, ttlchanal n alonlc avow\l y acci is Iy

fccu

. a criinal

iovc (or Rl.zio, '40, o 44. Knox fliightly infiiilatc'; ti.hat fulch ;t i (icin w.VIS
'Iltcrt:'.int'l, 3,,1. iclviJ, i 1i (oI ivt'lfltioi x\'il tle Qiccn, illiri.atcs th t
w\yas ar;iai hcl f.iniliaity with Rl izio mliit be llblc o mi:onlil 'li), 11 (.

\'i.. 1. R r 'I'
,k¢

BOOK IV. complicated paions raged in the King's bosom, with the utmofl

6 - ' fury. He became more impatient than ever of any delay, and even
S 66. threatened to strike the intended blow with his own hand. At lall,

preliminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for their mu-
tual security agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banished Lords, to consent to their return into Scot-
land, to obtain for them an ample remifion of all their crimes, and
to support, to the utmost of his power, the religion which was
now eftablifled in the kingdom. On their parts, they undertook
to procure the Matrimonial Crown for Henry, to secure his right
of fuccefiion, if the Queen fiould die before him, and to defend
that right to the utternofl, againlt whatever person should presume
to dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, mould hap-
pen to be killed In prosecuting of the design, the King promised to
acknowledge himself to be the author of the enterprize, and to
protect those who were embarked in it ".

NOTHING

The King himself seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his expostulation with
the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given creit to thcfe suspicions, Melv.

2.7. Kcith, Append. 123, 124. But, in opposition to these suspicions, and they
are nothing more, we may obfcrve that Raulet the Queen's French Secretary was dif-
miffed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office in December I564.
Keith, 268. It was in consequence of this preferment, that he acquired his great
credit with the Queen, Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months
after, Keith, 269. The Queen immediatcly conceived for him a palTion, which had
all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this passion, and pro-
moted the marriage with all his intcrcll, AMelv. i i i. During some months after
the marriage, the Q(ccn's fondncfs for D.rnly continued. She soon proved with
child. From this enumeration of circumftanccs, it appears almoll impofliblc ti;it
the Qcn, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, couLi

* Good. vol. i. 2(6.

C.l ry'

No'rHING now remained but to concert the plan of operation, to BooK IV,
chufe the aors, and to assign them their parts in perpetrating this

- 1566.

detestable crime. Every circumifance here paints and charade-perpetrate
rizes the manners and men of that age, and fills us with horror at tht re'st
both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was the palce.
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth month
of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been ftized
clfelwhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproacling
Rizio with his crimes before the QLeen's face. Tle Earl of
Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
direa an enterprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthvcn, who had
been confined to his bed for three months, by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was cntrufted with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himfeif needed to be supported by two
men, lie came abroad to commit a murder in the pretence of his
Sovereign.

ON the gth of March, Morton entered the court of the palace with

an hundred and sixty men ; and without noise, or meeting with any
resistance, seized all the gates. While the Qeen was at supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domestics, the King fud-
denly entered the apartment, by a private paflage. At his back,
was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that ghastly and

carry on any criminal intriguc with Rizio. B]ut the filcincc of Randolph the Eng.
lifi Rcfidcnt, a man abtmllu tly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's filults,
andl who docs not once insinuate that her conidclnce in Rizio concealed any thing
ciiiminal, is in itfclf a fuficicnt vindication of hci inoccncc.

R r 2 horrid

BOOK IV. horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three or four

~' of his moit truity accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-
I566.

pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio intfantly appre-
hended that he was the victim at whom the blow was aimed; and
in the utmost consternation retired behind the Queen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might
prove some proteAion to him. The conspirators had proceeded too
far to be refrained by any consideration of that kind. Numbers of
armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger,
and with a furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he had occupied too
long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threatenings, to
save her favourite. But, notwithstanding all there, he was torn
from her by violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his life,
piercing his body with fifty fix wounds *.

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queen,

who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durfl not fled the
noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a itranger. Some of
them were difinffed, and others made their escape.

hv coIfinel TIE conspirators, in the mean time, kept poffefiion of the pa-
ti; ("CI lace, and guarded the Queen with the utmoit care. A proclarna-

tion was published by the King, prohibiting the Parliament to meet
on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for prc-

* Sec Appendix, No XV.

vent-

venting any tumult in the city *. Murray, Rothes, and their fol- BOOK IV.
lowers, being informed of every flep taken against Rizio, arrived I-
at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received
both by King and Queen. By the former, on account of the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
latter, because he hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power fie fill felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded any
crime fle could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wrealing
her vengeance on them, ile became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to hin. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en.-
gaged him to labour for their fafery. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruth-
ven into her presence, and to grant them the promise of pardon in
whatsoever terms they flmould deem necealry for their own fe-
curity.

THE King, mean while, flood aflonifhed at the boldness and
success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course to hold. But Ilie gin

the Kin, allt.n

The Queen observed his irresolution, and availed herielf of it. She makes h1.
employed all her art to diSengage him from his new associates. His cliapc.
confcioufiefs of the insult which he had offered to so illustrious a
benefadrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and complaisance.
In spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the Queen's artifi-
ces, she prevailed on him to dismiss the guards which the conlfi-

* Keith, AppcnJ. i,(6

rator.;

BOOK IV. rators had placed on her person. And that fame night he made hi;

-5f)6 ecape along with her, attended by three persons only, and retired
Marich 11. to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had been communicated

to Huntly and Bothwell, and they ere quickly joined by them,
and several other of the nobles. Eothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crouded to their Chief, in
such numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the power of the
conspirators at defiance.

l rcoci!c l Tiiis sudden flight filled them with inexpreflible conflernation.
to the c:.iied They had obtained a proinifc of pardon ; and it now appeared, from
xobk'~.

the Queen's condut, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the accomplibfirent of it; but thir Ineflengcr was
detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards Edinbturgh,
at the head of 8000 men, talked in the higheit firain of resentment
:and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time, to separate
Murray and his aftlciates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sen-
iible that the union ofthefe parties would form a confederacy, which
might prove formidable to the Crown, fle expressed great willing-
ness to receive the former into favour; towards the latter, fle de-
clared herself inexorable. Murray and his followers were no le1s
willing to accept of pardon, on her own terms. The conspirators
againil Rizio, deprived of every resource, and incapable of refil -
,i.rch 19. ance, fled precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed iitua-

tions with Murray and his party, who left that place a few days
before.

ThC ;11,,;,'-r No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as tlh
i,-lo s'l i,t10 Earl of Morton, cver egaged in a more unfortunate enterprize. I)c-

ie3tcd

3

ferted basely by the King, who now denied his knowledge of the BOOK IV.
conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoned ungenerously ---
by Murray and his party *, he was obliged to fly from his native 1566
country, to resign the highefl office, and to part with one of the
most opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed againfl

those concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it muff be obf rved, that
only two persons, and these of no considerable rank, fuffeied for
this crime 7.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumflance, which, though

fornewhat detached, defervcs not to be forgotten. In the confede-
racy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was afiafination, the preserving of the Reformed Church is,
neverthles, one of the nmof considerable articles; and the fame
men who were preparing to violate one of the first duties of mora-
lity, afi:cted the highest regard for religion. History relates thele ex-
travagancies of the human mind, without pretending to juflify, or
even to account for them ; and regulating her own opinions by the
eternal and immutable laws ofjufice ad of viitue, points out uch
inconfiicncics, as features of the age which file dfcribes, and re-
cords them for the inflrution of ages to come.

As this is the second infrance of deliberate affifination which , niot-.c

has occurred, and as we shall hereafter meet with many other in- 'ilI ,,lt;li'y
fiances of the fame crilie, the caulcs which gave rile to a practice iilnl ;1 tiat
io shocking to humanity, defcrve our particular attention. Resent- "
mcnt is, for obvious and wife rcafons, one of the frongeft pafiions
in the human mind. The natural demand of this paflion is, that

* Mclv. 13 I. Kcill, Appendix I jo, 3-4.

the

BOOK IV. the person who feels the injury should himself inflic the vengeance
---_w due on that account. The permitting this, however, would have

5 66. been deflruAtive to society; and punishment would have known

no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this reason, in
the very infancy of the social ifate, the sword was taken out of pri-
vate hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But, at first, while
laws aimed at rcfiraiinig, they really strengthened the principle of
revenge. The earliefi and most simple punishment for crimes was
retaliation ; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former institution. In both these, the gratifica-
tion of private revenge was the object of law ; and he who fuffircd
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to pursue, to exact,
or to remit the puniflment. While laws allowed such full scope to
the revenge of one party, the interests of the other were not
negleced. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjustly accused, the person
to whom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adversary
to ingle combat, and on obtaining the vitory, vindicated his own
honour. In almofl: every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Juflice had feldorn occasion to use
lher balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The pafTion
of revenge was nourifled by all these means, and grew, by daily
idulgence, to be incredibly firong. Mankind became halituated
to blood, not only in times of wvar, but of peace; and fiom this,
as well as other causes, contradced an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. Tlis ferocity, however, made it neciesary to dif-
courag the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of compenlla-
tions in criminal cafes; and to think of tome milder method of ter-
minating difputcs concerningl civil rights. The puniflillmets for

Cl'illC,'

crimes became more evere, and the regulations concerning pro- BOOK IV.
perty more fixed ; but the Princes, whose province it was to in-
slid the one, and to enforce the other, poffefled little power. Great
offenders dcfpifed their authority; smaller ones sheltered themselves
under the jurifdidion of those, from whose protecion they expecqed
impunity. The administration ofjuflice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to puniflh the crimes of a Chieftain, or even
of his vassals, often excited rebellions, and civil wars. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the causes of discord were
many and unavoidable, wlo were quick in difccrning an injury,
and impatient to revenge it; who esteemed it infamous to submit
to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him who confidered the right
of puniflinlg thole who had injured them, as a privilege of their
order, and a mark of independancy; such flow proceedings were
extremely unfatisfadory. The blood of their adversary was, in their
opinion, the only thing which could wash away an affront; where that
was not flied, their revenge was difappointed,their courage became sus-
peded, and a slain was left on their honour. That vengeance, which
the impotent hand of the Magifirate could not insid, their own could
eallly execute; under governments so feeble, men afiutned, as in a
slate of nature, the right of judging, and redrefltng their owVn wrotngs.
And thus afiaflination, a crime of all others the moll delrudl-ive to
focicty, came not only to be allowed, but to be deemedl honour-
able.

THE hiflory of IEurope, durilg the i4th and 15th centuries,

abounds with dcteflabli infanccs of this crime. It prcvailed cLiefly
among the IFrlnch ;and Scots, bc\'t'ci whomt'1 thtre was a cloic
intcrcouric at thai time, and a Iurpriling, reclmblllce in their na-
tional cliaradr.lcls. 1 1 407, the only brother oI the King of France

VoLO . S f was

BE:OK IV. was murdered publickly in the ftrcets of Paris, and infiead ofpunifh-

-5I6 ing this horrible aion, an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in
I5 6. d

defence of it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to mnain-
tain the lawfulnes of aflamrnation. In 1417, it required all the
eloquence and authority of the fnmous Gerfon, to prevail on the
Council of Conflance to condemn this proposition, " That there are
some cafes in which affafination is a virtue more meritorious in a
Knight than in a Squire, and more meritorious in a King than in a
Knight *." The number of eminent persons who were murdered
in France and Scotland, on account either of private, or plitical,
or religious quarrels, during the 5th and (6th centuries, is almaoil
incredible. Even aer thole causes, which firfl gave rife to tiis
barbarous pratdice were removed ; after the jurifdicion of Magistrates,
and the authority of laws were better established, and become more
universal; after the progress of learning and philosophy had polifil
the manners, and humanized the minds of men, this crime con:i-
rued in some degree. It was towards the clole of the 7ih ccn--
tury before it disappeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the accefion of James VI. to the
throne of England, seems to have put a flop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national cufl-om, both on the

understanding and on the heart, and how far it may go towarL,
perverting or extinguihilng moral principles of the grectc ilo t:-t-
ance, is remarkable. The authors of those ages have perfc&liv i:.-
bibcd the fntiments of their cotcmporarics, with regardi to a!filii-
nation ; and tlihe, vlio had Icilure to rcflect, and to juelc, aplcr
to be no morre (locked at this crime, than tle pcrions xvllo co,)n-
mitted it during the heat and impetuolity of paflion. BucllanaI:

L'Lvant. limi Cou,c. dc: Cu :.f,

r

relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without BOOK IV.
exprefling those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-- -6

.0~~ i.~~ . 1~566.

dignation which became an historian . Knox, whose mind was
fiercer and more unpolifled, talks of the death of Beatoun and of
the Duke of Guile, not only without censure, but with the utmost
exultation -~. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross mentions the
afIaflination of the Earl of Murray, with some degree of applause
Blackwood dwells upon it with the molt indecent triumph, and
ascribes it directly to the hand of God ij. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal ator in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
some short time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one exprefiion of regret, or one symptom of com-
pundtion for a crime no less diflonourable, than barbarous -*. Mor-
ton, equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame senti-
ments concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he himself
nor the MIiniiiers who attended him, seem to have conlidered it as
an attion which called for repentance; even then he talks of Dn-
,ii's /7?t!z-'htci' as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able deed 'f---. The vices of another age astonish and flock us;
the vices of our own becomle fllili-ar, and excite little horror. W\e
return from tils digr-ciion to the couc.fe of the hiltor.

THiE charm, which had at fl:'f attached the Q()e:o to Drnly, i,, ,Th -c :.

and heldi them for romIe t:iie in an happy union, was niowv entire- re .,' ;,,
ly dii]Ti\ed ; anld love no 1l: eiU cover i; 0 his follics and v1ices \x \ih :, ii.-
'ts fiendly veil, they appared t v their fill (dimcnlion a ld
d j l'. iitv i ~l}'l. , l :rv,, ptlltill't*l a pw; cLan .tio;:, dilclaiilj, .r

Hil T,11, ,I 7C

,I

any n ovledge of tlhe conyl ira.cy agai iif I
i zi.io, tl'c (e cIn v','as iilly

* l liis. '( i5, 3 1 .

] i Anl-ii',
> 1 1 '']s. . i' .

!! Ji,.L'.

2. I(<.
' *' I.'ll!l i 1 a,. 11,' 1 ,1 'i,\vi. M ci . .\pj ctnJ.

.1 Sc ' ";: ' : :x,; N '
N .

S I Z corne'icd,

Boorc IV: convinced, that he was not only accessory to the contrivance, but

6------' to the commiflion of that odious crime *. That very power,

which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness, she had conferred up-
on him, he had employed to insult her authority, to limit her pre-
rogative, and to endanger.her person. Such an outrage, it was
imnpofiolle any woman could bear, or forgive. Culd civilities, ie-
cret diflruf:, frequent quarrels, succeedcd to their former transpor-ts
of affcdtion and confidence. The Queen's favours were no longer
conveyed through his hands. The croud of expectants ceased to
court his patronage, which they found to avail so little. Among
the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others complained of
his pcrfidioufiefs ; and all of them delpifctd the wealnefs of his
undcrRfandin, and the inconflancy of his heart. The people them-
1zlves observed lome parts of his conduct, which little suited the
dignity of a King. Addited to drunkenness, beyond what the
manners of that age could bear, and indulging irregular pafions,
which even the liccntioufiefs of youth could not excuse, he, by his
indecent behaviour, provoked the Qeen to the utmost; and the
paiimons which it occasioned, often forced tears fiom her eves both
in public and in private--. Her aversion for him increased every day,
and could be no longer concealed. Ite was often absent from court,
appeared there with little splendor, and was trufied with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to please the Queen,
who favoured Morton and his affociatcs, or who adhered to the
hotufe of Hamilton ; he was left almnoio alone i a nelectcd land
unpitied olitude {.

Tri',, ,- of ABOu r this ti:ne a new favourite grew into great credit vitll th

il0 ,li ,lL- e

c
Qccn, and soon ailled an acndant over her hciart, which cncou-

* IKeith, 350. - Ibid. 32)9 : i. 131, -c.

ragc.1c

raged his enterprising genius to form dcfigns that proved fatal to BooK IV.
himself, and the occasion of all MIary's fu!lfejqent misfortunes. "-""

1566.

This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the heal of an ancient
family, and by his extensive poffeflions and numerous vafiids, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that
turlulent age, when ib many vast projcSs were laid open to an
afpiing mind, and invited it to action, no man's ambition was
more (aingr tlhan Bothwcll's, or had recourse to bolder or more
singular expedients for obtainin power. Vhen a every pr-
son of diflinion in the kingdom, whether Papist cr Protcflart, Lad
joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous encroachmnents
of the I rench upon the liberties of the nation, lie, though an avowic.
Proteflant, adhe;ed to the Qicen Regent, and acted wlth v:i,-!r o
her fide. The fuccelf which attend(ed the arms of the Congrrega-
tion having obliged him to retire into France, he wa tkcn into
the Qtjcen's lervice, and continued with ]her till the time of her re-
turn into Scotland *. From that period, every frep of his condua
tovwards iary as remrahly dutiful; a mdhi

ai all the fliftins

of faltion, we fcarlcely ever fiind him oldingi an!y co'J.ic wli could
be ofeniive to her. When Mlurray's proceedings \wih regard to
her marriage gave umbrage to the Queen', fle recal!ed Botl:v'll
from that banilihmcnt into which fle had vwith rcuance d!iiven
him, and confilered his zeal a, abities a the mV:'crfitl
supports of her authlo; it. WIien t co-'nip'r a: i iio
seized her petioIn, lie became ti,- ciii t ini!i!:!!: ci rcc. ',''i
h.'r liberty, and (eriveld her, on tat oceL ali, ,

lth iL im ich s

s :-

lity andl uccels, as made the de( cp.' i.i,c i .):1 o,! her mind, and
greatly incrcafed the confilInce \ i:! ii i e l d iCtliei*Co placed in

. Andci; i. -.

lihl'!,

BOOK VI.him *. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of her bounty; fle

566." raised him to offices of profit and of trust, and tranfated no mat-

ter of importance without his advice t-. By complaisance and as-
fiduity, he confirmed and fortified there dispositions of the Queen
in his favour, and insensibly paved the way towards that vast projec,
which his immoderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and at the expence of many
crimes, he at lafl accomplished.

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a flnder guard, it seemed impru-
dent to expose her person, at that time, to the insults lie might
suiTer in a kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny. For
this rcafon, the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her rcfidence
in the caifle of Edinburgh, the firongeft fortress in the kingdom,
and the most proper place for the security of her person . In order
to render this security more perfect, Mary laboured to cxtilnguifih
the domestic feuds which divided ome of the principal nobles. Mur-
ray and Argyll wvre exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell, by
reciprocal and repeated injuries,, The Queen, by her authority
and enltreaties, effeted a reconcilement among them, and drew from
them a prorifi to bury their dilcords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that fie made it the con-
dition on which Ite again received Murray into favour I1.

Or: ile t of J,

N CMarl'y wVias dclive of llher only si JLanes, a
.1!, -' ', l. P" it" \VR'iolc lbirtih x'' h''i.'ippv for tlIc 'L! !c iiland, and uniortun'itc

to lIc,' aloCe. jis ac, ci'iol to te t!I:hone ofi El Iandi united tlic t

"- .ilMmt !'. . K,

'. *| M lv. 133. i|.Ix, o ;', 6.
. lE till], ji 5. 11 Ibid. j j'. Appcitl 1,(i .

div, !i,

divided kingdoms in oin mighty monarchy, and fcabliicd the SooK IV.
power of Great Britain on a firm foundation. \Vhi'e fie, torn --

I 53.

caily from her ifon b te cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to
indulge tltofe tenider iaiTin s, nor to tafle those joys which fill the
heart of a mother.

MEI.vrrI was inflantfl dcpatced to London with an account

of tis event. It si - Elizleth, at fill, in a fcnlble manner;l
and the advantage and ifueriority which her rival had acquid by
the birth of a son, forced tcas from lir eyes. But before Mrlvil
was admitted to audielnce hie had lo far recovered the commrlni.
of herself, as to receive him not olly with decency, but with x-
ceffive cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation \which
Mar)y gave hier, to and goldmoiler to her son'.

As Mary loved fndr and magnc, fle :-eolved to cc-

lebrate the b:ptifml of the )ou gi Prince \with grcat poni; am' I;r
that purofe tent invitations of the faine kind to thel Frinch iK-ing,
and to the Duke of "avoy, the uncle of her formcr !ulbani.

TH17 Queen, on her recovery, difcoveredl no ichann e in her fen- :, '

timncuts with reipc t to tile King *-. e death or izlo, and tlhe ' :T'
cnanteri.nc hle had givelii to an adion io i i'nt a! Ai ',i

.
, ,,

;t*i:n i] .

a . 1 1 i J i. r ii L 1 ' I ' *

t .

- - , ,

atb ' :
._ ),L' lee

\2 ]c'.

'.A ,il li l

e neh r i,'' . : .s rcl c' i ',
}\ in!

..'..; a ;. in.ir n I 'r'1., ' x' lil l

j\,','' ;': ' 1II \'i[i

ile t[1i l I ' [?: r2ci-( 'an I: n '( :i, C I, ill
to l,.'t .l' aI'.3 au't 'r it; j 'i'le e ,_.il btw¢ecn th ni, beCaie

,:t l.. 1, '.

J '. .'\~' l. ,!":;',Il .' L; .
, I, . ['} i: , oS : DJi . I :-'.

} Li..c, 'Ji'i,,nd. o...e y

c
.~ c Cy

BOOK IV. every day more apparent . Attempts were made toward a re.

I5'66. concilement, particularly by Caftelnau the French Ambassador;

but after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy mat-
ter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on
the King and Qicen to pass two nights together --, we may, with
great probability, pronounce this appearance of union, to which
Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere; we know with certainty
that it was not lasting.

ITer attach- BOTIHWELL, all tle while, was the Queen's prime confident.
mCint o rutl - Without his participation no business was concluded, and no favour

beRlowed. Together with this acendant over her councils, Both-
well, if we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired no
less sway over her heart. But at what precise time, this ambitious
Lord first allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the place of
that duty and refpet which a subjed owes his Sovereign; or hlen
Mlary, inflead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a pafion of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.
Such delicate transitions of paflion can be discerned only by those,
who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and who can view
the fccret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble fation allowed them only a distant access to the QiCeen and
her avourite. And the ardor of their zeal, and the vioience of
their prju.iiccs, rndlcl thleir opiiions rafli, precipitate, and inaccu-
ra te. l' is 1j the crflTcIs of tlis rcipirocal pafoln, rather than by
tlici! ac;counts of it, tliat flubfuent hiltorians can judge of its reality.

A AVEN 1 JR(Jus as Blth\cvll's proIje to gain tleIC Qnen mav an-
pcar, it wvas oimcdl anLt carried ol under very favourable cilcum-

* Kitlh, Appcnd. ,.9, -1 Ibid.

tqa IIL'C:.

flances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She pofeffed great BOOK IV.
sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmofl tenderness
of affedion. She had placed her love on a very unworthy object,
who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with neglec,
with insolence, and with brutality. All these she felt, and relented.
In this situation, the attention and complaisance of a man, who
had vindicated her authority, and protected her person; who en-
tered into all her views, who soothed all her paflions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design, and re-
commending his paflion ':, could scarce fail of making an impref-
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

TIHE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and accuf- Thc i;, ,,e-

tomed to command, could not bear the contempt undr which he c ci,'tl,,, aCe
had now fallen, and the Rate of insignificancy to which e saw himn
fclf reduced. But in a country, where he was universally hated or
deied, h:e could never hope to form a party, which would c-
cond any attempt he mighit make to recover power. IIc addref-
ftd him;clf, tthrefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France
:and Sptain, with many profcfions of iis ovn ':al so.;: tlie Ca.ho-
lic rel igio, and with bitter co:rnpi.oiis againil tlhc ()1ec:l, ior I.e-
lecilng to promote that interell -. And fcon altcr, le took a
refolutlon, equally wild and detlpcrate, of cml.arkin'g on board a
sip, whiclh lie had provided, and of lyving into :orci n parts. It
is a!mol iinpofiillli to form ainy i tisfactorv conlc'tirc

aoicr in

tile motives lwhich inlllC'ienc a a.iicioli alnd irre- lr lil I; , 1Ic
hoped, pec-li,is, t recommenild Iiiinl'f to the Cailillc 'liinccs ol
tihc coIltilciit, by his / al for rclI''i,)n, and tl.it il'cv wot 'd cm-
ploy tlicir i rclltEL to\;h.le

rcinl li in tlc p l;l ol tllat

poVCIwer w liil l , d

l il . Icrhaps, ie cxp t'tld lOtli
', xoc tli.iii

Anol , 4. . , . 'xln, 59).
"V oL. . I . ' s. t i t

BOOK IV. the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now fa'ten,

66'-- among firangers, who had never been witnesses of his former pro-

'566' fpcrity.

iciIr. Te con:municatd his design to the French Ambassador Le Croc,
oubh beioL;r and to his fther the Earl of Lennox. They both endcavoucrd to

diniv-ade him from it, but wilhout success. Lennox, who ifcms,
as well as his foin, to have los the Queen's confidence, and who,
about this time, was fcldorn at court, inflantly communicated the
nattcr to her by a letter. fienry, who had rcfufed to accompany
the Queen from Stirlin to Edinburgh, was likcwie ablfet from
court. lle arrived there, oeeron the ilime (dIy ihe received'
the account of his in:ended flighlt. Ite was more than ufallv wa -
wvard and peeviih. H-e icrupled to enter the palace, ulnicl certain
Lcrds who attended the Queen were difmified. M\ary was oblied
to meet him without the gates. At las he fuiered her to condift
him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to driw frcm him
the reasons of tle firange resolution which he hlad taken, a!nd to
divert him from it. But in spite of all her arguments and cntr!ea-
ties, he remained ilent and inflexible. Next day the Privy Cou' ;1,
by her direction, expofliilatcd with him on the fame head. [e per-
filled, howvver, in his sullenness and obstinacy ; and ineiher dC4.ne
to explain the motives of his conduct, nor signified any intention
of altering it. As e left the apartment, le turned towards tC
Qpeen, and told her, that fle should not fe his face :aiin, for a
long time. A few days after, he wrote to MIary, ant m1,entioni-
two tinL, s groiuns of his d(ifguf She ] c'f-ll, lie id, no
ionig-r admitted hi m into any confidence, aid had depi ved l:'t1
of all power , and tlic nobles, after her example, trcatld ,ii : v. ii'
open Incglcet, o1 that lhe appeared in every place without the di-
nity5 and Iplccdor of1 a King.

No^! 1 1 I \j

NOT'-ING could be more mortifying to Mary, than this intended BooK IV.

rlight of the King's, wilich wo ld have spread the infamy of their "-'
doiemsiHc quarrel all over Europe. Compa:fion for a Monarch who ;;;
would then appear to be forced into exile by licr neglect and ill usage, ¥"~' 2'"
mnight have diirofied mankind to entertain fcntinents concerning the tsl2c: sli,:it.
caues of their discord, little to her advantage. In or,'er, therefore,
to prepoflf2s the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputat on
from any ccnfure with whiclh Danry might endeavour to load it,
tle Privy Conncil tran:fmnittd a narrative of' this w2ole tranlc'ion,
both to the K;:n-, and to the Qiecn .:'other of£ rance. I: is dawu
with reat art, and fits Mary's cod uci in the mioft: fav.or'lc oint
of light ¢.

Aou? this time, the licence of the bcrdcrers c:alld for rcdrci,

And i.ul-y reftoivig to hold a cou!.i of juilicc at Jcdburgh, the
iiliaboi';its of fcveral a jacent c:intics erce fnlmonc to attend
tlicir <ov<;ei.n in nr a acclrd(i: to CiiOoa.l . I-(.Llv'ell was,
at tait tii:c, i auntcal r o' all ie :ma-chcs, nn c:lCof
ailno:. toe n ii.L i:mprtant in tl

n ' !gon m ; and tt:,h f. di I

:: -

video: :: 2[) L.

' c :;,.- .iic : vci 'i;i::.;.'.;, 'jto'.'.:' L:; to. (.:: :;s ' i-

y)vour u3po'l niI ;.O;,e In orer t.) d';.:y l.is ovn ;'ur .- i ac-
tivity in the ria ofa cf i

t'< r:s nl, 1 c . mitcd I to) f;. - of

banditti, w.o, l ir i.' nionv t..e * .i. or J [.-9l

i . .1

tiC reft o. the country. ilut v'A: 1 .:;' ' ;g 5)

t02

\: ( i. <'

t icfe d. i'lo,! l.',o', tc le was w oundGed l Ii : in i ;. .. , ;. t .:t
i.i fiower; w\,rc ! lii'Fcd to carry him to I :il.n,: ?.'':. "1. r
iflitntly ilevv thlidLir, wil an im'atiencc w.hih P :.cg'< ,'' I. t.s..
aixity o a lver, ;iut litJ lited the dignity u.fa '
ic. . I i:, 7-

I ) r

'

I CTI '

u i ll.t',l t ip.l !j . 1 ,.. . :iJ i .i',T i: l ,

I"
' 'i

~~1a ttti

y hnl

.i l il,:l i.ll 'll. T c

l .1 t, ['

lt, ., r

\ . ,..; lti ,:J\nll . i:. ,.1 .ii
ri' t 2 lt.,

Bois IV. ing that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom, fle

6L-- ' returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of fiuch a jour-

ney, added to the anguish of mind he had fffered on Bothwell's
account, threw her next morning into a violent fever *. Her life
was depaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her constitution
rcfifted the malignity of her disease. During the continuance of
the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never came
Novcmbr '. near Jedburgh t-. And when he afterwards thought fit to make his

appearance there, he met with such a cold reception, as did not
cncourage him to make any long flay -i. Mary oon recovered
strength enough to return along the eaflern borders to Dniibar.

VnLr;:z, TChe refiJed in this place, her attcntii n wias turnedl to-

wards Englaln. Elizabeth, notwithflanding her pronifc, and
even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but e;c3u-
r;a:d iMorton and his aociates to remain in England 1. MaIr' on
the other ha::., afforded her protedion to {fveral Enlimh fugitiv-s.
> 1ch QO en watcicd the motions of the other with a jalous att:a-
tion, and fccretlv countenanced the praliccs, lwhich were carrvi-
on, to difurb the adninifiration of her rival.

fL.:.r to hLive been woniined in a: fu.;I, occ,.fioncd by the dicifpij of a fingc lman,
- .;:hli r tihn ila ny open iiftilrtcC ion of the borlci-crs. It dloes not appear I'; a'
tl'.. (;'!1 vnwas. attucnilcd th:ithcr by ;any confkilc-lb)lc train. Had any military oI'-
,r i i.)!i bczii 1ccc..:'y, as is suppos'cd, C;,)ol. vo'. i. 3 ! . it \voud hiave I cn c: -

umnly i i;.pro o"r t) riftc lthe 2lo ckn' prfi)n in an cxpc.iltioi a':ii ild

t licVcs SO

i ,)zi ': the (:It'i ! '

:ot!i.l ,.tilh\V' 1 to L'c i!l no t'..il, /-', fh l iclllj it,'

r ti,' l t; ;ii.!

;I;: tiel-i . V ,- :

! llC::I O In,1 L of llc i `t o(. n I I

, ni r ho C\\'c ,iiay' tpo if that 1lI' :
,

t. ^ l, '.Ls :1 i i':.'t . N o ,r: ] l ~l0 11)1 t'h t \ hh .! ,C iavupl (.l :l! , 2" :1.:

' ,' ;l, ,

S ^-

] - . a

oit. r. .

, 1.,,i. .. , .[j( ' ('a! ,l .
.1 . ii 5.

:r,,

FOR thli purpofc, Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, and her BOOK IV.

othei cwii:iries, were extremely aive and successful. We may -v---'
impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that fpi-it which ap- 1566.;
peare: in the Parliament of England, and which raised a florm that 'arl,.iment

1 [** l 1' 1 n i fs:vors Ma-
threatened E.izaLbth's domeic tranquillity, more than any other ry's preten-

· lions to the

event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity to al-fDuccioo.
lay it.

ELIZABETIH had now reigned eight years, without discovering

the least intention to ma ry. A violent distemper, with which flh
had lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation with the profpcd of all thole calamities which are occasioncd
by a dilfputed anid dubious fuccceion ; a motion was made, and eager-
ly listened to in both houses, for adrchi;g the Queen, to provide
againfl any such danger in times to come, either by signifying her
owvn resolution to marry, or by consenting to an a eitablilhing
the order of fuccclEon to tlhe Crownl . Ilcr love to her sub-
jeCts, her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, it was pre-
tended, not only called( upon, but obliged her to tale oe of tihefe
flips. The inuniper'ali avcnoni whicli flhe had all along discovered
for marriage, tmale it iniroL. bllc tl;t (lie would chul tle former;
and if she complic.l wvith thle littcr requcft, no title to the Crown
could, with any colour of iieC, 'o set in oppolition to that of the
Scotcl Qeen. Ei.'.abcth'. v.a ig>,cius Colgli to fc the re-

j

c

We oic

Ei 0dl·

nmotefl con!bueo nces ot liis ,;:otwo, ,d 2birv cdl thlcin \vith the uit-
moillt anxiety. .\.!:-x, 1 i'Lr iinl b; o oitulc to -r,tiN tle t

:atvy of' l£iir-

)Il-';: ), hliui pl.iJ)!v i'';i:; .:.?(-! :1 , i'l ;'1 ,

sli'O)ttl'. 1 ('1 ( t S lrs tl I pr~,rI i-

ili,, (t *)t}i);' U,.i'.l v i

,: ;', t. L; !

p'

* ' - 1

'N .i

. to t.!c I ;.ilhl Cro i'o l; a111'

bv cl-r I-'c t i''.r

'i j t ii i\t ' ti ' i. , I '1:i,!r ,' to I '3v()' t licr title -'4 .
A ll the I ;lu . l',l.!:'i)l,,,.o ai ti.l' \\ni(n 'l ior lier :'cL' lioli. Ii.r

* \y'' -\. . J ,

n.

tI ; : ,

I s. I M <l11'* t('.
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2 t i ?

1300K IV. gentleness and humanity had removed many of those apprhlenfioni

i6&. which the Protestants entertained on account of her religion. The
i566.

court faction, which envied the power of Cecil, and endcavoured
to wrest the adminifiration out of his hands, advanced the preten-
sions of the Scotch Qeen in oppoition to him. The union of the
two kingdoms was a defireable ohject to all wife men in both na-
tions; ad the birth of the young Prince was a security for the con-
tinuance of this bleifilng, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.
Si zxbht ls UNDER tlhee circumfiances, and vwli'e the nation was in such a

'1,;,4,,'9, on temper, a railin'.l ntary declaration of Mary's title would have bcen

highly detrinmental to Elizabeth. The prc'lcnt unsettled state of
the fucccfiion left much in her power. lHer rcfentent alone miht
have gonec far towards excluing any of the competitors from the
Crown ; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained, and ovr-
awe te ambition of the Scotch Qeen. But if this check floild
be rcimvc.l, by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary would
be at i:il liberty to purflc her di::n crous designs, a:,d to a: wvitlh
out f.'ar or refi:rve. ler partizans vee are ready mneditatingi fcheIices
Itor' iTiriLrcclions in difFerent parts of the ki:gdromn -; and an ac'c o
'-i'li ':.int, rccou!iizinr, tle ri:its of tlat Piincefs, vhofe pretc;l-
{ .;:': t'l', fl.'cnrcJ, \vo!uld h;''ve blin nothing lTs than a figL al to

arms; an:/, 0thandi'- :alz'

.niOns; 2aii, nctv/itln.lnLiiii'.g lii:.-alc'l's j 'il title to the affedtions
r"Ji : " , r';h have'c ei";'k an. eidaincred her thronc.

\"(\' '.r.: tilt{:; WLrt'! r;e'm: : '

K in l.!',lcncc in botl hloufcs, an ac-

*i,, ,, i, rn- c' ie t w. tr .1.

' £lsi'tetC ,;

o L:n mlv Th . lvi her Anmbalilor. A,.

{,., i

i',, i s i- (L'i l)')I; \,':!I)t ?,/;; ( .)
-' .t S I UL' i b' t[, C'Cl aillonl °; thlofe w 1o

v'crc ,e ar E e't',;:.l'lh 's p'rl:n, i c ;.'.\';'iiiLd to cu',ivit te diu
pofitioii wliicli apietar to\v: 'll; Ititii ti t riglit of fulcciC ion l il

'!

. i'h'.
)17h

cl'

her favour, by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. She Booc IV.
exprefied in it a grateful ecnfe of Elizabeth's friendship, which file ----
chiefly ascribes to their good offices, with their Svcreign, in h:er
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amiLy with
EnglIand, without urging or purfniing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than fiould he agrecable to the (Qeen. 3ur, at the
fame time, as her right of ficceion was undoubtcd, ie hoped it
would be examined with candour, and judged of with impartia it.
The nobles who attended her wrote to th EI!nilh Priivy Cou:ncll
in the fame fhrain '. Mary artfll!y gave tle l',cr te:c aii obi-
ing nothing more than a dcclaration of her on, and of her ifb-
jecQs gratitude towards Elizabth, . But s ihe cold not bc ino't.:
of the jcaloufy and fear with whiich EliziaLeth oblcr:cd te j p:--
ceedings of 'arliaent, a lep so uncomnmon as tiiis, of ne I iic''.
entering into public corrcl}iondence with the Privy Coills

i So

another, could not b oth rwitbi conitrucd thlan as t.kcn 'irii a1l i;-
tention to encourage tlhe JLirit wlichll iai alrea.y been rai!id a:nonil
the Engliffi. In this li'hi it Jei to Iiave appeare to liz e:ii'
herself -. Blut the di,-' ':ol toier people rci'.irg it neccarv
to treat Mary's pctrfil vi'i;i .:cat d'i ccnc,: , and her ttl w.itl miucl
regard, fhle mentioned it to hlir only in the iu;-it lan':.Ue.

NOTHING, however, cc.; lce a ..n '.:ce c 'uei norti':' uin to a; i'i- ':

ccfs of Elizab eths .chn ..t, r

ti'1 ; .h.

h .

of PIai li.iment dilo (.i',cc oii

'" ocl ;C.u., , h

,e l[i;nt a:l licr policy '; -

to ltdeeat, or l l i; r.^Lil:,. n. ter a . ii. i j

talCi~ltll(_t} Llll

cu . ~i'

(A lI:,~'

'.jL 'al l</

_ii:5 i Itlc i i

] : i: ,
:

hat :,:,f

tl r ;',.al t(o eC',2'.!..itU, f!:. cliil.> i:) h;c': p;er:c.iLce a ci:--

taiIi nun er -l c'.L._i o ; ;;n . si. tl d
:t c, :r i.d tlien ; (I ,

A' > i
;i', ;.;'. Appcnl jj. . ?j iK itli, -7.

adl

BOOK IV. and refused those which were offered; and in the end prevailed to

66- - have this formidable motion put off for that fefiion. Happily for

her, the conduc of the Scotch Queen, and the misfortunes which
besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any future
Parliament *.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation of impar-

tialitv, and that ile might not drive Mary into any desperate mea-
sure, fle committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had publish-
ed something derogatory to the right of the Scotch line-I; and fig-
nified her displeasure against a member of the house of Commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at Mary .

An e.xtranli- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to pro-
11trV lp of
1:irv'. 1ll fa- mote the interest of that religion which he professcd. The re-
olr. of lo'- eftablihment of the Romifi dotrine seems to have been. her

favourite paflion; and though the design was concealed with
care, and cndutcd with caution, fie pursued it with a perfc-
vcring zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay aside fore-
, hat of her usual reserve ; and the aid which ie expected from
the Popifl Princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne,
encouraged her to take a flep, which, if we confider the temper
of the nation, appears to hb extremely bold. Iaving formerly held a
secret correfipndence with the court of Rome, fle now resolved to
:d1lo\ a Nunc:io from the 'Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Catrliilnl Laurnc, at that tinme ]}il:lop) of Mondovi, was the pr-
soln oil whom Pis V. onfcri'cd tis ol'ice, and along with hlimi he
linlt the Qlcell a pcfent of 20,00, Cowns l. It i. not the clia-
ral.tr of tile Plapal court, to opten its tcafllly upon dilLint or imli-

9* D'l('xn.", ,h1.urn l. -- , .

l\

.- 130. EC

L 3 ). ]k'lv. i4lo li'nc',, oi.

'\ Ced.4 i , llyllc.,, .

I, V
L'). \' it. Ltt , ,i.. 1,irll. . . ii . .

alljry

nary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland, could be no BOOK IV.
other than to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Romish i 6
fee. Thus Mary herself underflood it. And in her answer to a
letter which she received from the Pope, after exprefing her grate-
ful sense of his pternal care and liberality, fle promises that he
would bend her whole fl-rength towards the re-eftal)lifhment and
propagation of the Catholic faith ; that i/he would receive the Nun-
cio with every poflible demonstration of respect, and concur, with
the utmost vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour
of God, and relloring peace to the kingdonm; that the would cele-
brate the baptifmn of the Prince, according, to tie ceremonies which
the Rormifh ritual prefcribcs, and hoped that her fuliels would
l'e taught, b tthis example, again to reverence thc acraments of
the church, which they liad io long treated wvith contempt; and
that fie would be careful to instil early into 1hr oll the principles
of a sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith -'. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had ent over one of
his attendants with part of the noncy, the Queen did not thinlk the
;nlul-e proper for l;i rectio". l iizaleth was pr.'paiiig, to lendi
a maginidcciat cmabaft i:to
l Scotland, ag.:insit the time of the Princl's

.ptiin, land as it would hiavc ben i proper to C(L' n her, fie
wiifly contrived, under various pretcnccs, to dcti2a Lauren at I'lb -.
'iThe convulfons into vwhich the kinglm(i was tl\own lc,.); altt,
made it iipofiible for himn to purfuc his journey any frithcr.

A r the veryti tme tht R'Mary was sc'crcly carri')ig (:llo:2 t ic u(r-

ciatlons for inbvci tinl tihe Rtcirned I lt irc , t}ce di 1,

OLt lcrillc
)pulllickly t) employ hcr autllority towards tl)t.ini i its )l,;ii-

c('l.,ti \'it, I.ii. p. I' ,1 . v l ii . -I lIdt, A J'TC d. i.; .

I k Jitl), 501, '(.1. 1lhJx, 41.
V ,. Z [I t1 )' ,',

BooK IV. year, fie i-Tued several proclamations and acs of council for tat

_---.--. purpos;e aid rea(dily approved of every scheme vhich was proic;!d

for the more cfeciual payment of their flipends. This ipart of ler
conduiI des little honour to Mary's integrit; a! d thou ;i juliitied
1b- the example of Princes, who often reckon salihoodi and deceit
amoTn the necciiary arts of govcrnn cnt, and even anthoiild by
the pernicious cafili-y of the Romish Church, which transfirs
breach of sith to heretics, from tle liit of crimes, to that( f duties,
nmuif, howevcr, be numbered among tliofe bltcmiiles whicli never
stain a tru'v g'rcat and enerous clar-acer.

Tr'..-' .

"' As neither the Frenchl nor i'Idnllotcf Ambaii dors were v t

,..,; ,.r lvCsarreved, te banptifn of thie I'ii:ce was put offl from ti:c to time..
'' '"' -lnTean whlile Marty fixed her rclid nce at Craignaillar :.
- Such a re--

tirent, erli, cras, suited the prefnt temper of hler mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her ovn palace f loiy-rood-houfie
:Her aversion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and \wa
become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to th..
gaiety of spirit, which was natural to Icr. The raflnefs and eitc
of her own clhoice, and the King's ingratitude and obiinacy, si!id
her with shame and with despair. A variety of pafiions preyed
at once on a mind, all whose sensations were exquisite, and all its
emotions firong, and often extorted from her, the last wifth of tlh
unfortunate, that life itself would come to an end -.

A i;vnr-ec be- MTURRAY and IMaitland obfcrved all those workings of pafioin
, s' 1 1 i
n a1

i , i. n the blcal of the QLcen, and conceived hopes of turning them to

the advantage of their ancient aficiates, Morton, and the othcr
conspirators aainlft Rizio. They were flill in hanillimcnt, and the
QTccn's rcfentment againfl them continued unabated. Murray an

:i Kcilh, 355. -1- IbiJ. Pref. vii.

tiec

the Secrctary flattered themfclve, howevcr, that hier inclination to Booc IV.
be separated from Darnly, would iu, mount this deep-rooted aver-
sion, and that the hopes of an event so dcfirelable might induc c6
her to be reconciled to the confi irators. It was eafyi to find ra--
sons, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a cntence of di-
vorce. This sentence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In retL;rn for this 1cr-
vice, they proposcd to fipulatc with the ,Queen to grant a pardon to
Morton and his followers. The dcfign was firfi of all communi-
cated to Argyll, who, as well as hMurray, owed his return into Scot-
land to the conspiracy aainft R.izio. Iluntly and l3otihwcll, \wh'
at that time dircitd all \Liry's councils, were likl;e cii.cd in-
to the concert. Thley all joi;icd togeter in in:iking the overti:: to
the Qicen, and enforced it wiL: lli MaIitland's eloquence -:. But
Mary, however desirous o obtaiiiinl( tlhat deliverance from Dari-
ly's caprices, with vhichI they elndeavoured to allure her, had nc-
verhc!cfs good rafons fI'r rlLiccti ; tle mctod, by which they
propotid to acT:ovil;i it. The biiIth of her Ion hid greatly
f2rengthci:c.nd her clain upon the l:n iLh if'cceiiion, and encourag-

Ie the abehcI' o (f it to appear v.'nii ei;c.tc r bold:-,.l, 1(nd to act
witlh more vicur. Slh could scarce h '? to be iii-rccd fom ler
iuli'hoant, withlout thirowinj to)iine illmpultation on0 her I;n. This
_miglit open a new dilipute with Ireg'ar' to thie fluccfion, and put
it in the power of Eli:.lcithl and he'r Mi niflrs to call in ( teilii)n
the LPrince's lcitiinacy, or at kIalt to lilljci' it to all tlic dtllays a1(n
cavils of a judicil i;tiiry. 'I'lie l.ar of tlhcfe i:convncicl1ciic
wei lield with Mary-, :.1d (lcterinel d Icr rather to cndlure icT!
]h:rd ftc, than to 1Cek Irelic, by vcnturing on fuich a dangerou cx-
pcrincU
t.

* , c tr.
A .,vul. iv. :ut i. JS3.

U I 2 'fl!

Booic IV. TIE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the Englifi
- --"- and French AmbafTadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling,

to celebrate the baptifhn of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and fplcndid train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
fitable to her own dignity, and the refea with which she acided,
at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great preparations had
been made by M7ary, and the magnificence dilplayed by her on this
occfion, exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
Dccem. i. The ceremony itself was performed according to the rites of the

Romish Church. But neither Ieford, nor any of the Scotch nobles
who prosered the Proteflant rcliion, entered within the gates of the

C'hael '. The spirit of thalt n1 c, firm and uncomplying, woult not,
upoon anv inJ.uccilment, condelccnd to witnleis an ain, which it
et'een'.ed idvlatroous.

Thc r2. -, IH>:N.RV'S bcl.1aviour, at this jutncure, perfcLiy diVcovcrs tile
( li:,'. ' Ncxccfs f ll's caprice, as well as of his folly. lie ciofe to
,':"'" : retI-dc at Ctirlin , Lbt confined hliflfcf to his own aoartirl:k.

And as the Q:C!n ditlruited every nobleman wh1io ven)tu to
convcie- wki!il li:, lle was lct in abfblute iulitude. Notji
C .Jld be nmrc fin :gu-, or was lets cxpected, than his cuiinlg to

?,oear in a mx ::ncr, that both publillhcd the contempt under vwlichi
lce hl.d f.ailen, and, by expoling tle dcicen's domeflic unlnapp1-

c;s to ithc oi\ tilon of o Imany foreignelrs, looked iic a ftep tlak!

h' \'"; ";:' l;'t',ittli ;i-,dici F

atl hr ts t a ]i.ume the 'a c t ciJi .

:' .!t :. :

e ( '
0 ;, ,1,; and wlhcli wx.s nec'ci.ry for the ir rec'Ll i

vl i;r ,n . t

, Il .>c l o'; I tnct ca ;i,!ii vl i t t Io ctii , i o .I 'to l' t 1,-

L.'ty i n
i!' l o irrotv, .and g!c vLnt to IKIr L.'r *. ' i'ii ,v'

* l,-]tJ:, ^;ioj. I di i' .
P ;t i.

' '''

fill perrlfied in his design of retiring ito forein prts, and daily P, 0 IV.
threatened to put it in exccution '.

-166.

T.,r cercmony of witnefflng the Prince's baptifrn was not the fo!e :,ti . ,
bulfneis of Bedford's cmbafy. His inftrucions contained an over- ',, lO.r r

Ur ni:m:,d. te

ttre, which ourht to have gone far towvards extiinguifiing thofcjea- lirTi. :,: .:
luufics lwhich had ft l ong fubfihld between the two Queens. The
treaty of Edinburgh, which has been o often mentioned, was the
principial occasion of these. The spirit, howevr, lwhich had riien
to iucl an height inl the atc larliamnt, the power of the party
lwhich abetted the Scotch Queen's title, tllh nuilmber and aivity
of chr ,aents in difierent parts of the kingdom, alarmed I'i
,-

* C::nJcnI anf 1rms, 4CI, tliat Plco!-l ' vas coinm.mndec b; F..I:i.bc; h not t r2 -

D)ir !'i - tbli tilc of Kin2, As t.l sw::s n i.ii'i,

'i t ) be o:, iLcr by . .-

or l;Kr billiL.li, iti tli biI as rtti to be t'- c;;sc of tl l ic' I',f c fl '1 1;ij
ccrn'moriy o'

h is {br['s b.iptf'-,. }Kcitih, 3' Go J e3l )1.

it, i. .,o fil(: t!' :. is

to bc/ 1'521;l ani)n, I,'.lt'o i i

inu''P'im u;, the oi, ili Il f x lhich lli!l r'mi' in . K iti',

:3 . 2. 3.i o l's aJ Le to the

a (iccIn by . .il i,

i ,con ' t i C.,-

(.'2s ai'. l ii. i -. I'. ,. I','il's .,. c lunt is c m';i;::_,i l'.v }- .i/, h Prlr

> iiM i c-

ti';s to irllL;' xj '".7', \x;'' i ,'c ;[ l,'ms t'.t 'h : conI:

:< VJs .

. .'i;.t i t c::;'.',y,

his lcfi ofic tCL .

to arr

!ci!', ; 1, lii i

br. :.t... t

to llo pu i (, ';,t

mS.

i ' pl A i A

p.1 r p.;b I'.c l A ;

.i X, ' X (.[.

n.:'-ccs in ti he

b i c t0hin r .. I. I Cl c t; l' ; i.t l - K ' ;'-

fcinc, but xv l out i';-i:: ; .;t r1 u;1 i i, ':;.'. i,,

c', ,1: 1

. !, .l . C .ill.t'I ;

\\ '].!s, tlh oi lt l, ii th.,.t h' J . n i

,

l r ,. o.1 :, !. v , .; lI' i ..; ,_c i,. c 1 t)

u
,-

ticn it. |lis ,t , i; [},i-: ! ' : *

- i-. i

.; i : \ '

, ' '

. '.'.

], ;},[ . i ;

tli . l

..l.V

! , .'

.l:,

i 'i. '

.

'l ; 'n ;,
l7 ' .

. ' V.l " ,

tjci ic1 i ll !,' .' .. . .. ...

...:

' : 'I ' ..t ! i i ;. l i i.

'....

In l Illt ill l '

ol (~ : . !i'' ~,;, '

' . '

.

i!. . . : 'i

-

. I I

i . ( ; '

, ;
;/

'1l hi 1l, . n- 1

' iilJ iil ............... , . i\' :'

,i ,

;

,t.i L, };,.,

..; ll;,, j:

i
;. ;

L,1 VI i .1 011 LV 1)51 I ~) j

I
t I,

BOOK IV. beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the amli-

56 6". guous and artful expressions in that treaty might afford her. All sic
J566.

now demanded of Mary, was to renounce any title to the Crown
of England during her life, and the lives of her posterity; and oa
the other hand, she engaged to take no flep, which might prove in-
jurious to Mary's claim upon the succession *.

MARY could not, with decency, reject a proposition so equi-

table; hle infilled, however, that Elizabeth lfhould order the right
upon which fle claimed to be legally examined, an] publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the teflament of HIenry VIII. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldel sifter the QEecn
of Scotland, fiom the place due to them in tlhe order of fucciion,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. lIa-
ry's Miniflers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this testa-
ment, which they so juflly conceived to be injurious to tlihr Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery; and on different occaions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have fufi'rcd confidcrjablv by
gaining this point. The original tellament is ill extant, and not
the leafl doubt can be entertained of its genuiicncefs and authenticity,
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to fct afite te
title of the hloui o Stewart. Sle aimed at nothing more, than t)
keen thle qiiciLion concerning the fuccecion perplexed and undeidecJ,
andIl by indufirioufly luding thisrequeft, fIR did real fcrvice to nMar';
c.I liFe -.

A I'- v, dalys after te 1batifin of the PIilce, ITorton and all

the otihetr coliipiratl ors :iaiinil Rizio obtained tlheir pardion, and IL:lcl;:
t) clilr into cotland. Mary, vho had itherto continucd inc(<--
orabic to every entreaty in their behal;f yiellded at lalt to the luli-

* Kcitlh, 356. i l,.l. 3^S , 353. Ntec (.)

cit at. iu ,

citatons of Bothwll . tie could hope for no fucccfs in those BOOK IV.
bold difigns on wiich his ambi ion refivcd to VCrture, itllhout - -
(lrawvin:, l from eve'r quarter'. F p'rocurig a favou for o-tn 1566.

.and l , ai;.iatCs, of wvhich they had good reifon to cefpair, lIe
cxpchted £to secure a alind of faihiul and dcteriined adherents.

TIuz Ki;n fil remained at Stirliing, in solitude, nd under con-

tempt. IlAi imlpatienc in this si u:'.tin, toethir w\ith the al2ar
given himi, by the rninori of a dcfigl to fciz- his crtc;;n and con-
fine him to prison l-, was the occaiion of llis lcavnc Sirlii ii an
abrupt manner, and retiin to iis father at Glatow.

Two Aflienblics of thc Church were held

1duii gC tis Year. Nw '

complaints were ma -c, liandl lllon good groulln(, of te povelty ,'.- .
and contempt uidcr t'hlichl the Proteflant clcrgy xerce fll:cred to s'''''
langutil. Penurious as the allotment for tlhcilr fDililce ws ,
they had not received the !cadl p:t of wlat was due for- th e p--
ceding year' . Nothiin icis thian a zeal, ready to endure and to
fuarc- every thir g for a :).d"

c.ailn, coulid Vi' r pclir:ated men to

adlicre to a church, 'o iadit.et and 1b n I led. 'e c 'xtr'ao'di-
nary xpenccs, occalioned by the Prince's bI.atifin, Iiad cxiauiaied
the Queen's trcafury, and the iluls :1;pprop'iatd for tlhe fi.Liiancc
of the clry r verted into cther channels. The (tQeen was
therefore obliged to prevent the ]n ri ? o;ftranccs of tie aftncl',
bv fling on me nCv Met'od o tic i' cf f( ti c rch. crn,.
fyImptoms of liberality, iA ' tarls inihcnce i it
have been cxpected in aliiin;inc vieh was vi:de with] an i n_.
tention of looth iln; a;tid ilcnle in tlie re'',. I1 t btcth the lQ ccn
andl the noblcs held j1 i: the Eichi, c r t iC c 1ureli whichi they liad
icized. A ibm, which, at the hi51)t computati)n, can Iarce c

f (Good. ul, . i, 1 I© \. 1' 5.1. -l K iot, sidj. '.i
'l lIbiL. 5(,-.

r c c t

BOOK IV. reckoned equal to gooo9000 . terling *, was deemel sufficient for tlhe
'"66,- maintenance of a whole national church, by men who had lately

I 66.

seen single monasteries pofeffed of revenues far superior in value.

THE ecclefiaflics in that age bore the grievances which affaed

themselves alone, with astonishing patience; but wherever the Re-
formed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to be
alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions
of danger. Ajuft occasion of this kind was given them, a short
time before the meeting of the Assembly. The usurped and op-
preflive juriflditdion of the spiritual courts had been abolished by the
Parliament 156o, and Conminflries were appointed to hear and
detcrmine the causes which formerly came under their cognizance --.
Among the few ads of that Parliament, to which Mary had paid any
regard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the Ccnm-
inilaries, and had given them inflrutions for direding their proceed-
ings , which are still of great authority in that court. Froml that time
thlet jtudges lhad cntinucd in the uninteerrupted c;execife of their
finlAion, whicnI of a udden(I tlhe CQeen iiT.ld a procliun.ition, rc-
floring-, the Archlbifop of St. Andrew's to lis alcient juri.didioL,
and depriving the Commiitries of all athority jl.

A MoTIVE, which cannot be jufiificd, rendered tihe Qucen not ln-

wviliing to venture upon this raf aion. Slic had -been co!,trIi\inlo- ;,
some timic, ow to re-eflaLlif, the Popish religioi and tilh reoriing the

l cicn t cccic' li l ics to their ftri cr i il i i :J,

i lncd to be a c( n-

irL-'l!'.!c [ p tO('vards ti;at CIend. T5c i )LiV: wliich pronptcd L'. Ii-
v.'ll, to w]o!' i ilT!c]Le over tlh Queen tli, abtion mulzi bcchiL'y
im'im'tited^ "', was ill inore cniil. I s lit Irp, iii: Iulhnbiti,l !,:1
allcraLly formled that bo' lld di , he;l t)Ion uter Le put il l,-

,

t i 25(,i . |

!. ' Ox,.j .

'|
J].

.

'
.i

..j~~~~~~~~l:
l , '

Cution, and the use which we hall hereafter find him making of that BOOK IV.
authority, which the Popifll ecclesiastics regained, discovers the reasons -
of his present conduLt, in contributing to revive their power. The
Proteflant clergy were not unconcerned fpetators of an event, w.hich
threatened their religion with unavoidable deftruclton ;-but as they
despaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen herself
they addresled a remonflrance to the whole body of the Protefant no-
bility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the danger to
which it was exposed at that time, seemed to require W. What es-
sects this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have no
opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he Th, Ki,n

could reach Glasgow, he was seizcd with a dangerous dillemper. fal' ,'ick r
The fylimptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and in 567.
that age it was commonly imputed to the effcts of poibfn -. It
is impofiible, amidil the contradictions of historians, to decide with
certainty concerning its nature, or its caufc 4:. hIls life was in the

u tim oi

*I Kcth, 567. M- cl''. I54. Knox, 4.

1 3cBuchanant and Knox arc positive that the King1 hla bCCn poi.bincd. Tlley

Incntio the black and putrid pufiulcs which broke cl ot all O' c, hlis bl . I3 u-
clianan adds, that A'bcrnc'tly hi:, phviyci.i pluinly cclaiicd tLhat poi;),n \vl tlhe Laul
of' these sym lptoms, and thatt the Qajcn rIiI d to nlICw her o n Jpl hyliciat ti at ten,
him, Buch. 3:9. K1nox, 40. 2. Blaclvkoold lanilin. -c. Jclbb. vol. ii2. ., ,).
altrcit, that

tl h fina ox the dila f C with wliihl tlh I< in'r was tiZd. 1ic i;

clled a poclkifl m n in tle (1tccn' letter, (;,i,)l (,1. ii. 15. I ili rcltul iiiC
l?! F cn. l,.ris fr ldI

i htli'; tlie Kili; at the kill of lild, xiz. lefi the y tingl; tlin:

fliotlLd ;.it(ll the ilfctionl if hlie flaid iIn lte p !cc, f'elli ti> fivul tlhis ()lopinion, An-
d'er. vol ii. Ca) t lt mcntiolns it ;Isa proo ol 'a'ry's tcndcricfi to hlr litHadm
thlIt tlo n'h ile nevel had lie fiiall p ux

i hci; l,

t e li i l

C nt o

cd ti attend lini. )I. ii.

41 . 'I'ilis, i it.had b ee triL , vould h.i 'til> d ood It'i.l

l ccnccf oI L
ot ilil igi

VOL . . X i\ '

BOOK IV. utmost danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour of

5-fiT^ his conflitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.
I567.

Negk&edt by MARY'S neglect of the King, on this occasion, was equal to
1MA ary, that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh.

She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal aftiedion which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all those tender officcs which sooth
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this juncture, fie (lid not even
put on the appearance of this passion. Notwithflanding the King's
danger, she amused herself with excursions to different parts of the
country, and suffered near a month to clapfc before she visited him
at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

The brech TIlE breach between Mary and her husband was not occasioned
between them by any of those flight disgusts, which interrupt the domestic union,

without altogether difiblving it. Almost all the paflions, which ope-
rate with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to the
most dangerous extremes, concurred in railing and fomenting this
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours she had bellowed,
contempt of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, encroach-
ments on her power, conspiracies againfl her favourites, jealous,7,
insolence, and obstinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had ,reat
reason to complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility; and
added to the anguilh of dilhppointcd love, they produced those f 1rn-
toms (..f dcfrpar Vw'liLll we hlave already ddccribed. I cr rccntmcint
against the ing icCls not to hllve abated fIomn th t time of his l'-
ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own 1lIand, to her amlxiTi-

Lim rbolLr ; but Malry lad thc f ll pox in tcI infhcy,

S.pilkl I.cltc rs. .

i;, 3,

LIlly) aftiims, tlit the Kinii's iiciLc was ti c ellh pox) Klit, 3(4 N( ,t .
In tllat l

; 'c, tli; (illalc was citccrllm so cond;CO iCuO;, tll at pl. ttlol illlI'J \

l ii :;
'w.'ic ir.iovcd \ tilhouLt the w',il;, l citie;.

( '.

dor in France, jufi before she set out for Glasgow, no tokens of BoOK 1V.
sudden reconcilement appear. On the contrary, file mentions, with

1567.

tome bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with which he January 20.
observed her actions, and the inclination he discovered to disturb her
government, and at the fame time talks of all his attempts with
the utmost scorn .

AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce to be vi;ts the

King at Gl.:{-

expectced that fle would visit the King, or that any thing butgo^w,
marks of jealousy and difruft flhould appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe she not only visited
Darnly, but, by all her words and actions, endeavoured to exprefi
an uncommon affection for him: And though this made impreflion
on the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on some
occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to thole lwho are ac-
quainted with the human heart, and who know how feldon
and how slowly fichl wounds i domeflic happiness are healed, this
sudden transition will appear witl a very futpiious air, and will
be confidered by them as the cfFicL of artifice.

BUT it is not on fufiicion alonc, that halry is cha!red with r.s il.

diffimulatioii in this part of her coniuct. TV\o of licr fanmous tci
letters to otlhwill were wViittcn during her fiav at Gl afoxv,
and fully lay open this fccne of iniquity, lie h;ad far fuccclceccd
in his ambitious and criminal dci,,gn, as to gain , a fiute atfcn-
dant over the Qcen. And in a iituation, fucll as n\ ary's, me it not
f) con fpicuous, services of fr inferior i mportalce, aill a i.(slli mch
lcef ifinLuatiiug than Btliwcll s, m;ay le fhilpofLr to flual npcr-
ccptibly o a fcmale heart, and entirely to overcomel it. Ainon
those in the lligllcr rnks of life, iclruplcs withl rcgad to conjiiigil

'*' Ixilh, I2rt's. viii.

X x 2 iklkiLV

BooKe IV. fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor firong. Nor did theman-

ners of that court, in which Mary had been educated, contribute to
J567.

increase or to fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and Hen-
ry II. the wildness of the military character in that age, and the
liberty of appearlng in all companies, which began to be allowed
to women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy of fcntiment,
and those polished manners, which alone can render this liberty
innocent, had introduced, among the French, a licentioufniefs of
morals that role to an aflonifhing height. Such examples, which
were familiar to Mary fromi her infancy, could hardly fail of dimi-
nifling that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first approach of forbid-
den fentincnts less flocking; refietment, and disappointed love,
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufi-
fiable on that account; and so many concurring caufcs might, al-
ioft imperceptibly, kindle a new palfion in her heart.

BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and

T'he :ot'.cs .
i: it. 'progrcfs of this paflion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-

dour and tenderness of love. The afflction which Mary there cx-
prcfies for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her
conduc ; which, without admitting this circumstance, appears al-
together mysterious, inconsistent, and inexplicable. That recon-
cilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impofiible to give any plausible account, is discovered, by the
Queen's own confefiion, to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her avwrfion for her huf)and, and the suspicious attention with
which flie obfcrvcd his condu , became univerl-lly known, hric
cars \vere oflicioully filled, as is uual in I;ch calts, with rouil)i!cti(
or aggravat(d accounts of his ations. By fume, hec was told, tlat
the Kin initcnded to fcizc the crfon f the Prince his son, anl

All

in his name to usurp the government; by others fie was aured, BooKI IV.
that he resolved infantly to leave the kingdom; that a vessel was

i 67.

hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive 5
himn . The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country must have been highly difhono.iable to the
Queen, and would have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided in Glasgow, at a distance from her, and in that
pait of the kingdom where the interest of his family was greater:,
he might, with more facility, accomplish his designs. In order, there-
fore, to prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary
to bring him to sone place, where lie would be more immediately
under her own eye. For this purpose, fle firl employed all her on
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to remove him hi tl, cc(n:c
to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he l'Q'; : '
would have easier access to the advice of phyfcians, and that fie
herlf ifcould attend hirm sithout being absent from her son ' The
Kin-l was weak enough to fuff-r himself to be persuadcd ; and being
flill feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter to
Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house, elonging to

the Provoll of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It flood
almost upon the iame spot where thc houfc belonging to the Prin-
cipal of the University now fans. Such a fiitu;tion, on a rising
ground, and at that tine in an o:pn ficil, hlad all the advantagcs
of healthful air to recommend it; but, on te other hand, te !:-
litude of the place renderd it extremely priwecr for the commnif-
flon of that crilim, with a view to which, it lemIs manifil.ly to
have b.cn cliofn.

\,MAKYI conltinued to attend the in wit the mol: al;td!ous [is ,

care. She feldolm wa abfl lt froin lliml t-ul tile (i.[, t l';hl
Ql,11'

* l ilh, l l. xiii. I
t,,ii. ' 1. Iii. " o.

fvcrl,

BoOK IV. several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped oh

6--'-- him so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great
1567' measure, quieted those suspicions which had so long diflurbed him.

But while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he stood on the very brink of defirution. On
Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the Queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a marque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which the King lav
was blown up with gun-powder. The noise and hock, which
this sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who ilept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouched
by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.
Pis chalacir. SvUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart, Lord Darnlyv

in the twenty first year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
railed him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diftracion. His insolence and in-
coniltancy alienated from him those nobles who had contributed moil
.ealoully towards his elevation. His levity and caprice exposed
him to the ICorn of the people, who once revered him as the dc-
fcciinant of their ancient Kiigs and heroes. Had he died a natural
death, Ilis end would hIivc lben unlamlented, and his memory have
bcee oon

f j brltcnl; lut tlh cruel cir-cmtlntanccs of his in r-der, and

the ilakn!;1( \ i whichl it was afterwards aven edC, hlave imade Ii:
nanmec to be rI-cn irn!crcI \with regret, ,nd have rendered him te
obcld of pity to which he had otherwilc no title.

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess who had con- BOOK IV.

trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, with '-
altoft a general content, on Bothwell *; and some reflections were Both\ci and
thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no firanger to the crime. thQo Cen "ui

pect(d oF te

Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidence, that the na- murder.
ture of the ation will admit. The Queen's known sentiments with
regard to her huff)and, gave a great appearance of probability to the
imputation with which fie was loaded q-.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was ifTued by the

Q.een, ofiTrlng, a considerable reward to any pcron who iiould
discover thole who had iben guilty offuch a horrid and deteltable
crime +. And though Bothwell was now one of the greatest sub-
jects in the kingdlom, formidablc on account of his own power,
and protet&d by the Q3en's favour, it was impofible to suppress
the ientilelnts and indigiation of the people. Papers were afixtd
to the mo public places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and namin ; his accomplices; pidturcs appeared to the fame pur-

pofr, ]nd

voiics wre hearJ, iil the middle of thehri

him with that barbarous ation. But the authors of thcl rurours
did not confine thrir accuations to 3oth-vell alone, they infinuatc that
the Queen lhcr:lf wla accci. or to the crime T. This bold accuf.:-
tion, which si dirlily a:'.:.!ccd .ar's reputation, drew the attcin!i',x
of liher council; ant by en g,.g', g tllclm in an inquiry after the anthlo
of thefC lilelh, hi ctcd them fi:rom c:lca; : -;fr te ml lli'icc:''f c(-
the Ki;i :'. It coulid IW!CC ;Ce cxpLce dt ti:at ,.,:v- le'cri l' vould
be cxt;c ci ly I;vlii'O!c t ci. t V. ) v.. l l i oi ; iihu-
band, wxigl m iii nc l. d ltb v;lc Ciy l a.c . It \v: s ,iot.j vcl: ii.-

t ecs
*e I )isl. 15;. A,,i.i. i .! i 151 H,,

ten..1-

BOOK IV, terest, who had the supreme diredion of this, as well as of all other

67TJ faffairs, to flifle and suppress whatever evidence should be offered,
J567·

and to cover, if possible, the whole tranfadion under the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
some persons called before the council; but the examination was con-
duded with the most indecent reminfnefs, and in such a manner,
as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt A.

IT was not her own fubjeEs alone who fufpe&ed Mary of being

accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dishonour-
able to her character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy and
malice of her factious nobles. The report of the manner and
circumstances of the King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accustomed to deeds of violence,
it excited universal horror. And as her unhappy breach with her
husband had long been matter of public discourse, the first con-
jeaures which were formed with regard to his death, were extreme-
ly to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology to of-
ser for her condut, called on her to prosecute the murderers with
the utmost diligence, and expected that the rigour of her proceed-
ings would prove the best and fullest vindication of her inno.

cence .

T.enn\ ac- LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with in-
ccuci:. Bothwcll
(i, ti, k'il s ccleant importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's disgrace,

iiT'. and lcing treatedl by Mary with neglect, usually rcfidcd at a dil-

tance from court. Roized, however, by an event no less lock-
ing to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his fichcmes of anbi-
rdl l 2t. tion, he ventured to write to the Qeen, and to offer his advice

" Andcrf. vul. iv. I 67, i6S, ; Kitl, Pr ix.

willi

wich refpet to the most effectual method for discovering and con- BOOK IV.
victing those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of 6
a husband. He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty, with
vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared his own
suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were named as his accom-
plices; he required that, out of regard to decency, and in order to
encourage evidence to appear against them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious crime should be committed to custody, or at least
excluded fromi her court and presence*.

MAlaY was then at Seaton, whither fie had retired after the

burial of the King, whose body was deposited among the Monarchs
of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner t. The former
part of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be eluded;
and it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But,
instead of confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him into all 'rv cn:;r.

nuc, to favour

her councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed the mur-l iL.
derer of her hluiand, to enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the
power of a favourite . The offices which Bothwell already pot.
feiled, gave himn the comrand of all the south of Scotland. The
castle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of too much confequencc,
not to wish it in his own power. The Qeen, in order to pre-
vail on the Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the pcr-
obn of the young Prince in his hand<, and immeditcly bleowcd

o r.ie., 1,

the government of that important fortress upon Bothwll |l. So
many etcps in her conduct, inconlifient with all the rules of pru-
dence, and of decency, must be imputed to an exccfs cither of ll-
ly or of love. Mary's known charadter fully vindicates her from the
former; of the latter, many and striking proofs oni appeared.

' Icith,. 369. - Andcrf. vol. i. 23. l' Id. ibid. 10, &c,
Il 1i. ibid. Prcf. 64. Kcili, 379).
VOL., Y y No

BOOK IV. No direct evidence had yet appeared agaiAft Bothwell; but s
_..- '- time might bring to light the ircuiftances of a crime, in which

i 567.
March. 19. so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance
tlitenson his to haften on the trial, while nothing more than general suspicions,

and uncertain surmises could be produced by his accuftrs. For this
reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of March,
the twelfth of April was appointed for the day of trial. And though
the law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes were car-
ried on in that age required a much longer interval, it appears, from
several circumfances, that this short space was considerably contrac-
ted, and that Lennox had only eleven days warning to prepare for
accusing a person, so far superior to hiimfelf, both in power and in fa-
vour *. No man could be less in a condition to contend with an
antagonist who was thus supported. Tho' Lennox's paternal eflate
had been reflored to him, when he was recalled into Scotland, it
teems to have been considerably impaired during his banishment.
llis valTals, while he resided in England, had been accustomed to

'* The at of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date

March the 28th, which happened on a Thursday. Anders. vol. i. 50. The Queen's
warrant to the mej,ng.rs, impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is
dated on the 29th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fme day. Ibid. oo. He was summoned at his
dwelliiig-houfes in Glasgow and Dunbarton the 3oth of March, the ift and 2d days
of April. ibid. iol. Hie was fmmoned at Perth, April 1if, Ibid. 102. Though
Lennox reftiled at that time 4o miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have been
,iven hiIn oner. Such an unncceffary delay aflords foine cause fr fifpicion.
'I is tue, Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh
Ilie cnluing week; this ,gave him warning some days sooner, that file intended to
h iin on the trial wiliouit dlay. But the precise time could not be legally, or ccr-
rtinly known to Lennox sooner than 11 or 1. days, bore tle day on wVhich li:
was requiredc to appear. By the law and practice of Sctltl;nd, at that time, parti.
w.re f: linollned in cales of treafol 40 days previous to tle tial.

4 foime

some degree of independance, and he had not recovered that ab- BOOK 1V.
solute ascendant over them, which a feudal chief usually possessed. ---
He had no reason to expec the concurrence of any of those factions 567'
into which the nobles were divided. During the short period of
his son's prosperity, he had taken such fleps as gave rife to an open
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
house of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to
the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
second him.

It is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and fat

as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which gave di-
reCtions with regard to the time and manner of his trial. And he
still enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the Queen's
presence with the fame dilfinguifed familiarity as formerly *.

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the wishes Lennox craves

and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; every tep a delay.
towards which seemed to be taken by directions from the person
who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose
to conceal rather tlan to dcteEt his guilt. Lennox foresaw what
would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and with how little ahfety
to himself, or success to his cause, he could venture to appear on
the day prefixed. In his former letters, though under expressions
the most rcfpeCtful, fore symptoms of his difitrufing the ueen
may be discovercd. Ic tlokc out now, in plain language. He
complained of the iiinjry tdone him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. 1 e reprsentcd once more, the indeccn-

A, ,Ieif. vol. i. 50, 5'

iY V 2 cy

BOOK IV. cy of allowing Bothwel, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to

6-- - retain his. former influence over her councils. He again required
J 567' her, as fie regarded her own honour, to give some evidence of her

sincerity in profccuting the murder, by confining the person who
was fufpeded, on good grounds, to be the author of it; and, till
that were done, he signified his own resolution not to be present
at a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were so irregu1-
lar, and unfatisfadory *.

App'rs for HE seems, however, to have expected little su'ccess from this
t 'izuirL,.'t application to Mary; and therefore, at the fame time, besought

Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain fch a delay as he de-
manded -. Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufpeced the one Queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of
the other, who had treated his son with the utmost contempt, and
himfelfand family with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote infiantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for obme time, and urged, in
such strong terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had ued, aj
might have convinced her to what an unfavourable confiruion her
condu&t would be liable, if flie periisred in her present method of
proceeding :.

NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of Lennox, could

Tlw trial fro-
ccil,. prc\ail to havc tle trial put off. On the day appo:inted, Bothwell

appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would h;:ve
been dangerous to condemn, and impoli!lc to punihl him. Be-
lic.; a tll croln boidy c f his friends and va:tI:ls afiemblcd, accori-
in to cutloin, fromt diTzIffert parts of tlhe kingm, hIc was attrled

* \t:1 \tv'). i. 5 1 ( uui . S1. i. 13j

. '[ / cI: sc!T. PI'1i. (..
S':c A'.i'i,,i;:, N ' X iX.

i-y

by a band- of hired soldiers, who marched with flying colours along BooK IV.
the ftree's of Edinburgh *. A court of justice was held, with -

1567.

the accullorUed formalities. An indidment was presented against
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his accufa-
tion. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his depen-
dants. He excused his Mafier's absence, on account of the fliort-
ness of the time, which prevented his aflembling his friends and
vassals, witllout whose afTiance he could not, with safety, venture
to set h1mfelf in opposition to such a powerful antagonifl. For this
reason, he desired the court to flop proceeling, and proteited, that
any sentence which should be pased, at that time, ought to be deemed
illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, inililed, that te court
should inflantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own letters, in
which lie craved of the Queen to prosecute the murderers without de-
lay, was produced. Cunniiigham's objetions were over-ruled; and
the jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the firfi rank, found
Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

No perlon appeared as an accuser, not a ingle witness was ex- Eotlucl,;I c

amined, nr any evidence pro. uced against i im. The jry, under q
these circumfinances, coulid do not:ng elte but acquit him. Their
verdicr, however, was l.r from 1 ratitiig tile iwihes, or silencing
tihe murmurs of the peope. Every circumstance in the trial gave
grounds for lufpicion, and excited :[ndlritloi ; an tce jdglfmctcii
pronounced, inflead of b i: a procof c i tiivell ' in\ ,cclce, Vis
cftcemed an! airguint oi his ii',:. Ii'af;tuilniics aid !ibj]s v:.Lce
afiixed to diltfrct l:c s, e nrcfii alr the Icniilts of te public,
with the utinoil vi; i;ler.cc of laI 'L u ,'

* .\ tjdCi . li, I. .

r'i g

BOOK IV. THE jury themselves seem to have be.n wamre of the rCenfure,

to which their proceedings would be epQfed; and, at the fame
15 67- time, that they returned their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl

of Caithness protefled, in their name, that no crime hould be im-
puted to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and
no proof was brought of the indictment. He took notice, likewise,
that the ninth inflead of the tenth of February was mentioned in
the indictment, as the day on wjiich the murder had been commit-
ted. A circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the indictment; and at a time when men were
disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
this small matter contributed to confirm and to increase their sus-
picions

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which he

had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication of his innocence. Im-
mediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cuflom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in which he offered to
fight, in single combat, any Gentleman of good fame, who fliould
presume to accuse him of being accefTory to the murder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had been

cleared by the moll unexceptionable and fatisfacory evidence. The
ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more viiible than ever ; and Lennox, who could not ex-
pcet that his own person would be safe in a country where the mur-
delrcr of his son had been absolved, without regard to justice, and
loaded with honours, in contempt of decency, fled with precipita-
tiun towards England A-.

B otlhw. Trial. Andcrf. vol. i. 97, &c. It Keith, 378. Notc (d.)

T~vo

; rTwo days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the open-BooK IV..
iig of which the Queen diftingui(hed Bothwell, by appointing him ~'~"

x567.

to carry the sceptre before her . Most of the Adts paifed in this A '.riamcnt
Assembly, were calculated on purpose to firengthen his party, and held.
to promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all the pof-
sessions and honours which the partiality of the Queen had confer-
red upon him; and the at to that effete contained the frongeft de-
clarations of his faithful services to the Crown, in all times paRt.
The-furrender of the cattle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed,
The law of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and he, and his
adherents, were restored to the estates and honours of their ancestors.
Several of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained the ratifications of the grants made in their favour. And
as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law paired, whereby those, in-
to whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded
inflantly to destroy it; and if, through their negled, it should be
allowed to spread, they were fubjeded to a capital punifment, in
the fame manner as if they had been the original authors -.

BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had acquired over RemriLiabie
Mary's mind, appeared in the cleare:f manner, by an a in favour lat, in s:,o

of the Pcsbr-

of the Protestant religion, to which, at this time, flie gave her as- ma:ion.
sent. Mary's attachment to the Romiih faith was niforlm and fu-
perftitious; ihe had never laid ade the design, nor loit tlh hopes
of restoring it. She had, of late, come under new cngagements
to that purpose, and in confeiqence of theie, had ventured upon
iome steps more public anti vigorous than any she had formerly
taken. But Bothwell was prompt(ed, by powerful i otives, to pro-
mote this law. He had been guilty of crimes, which rcndeircd hin
thc objcdt of just and univcrfal deteflation. lie \sas mcditating

* Keithl , 37 . Note (d.) q ibkd. .o.

it]I'/ ,

BOOK IV. others,. which he easily foresaw would heighten the public indigna-

- --' tion against him. By this popular law, he might hope to divert,

5 or to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered himself, that

the obtaining this unexpeted and legal security for the Protestant
religion, would attone for much guilt, silence the clamours of the
clergy, and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his
crimes. The a itself was so favourable to the docrine of
the Reformers, that the Parliament, which met next year, un-
der very different leaders, could substitute nothing itronger or more
explicit in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratify it word for
word '. To pass such an a, was utterly inconfiflent with all the
maxims which Mary followed in every other period of her life; buc
what could never be extorted from her by the solicitations of the
Assemblies of the church, or by the intreaties of her people, the
more powerful influence of Bothwell now obtained -.

Bothvcll pr- EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with
vails on the
,ohl. t r- all the iiuccefs which his nmof finguine wishes could expcd. Lie
:";:hli)si( '!l hi:ad entirely gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the ling had
to th1 Qtcci. excited no public commotion; he had been acquitted by his peers

of any share in that crime ; and their decilion had been, in fuile

* Pail. I. Jac. V. c. r.

t- Inuchanan, i;n.s. 3^5, not only omits taking :,iy notice of th;ik law, but alrt:,

th.it the j( ccn) , tio h i the lhad -l iven plolnilcs in l;vourl of the reformed rcli' io,,
-rfulifc to lpermit ?nv at to pas: i support of it, aiild cvell lifinifTcd the ccpLu-
tics of the cliurch ith contempt. Spotlwood, .')2. and Caldcrwood, vol. iii. 4r.
(bll afilmn tli faikm thing. It wol], not have bccn ncccirlry to obfcrvc thi; il-
l ince oft l chiullns:' ain lccir;v ; but that an ll ;t hor so conlcrfant in our 1,i\vS a:
Spiotfwoodl, an:i onl e so ilLinlri(,ts a Ca(llcrwood, (hounlI commit such an cr cl',
wuitl ::

prilnt(i aI(l ot :liam.nt to the conlil.ay w a beftre their eyes, is icnrti.k
;tb'c. l\itl la!nitic;a h liiiifdlf has taken iinotice of this; ,d. i tlctio, p. 8.

1 01fit

fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the regal au- BOOK IV.
thority was so extremely limited, and the power of the nobles so 6
formidable, he durst not venture on the last action, towards which 5
all his ambitious projedts tended, without their approbation. In or- April '9-
der to secure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of Parlia-
ment, invited all the nobles who were present to an entertainment.
Having filled the house with his friends and dependants, and surround-
ed it with armed men , he opened to the company his intention of
marrying the Queen, whose consent, he told them, he had already ob-
tained; and demanded their approbation of this match, which, he
said, was no less acceptable to theirSovereign, than honourable to him-
felft. Huntley and Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwell's schemes,
and promoted them with the utmost zeal; the Popish ecclefialics,
who were absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to looth all her
paions, inflantly declared thcir fatisfadion with what lie had pro-
poscd. The reft, who dreaded the exorbitant power which Both-
well had acquired, and oblerved the Queen's growing atecdion towards
him in all her ations, were willing to make a merit ofyilcdilng to a
neafure, which they could neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were
confounded and inraged. But, in the end, Bothwell, partly by pro-
mises and flattery, partly by terro: and force, prevailed on all who
were present to fublcribe a paper, which leaves a deeper ihin than
any occurrence in that age, on the honour and charaCtcr of the na-
tion.

Tils paper contained the flrongcft declarations of lothwcll s in-

nocence, and the moftl ample ackino ilcdgment of 1his good tl iccs
to the kingdom. If any future acculition flould e brought againil
him, on account of the King's Inurder, the lubfcricr-s promilicd to

* Guoo, vol ii.

ii . Alldci, vl, i, 9y .
Vo . I. Z ; ill,1d

BooK IV. fland by lhim as one man, and to hazard their lives and fortunes in

'"- ' his defence. They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
1567.

proper person fi(l could chufe for a husband ; and if he flould con-
descend to br-ow on him that mark of her regard, they undertook
to pomote the marriage, and t join him with all their forces, in
opposing any person who endeavou;ed to obflruct it -. Among the
fuiblci-ibers of this paper, we find omnc ewho were the Queen's chief
confidents, others who were frangcrs to her counfls, and ob-
noxious to her difplcafure ; ome who faithfully adhered to her,
through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and others who becamn
the principal authors of her fuLfSrings; ome pafionlatcly attached
to the lomifi fperltition, and others zealous advocates for tle
Protcftant faith 1-. No common interetr can be fuppoed to have
united men of such opposite principles and parties, in recommend-
inl to their Sovereign a ftcp so iiiiurious to her 1onour, and so fa-
tal to her peace. This strange coalition was the effect of much ar-
tifice, and mull be confidered as the boldest and most mafleriy
flroke of Bothwell's address. It is observable, that amidif all the
altercations and mutual reproaches of the two parties which arole
in the kingdom, this unworthy tranlsitAion is leldom mentioned.
Conscious, on both lides, that in this particular, their conduc could
ill bear examination, and would redound little to their fame, they
alw'ays touch upon it unwillingly, and seem dcfirous that it should
remain in darknles, or be buried in oblivion. But as io many per-
sons, who, both at that time, and ever after, poiffeied the Queen'5
favour, subscribed this paper, the fufpicioil becoms s1-ong, that
Botlh wll's amblitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor
ldifapprovcd by her .

* nA si . ,1. i. 177.| Kit;L, -$2.

| O f .ll tlic dilililc t l1lticmn ; w ith ti r tl to t; i .ti l, ,tiljon, li;L:t of ',
t li(,iIII

si';i ;' to
b'; ii'- '-i~ l :ic in~i c e I:ii lv \ i(ll ii i i . 1 .: u p jc ll t l ili . '

THESE suspicions are confirmed by the mofr dire( proof. Melvil, BOOK IV.

at that time, enjoyed a considerable share in her favour. He, as well - ,
as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in England, with those
who favoured her pretensions to that Crown. The rumour of her
intended marriage with Bothwell having early spread in that kingdom,
excited the utnmoif indiignation ; and he received a letter from thence,
which repcfcntcd, in the irongeft terms, what would be the fatal es-
fclis offuch an imprudent flep. Mclvil put this letter into the Queen's
hands, and i,forced it with the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded thecf remonitranccs, but communicated the matter to Both-

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been hi' af)lciatc in the murder
of the King, and that they now wvanted to rin him. tc a:fiirms, at the famce tiime,
that the fib!riptions tu this paper were obtainedl by them, out of fear that oth-
wvell niihrt iJin; in liis hopes, ani betray the whole blooJv f eret. 404. Jut beiile
thle abnlr' ite' of fuppofl, thait anyr ma.n's enies woul contribute tol-wards rairIn
jhiin t fclh hih dig.i iv', on t': ii:cl'tain hopes of aftcrwards depriing Ihinl of
it; bcliidls tlhe iimp jllibi!ity of a;:cemp hli ini' such a i arrl c, if it 11had becci citlh
il'irXinia to te (i ,.ecni, or dih'ircc l) ti o ler ; v,'e nlny ( i eve t!.at t ii ; lit i 'io
is cl(flen"d by5 thie d'ie. tcii:;lwn of' the ( ._xC hIci l!l', xlho ! -aibs the corifZ n
of the nob'l.s to iothveli' s altiiec,, / ,

p 1 c/.j l' it

.I c/: '

, z !.:', ,,,,, s

t',;at zc' t'c e c n.''~.'t ,'l.c zcr/ '.,''.. l si.

\p 1. ;. t)

; . It '\ ,''.. lh.:'.' . l._: no 1%,.'.! :.t-

vantage to

t lai1y, if t 1 ih ' C tlil

crel the cofl0it of the 1 ,b1!s to

h v.1e

I;cen tlihir own Voluntary (ed. It is 1i! n'more fai iin1, to fid ti lv ,i bii
tl-is paper to M2 Tinriv and lls tation. An' f. v,!. i. *(. '1 1;, ilio ? li

i.;lt xv..;

one of the pet{tis; x ho Ilbf' iibhed it. Ieh'.i, 'i;. . F;r > cundliin,,.c!-;, ;:tt:
tile conference hi d a.t \ol I (CS, pet'eti.l thit l ion;' i It i o!)L;) , (e" t t .!Iic

.arl of ritilltl, would fLnblt ibCe thli; pI jer tiil .a w irni:t t s'I' l e

,r l (iie i \\.1'. r'l)-

ducc, b whi(. llC)' \w.C1 allo.'1 d t )

t;o ; tli.i' \'l.! ,1111 I}l!. l;i.l illn tliC'.i :i!i., ,

and exhibit.ed. i'n der. x (l. iv l irt ii. So. I l , di' i' .i;i II;

, i n'.t (,; :,

wIlio fupli f; 111lrt 1l

p1p l. 'i; pi

(t

[al i .

lio ftlli :( [ie '.1': (1

r In il' i l , :i11

th , next day, I ol):lte i)'i

' l

,le (

\ .p i, t)i whait t.I l.. d do e,\ ' .I
fc,.Lniity o thli.lel\.S, 355.

7Z / v

BooK IV. well. Melvil, in order to save his lfe, was obliged to fly from

'-·--- court, whither he durst not return, till the Earl's rage began to
567. abate ". At the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger

and infnmy to which flhe would expolf herself, by such an indecelt
choice; but an advice from her met with still less regard -.

Eothwcll car- THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary went from
r)i§h~' i:; Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her son. Both-
,' it e [l O 0'
uubibr. well had now brought his schemes to full-maturity, and every pre-

caution bcing taken, which could render it safe to venture on the lal
and decifivec iep, the natural impctuofity of his fpiuit did not fuffcr
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an expedition
aainf: the fce-bootcrs on thle borders, he alTembled his followers;
r 24 and ma'ching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned

suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Qucen on her return near
that place, dilpcrled her llendcr train without resistance, seized oi
her pcrfon, and condured her, together with a few of her cour-

* Mclv. i 6. According to Mclvil, Lord IIcrrcis likcwife rcmonnratcd against

tl- marriagc, and conjlured tle Qnccn, In his knees, to lay aidc all thoughts ut
si ch a ldifilionur.b'lc ali.inc. 1i56. LBut i:' hls bct obflervec, that Ilcn cis is une (oi
the noblcs ho fiLbfcribLc the bond, psil 19. Kith, '83. . T2. hat he is orn:
(if the witu.TLcs to thlc marlia.ge atilcs bect.ccn the Quecn and Bothwl!, May I4.
<;(;, d. vol. ii. 6 i.. ' lihat he [flt in council with Bothwell, Mar -. Keith, 3{.
i-;t this rmoinlia iicc of Lord IIcrrcis lt aiihil tli marriauc hapcpelcd befol- thlcc,
ma.lc by MI1il h iiiftl 1t, vI MlX'il's rcnoni,-l rnc'; muii;t havIe happened fiom
tilc b lorUIC th i mclitinti'r f Parl illut; for a.'tir l(ficedii!;

L,,tl\ c)ll, hc rti'.ud

flonil cort; i allo d l lhi; i r.lc tillc t) fiI) !, ;!.It lxad
11 tain .I o;ic..lI the (.?yccn'

.xlcn
I l 1. \1 ,,, (;ill, A \piil 2 .

i -,'. 'I he' ti:v: whx l x'( l t tt l:lx.: clipk', l\, ili.i

© lp(){}_' , li'1 . l '~I L' a1 pI r>l!';[ I {)l JlL ' ll1 1]:]rL'. I'c i .;p . '.'clxi! nia.,W l,:\ it , ,t, -
C'.)tllJ Hitt '1.11 be i;lat.Luil \xil c ,ll l t t, x .'i.t l.iIliL tli tl.

*I A n 11. Il. \< 1. i. .

tier:,

tiers, as a prisoner to his cafle of Dunbar. She expreffd neither BooK 1V.
furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage commnitted -"v

I567.

on her perl;n, and such an insult offered to her authority, but ieemmcd
to yield witihout itruggle or regret ~. Melvil was, at that timn, one
of her attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized in-
formed him, that nothing was done without the Queen's own con-
sent --. If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's name,
the scheme had been communicated to her, and every ftep towards it
was taken with her participation and advice .

BOTH the Qeen and Botlhwell thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It afrorded her a decent excule
for her condut ; and while lhe could plead that it was owing to
force rather than cicc, l(he hloped that her reputation, among io-
reigners at least, woulld ecape without ccnfure, or be exposcd to
lcfs reproach. IBothwell could not help ditrufling all the me-
tlods which had hitherto been uscd, for vindicating him from any
concern in the murder of the KIing. Sonmthing was ifill wanting
for his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a par-
don under the Great Seal. 3y the laws o Sco d, the moit hei-
nous crimlte null be nitioi-cd l-y name il a pardon, anld then all
lefier ofilfnccs are demed to be included undcr the generil claus,
R,,l a/ ll th1'r c.ri,!/Cs IC/.',ft/. L1' .

i To ize the pc:;on of the Prine ,

is hlihl t eafon ; and tlhothi l I>ed, that a prlon obtaincd ibr
this, would cxtend to every t!irg ofiv:hchl h had
il' L ac.u/ld u 'i

B oriwlir., hvi;ng ncwv lot the Q(e:t's pcri ln inato Ihis hand:;, r ,i;, -

it w,;ol l Ive 1CC: u _,. Inc min c .it' r aa

I t 1 . IllIll "

r It

v,
g.il'il try to hae t*i c, coiltu>;1:m atiilg Ils Ic} lnci: S. Fur tins

'<- l' jll,,

h , " ;'s -I l'ic .

I ,''.
] (;tt d. ,1. ;i. '"

,)ilantiy ),0o t°

!| a '.!

' . ( *J.. L. ., ,

li. '¢
iv. 1'. 1 .

BooK VT purpose, he instantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain sentence

--'.--- of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Hun l's

'i67 filter. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both before

Protestant and Popifil judges; before the former, in the court of
Commiffaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual court of the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, whose jurifdiAion the Qieen had late-
ly restored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. But his authority had greater weight than the jufcice of his
cause; and in both courts, sentence of divorce was pronounced, with
the fame indecent and fiufpiciuus precipitancy *.

WIIILE this infamous tranfadion was carrying on, the Qleen

rcfidcd at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the ut-
y J most rcfpec-. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his

dependants, conduded her to Edinburgh; but inftcad of lodgiln.g
lh'r in the palace of tIily-rud-houfe, lie conveyed her to the
c.ftle, of whlich e was governor. The discontent of thl nation
lendcred thlis precaution necciary. In an house unfortified, aid
of ey accef, the Qeen might have been refcud without ciifi-
culty out of his hands. In a place of ilrength, fle was securcd
fr-om all the attempts of his enemies.

ONE finall dificulty fill remained to be surmounted. As the

(.ice:ta was kept in a iort of captivity by Botlhwll, a mnarrinc
coclluded in that coindition might be imputed to force, and be held
,' y 1-. p i!nlid. in or!der to obviate this, lM:ry appearedc in the court of

k!ini,;n, anll in ;reCiience of tle ChaicCll or, tlie other julidges, and
ilever.i of the n',ilsity, dCcl;red tnlat Ihe was now at flll li)ber!y;
anl tbl:rilugh lotllcill's violence in i ix;:ig hler perln lad, at firl,
cxcited iier inilignation, yet hlis rcfpicdlful behlaviour Iince that tiimi

*' And. i. 13?,

had

.9

had not only appeascd her rcfe:itment, but detcrmined her to raise Boo,: IV.
Lhil to higher iionours *.'/

15( .

WVIIAT these were loon became public. The title of Dke r

,,-l; '

,

: o

of Orkney was confcrred upon Bothwell ; and o the J 5th oL'' ':''
May'i,'s a 'rrirge v.ith the Quecn, which had so long been the
obj'ct of his wilhcs, and the motive of his crimes, was Iolemnizcd.
The ceremony Vas e fomcd, in public, according to the rites of
the Proteilnt Church, by Adam Bothwell bithop of Orkney, one
of the few prelates who had cmbriaced the Reformation, and
on the fames day, was ceclebrated in private, according to the
forms pre.cribcd by the Popilll religion -. The boldnles with
which Craig, the Miniir whio was commanded to publifi the
banns, tefi-il -l againfil the de1gn ; the frlall number f the nobles,
who were lrclelnt at the marriage ; and the ullen and difiie eiul
filnee of tel, people, wllcn tlhe Queen appeared in public ; w.ere
maniiselc si rmptoms o the violent and general diffatislacion of hler
own fLubic1ls. The refusal of Du Croc the French ambaflador to be
prelent a tlhe nirtial cereilonlv or enter:ainmeni t diicovers the fen-
tilents of hier allies, wirh rei:rd to this pa;t of her condu6t. And
although evlery other atliie iin I Mys liie could be juftifed by the
rules of prudence, or reconcilec to the pi iniciples of virtue, this frail
mnarrl.as'e would remain an icontetliblc proof of hel rafl;icis, ii nlot
of hler guilt.

AI:Rr v's fiifl care was to -,nlr i inc apology f.r hrc- condtuc, to

the colrts (if FIrane all, I}l1'ill i. i }ie i 't.i )11cini: to licl aI .-
l::fJic ors ftil re-raii, aidLl ac ir-.wn by a aile i iiannd. Ijtt
I1111( r all tlie ;rLiilcial ;ai(l Ial:c o iuur;air!g fli L crp!oy,, it is cal- t,)
ditLuver not only tl..t many of tlhe ls ie lid tlaken were uLn-

- . \1 'l. .

1 .
' .\J. . .' I, ' ? 7'.

ju;lii ble,

BOOK IV.juftifiable, but that he herself was conscious that they could not

nr>^ be juflified .
1567.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not beflowed

upon Bothwell. Notwithitanding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rafli
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he flould sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name t. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he poiefled all the reality of power.
The QLeen's person was in his hands; he was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjccts could ob-
tain audience without his permission ; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her . The Scotch Monarchs were accuflomed to live among their
fuljeds as fathers or as equals, without diftruf, and with little
state; armed guards standing at the doors of the royal apartlment,
dificulty of access, difance and retirement, were thilvgs unknon,
and unpopular.

l to THESE precautions were necefiary for securing to Bothwell the

hi nnt.i- power, which he had acquired. But, without being maftcr of
T -of thl

'ric' :-the person of the young Prince, he eflecmed all that he had gained
"i'."' to be precarious and uncertain. The Quccn had committed her

son to tlhe care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well knovn to cxpect that lie would be
wiliig o ut tohe Prince into the hands of the lima, who wa; 1o
violently i'tlicdtcd of llaving Inurderedi hli, father. Botllwll, how-
ever, la'lurecd to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety,

AnJd, i. s 9. ood . :. And . 136.

I \ll icT

wi;ch gave rife to the hlackef fufplicions. All his addlrcs as wellBooK IV.
as at'-r,tV w-'re employred to perfiiuade, or to force M\ar, into a -6-'

1.67.

coin , j;, .

'" i ,, h . nds

·. And it is no fliglt proof bo)Cl

of the iirmniltls and dexterity of that nobleman, that he prefervc'
a life of so much imnortance to the nation, from lying- at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition milit have prompted to vio-
lent attempts againii it.

T nE eyes of ncighl;ori;ng nations were sied, at that time, r.:,. ;,.-

upon te .Srcat events, wlichi had happened in Scotland, durinl'"1,''

thrcc m o ' ' t V. 1 2'-

tlrl-cc 1mlonths. A 1King murdered, with the utnolit crucit,, in

. '..:-

the prime of his days, and in is cap}ital city; the )person si!s-
peted of tha1t odiouls crime fuffTr-ed not only to appear pulickly il
everv place, but admitted into the prencce of the Q'lene, diftin-
guihicd by her favour, and entrusted with the chief direion cf
her affairs ; fubjc(cdt to a trial, which was carried on with riofi:
fhamclcfs partiality, and acquitted by a fenteice, whl:ich iervcd o1Ilv
to confirm tlec iulli;cons of iis cuilt; civo:cc! from his wife,

lon preteuce frivolous, or i;ecent: ; ar:d after all this, inflead of
meceting withl the i.:nomii:.; du to Ilis actions, or the iunifment
merited by his crimiies, ermlilttct d (c,'"nv, and wilhout cppofiton,
to marrly a Queen, t wife o the Prince whom Lhc had affafEnated,
and the guardian of tliof la;'b \nliC C

I had ;ein uilty of violat-

in,;. Sucl a quick fiiccefiiln o- in: ci.l ts, so iiirnglar, and so dctcft-
anlc, is not to he found1 in any othel i r I!,ry. TI;'v Ie:t, in t]he (')pi
nion of iorign ers, a n.i'ik o l i:f ,il1v o tl cllh lcter l the ntti:.
'in c 'c)ts wcr lIle iln a:lh)!: 'r:c' : !l ( ver Fii ul ; tJley uLC iii Ii;i iLC
appelar any were inl i.:t'.lc; a"t 'tcr lot:rii! o l maiiy atro()ci.u
deeds to palts witlh iiulnity, tliy w,',c ulnivcrlall relproachld as

* Jcil v, ( o. '

. 21, *;' I
Vol. 1. A a menC1

BOOK IV. men void of courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of the

6-~^ reputation of their Queen, and the honour of their country .

i567.

Thenohble THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had been hitherto
comb'er a- anmufed by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The
sainiq her and
Bothwell. manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acquired,

his repeated attempts to become mailer of the Prince's person, to-
gether with some rafl threatenings against him, which he let fall 4-,
added to the violence and promptness of their resolutions. A conli-
derable body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an a-
fociation for the defence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindtay, Boyd, lurray of Tul-
libardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary were the
heads of this confederacy ,+ Stewart Earl ofAthol was remarkable
for an uniform and bigotted attachnent to popery, but his indigna-
tion on account of the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, on this
occasion, all considerations of religion, and united him with the
nmolt zealous Protestants. Several of the other nobles aced, with-
out quefi'on, from a laudable concern for the fafcty of the Prince,
and the honour of their country. But the spirit which lfme of
themn discovered, during the subsequent revolutions, leaves little
room to doubt, that ambition or refcntment were the real motives
of their condutct; and that, on many occasions, while they were
purrliigl ends jlfC and cccflary, they were atuated by priiciil s
u;d paflions altogether ujultifiable.

THE first accounts of this league filled the Qieccl nndl Ioth:'.I1
with great conficrnation. They wcre no flrangcrs to tlhc ic!timiiciit

it Ancrf. vol. i. 128, 13. . ivI j. 3. c Appndix, N XX.

'1 Ibid .
61. :1. I tl , 1)..

p.

of the nation, with refct to their conduCt; and though their mar-BOOK IV.
riage hd lnIt met \vith public opposition, they knew that it had -

1567.

not been carried on without the ecret disgust and murmurings of all1
ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with which this indig-
nation would bu!rf out, after being so long fipprefled. And in or-
der to prepare for the form, Mary issued a proclamation, requiring\ray ,, .
her fubjeds to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day ap-
pointed. At the ifme tine, ihepublifhed a fortofmanifeftuo, in which
lhe laul-,lrecl to vindicate her government fi-om those imputations
with whilh it had beeni loaded, and empl),ycd the strongest terms
to exprcs her concern for the f ety and welfare of the Prince her
ion. Nither of thiee produced any considerable effct, H-er pro-
clamlation was ill obeyed, and her anifeflo met with little cre-
dit .

TIIr confederate Lords carried on their preparations with no lets T!.e'Qi7eci

aAivity, and with much more LucccIs. Among a warlike people,,<I! to 'ul,
men of !b much pover and popularity found it an easy matter to1':':
raise an army. They were ready to march before the Queen and
Bothwvcli were in a col diticn to reinl them. The castle of Edin-
burgh was the place whiter the (ueen oughlt naturally to have
retired, and there her prfon migh-?t have been perfecly ife. But
the confcderates liad fallen on

l aCns to aililk, c upt tc fie-

lity of Sir ames I:lfir tle deputy govcnor, Orad 'thweii dlrt
not co1mmit to him ficli an i:llpltant trult. I ie co;iitiatcd tihe QI -'en
t, tlhe ca/lle of 1 w'tli\\iL, ;,:i 01en tl e aippici:rar ce of Lord IiHor, j (.
witlh a body of I.; ;li!v.,., i(i' .!;e tllh t i cl.-.c, e f'ed with piCe-
cipitatiOnl t) IlI)un . r, a d wv; s s.i l!(\vcii *v the Q(icel, diguiied i'l
men's cloatlis. Th'lic con.ierttc ti.sl :nced towards Edinburgh,

:,i Ktit~l, '<*'- a ', i', t'.whe

A a a .:: nvwhere

BOOK IV. where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the inhabitants to
L-- -- defend the town against them. They entered without opposition,

1567.

and were infantly joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal be-
came the firmest support of their cause *.

IN order to set their own conduc in the mofl favourable light,

and to rouze the public indignation againifl Bothwell, the nobles
publilfed a declaration of the motives which had induced them to
take arms. All Bothwell's palt crimes were enumerated, all his
wicked intentions displayed nd agngravated, and every true Scott-
man was called upon to join them in avenging te one, and in pre-
venting the other '~.

MEAN while, Bothwell aifembled his forces at Dunbar, and as

he had many dependants in that corner, he soon gathered fiu;i
P.rength, that lie ventured to advance towards the cnfc.dcrats,
Their troops were not numerous; the fulddencfs and fec!ccy of their
enterprize gave their friends at a difiance no tlie t oin theml;
a.1d as it docs not appear that they were iupportcd either with
money or fed with hopes by the Queen of Eglanld, they could not
have kept lontr in a body. But on the other hand, Bothwell durfl
not rilque a delay I. His army followed hin v ith rcludance in
this quar,.cl, and terved him with n1 co:d;I.l afl.clion; so that s'
olsv ho)pcs of fnccel was i in' p-i'i lg the en iy, or in ilrI ri;
t li blow bef)ore his own troops I.(u 1I:i'iir.: to rccollcdt tlhelmfcllvc ,
cr to iinbll))e t h lame nfct vourtll blc otiiiiion of hiis aICi.)is, wliil li At
fp;c(-id over te rcltl of the nation. 'tcsc in-v'tivc:; dct'niincdt t!-

>lccn to march forward, with tin ilnco;l -ra tc a,(n f[:;l li. 1(tl.

' lKcil , 3 8 . I Ar.:, ,!,i ]. -, Kni I.,
I.:.

tl,0.

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates ad- BOOK IV.
vanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the fame ''76

. 567.

ground which the Engliih had pofefied at the battle of Pinkie. T5l iiohlcl
The umrbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there was t,"arc ii1
no equality in point of discipline. The Queen's army confited Jun" ;
chiefly of a multitude, haflily aembled, without courage or expe-
rience in war. The troops of the confederates were composed
of Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their molt trusty
dependants, who were no less brave than zealous *.

Du Croc the French AmbaTfador, whio was in the field, Ia- An.con- -

boured, by negociating both with the Qiecn and the nobles, to tcpie,.
put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. Eie repre-
fcntcd to tle confederates the (Qecn's inclinations towards peace,
and her willingness to pardon the offences lwhicl they lhad commit-
ted. Miortcn replied, with warmth, that they had taken arms not
a.init tlhe QIIcn, but agtinfr the murderer of her hu.fand, and
if lie v.'cC !ivcn up to jutlice, o: bani;Led from her prefince, flie
Imoutld l:tid tic:'. ready to yild the oc id nce \vhii.hl is due f'c1nin
i4bic'ts to th:cir Socerci.n, Glencairn adldd, t!hat tl-h v did not
clilS to al- p.i-don for any since, but to pun!iil t.oc who had

or nc C(. Lau'rjc t

tui't'lity a;flle''s convinccdt the Amba!lflorl- tIllii t

llis mncdi ic'n w v'zld be ie s'Lt:al, a:id th tl thi.;i:'-,afl)n; Vcr too
I-,il to a'l\w tm t li to

if Ic to) any pcii c p loptoins, or to thik
of rct'catii g a l Ir h avin proceeded to Jar .[ o

Ti . l : £C alr'1 ; r, wa l' tiel to ; \';1iil; .rc, (in :la i; i11' g5'(r l t,

n .

The il' c illl',ilratc, adi.;:'.:-cd tl t il: :..c(, Ilcl(ItlO', lb!tt 1')Vwly, and
wvithl thie c.tliO i l Vl.tll \\',s n;ittu;al on thlatt unhal;p, si ld. lcr

jAl J 1 .l i. ." p .\ ''M ' i

BoOK IV.troops were alarmed at their approach, and difeovered no icli',a-
L--,',- tion to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; she went'

J (67. ° .

167 e threatened, she reproached them with cowardice; but ail ii

vain. A few of Eothwell's immediate attendants were eager for the
encounter; the reft flood waverilg and irresolute, and forne be-
gan to flcal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to infpt-it them,
by offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his on innocence
in tingle combat with any of his advcrfaries. Ki-rkaldy of Grange,
IMurray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay contended for the honour
of entering the lifts againfl himi. But this challenge proved to be :
mere bravade. Either the confcioufiefs of guilt deprived Bothwell
of his wonted courage, or the (2Qeen, by her authoritr, forbade
the combat .

AFTER tle symptoms of fear dificovered by her followers, AI\ry

would have been inexcuthble, had she hazarded a battle. To
have retrcated in the face of an encmy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which ie flood, with part of their cavalry, was utterll
impracticable. In this ituation, Ihe was under the cruel necefiicl
,of puting lcriel into the hands of those fubjcSs who had talicla
armns agains t her. She demanded an itcrview with Kirkaldy, a
brave and generous man, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. IIe, with the conir,.nt and in name of the leaders of the
party, promiied that, on cc nditioll ihe would difii Bothwnc!
fromi her prcitncc, and govcrn the ;i c:doml by tle advice of her
nolics, tly would honour and ocbey', lr as their Sovctrcin -.

pD;;nr';: this pr:Iy, IBithwcll took l:i; last f.lc'weli of the O:cn
,,1 t, I .,. and -l c olr tlCe icld \vitl a1 few f.iiiow rs. IT!is dil :t rcvct ic

h.ijppen' d cxac tly one monlt lfi alic tl .t Il;arrijacc, \v. licll had coll lh i

t C i'tl . v ,.
1 . o. 1-l. (l. i i. 6t. Mii. 16v. i6 .

so many crimes to accomplif , and which leaves so foul a slain on BOOK IV.
Mary's memory.

J567.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to Kirkaldy, who Mary furren.

conducted her toward the confederate army, the leaders of which ,ob,. tc
received her with much refpe&t; and Morton, in their name, made
ample profeflions of their future loyalty and obedience . But she
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmost insolence and
indignity. As hle marched along, they poured upon her all the op-
probrious names, which arc bestowed only on the lowest and nmoft
infamous criminals. Wherever he turned her eyes, they held up
before her a andard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firctched on the ground, and the young Prince kneeling
before it, and uttering these words, " Judge and revenge my caute,
0 Lord " Mary turned with horror from such a hocking fight.
She began already to feelthe wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the molt bitter complaints, she
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from finking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and, in
spite of many delays, and after lookini with the fondicls and crcdu-
lity natural to the unfortunate for ionlm unexpecied relief, fle arrived
there. lThe fireets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal
or curiolity had drawn togetlhcl, to behold such an unufsal fccne.
The Queen, wovn out with fti !e, covered with dull, ad be-
dewed with tears, was cxpofc.l a a ipeaeclc to her own I'lIjcd:s,
anld led to the Provoll's hot!c. Nhotwith!!andi liall her ,llr-i-
ments and intrcaties, the £iC flLe aIdard ws carricil bieforc lhr, and
the fiae in silts ando rc-pro-hcs repCte(d. A woman, young, beau-
tiful, aind in dlillefs, is naturally tlic olict ofu coinpaflluii Tlic

Good, v..l, ii. (.

COll-

Book IV. comparison of their present misery with their former splendour, usual-
'-----w ly softens us in favour of illustrious fufifrers. But the people beheld

I567. the deplorable ituation of their Sovereign with insensibility; ad so

firong was their persuasion of her guilt, and io great the violence of
their indignation, that the sufferings of their Queen (lid not, in any
degree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that fyrpathy,
which is seldom denied to unfortunate Princes ^.

* Mlvil, 166. Buch. 364,

T 91lE

# BOOK V.

T H E
THE
HISTORY

OF
S C T L AND.

BOOK V.

H E confederate Lords had proceeded to uch extremities V
againfl their Sovereign, that it now became almof impof- _
fible for them either to flop fort, or to pursue a courie I567.

less violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them of thl eot:l
in their ente-prize; trs openly condemned it. A fnall circunm- Cc"'."i"

the iueeri,

fiance might abate that indiglation with which the multitude were,
at present, animated againfl the Q.ecn, and deprive them of that
popular applaule which was the chief oundation of their power.
These considerations inclined tiomc of them to trcat'the Queen witlt
great lenity.

u T, on the other hand, Mtry's anlccitli for B0otl'll continued

as violent as ever; flic obllnatciy rcilifel to liaicicn to any pro-
potzl s;i- dil4.,!iig thlu'i-r In'rrl'i; c, and d( 'tcr icd tII( to abandoll
a m nl!, ir v l v,:,c l(o c i)!c lild a lread l tI rilicci t m

ucl() il:'. It tllhey

fliould allo\ lir t to rlcvIc the 1ilrenlc i)t \Vlcr, tlc firi' exe ortion of
it would be to'rc.a I'1l:'vc!; .;id; ti v lad ic. .lll, Ibotli fionil his

* 1Kdiit;, .j i;, .1

y ^ 4 ,.

*1!'

4;. rv . '.'t , Ap 1JI. N ' X1.
\;oL. I, i' 1~ 'e) ,lent

BOOK V. resentment, from her condu&, and from their own, to expet the

_-v-- severest effects of her vengeance. These considerations fur-
I567. mounted every other motive; and reckoning themselves absolved,

by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, fiom the engagements
which they had come under when he yielded herfelfa prisoner, they,
without regarding the duty which they owed her as their Queen,
and without consulting the relt of the nobles, carried her next even-

They in- ing, under a frong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and signed a
prile "
in warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to detain her as a pr-

fnner. This catle is situated in a finall island, in the middle of a
lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mother. In this place,
under friE custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeted to the in-
fults of a haughty woman, who boafled daily of being the lawful
wife of James V. Mary suffered all the rigour and miseries of cap-
tivity .

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to Strengthen their party; they entered
into new bonds of association; they aflumed the title of Lords qs
the Secret Council, and without any other right, arrogated to them-
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first ads of power
was to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned
in the murder of the King. This shew of zeal gained reputation
to themelves, and threw an oblique refletion on the Queen for her
renmifihefs. Several fufpeded persons were seizcd. Captain Black-
adder and three others were condemned and executed. But no dili
covery of importance was made. If we believe fbIe hiil-orian,
they were convictcd by fificicnt evidence. If we ive credit to
others, their fcntcnce was unjuf, and they denied, witl their lasil
breath, any knowledge of the crime, for which they fuffcrcd -|l.

Keith, .103. Note (/). I Call.vl. ii. 3. Cr.wLv M m. 35.

AN

AN unexpected accident, however, put into the hands of Mary's BooK V.

enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt. Both- -
well having left, in the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing fe- 56
veral sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own hand ; he now
sent one of his confidents to bring to him this precious depofite. But
as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the casket seized
by Morton *. And the contents of it were always produced by the
party, as the most ample jufification of their own condut, and the
most unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their Sovereign
with the imputation of imaginary crimes t.

BUT the confederates, notrithfanding their extraordinary fuc- Some of tIe
cess, were fill far from being perfectly at ease. That so small a part noblis favou:;

the Ci m.

of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their Sovereign,
or to afTume the authority which belonged to her, without the con-
currence of the reif, appeared to many of that body to be unpre-
cedented, and presumptuous. Several of these were now assembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they should hold,
in this dificult conjuncture. The confederates made omne attempts
towards a coalition with them, but without effict. They employed
the mediation of the Assembly of the Church, to draw them to a
personal interview at Edinburgh, but w ith no better fiiccefs. That
party, however, though its numbers were formidable, and the
power of its leaders great, oon lois reputation by the want of una-
nimity and vigour; all its consultations evaporated in mrnururs
and complaints, and no Ichemn was concerted for obfiruiting the
p rogrefs of the confederates : .

TiirrR i appeared tome profipct of dangeri firom another quarter. Il;,l) i,t

This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without lany 'c i.f(jiniiLr
aid flrom Elizabeth, and even witlout lher knowledge . A. nd

* Anlllcl' . i. i. ( ul. v(. ol ii. 0).

-t

Sc ) Illl1crt:ti l L;t trle c uJ ti e
thei Apitllix. lcitlit, l7. 1 l1. 11.

1 b b 2 tliuhl1

BOOK V. though (he was far from being displeased to fee the affairs of that
'"g7"J kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom he hated, reduced to dif-

trefs, he neither wished that it hould be in the power of the one
faction entirely to suppress the other, nor could she view the steps
taken by the confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding
the popular maxims by which he governed her own fubjets, her
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their Sove-
reign, which they had no right to controul, and had offered vio-
lence to her person, which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They
had set a dangerous example to other fubjefts, and Mary's cause be-
came the common cauSe of Princes . If ever Elizabeth was in-
fluenced with regard to the astirs of Scotland, by the feelings of
her heart, rather than by considerations of interest, it was on this oc-
June 3o. cafion. She inflantly despatched Throgmorton into Scotland, with

powers to ncgociate both with the Queen, and with the confede-
rates. In his inftrucions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation -. And the choice of
an Ambassador, so devoted to the interest of the Scotch Qjeen,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's
fiieindfhip, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail to MIary.
The confederates foresaw what would be the effects of these good
offcs ; and that the Queen, elated by the profpet of protection
would rect with icorn the overtures which thev \vere about to
imake her. They, for that rcaCon, peremptorily denied Thlrornorton
.;cc.' t their prisoner. And what propoihions he made to themi in
her behal)f, tllic either rcfiled, or eludc'ed

,,.,., I VilN \lvilc they deliberated witl thle utmon anxiety, concern..
} .....i , in, . the fttllencl t of the lt ti()l, and the futtire (ifpofTil of t:

Osco(n1':; pcrFn. t'
Quen': perio;rlun. Llizaetilih,
einhth t i 'lrogm ortoIIn mIi d iL;

Kitdith, 412, 415. I 1i, 411. .[.
d. 41,, 127.

,. (t )grc,(1

progress in his negociations with them, and that they would liften BOOK V.
to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party of 567.
the nobles who were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to reflore their Queen to liberty, and promised to aflift
them in such an attempt, to the utmost of her power *. But they
discovered no greater union or vigour than formerly, and behaving
like men who had given up all concern either for their Queen or
their country, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of their bo-
dy, whether we confider them with refpeft to numbers, or to power,
to fettle the government of the kingdom, and to diIpofe of the
Qeen's person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, and
various opinions arose with regard to each of theic. Some seemed
desirous of adlcering to the plan on whicl the confederacy was at
fiti formed; and after punifling the murderers of the King, and
difiolving the mIarriage with Bothwell; after providing for the safety
of the young Prince, and the fccurity of the Proteflant religion ; they
propol'id to re-eltablitf te Quecn in the poflTilion of her legal au-
thority. The i-cccis with which their arms had been accompanied,
infpiied others witl bolder and more desperate thoughts, and nothing
les would iatists them than the trial, the condemnation and punihi-
ment of the Qecen lerilf, as the principal conspirator againfl the life
of her hufl)a'.d and the safety of her font : the former was Maitland's
fyflem, and breathed too much of a pacific and modcrate spirit, to be
agree-able to tle temper or wishes of the party. The latter was re-
commended by tie clergy, and warmly adopted by imny laics; but
tlic )noblCs C!urlt lnot, or would not venture oil icll an uillprce-
dented and audlacicis (led :J.

"' i' Appc dix,, N'-'. XX[I. -| I;c lh

. , 1 , 4:

, 52.

'I il'1 I illtclllt)i 1 l l r li'Kl ti , ('

s .tx ;-)

t1t. 1 11 dc'lU*; (,)

m l. vc i.ll (.,,i J 11

l,) I' ol 1

,t 1 i l nl' 'lll(I c '

: ,it tlii: illl. ' \\'c ii.l '11 Il I l'.li.,l , ll l l ),llill i' tl,.11 :\.l

y

U9\\cl In I lil t .* i

,i

,1 ',ti 1.

* I);,j, ', Ctoinpl, 'lb). .1, 2<': . S'.c App,'l ulLix,
IN" X\ l1.

W~~iqov ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ I
.X 111.

lCv 1i II

BOOK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so moderate as
~567- . the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be persuaded or
t67.

They oblige forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be proclaimed
the Queen to
resign t go- King, and the Earl of Murray was to be appointed to govern the

nlcnt. kingdom during his minority, with the name and authority of Re-

gent. With regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
termined. It seems to have been the intention of the confederates,
to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to intimidate
herself, and to overawe her partizans, they still reserved to themselves
the power of proceeding to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accufromed
to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which she was
born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own fubjecs, to con-
sent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons, whom ihe
confidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which she herself was fripped, were points hard to be
gained. These, however, the confederates attempted, and they did
not want means to insure success. Mary had endured, for several
weeks, all the hardships and terror of a prison; no profped of liber-
ty appeared ; none of her fubjeds had either taken arms, or so much
as solicited her relief * ; no person in whom she could confide was
admitted into her presence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King and Q/ecn of England were refused access to her.. In this
solitary fate, without a counsellor or a friend, under the prelilure
of distress, and the apprchenlion of danger, it was natural for a
voman to hearken almost to any overtures. The confederates took

* KEcith, ,25.

advanl-

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They employed Lord BOOK V.
Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to communicate their - -
scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her subscription to those pa- I567r
pers which were necessary for rendering it effectual. He exe-
cuted his commission with harshness and brutality. Certain death
was before Mary's eyes, if fie refuscd to comply with his demands.
At the fame time, fle was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name
of Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a refigna-
tion extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was
void in law, and might be revoked so soon as fie recovered li-
berty. Throgmoiton, by a note which he found means to convey
to her, fuggetled the fame thing *. Deference to their opinion, as
well as concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing
which was required, and to sign all the papers which Lindfaypre-
sented to her. By one of these, (le resigned the Crown, renoun- Jtl 2-
ced all share in the government of the kingdom, and consented to
the coronation of the young King. By another, fie appointed the
Earl of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers
and privileges of that high ofEice. By a third, she fbftituted some
other nobleman in Murray's place, :f he flould refute the honour
which was designed for him. Mary, when he subscribcd there
deeds, was bathed in tears; and while she gave aay, as it were
with her own hands, the fceptrc which Ihe had swaycd so long,
fie felt a pang of gief and indignaition, onle of the fevcrei, perhaps,
which can touch the 1human heart .-.

Tiii. confederates enldeavoured to give thls Icfignation all the ;uic, \;.
weight and1 validity iln tlir power, lw p)roccc, 1 g witllout delay to 1')'I :1,i

(C'h. eC

t, C'lvt.
t KCilb 4'.5. Noti(/). ',[,. l '), ! Ibi.. 4 .;'. C' ,\'. ilM. . 3.

4"~'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ts(lr

BOOK V. crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

._6--' on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in pretence of all the
i567. nobles of the party, a considerable number of lesser Barons, and a

great assembly of the people. From that time, all public writs were
issued, and the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever effected with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither poffeifed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned
their Queen, and without shedding a single drop of blood, et her
son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

Rcafonings cf DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
both partic. the nation were turned on them, with astonishment; and various

and contradictory opinions were formed, concerning the extraordi-
nary fleps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of government, which pre-

vails in Scotland, said the favourers of the Queen, and notwith-
standing the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince poilrtes
considerable power, and his person is treated with great veneration.
No encroachments fLould be made on the former, and no injury of-
tered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happincfs of
the nation cannot be securcd by any otlicr means. Sucl cales ftl-
diom cxill, and it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at
lealf to a majority of the tociety, to judge of their cxitlcrnce. By
what ation could it be pretcnldct, that Mary had invaded the rijhts

C 1'

or property of her fubjeas, or what scheme had she formed a- BOOK V.
gainft the liberty and constitution of the kingdom ? Were fears, and - -
suspicions, and surmises, enough to juflify the imprisoning, and the 1567
deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown descended from so long a
race of Monarchs ? The principal author of whatever was reckoned
culpable in her conduct, was now driven from her presence. The
murderers of the King might have been brought to condign punilh-
ment, the safety of the Prince have been secured, and the Prote-
slant religion have been eflablithed, without wresting the sceptre
out of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual imprisonment-
Whatever right a free Parliament might have had to proceed to
such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its determinations
might have merited, a sentence of this nature, pafied by a few
nobles, without acknowledging or consulting the reft of the nation,
muff be deemed a rebellion against the government, and a confpi-
racy againit the person of their Sovereign.

TIE partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently. 'Tik

evident, said they, That Mary either previously gave consent to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid aion.

!-er attachment to Bothwell, the power and honours with which
the loaded him, the manner in which fth suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with which fle'married a man,
fiained with so many crimes, raise firong suspicions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have fulfered the fipreme
power to continue in the hands of an ambitious man, capable of
the most atrocious and desperate ations, would have been dilfracc-
ful to the nation, dihlonourable to the Q(tien, ad dangerous to
the Prince. Recourlc was, tllercfore, had to arms. The Qucen
had been compelled to abandon a lhuCllnl, o unworthy of hcrfelf
But her afecttion toward him ilill contiiuini; ul.:lntcd ; her in--

VOL. I. C ( c (tiiuationl

BOOK V. dignation against the authors of this eparation being visible, and
------ often expressed in the tirongeft terms; they, by restoring her to her
1567 ancient authority, would have armed her with power to destroy

themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded
her an opportunity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, therefore, re-
mained, but by one bold action to dcliver thermfelves and their coun-
try from all future fears. The expedient they had chosen was no
less refpeaful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public safety,
While one Prince was set aside as incapable of governing, the
Crown was placed on his head, who was the undoubted reprefen-
tative of their ancient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on comparing the ar-

guments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we
may entertain concerning the justice or necefity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied that their conduct,
so far as regarded themselves, was extremely prudent. Other ex-
pedients, less rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for
fettling the nation; but, after the injuries they had already offered
the Qjcen, there was none so effetual for securing their own safety,
or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of the confcdertes

appeared not only wife, but jull. The King's acceflion to the
throne was every where proclaimed, and his authority fubtiittcd
to without opposition. And though fcveral of the nobles were still
afTlmnblcd at IHamilton, and feemned to be entering into tome coimbi-
nation againll his government, an afciation for supporting it was

forlmedl,

formed, and signed by so many persons of power and influence BOOK V.
throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt *.

567,

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about tils time, added Murray a-

strength to the party, and gave it a regular and finilhed form. Soon vernmeiu.
after the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired into France,
upon what pretence hifRorians do not mention. During his residence
there, lhehad held a close correspondence with the chiefs of the con-
federacy, and, at their desire, he now returned. He seemed, at firfi,
unwilling to accept the office of Regent. This hesitation cannot
be ascribed to the scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Mur-
ray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition to apire
to this high dignity. He had received the firll accounts of his pro-
motion with the utmost fatisfadion; but by appearing to continue
for fonme days in fufpence, he gained time to view with attention the
ground on which he was to a; to bailance the firength and re-
sources of the two contending facions, and to examine whether the
foundation on which his future fame and success muds reft, were
found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he waited on Mary at

Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter, and a Qiecnr, in a prison, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her,- nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the cir-
cumflanccs, which discover the great want of delicacy and refine-
ment in tlhat ae. Murray, who was naturally rough and uncourtly
in his maInnr -q, expoflul itcd it warmly with the Queen concern-
ing her pafl- condud, and clhrg:ci her faults so home upon her,
that M:!'v \;who Id fi(ittlcrcd herFellf with more gentle and brother-

' A 'r!l,' . v,,. '. ? , . I itili,
7,,.

(' c c ;, ly

BooK V. ly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself

56.-- entirely to despair *. This interview, from which Murray could

reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so fe-
vere and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bitter cir-
cumfrances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most unjufti.
fiable in his conduct.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted the of-

Auguf 2. fice of Regent, and began to act in that charater without opposition.

Fate of Bo. AM I DST so many great and unexpeEted events, the fate of Both-l
well. well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As-

ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for ome time among,
his vaflals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding it impof-
fible for him to make head, in that country, againfl his enemies, or
even to secure himself from their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinfiman the Bifhlop of Murray; and when he, over-awed by th
confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he retired to the Ork-
ney isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friend,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
sered at once the miserics of infamy, and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few small ships, which had accompanicd him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vesTel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
subsistence for himielfand followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Mur-
ray of Tullibardin were sent out againfl him by the confederates;
and surprising him while he rode at anchor, fcattcred his small fleet,
took a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a ingle ship towards
Norway. On that coafl he tfll in witl a vefiel richly laden, and
immediately attackcd it; the Noriweians lailed with armed boats

Kd;il, .445, 446,

tu.

to its atiftance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell and all his BooK V.
crew were taken prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the indignity and ri-
gour, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real charac-
ter was soon discovered ; and though it saved him from the infa-
mous death to which his associates were condemned, it could nei-
ther procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his impri-
fonment. He languished ten years in this unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unafiifted by firangers *.
Few men ever accomplished their ambitious projects by worse means,
or reaped from them les fatisfation. The early part of his life was
restless and enterprising, full of danger and of vicifitudes. His en-
joyment of the grandeur, to which he attained by so many crimes,
was extremely flort; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted
by many fears. In his latter years, he funfered the most intolerable
calamities, to which the wretched are subjed, and from which
persons who have moved in so high a sphere are commonly ex-
empted.

THE good effects of Murray's acceflion to the regency were Succcrqofthc

s0~~~~~ ~~

i- * "

r i /->. i R egent'a ad-

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre-miniitratio,.
solute, and disunitcd; and no sooner was the governrent of the
kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was compoted loft
1al hopcs of gaining ground, and began to treat fcparatcly with the
Regcnt. So many of them were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition to the eflablifhed
government was left in the kingdom. Ilad they adhered to the

* Me'iv. 6S

Q el

Boo0K V. Qucen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth's difpofi-

' - tion at that time, that he would have afforded them such affilt-
J 57. ance as might have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.

But there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
that he was discouraged from espousing their cause; and the Re-
gent taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to submit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to themselves,
or to the Queen S.

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of strength in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy-
governor, surrendered the castle of Ediiiburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms
of great advantage to himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who
discovered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate ; some other
small forts surrendered without refitlance.

, Tarliment. 'THIS face of tranquillity in the nation cncolarrad the Regent to
:Dc.n, tj. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wa'm to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the c( ,ilcirates, except
the approbation of this supreme court; and alic:. the success which
had attended all their measures, there could he little doubt of ob-
taining it. The numbers that resorted to an Afil-mbly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of so much importance were great.
The tmeeting was opened with the utmofi solemnity, anl all its adb
paifcd with much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who
had dilcovered the warnmefl attachment to the Queen, wel-e prcftt.
But they had made their peace with the Regent. Argyll, Iluntly,
and IIcrreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that their bella-

Keiih, 447, 45C, 463.

ic. tll

viour towards the King had been undutiful and criminal *. Their BOOK V.
compliance, in this manner, with the measures of the Regent's i
party, was either the condition onl which they were admitted into 1567
favour, or intended as a proof of the iincerity of their reconcile-
ment.

THE Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de-
mand, either for the lafety of their own persons, or the security of COnfi'm1th

proceedings
that form of government which they had ef-ablifed in the king-of the culfc-

t,~~~~~~~~~~.~~~ -deratcs,

dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and declared
to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's clection, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and hc was declared to be accefiory to the murder of the King --.
At the fame time, all the as of Parliament 56o, in favour of the
Protestant religion were publickly ratified; new fatutes to the fame
purpose were enaCted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was negleted.

Ir is observable, hiowver, that tle fame parsimonious spirit pre-

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of 1560. The Protestant clergy,
notwithilanding many difcouragclments, and their extreme pover-
ty, had, for fcven ecars, performed all religious oflices in the king--
domn. The xpLdiclts fallen upon for their fubfiftance liad hi-
therto proved iliT .'';cJ , (oI 'ci'c intended to be sO. But, not-
witliftandg thelir nlovrn i ;di'cnce, and the warmi reinonfirances
of the Affcinbly of the church, which met this year, tle Parlia-

'* AnIIrelo ,,1. i . I :. s'5cc ,\lppLIll. N" Xl111
I r(l, ,. \,.ii. (I6 ,,dcif. vol. ii., 2,<.

mncnllt

BooK . ment did nothing more for their relief, than prescribe some new re.

-5 -' gulations concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices, which

did not produce any considerable change in the situation of the
clergy.

I 568. A FEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, four of Bothwell's
Jalwnary . dependants were convicted of being guilty of the King's mur-

der, and suffered death as traitors. Their confessions brought to
'light many circumstances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but they were persons of a low rank, and
seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the confpi-
racy *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal submission to the Regent's

authority, there still abounded in the kingdom many secret mur-
murs and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Murray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelherault, who, as
first Prince of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to
be Regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began to move
many to commiefrate her cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opi-
nions in religion dreaded the effecs of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'
his abilities were great, did not possess the talents requisite for sooth-
ing the rage or removing the jealousies of these different factions.
By insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened many,
who had oppolfd him ; but he was a stranger to thefc gentle arts,
His virtues were evere; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the regency, distant and haughty.
This behaviour offtndcd some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
.Quecn's faction, which had been so easily dispersed, began again to

Andkr., vol. ii. If15,

gathcr,

gether, and to unite, and was secretly favoured by ome who had BOOK V.
hitherto zealously concurred with the confederates *. 68

1568'
SuCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards the Mary ecapes

from Loch-

Queen, when the recovered her liberty, in a manner no less fur- icvin.
prifing to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which ome unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
had hitherto disappointed. At lait, Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and insinuating, fle treated
him with the most flattering diftindion; he even allowed him to
entertain the most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expreffi-
ons, as if the would chute him for her husband -. At his age, and
in such circumitances, it was impofible to resist such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found nmeani
to feal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind her,
and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipi-
tation to the boat which was prepared ibr her, and on reaching the
liore, was received with the utmoftjoy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton,
and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, waited so
her. She inflantly mounted on hlorleback, and rode full itecd to-
wards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived
there that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours, the set out for Hamilton ; and travelling at the fame
pace, the reached it next morning.

" MIlv. I 79. Kc1ih, 4(9.
VOL. . 1) d (1

Bo0K V. ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends whom, in their

"568. present disposition, a much smaller accident would have rouzed,
1568 p

A\irivesatHa- ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great
nilfto, anae- and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-
rousarmly. lowers, as formed an army above 6000 strong. In their presence,

fle declared that the resignation of the Crown, and other deeds
she had signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her
by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and on that,
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief men
of her party pronounced all these tranfadions void and illegal. At
lay s. the fame time, an aflociation was formed for the defence of her per-

son and authority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bishops,
eighteen Lords, and many gentlemen of diftindion®. Among them,
we find several who had been present in las Parliament, and who
had signed the counter-aifociation in defence of the King's govern-
ment; but such sudden changes were then so common, as to be no
matter of reproach.

cr no AT the time when the Queen made her escape, the Regent was
.' the Re- at Glasgow, holding a court of juflice. An event o contrary to

their expectations, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock
to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute ;
others began to carry on private negociations with the Queen; and
some openly revolted to her fide. In so difficult a juncure, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depended on his choice,
the regent's mod faithful afluciates were divided in opinion. Some
-:lvifed him to retire, without los of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already strong, and only eight miles diflant ; the adjacent
country was fll of the friends and dependants of the house of I la-
ililtun, andi other Lords of the ()Qucn's fi;dion; GlaSgow was a
3 ic aid unl.rtificd town his own train conllifled of no1 greater

"* Keitli, ii;
5

n LI in Le r

number than was usual in times of peace; all these reasons pleaded BOOK V.
for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were urged _68.

i$68.

of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well
affected to the cause; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in a few days;
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as upon num-
bers; reputation is gained, or loft, by the firtl itep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended with all the igno-
miny of a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire His piu!:::t
his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this,
the superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both
to chufe with wiildom, and to at with vigour. He declared against
retreating, and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to hearken to ome
overtures, which he made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost industry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He was oon in a
condition to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy
in number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the negociation, and
determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had commanded her \r,

army to move. Their intention was, to conduct her to Dunbai-
ton catle, a place of great firength, which the Regent 1)id nl(t Licc
able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the govcrnor; but
if the enemy hould endeavour to intcrrupt their marcll, tlwic retlved

* BLuchn. 3y9.
D d d 2 not

BooK V. niot to-': d :iie ai engageiierit. In Mary's fituati0n, no recflutlon

C68.- could be i:more iiprudent. Alpart ohly of her forces was assem-
bled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans were soon expeced;
her sufferings had removed, or diminished the prejudices of many
among her fubjeds; the address with which she surmounted the
dangers that obftruded her escape, dazzled, and interested the people;
the sudden confluence of so many nobles added lustre to her cause;
she might afiuredly depend on the friendship and countenance of
France; he had reason to expect the protection of England; her
enemies could not possibly look for support from that quarter. She
had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious measures; they
had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her pas-

sions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition from the
depth of diltrefs, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
the never doubted offuccefs. Her army was almost double to the
enemy in number, and confifed chiefly of the Hamiltons, and their
dependants. The archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief direc-
tion of these, and hoped, by a vitory, not only to crush Murray,
the ancient enemy of his house, but to get the person of the Queen
into his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's
sons, or at leatl to commit the chief diretion of her affairs to him-
self. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, to himself, and to
his family ®.

M.,AR'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was not greater
i.a.gi.. than the ill coiidut of her generals in the battle. Between th

* :\n(': rs. vol. iv. 32. Mclv. Add.

t . ,.

two armies, and on the-road twards Dumbarton, there was an BOOK V.
eminence called Langfide-Hill: This the Regent had the precau- -
tion to seize, and posted his troops in a finall village, and among
omen gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
tion he waited the approach of the enemy, whose superiority
in cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the
attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen was fierce
and desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed,
on the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of mufqueteers,
attacked on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, and not
supported by the reft of the Queen's army, they were oon obliged to The qri.'
give ground, and the rout immediately became universal. Few vic- d' "Llt
tories, in a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have been pur-
sued with less violence, or attended with less bloodshed. Three
hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were killed.
The Regent and his principal officers rode about, beseeching the
soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of prisoners was
great, and among them many persons of diftintion. The Regent
marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to God for
this great, and, on his fide, almo2f bloodless vicdory *

DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great dif- tlc. is;t.

tance, and beheld all that pafled in the field, with fi£ch crmotion,
of mind as are not cafily dfciribcd. When flc tlw the army, v.'jli(i
was her lafi hope, thrown into irretrievable c()nfLionr, her fp rit,
which all her pai: minifc,rtuncs had not been able cn'ircly to luibdtc,

* KHalt', 4 77.

f·
i

BOOK V. funk altogether. In the utmof consternation, he began her flight,

6-^-' and so lively were her imprefflons of fear, that the never closed
568.

her eyes till the reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full
sixty Scotch miles from the place of battle *.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid, than

singular. In the short fpaceof eleven days, he had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies; he had seen a power-
ful a ny under her command, and a numerous train of nobles at
her devotion; and now he was obliged to fly, in the utmost dan-
ger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of
her kingdom. She did not think herself safe, even in that retreat;
and her fears impelled her to an action, the most unadvised, as well as
the molt unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retiring into
England, a tep, which, on many accounts, ought to have appeared
to her rash and dangerous.

eR,:ioCSL BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual ditlruft and jea-
li;la'li.° louiies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their fubfe-

quent tranfadtions had contributed to exasperate and inflame there
pafiions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and intrigues,
to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to advance
her own pretensions to the Englih Crown. Elizabeth, who pof-
fefled greater power, and acted with less reserve, had openly sup-
ported Mary's rebellious fubjets, and fomented all the dissensions
and troubles in which her reign had been involved. The maxims of
policy flill authcrized that Qeen to pursue the fame course; as by
keeping Scotland in confusion, fle effedtually secured the peace oi
her own kingdom. The Regent, after his vidtory, had marched

* Keith, 481.

to

to'Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the Queen had taken, BooT V.
it was several days before he thought ofpurfuing her *. She might -- _a
have been concealed in that retired corner, among fubije(s devoted
to her interest, till her party, which was dispersed rather than broken
by the late defeat, should gather such strength, that (he could again
appear with safety at their head. There was not any danger, which
fie ought not to have run, rather than throw herself into the hands
of an enemy, from whom The had already suffered o many injuries,
and who was prompted both by inclination, and by interest, to re-
new them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Elizabeth

had declared against the proceedings of her fbjeas, and solicitcd
for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance of
sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England, and had
promised to meet her in person, and to give her such a reception
as was due to a Queen, and an ally A. Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs, while (he had power
in her hands, he was, at present, the objet, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be both un-
generous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were fresh in
Mary's memory, and if he hould fall a second time into the hands
of her fubjedts, there was no injury to which the presumption of
success might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt ecaping
into France, was dangerous; and, in her situation, alnmost impof-
fible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing as an exile, and
a fugitive, in that kingdom, where ihe had once cnjoyedl all the fplcIl-
dor of a (ueen. i lland remained her only asylum ; and, in
Ipite of the intrcaties of Lord I Icrcis, llceming, and her other at

* Crawt. c 9.. 5 / ,). A

ctf. vi l
. ) iv. )n, I2n.

tclil ;ilts,
2

BOOK V. tendints, who conjured her, even 6on their knees, not to confide

6 in Elizabeth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was invincible,

and he resolved to fly thither. Herreis, by her command, wrote
Her reception to Lowther the deputy governor of Carlisle, to know what recep-

tion he would give her; and, before his answer could return, her
fear and impatience were so grea'., that (he got into a fifher-boat,
a and with about twenty attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cum-

berland, and thence she was conducted with many marks of refped
to Carlisle *.

lizalncthl de- So oon as Mary arrived in England, he wrote a long letter to
: .rning tie the Queen, representing, in the itrongeft terms, the injuries which
untng h:of she had suffered from her own fubjets, and imploring that pity

and assistance which her present situation demanded . An event
so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in confe-
quence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influen-
ced by considerations of justice or generosity alone, they would not
have found them long or intricate. A Qeen, vanquilhed by her
own fubjeds, and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown herfelfinto
the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally, from whom she had
received repeated aflurances of friend(hip and protection. These
circunltances entitled her to refpet and to compafion, and re-
qulircd that he (fould either be reflored to her own kingdom, or
at leaf be left at full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter.
But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the queflion was not,
what was most just or generous, but what was mofl beneficial to
herfclf, and to the Englifi nation. Three different resolutions might

* Kcith, 483. Andcrf vol. iv. 2. 1 Id. 29.

1have

,have been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-inflate BOOK V.
her in. her throne, was one; to allow her to retire into France,
was another; to detain her in England, was a third. Each of 563
there drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, which
were examined, as appears from papers frill extant *, with that mi-
nute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Minillers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were moil firmly attached to the Eng-
lifli interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resent-
ment. And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom Strong or lasting,
regard to her own interest might soon efface the memory of her
obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scotch nation with France, and revive her own pretenlions to
the Engliflh Crown. Nor was it polible to fetter and circumscribe
the Scotch Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a single victory nighlt give them
the fuperioritv, which they had loit by a lingic defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

TIuE dangers arising f-om fuffcring Mary to rctire into France,

were no less obvious. The French King could not refulte his al-
fiflance towards rcfloring his ilkerl a ally to her throne. IEliza-
beth would, once more, fee a oreign army in thec iland, over-
awing thl Scots, and realy to enter her kinlgdom and if the coin-

* Anllcif. vo1. i. 3.1, ()9, 12.
Vo01. I. ; c c motioe:;

BOOK V. motions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the Prin

'~68.J ces of Lorrain might resume their ambitious projects, and the united
I568.

forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where it is
weakerf and most defenceless.

Refoivcs to NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her in England; and
(tnglasid.r in to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in a

prioln. The former was a dangerous experiment. Her court would
become a place of resort to all the Roman Catholics, tothe diflfflded,
and tothe lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth afferced to repre-
sent Mary's pretensions to the Enlih Crown as altogether extrava-
gant and ill-founded, he was not ignorant that they did not appear
in that light to the nation, and that many thought them prefcrable
even to her own title. If the aivity of her emiiaries had gained
her ib manv abettors, her own personal influence was much more
to be dreaded ; her beauty, her address, her Ifuifrings, by the ad-
miration and pity which they would excite, could not fail of mak-
ing many converts to her party .

'TwAis indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a

priloner would excite universal indignation against Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled ieverity towards a Queen, who implored, and
to whom fle had promiied her protection, fle would forfeit the praitie of
jultice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her adminiltation.
But thel Englifil Mlonarchs were often so olicitous to fecurc thcir
kingdom againflt the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about the means
\vllich they employed for that purpose. Hlenry IV. had seized the
heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the violncc(

* A tndcit vol. iv. 5, 6.

of

of a florm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his kingdom; BOOK V.
and, in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without regarding 6

--------- - -- --i 568.

his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, detained him
a prisoner for many years. This action, though deterted by po-
fIerity, Elizabetl reiolved now to imitate. Her virtue was no more
proof than Henry's had been, againfr the temptations of interest;
and the pof'iion of a present advantage was preferred to the prof-
ped of future fame. The satisfaction which he felt in mortifying
a rival, whose beauty and accomplifliments fie envied, had, per-
haps, no lets influence than political considerations, in bringing her
to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to screen her-
self from the censure which this concdui merited, and to make her
treatment of the Scotch Queen look like the effect of necefiity, ra-
ther than of choice, fle determined to put on the appearance of
concern for hier interest, and of deep sympathy with her susser-
ings.

W\rIT this icw, fie inrtantly dlelpatched Lord Scroope warden ,j,,. o.

of the xvell marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lai, to the (eccn of Scots, with letters full of exprefiions of kind-
ness and condolnce. But, at the fame time, they had private in-
firuCtions to watch all her motions, and to take care that tie i1)ould
not eicape into her own kingdonm . On their arrival, M\lary de- Mh I
manded a personal interview with the Queen, that ile might lay 1:i

. l... ,lm,:

before her the injuries which she hadl suffered, andi receive from :..,,i', it'--
hcr those friendly (slices wliicli fie had been encouraged to cxpcdt. Ic:!
They anftvcred, that it was with rcltiance tils ihonoilr was t
pricnt denied her ; that while fUiK layr under the iimputation of a
criime Io horrid, as the mlurder of her hulband, their Milrcl, to

'* A q.' Ls. vu, l, iv. -, .% w?,

I. c c z whom

BooK V. whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a slain

I -68. upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence; but as soon

as i(he had cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised her a
reception suitable to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her dif-
trefs '.

Shc ofTci. to NOTHING could be more fiivolous than this pretence. It was
vxinj.cate her the occasion, however, of leading the Queen of Scots into the fiare, in
cond LI&l.

which Elizabeth and her Ministers wilied to intangle her. Mary ex-
prefled the utmost furprize at this unexpeded manner of evading her
requefl; but as fle could not believe so many profeflions offriendfhip
to be void of sincerity, the frankly ofrcd to submit her cause to the
cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her
own innocence, and of the falfliood of the accusations brought againfi
her, as should fully remove the scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the

FTi.ihbch Engliffi Queen. This was the very point to which Elizabeth la-
tgcofhi,t- boured to bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scotch Qjeen,
*~' she became the umpire between her and her fubjeds, and had it en-

tirely in her own power to protrac the inquiry to any length, and
to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the mean time,
lhe was furnished with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a dif-
tance from court, and for refuting to contribute towards replacing
her on her throne. As Mary's condut had been extremely incau-
tious, and the presumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it
was poilblc her fubljccts might make good their charge againflt her;
and if this fiould be the result of the inquiry, flie would, thence-
iorth, ceale to be the objet of regard, or of compafiion, and th
trcatiii- her with coldness and neclect would merit little censure.

Andclf. vol. iv. 8. 55.

In

In a matter so dark and mysterious, there was no probability that BOOK V.
Mary could b:ing proofs of her innocence, so incontefted, as to
render the conduct of the English Queen altogether culpable. And
perhaps, her impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such
cabals, as would justify the uling her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETIT early forefav all those advantages, which would

arise from an inquiry into the conduLt of the Scotch Queen, cr-
ried on under her direction. Tlher was some danger, however, that
Mary might difcovcr her fecrct intentions too soon, and by reced-
ing from the offer which she had made, endeavour to difappoiint
them. But even in that event, fie determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thoughlt of several different expedients for carrving-
it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced that Mlary nwas accef-
fory to the murder of her son, and thirftin, for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza-
beth's juflice, and solicitcd her, with many tears, in her own nance,
and in her hfband's, to bring the Scotch Queen to a trial for that
crime . The parents of the unhappy Prince had a jui right to
prefer this accusation ; nor could hec, who wxv their nearefl ki:l-
nwoman, be colndemlned for iil.ening to 1so c it ie a demand. I3c-
fides, as the Scotch nobles openly acculd Marv (of the fine crimn:,
and pretended to be able to clonfirm their chaige !by lflicicnt proof;
it would be no difficult matter to r'ev;lil on th, to petitiW tie
O(tecn of IEn1-gitad to take cor tnii::a cc of thelir Irc 'ccl insr .agaili-
tlheir Sovercin ; andl it was the Oluir:i; of ]the I-', lih c:'K!, !i ,t
it would be rcafonablc t o y xiv l tilt tCqlteit .{-. At te It'nc

('.iisl 41?. il.\} sci', .('. * AIJ.il . vn.1. i'. 37.

BOOK V.

time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-
6'-v'd land began to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended

that the decision of the contest between Mary and her subjes be-
longed of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all these
expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve, to make use of as oc-
cafion might require, he wished that the inquiry into Mary's con-
duct hould appear to be undertaken purely in compliance with her
own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and ib long
as that appearance could be preserved, none of the other expedilnts
were to be employed.

WHEN Mary consented to fubmlit her cause to Elizabeth, flhe was

far from fufpeding that any bad coniequences could follew, or that
any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
peed that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine her dc-
fences * ; fie meant to confider her as an equal, for whose satis-
fation fle was willing to explain any part of her condut, that was
liable to censure; not to acknowledge her as a fperior, before
whom fie was bound to plead her caulc. Put Elizabeth put a very
different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself as chofien
to be judge in the controversy between the Scotch Queen and her
fubjests, and began to atd in that capacity. She propofcid to ap-
point commissioners to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wi otc
to the Regent of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear
before them, in his name, nnd to produce what he could allcdge
in vildication o Ins p UcccliL) 'IU

ilL lib 1OuvCI ciu;,.

]\Tv "n:tly MARY had, hithlcto, relied with unaccountable credulity ,il
1:;':, ,'',i :t Eliz.')ctlh's profcliulns of re:lld, an1 cxpedcd that so mally ind(

: Anjl rr. v ilV. 10.

I r[fpc<c!<:J

fpeechcs would, at last, be accompanied with some suitable aions. BooK V.
But this prop-osal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived -
the artifice of Elizabeth's conduc, and saw what a diminution it
would be to her own honour, to appear on a level with her re-
bellious ifujeLc, and to land together with them at the bar of a
superior and a jdge. She retrated the offer which fle had made,
and whiclh had beec peirvcrted to a purpose so contrary to her in-
tention. She demanded, with more carneflncfs than ever, to be
admitted into Elizabll's prcimece; and wrote to her, in a fRrain June I.
very different fi-om wlatl i had formerly uLed, and vwhich fullv di£-
covers the grief and indilnationl that preyed on her heart. ( In
" my prefnt fitnat;on, hs fc,

, I neitier svill, nor can reply to

; the accui. ti onls of mIny ubjcc. 1 am ready, of my own accord,
: and out of frieindlhlip to you, to iatisty your scruples, and to
': v indicate my own IC)iujt. MNy I-Lbjucts are not my equals;

nor will I, by ulbmittiln my cauf to a judicial trial, acknow-
ledge tleml to be fu. I fled into your arms, as into those of my'

" nearef relation, and moL erfet fiiend. I did you honour,
" as I imagined, in chufing you preferably to any other Prince, to
" be thc restorer of an injured Q)uecn. Was it ever known tiat
" a Prince was blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of

those who appLaled to his justice, againit the false accuiltions of

: their enemies ? You admitted into your pretence m7 balard-
" brotlher, w:lo had been guilty of relbilion ; and vou deny ime

tlhat 1honour God frbid that I thould be the occallon of b!r -

.. i. ou

iti

po: yoaiii r I expected that your man:;icr

' of tre:atiln me \wo- t1i ave atdcd It lifsic to it. Sl'itl' me Cit]!icr to
"; ii-lec te ai.i of otlltr rinces, wholi dci.':ia'C, oil tis hcaI i,

\iil b I';. ao'il theilr r.l itnilent of in' vi'(ong'' greater; or lt

' i i,'ct ,. :(.' 1 l r
:'( i Y't afiis.11{a ncc, wh hlil it b'come'. yo'(),

. in.aure

BOOK V. " mre than any other Prince, to grant; and by that benefit, bind

6.! J " me to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude *."

June Zo. TiiIs letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did
i-:iizabtli's not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter be-
pr C t'rio:.s
.Iaiit hc. fore the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwithftand-

ing the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scotch Queen, to go on
wilh the inquiry into her conduct, and till that were finished, it
was agreed that Elizabeth could not, confifently with her own
honour, or with the safety of her government, either give her the
afihftance which she demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. And left fle faould have an opportunity of ecaping,
while he resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable to
remove her to some place, at a greater distance from the bor-
ders -.

Proceedings VWHILE the English court was occupied in these deliberations
otilliiCnt the Regent did not neglec to improve the victory at Langfide.
Qtuitn', ad, That event was of the utmost importance to him. It not only

drove the Queen herielf out of the kingdom, but left her adherents
dilperfid, and without a leader, at his mercy. He leemed resolved,
at first, to proceed against them with the utmost rigour. Six per-
ibns of fbme diftin'tion, who had been taken prisoners in the battle,
were tried, and condemned to death as rebels against the King's
government. They were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful intercefiion of Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamilton
of 1otlwwcllhaugh was one of the number, who lived to give both
the Regent and Knox rcalon to repent of this commendable a of
)enity 5{'

' Andeif. vol. iv 4. Id I Id. ibid. 102. I Cdd. vol ii. 9 .

SOO(

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army, consisting of 4000 BOOK V.

horse and ioo foot, towards the weft borders. The nobles in this r 68
part of the kingdom were all of the Qeen's faction; bt as they
had not force sufficient to obftrud his progress, he must either
have obliged them to submit to the King, or would have laid wafle
their lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it
was to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth the Scotch
Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her desire. After keep-
ing the field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Englifl
Ambassador, difmiTed his forces; and an expedition, which might
have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a few ads of fe-
verity ~.

TfIE resolution of the Englifli Privy Council with regard to Mary's ,r)' carried

person, was oon carried into execution; and, without regarding her to Bolton.
remonfhrances or complaints, flhe was conduted to Bolton, a cattle July '3i
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire -. In this place,
her correspondence with her friends in Scotland became more difli-
cult, and any profpedt of making her cfcape was entirely cut off: bhe
now felt herself to be entirely in Eliz.ibeth's ower, and though treated
as yet with the relpect due to a Queen, her real condition was that of
a prisoner. MIary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
dreaded it as the worst of all evils. XWhile the remembrance of her
late imprifonmcnt was fill lively, and the terror of a new one filled
her mind, Elizabeth tholghlt it pro.1pr jt:nturc to rnw iir for-
mer proposition, that fie would fltkr- the Regent and his adherents lJl; '''
Io be called into eEngland, and coniiflt to tiiri being heard in de-

CA
( ,l vol .

l ii, 9. I .\nll.v, iv. i {.
*V,; . . F 1 fence

BooK V. fence of their own conduct. And on her part, fle promised, what-

ever should be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her power

J 568 and influence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few

,Agrees that limitations, which were far frohi being unreasonable. Fear, im-
an inquiry be patience, despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which the
made into her r '
condut. proposition was accompanied, induced the Scotch Queen to com-

ply .

Hr diff NI order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired nothing so much

lation with as to render the union between them as close as poflible, file liewed
regard to re-
ligion. a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,

during all her past and subsequent misfortunes, flhe was uniformly
inflexible. She expressed a great veneration for the liturgy of the
church of England ; fle was often present at religious worship, ac-
cording to the rites of the reformed church ; made choice of a Pro-
teflant clergyman to be her Chaplain; heard him preach againfl the
errors of Popery with attention and seeming pleasure; and discover-
ed all the symptoms of an approaching conversion -. Such was
Mary's known and bigoted attachment to the Popish religion, that
it is impofiible to believe her sincere in this part of her conducd; nor
can any thing mark more firongly the wretchedness of her condi-
tion, and the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed her into
difftnulation in a matter, concerning which her fentimcnts were
scrupulously delicate.

AT this -ti-e the nreen.t ca,-1d ParlimPment, nrlor to pro-

Augflt iS. *

L.""

A I'arliamcnt ceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to acknowledge the
in ScotLind.

King's authority. The Queen's fadion was alarmed, and Argyll
and I luntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants, the one

Arldcrf. vol. iv. 1o9. IIaynce, 468. 1I Andcr. vol, iv. 113. IInyncs, 50og

in

in the south, and the other in the north of Scotland, began to as- BOOK V.
femble forces to obflrut this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, ---'
and envy at those who governed in the king's name, had added so 68
much strength to the party, that the Regent would have found it
difficult to withstand its efforts. But as Mary had ubmitted her
cause to Elizabeth, fih could not refuec, at her defirc, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently till mat-
ters were brought to a decision in England. By procuring this
ccflation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as fbatonable relief to the Re-
gent's fadion, as fli had formerly given to the Queen's .

TH-E Regent, however, would not content, even at Elizalbth'

request, to put ofithe meeting of Parliament. But we may acribe
to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen from exterminat-
ing the other, any appearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The molt violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeited; the reft were allowed ftil! to
hope for favour -.

No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her cause to her rival, EI.=bt
than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, deputies pro- quires the I(c

ent to Id-

perly inftruded for vindicating his conduc, in presence of her corn- t,\ hi, cou.
miflioners. It was not without hesitation and anxiety, that the'l"t'I
Regent consented to this measure. Hils authority was already efta-
blifhed in Scotland, and confirmed by Parliament. To uffer its
validity now to be called in qucflion, and fubjcded to a foreign ju-
sifdition, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign bc-

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 125. I 13uch. 371.

F i' f . fore

BooK V. fore firangers, the ancient enemies of the Scotch name, was an

- 8 ' odious task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to succeed

56' in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse faction daily

increased. Hie dreaded the interposition of the French King in its
behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so
much at heart, her commands were neither to be disputed, nor dif-
obeyed. *

roth the THE necessity of repairing in person to York added to the ignominy
Queen aid he of theftep which he was obliged to take. All his associates declined the
appoint corn-
s.ioners. office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose themselves to the

odium and danger it was easy to forsee that the discharge of it would
be attended, unless he himself consented to hare these in commoll
Septem. 1S. with them. The Earl ofMorton, Bothwell Bishop of Orkney,Pitcairn

Commendator of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay were joined with
him in commission. Macgill of Rankeilor and Balnaves of Halhill,
two eminent Civilians, George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man
whose genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and several others, were
appointed to attend them as afiitant. Maitland owed this diftinc-
tion to the Regent's fear, rather than to his affection. He had warmly
remonfRrated against this measure. He wished his country to con-
tinue in friendship with England, but not to become dependant on
that nation. He was desirous of re-establishing the Queen in ome
degree of power, not inconfiflent with that which the King pof-
sessed; and the Regent could not, witl safety, leave behind him
a man, whose views were so cntrary to his own, and who, Iyv
his superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the nation, equal
to that, which others derived from the antiquity and power of
their families t.

* Buch. 372. Sc Append. NI XXV.
t Id. ibid. Andcrf. vol. iv. 35. bclv. 186, 188.

NIR,-

MARY impowered Lefly Bithop of Rots, Lord Livingflon, Lord BOOK V.

Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, ---
Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of Skir- 568
ling, to appear in her name .

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,

Thomas RatclifT Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Com-
inifioners to hear both parties.

THE fourth of Oober was the day fixed for opening the Co.- The confit

f'rece. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, the dig- 'nc 't

c ':;

nity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the importance of
the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfaaion no less illufri-
ous, than it was ingular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, firikes us with an air of magnificence.
Her rival, an independant Qeen, and the heir of an ancient race
of Monarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
representcd the majesty, and pofffecd the authority of a King, flood
inperfon at her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power her
anceflors had often dreaded, but could never subdue, was now ablo-
lutely at her disposal.

TIE views, however, with which the several partics conlfented \, .,,

to this conference, and the illie to which tey expcted to bring it, ,j ''lt

r
were extremely different.

* Aiidcrf vl. iv, ; - i

BOOK V. MARY'S chief objeEt was the recovering her former authority.
k-S-- This induced her to content to a measure, against which he had

56 ' long struggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-

taining hopes of being restored to her kingdom ; in order to which,
file would have, willingly, made many concessions to the King's
party; and the influence of the Engiilh Queen, and her on impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led her to many
more*. The Regent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
protection to his party, and fcems not to have had the moil
distant thoughts of coming to any composition with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Marv's honour, and solicitous
that ihe hould wipe off the aspersions which blemished her cha-
rader. This flie pretended to be the intention of the conference;
amusing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the French and
Spanish ambassadors in her behalf by repeated promises of afit-ing
her, as oon as file could venture to do so, without bringing disgrace
on herself. But, under this veil offriendflip and generosity, Elizabeth
concealed sentiments of a different nature. She expected that the Re-
gent would accuse Mary of being accessory to the murder of her
husband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would permit, to
take this desperate ftep -. And as this accusation might terminate
two different ways, fle had concerted mearures for her future condut
suitable to each of these. If the charge against Mary should appear
to be well founded, file rcfolved to pronounce her unworthy of
wearing a Crown, andL to decla.re that , e would never buthen !!er
own confcicnce with the guilt of an action so deteflable, as the re-
ioring her to her kingdom :. If it should happen, that what her

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. - Andcr. vl. f. 1iv 1, i)1,
jlIayncs, 487. :1: Andcrf. vol. iv. i.

accuicre

accusers alledged, did not amount to a proof of guilt, but only of BOOK V.
mal-administration, fie determined to set on foot a treaty for reftor-

i568.

ing her, hut on such conditions, as would render her for ever de-
pendant on England, and the slave of her own fubjeds *. And as
every flep in the progrcfs of the conference, as well as the final re-
fult of it, was in her own power, she would still be at liberty to chufe
which of tllef courses the would hold; or if tliere appeared to be
any danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, flhe might
protrat the whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in inextri-
cable perplexity.

TiE conference, however, was opened with much solemnity. Comltliin: t o

But the very fir-t flep discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to in- coi:o .
flame, rather than to extinouifh the difienfions and animofities .Te il:
among the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the con-
tending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the Queen to offer pardon for what was pall, or her fubjees to
promise more dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary, oll,c i.
Mary's commilioners were permitted to prefer a complaint agaiinf
the Regent and his party, containing an enumeration of their trca-
fonable aions, of their seizing her person by force of arms, com-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign the Crown, and
making use of her son's name to colour their uurpation of the
whole royal authority. And of all there enormities, they required
such speedy and cffectual rcdl-es, as the injuries of one Qecen de-
mrandedI firom tlhe julrice of anoter .

IT was then cxped-cd that the Regent would have dil'clotd the
whole circuimfianccs of' that unnatural c imc, to whiich lie pre-

* Andcir. ol. iv. 16.. I. iLiJ. .'
2 tcnded

BOOK V. pretended the Queen had been accessory, and would have produced

---' evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,

the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought against
himself. He discovered a reluctance at the undertaking that office,
and flarted many doubts and feruples, with regard to which, he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself*. His reserve and
helitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the Englifhi
commifiioners than to his own associates. They knew that he could
not vindicate his conduct without charging the murder upon the
Queen, and lie had not hitherto shown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

ii,,, ,,f THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most powerful and
No ri',il I'h moit popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and he be-
hc Regell cn.

gan already to form a project, which he afterwards more openly avow-
ed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage witl the Qucen
of Scots. e saw the infamy which would be the coniequence of a
public accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it might be to her
pretensions to the English fuccefflon. In order to save her this cruel
mortification, he applied to MIaitland, and exprefied his af-onillh-
ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for willom, concurring
with the Regent in a meafuire so diflionourable to themfclves, to
their Queen, and to their country ; submitting the public tranihtions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners ; and publitliing the
ignominy, and epnofing the faults of their Sovcrcign, which they
were bound, in gooL policy, as well as in duty, to colncal .and
to cover. It was cafy for Maitland, wvlhofe icnltirmcnts were tlch
,nce with the Duke's, to vindicate his own colndut. IIc aflurcd

* Hiyncs, 47b.

!fim, that he had employed all his credit, to diffwade his countrymen BOOK V.
from this measure; and would fill contribute, to the utmost of his '
power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to com- I68
municate the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced the
fame argumentswhich he had used with Maitland. He warned him
of the danger to which he must expose himself, by such a violent
adtion, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would ne-
ver forgive a man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her characer. If she ever recovered any degree of power,
his deftrudtion would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it
at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth fcrcen him from this, by a
public approbation of his condut. For whatever evidence of Ma-
ry's guilt he might produce, The was resolved to give no definitive
sentence in the cause. Let him only demand that the matter ;iould
be brought to decision, immediately after hearing the proof, and
he would be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be for him to
appear as the accuser of his own Sovereign *. The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover in these remonftranccs, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep impretionl on the Re-
gent. He daily received the strong fl- afurances of Mary's willing-
ness to be reconciled to him, if he abflained from accuing lher oi
such an odious crime, together with denounciations of her irrecon-
cileable hatred, i he acd a con!trary part -j-. All thle: confidier;-
tions concurred in determining him to alter lhis purpose, and to make
tria! of the exle(iient which tCh Duke iiad illitcllcd.

I Il demanded, thlrefoi e, to be informed, before lie procceded flr-

ther, vwhether the lEn1lih commlliuonrls were ipliwered to declare . [
:.a ,.

' '. l7. S Ii.)Tyn.s, 573. Andeifr. .,. iv. 77. 00Godl. v . ii. 157.
Scc Appc.ilix:, N' XXVi

VOrL. 1. (, g g the

BooK V theQueen guilty, by ajudicial aat; whether they would promise to pats

-'''- sentence, without delay; whether the Queen should be kept under

such reflraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the government
now eflablifhed in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if he ap-
proved of the proceedings of the King's party, would engage to pro-
tea it for the future *. The paper containing these demands was
signed by himself alone, without communicating it to any of his
attendants, except Maitland and Melvil . Nothing could appear
more natural than the Regent's solicitude, to know on what footing
he flood. To have ventured on a ftep so uncommon and danger-
ous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previously ascertaining
that he might take it with safety, would have been unpardonable
imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expet that he would
have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her commis-
rioners to gve him that satisfaction which he demanded. It be-
camne neceffiry to tranfnit the articles to herself, and by the light in
which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that they
should make no flight impression on Elizabeth and her Miniflers,

Think not the Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us
view their conduct, as we would with our own to be viewed,

'6 in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their estates,
" their lives, their honour are at flake. It is now in their own

power to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend her irreco-

" verably, and in a matter of so much importance, the utmofl de-
' ree of caution is not exceltive '"

WVil ii the English commifioners waited for fuller inlruc-

tions with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an anfwcr
to the complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scotch

* AZncif. vol. iv . 5. Id. 56. IMclv, 19. , Ander. vol. iv. 77.

Qu'c'cn.

Qeen. It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the sys- BooK V.
tern which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua- L--
tion of the Queen's being accessory to the murder of her husband;
the bitterness of file peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necefary to take arms in order to dissolve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious juftlfied the keeping
her for some time under restraint; yet nothing more was said on
these fubjeds than was barely requisite in his own defence. The
Qeen's commissioners did not fail to reply *. But while the ar- Gaobcr 17,
ticle with regard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at a difRance, of no consequence towards ending the
contefl, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduced in a mannerr e colti-

which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of these cc, e"m:led
difoveries which file had expected. The diitance between York and ller.
London, and the necefity of consulting her upon every difliculty
which occurred, coniumcd much time. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scotch Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, i all
probability, unknown to a Princess io remarkable for her figacity
in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feein through their
deepest schemes --. Inftcad, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, ihe resolved to remove the conference to
W\Vfliinfter, and to appoint new commifioncrs, ill whom she could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scotch QuCCen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolution -.

'AiidcrF. vul, iv. 64, 8 . oo. 1 ). :13. vol.
ii A iii. .

:1 ll.,)'llcs, 84. A IIJ.1 I. \u]. iv. !
i,.

(C; ' Io 2 l

BootK V. We often find Mary boasting of the superiority of her commis

fioners durilg the conference at York, and how, by the strength
of their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced all
their cavils *. The dispute flood, at that time, on a footing, which
rendered her victory not only apparent, but easy. Her participa-
tion of the guilt of the King's murder was the only circumstance,
which could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjecs. And
while they indufrioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as
much as that of her adversaries by fupprefling this capital argument,

ELIZABETHI resolved that Mary flould not enjoy the fame ad-

vantage in the conference to be held at Weftminfler. She dell-
berated with the utmofl anxiety, how she might overcome the Re-
gent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She con-
iicered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commiflon-
ers to anfwcr such an accusation; and as ae foresaw that the pro-
mises with which it was necessary to allure the Regent, and which
it was impoflible to conceal from the Scotch Queen, would natu-
rally exasperate her to a great degree, (he determined to guard her
more narrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her
no rcalon to di(truft his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he was
the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, fle thought it proper to re-
move the Queen as soon as poflible to Tuthbury in StaffordMire,
and commit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to whom
that cafllc belonged -.

Mr/s <,:'{- M x\r v bcganll to fufpcCt the design of this second conference;
...i, .7r1,,1- and notwithblalllilng the fitisfatioin fle exprceffd at fceing her caufLC
''tt"i"' takelcn more imllmediatcly Iuinder the Queen's own eye 4 , she framned
4tijlcr z I

* (,> Lo . vol. ii. -6, '-,
2 -8,3 1 I ty s, 487. t Alnlclf. vul. iv. 9.

I lil rt

her inflrutions to her commissioners, in such a manner, as to BooK V.
avoid being brought under the neceflity of answering the accusation --

i56S'.

of her fubicdes, if they flould be so desperate as to exhibit one
against her . These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circum-
flance extremely mortifying. The Regent having arrived at Lon-
don, in order to be present at the conference, was immediately ad-
mitted into Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only with
refped, but with affection. This Mary jutly confidered as an open
declaration of that Qieen's partiality towards her adversaries. In ;--cm. 2
the first emotions of her rcfentment, flle wrote to her commion- C1lr;-

C t11 -

ers, and commanded them to complain, in the presence of the ofL;izLc:h.
English nobles, and beferc the ambafladors of foreign Princes, of
the usage file had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries
which the had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjeas were
allowed access to the Queen, she was excluded from her pretence;
they enjoyed full liberty, she languifed under a long imprison-
ment; they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
ille laboured under every difadvantagc. For these reasons (he once
more renewed her demand, of being admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence; and if that were denied, ihe inf:ucated them to declare, that
the recalled tle content fie had given to the conference at Weflmin-
fler, and protefed, that whatever was done there, should be held
to be null and invalid -.

Tnis, perhaps, was the mo ptdent rcfolution Mary could have

t:ken. The pretenccs on which sic declined tile conference were
plausible, and the junclure for ofTeriiln them xcll cilo.cn. t;ut
cither the lQueen's letter (ii lot trealhi hIr ccrlln iliilt icrs in due
tinc, or they tltuered tilellcves to le:: 'ccc;\c by Liz.:tctli's

(JoU(d. vo'l, ii. .'1 ) *\1 IIJ, :i.l.
' ii -'-

pro-

BOOK V. profefions of regard for their Mistress, and consented to the open.

ing of the conference *,

1 568.
Noverm. 52. To the commissioners who had appeared in her name at York,

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the Great Seal,
the Earls of Arundel and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir Wil-
liam Cecil t. The difficulties which obflruaed the proceedings at
York were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given to the
Regent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
raise objections as formerly. His negociation with Norfolk had
been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil +. His personal safety, as well as
the continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favour-
ing Mary, she might, at any time, ruin him. And by a question
which she artfully flarted, concerning the person who had a right,
by the law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority,
flie let him fee, that even without refloring the Qeen, it was an
easy matter for her to deprive him of the supreme direction of as-
fairs 11. These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by
most of his attendants, at length determined the Regent to produce
his accusation against the Queen.

The Regent HE endeavoured to lefTen the infamy, with which he was fen_
.cIF's to efibl this aion would be attended, by protesting, that it was with
il;L. accflbly the utmost reluctance he undertook this disagreeable talk; that his
band's nipr- paty had long suffered their conducl to be mifconflrued, and

had born the worlt imputations in silence, rather than expose the
crimes of their Sovcreign to the eyes of firangers; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction forced them

1* Andcrf. vol. iii. 25. - Id. vol. iv. 9(. 1: Mclv. 191. [ IL1incs, 84.

to

to publish, what they had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, BOOK V.
endeavoured to conceal . Tliefe pretexts are decent; and had the --.--
party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the Queen's 56
actions, in the reft of their condu&, might have paired for the
real principles by which they were influenced, But their former
treatment of the Queen renders it impossible to give any credit to
these profefifons. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation,
where no liberty of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary
with having committed murder.

THrE accusation itself was conceived in the fl-ongefl terms. Mary

was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but
with being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the pursuits of
juflice by her favour; and the had formed designs no les danger-
ous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of the liberties
and confiitution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes ihould le
denied, an oer was made, to produce the most ample and un-
doubted evidence in confirmation o the charge -.

AT the next meeting of the commiffloners, the Earl of Len-rNc(:. :.

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's juRlice nagai;i:
the Queen of Scots, whom he acclt.fed, upon oath, of bllg i!
author of that crime, and prodtlccd FIlcr, which, ns he prctcIndci,
would make good what he a'il 'di ul. The enltrance of' a ncw :t -
tor on the fetl1c, o pportnecly, and at a junCtL rec ( critical, c.ai

' AnJvl . vol. i,. Irs. l. ili. I )9,

. a r.c

BooK V. scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was manifestly

------' Elizabeth's, in order to encreafe, by this additional accusation, the
I563. infamy of the Scotch Queen .

{Her cornmi- MARY'S commissioners expressed the utmost furprize and indig-
lioncrr r ctufe
to ,,:n, 1 nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Qgeen with ca-
Ic"II. . lumnies, which, as they affirmed, she had so little merited. But,

instead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the
charge, they had recourse to an article in their inftrutions,, which
they had formerly neglected to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their Mif-
tress's request, of a personal interview, they protested, if that were
denied her, against all the future proceedings of the commiifioners -.
A protestation of this nature, offered just at the critical time, when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary, and when the
proofs in support of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to
flufpet that fe dreaded the event of that examination. This sis-
picion received the strongest confirmation from another circum-
stance; Ross and Ilerreis, before they were introduced to Eliza-
beth, in order to make this proteitation, privately acquainted Lei-
cefter and Cecil, that as their MifIrefs had, from the beginning,
difeovered an inclination towards bringing the differences between
herself and her fubjedts to an amicable accommodation, so he was
fRill desirous, notwithitanding the Regent's audacious accusation, that
they ihould be terminated in that manner +.

Suci moderation is scarce compatible with the irong resent-

mcent, which calluinniated innocence naturally feels; or with that
cagernefs to vindicate itfclf, which it always discovers. In Mary's

't Andci fun, vol, i. z. - Id. 133, 5. ibl. iv, 134. CaLbb:ll, 157.

lituation,

situation, an offer so ill-timed mufl be confidered as a conefelon of Bool V.
the weakness of her cause. The known charader of her commis- V-

5 o b.

fioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion
of treachery. Some secret convition, that the conduct of their
Mistress could not bear so firit a fcrutinv, seems to be the moll
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they endca-
voured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre-

tence for rejeCting it. She told Mary's commiflioners, that, in the Decem. 4.
present junture, nothing could be o dithonourable to their Mif-
trefs, as an accommodation ; and that the matter would eem to
be huddled up in this manner, merely to upprefs diicoveries, and
to hide her flame ; nor was it pofiible that fle could be admitted,
with any decency, into her prfcence, while tlie lay under the in-
slimy of such a public accusation.

UPON' this repulse, Mary's comnmifioners withdrew; and as they

had declined antlering, there ceemed now to be no further rea-
son for the Regent's pr'oduciin the proofs in illpport of his chare.
Blt without Cgttin tlhfct into hr alnds, Elizabeth's fthcmes were
intcolea cat. And her artifice for this purpolc ^s asa mtan, but as
tiiccc¢tullI as any she ihd hitherto employed. She or!mand1cd lhc
c,ln lmioners to tefiilv her indignation alnd dililc:liire at the Ic-
,cnlt's lprefLmpti)ni in Ior(rtting ofar the duty of a iLi-iel, :s to
;:'I( ,:( hlis S,,vc-ih' (,f, icch atro ,:cius c!'iO.s. II ; i; U

( e: r t.j
r(.7:lin the ,o()ol opinin( on ' itclh a 'ow() cr ll p!'., t"iti.r(s:, (hfiW' [,

i,.\v t' ,t ilii; accttlati)ns \xvtc it x:.!licioii', n( ill-nrlic,,l,.i.

'i'i wi \\' prodlced,, and ddcivcrct t to e

tli I''. lilt c )ilnnilliii ';
t'~c :: *, (,i" tl c Sc'>:'.lh I)'ili lm 'nt iii ntn, nu, tt, , ;i.: ,, ,. t1,'' R, ... i;:::

\ol..;. 1 1 l ' '

BooK V; authority,, and. f the .Qeen' resignation ; the confeljons of the

i--6 C persons executed for the King's murder; and the fatal casket which

contained the letters, sonnets, and contracs, that have been already
mentioned.

Elizabeth ELIZABETH having got these into her poffefion, began to lay
treats Mary
with greater afde the expressions offriendfhip and refpeA which fle had hither-
iigour. to u.sed in all her letters to the Scotch Queen. She now wrote to her

in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had amounted al-
most to certainty; flie blamed her for refusing to vindicate hercflf
from an accusation which could not be left unanswered, without a
mlanifeft injury to her characer; and plainly intimated, that unless
that were done, no change would be made in her present situation i'"
She hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments would intimi-
date Mary, who was scarce recovered from the fock of the Re-
gent's attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm her refig-
nation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's authority as Regent, and
to content that both herself and her son flould reside in England,
under her protecion. This scheme Elizabeth had much at heart
the proposed it both to Mary and to her commissioners, and ne-
glected no argument, nor artifice, that could pofibly recommend
it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, to her
pretensions, and even to her personal safety. She rejected it with-
out hesitation. '" Death, said fihe, is less dreadful than such an ig-
< nominious ftep. Rather than give away, with my own hands,
"the Crown which descendcd to me from Imy ancestors, I will

part with life; but the lailt words I utter, shall be those of a
"Queen of Scotland -."

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 83, 179. Good. vol. ii. 2fc.
-\ Ilacs, 497. See Append. N° XXVII. (,cod, vl. ii. 274, 301.

I A '

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible how open her re- BOOK V.

putation lay to censure, while he suffered such a public accusation . 6
to remain unanswered; and though the conference was now dif-
solved, she impowered her commiflioners to present a reply to the
allegations of her enemies, in which he denied, in the firongeft Decem. 24.
terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon the Re-
gent and his party, by accusing them of having devised and exe-
cuted the murther of the King *. The Regent and his associates
aflerted their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
insist on a personal interview, a condition which (he knew would
never be granted i. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evident from the delays, the evasions, and sub-
terfuges, to which both Qeens had recourse by turns, that Mary
avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make any further progress
in the inquiry.

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Scotland, where i569.

his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to raise forne Feb.,z.
commotions. Before he set out, he was called into the Privy Regent with-

out ither ap.
Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. proingor

condeiiliinv'

Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had hi1 coduct,
been objected to his conduct, which ihe could reckon detrimental
to his honour, or inconsistent with his duty ; nor had he, on the
other hand, produced any thing againfi his Sovereign, on which
The could found an unfavourable opinion of her aions; and for
this reason, flhe resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precilly
in the fame ftuation, in which flie had fould tlhem, at the be-

* GuodJ. 2. 85. i Ibid. 283. CabbaLi, i57.

I h h 2 illliNI

BOOK V. ginning of the conference. The Queen's commissioners were dif-
---, miffed much in the fame manner .
1569.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so

earnefily on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclu-
lion of the whole appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous.
Nothing, however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's ori-

Blt eclcrtlv
ipiiirti hils ginal views, or more subservient to her future schemes. Notwith-

fltanding her seeming partiality, flhe had no thoughts of continuing
neuter; nor was she at any loss on whom to beRfow her pro-
tecion. Before the Regent left London, fie supplied him with
a conliderable ium of money, and engaged to rfpport the
King's authority, to the utmost of her power -. Mary, by her
own conduct, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
initances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which she had dicfover-
ed during the progress of the conference, and despairing of ever
obtaining any succour from her, lie endeavoured to rouze her own
adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to Eliza-
beth and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotchman with
indignation. Murray, flhe pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England ; to surrender to Elizabeth the places
of greatest strength in the kingdom ; and to acknowlege the de-
pendance of the Scotch upon the Englifll nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Scot-
land; and, at the Efme time, the qucilion with regard to the Eng-
lilh fccfiioil was to be decided in favour of the ,Earl of HIartford,
who had promised to marry one of Cccil's daughters. An account

* Cood. 2, 315. 333. I1 lI. 23. Carte, 3. . 8.

of these wild and chimerical projects was spread induitrioufly nmong BooKTi V,
the Scots. Elizabetil, erceiving, it was calculated o. purpo!t to -
bring her govcrlnent into dii-cputation, labolirel to d(i!trov it; cf-
feds, by a counter-proclamation, and becalle more difilutfi: thl
ever with the Scotch Queen.

TiiE Regent, on his return, found the kingdlom in the utmof ['';" ,1

tranquillity. Bult the rage of the Queenc's adherents, which had 1 .: :.illi
been fuLfpeded in expecRation that the conference in Tngland would
terminate to her advantage, vas now ready to break out with all
the violence of civil war. They were encouraged, too, by tlhe ap-
pearance of a leader, vlhole higih qality and ptenlions intidcd
him to great autthority in the nadion. This was the D];uke of C)ia-
telherault, who liad relidcd for tome years in Fi-ance, and was now
sent over by that court, vith a iMall IUpply of nioncy/, in hopes
that the pretc1nce of the first nobleman in the kingdom would
Ilren gthcn the Queen's s(tion. Elizabeth hadl detained lhim in
England, for Iome months, under various pretences, but was obliged
at latf to fuiffr him to proceed on his joutrncy. I3c!orc his depar-
ture, Mary inverted him with the igh dignity of her ,ieutenalnt ^>-
General in Scotland, together with tc f!ataslic title of her adont-
ed father.

TlEr Regent did not give him time to form is ay into ; ,

:ctregular body. lie afic

mblt an army, with l s ili ial a1expii, i

ti

, I

and marclItd to (;il!,0'ow. The fbilowvcr of iAnryl ;Ind iitlv,
who compolted the cii i L part ot the QOlcc'n's Ifiiioni, lyini iin vc-ry
didlant cornlers of the klinl,(do, and many ot thle Dulk's d*cpeiV-

-

IJ l,'1 ,

, ,,

I 1 S(I" CC A 'P |.' [,,
I . N 1 ' X IIJ

6? mint

BOOK V. dantshaving fallen, or having been taken in the battle of Langfide,

6"---- the spirit and strength of his adherents was totally broken, and an
I569. accommodation with the Regent was the only thing, which could

prevent the deftrudion of his estate and valTals. This was effected
without difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke
promied to acknowledge the authority both of the King and of
the Regent; and to claim no jurifdiaion in consequence of the
commission, which he had received from the Queen. The Re-
gent bound himself to repeal the a, which had passed for attain-
ting several of the Queen's adherents; to restore all, who would
submit to the King's government, to the possession of their eflates
and honours; and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties (hould be fettled by mutual content. The
Duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty; and,
in token of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the
Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Regent set
at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide *.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty. A fe-

cret negociation was carrying on, in England, in favour of the
captive Queen, with so much success, that her affairs began to wear
abetter asped, and her return into her own kingdom feerned to be
an event not very distant. The French King had lately obtained
such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extindtion of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
reeftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from proteeting
her fiiends in Britain. These circumstances not only influenced
Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impreftion on the Duke,

-* Cabbala, I 61. Caws. Mem. o6.

that

that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly discovered BOOK V.
that he wished to evade the accomplilhment of the treaty. The Re-
gent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to hake himself loose, 69
in this manner, from his engagements; and instantly formed a refolu-
ticn equally bold, and politic. He commanded his guards to seize
Chateherault in his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regardless
either of his dignity as the first nobleman in the kingdom, and next
heir to the Crown, or of the promiies of personal fccurity, on which
he had relied, committed hin and Lord Herreis, prisoners to the A;,rl1 l
c,!,le of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and unexpeted difpi-
rited the party. Argyll ubmitted to the King's government, and
made his peace with the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly,
being left alone, was at lafl obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought let- JuI2.
ters to the Regent both from the English and Scotch Queens. A propo:?l

in Hs)' our of

Convention was held at Perth, in ordcr to confider them. E!iza- vjr.: jctt&
beth's letter contained three different proposals with regard to
Mary; that file flould either be rcflored to the full pifeficni of
her former authority or be admitted to reign jointly withl the
King her son ; or at leafl be allowed to rlidc in Scotland, ill
some decent retirement, without any flarc in the admininration of
government. Thcfi overtures were extorted by the iporturiitv
of Fenelon the Frcnch almbaffilor, and have lomic appcarance e
bcing favourable to the captive Qtcnn. Tley wci, hlo.;cve-,
perfeclly fuitabl to Elizabcth's gcncral llern v.itl rcga;rd to coteli
aflfirs. Ainong propolitions fu inc jl1al r iip
i o()tpo:tiulatc, (he

* Clwv. v I1l. I 1. 'rI ',
i.<.

(uciliy

Booi, V. easily saw where the choice would fall. The two former were re-
- ,-. jeteed ; andl long delays must necefiarily have intervened, and many

569. -.

difiicultics have arisen, before every circumnfance relative to the Liii
could be finally a.djufled *.

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well fould be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found in-
valid, should be diflolved by a legal fcntence of divorce. This
fatal marriag as te principal source of all the calamities the had
endured for two years ; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries, her reputation had suffered by that itep. It was
he; interest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to account

X,,;r(fo1;' for her loIng ilence with repecl to this point. HSer particular mo-
:,ni
: .i jtivc or propo ing it, at this time, began to be so well known, that the

','-"'"t demand was rected by the Convention of eate. They imputed

it not o muchl to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eagcrncli
to conclude a maLrrige with the Duke of Norfolk.

Tinis marriage was tIhe objCe of that fecrct negociation in En.

landl, lwhich we Iavc already mentioned ; but, like all tlho) con-
ccrted for the relief of tle (Quecn of Scots, it ended tragicallv.
Thec fertile and projecding genius of Maitland fitrfP co:ncivecd this
fieicmec. I)Duing the Confercnce at York, he colmnuiiuict d it t,
thec ltlhe,,c inltiilil, and to the Bifiop of Ro . Thc orIe- rcalily
clufifd ith a iclhille, o inattcring to hiis anlbiit'n. ''l l.atter
(ca iilrcl'c it as a Ipro abcl device for rcflorinI: ls Mitlrc'i t.

~i-

I' t'ty, ; t l repnlcil ]lher (io her tlhrone. N',r x..',:.s !n'\ , v it!l
\'v( m N t'rltik ll(;I a cI, ol!' fpondc lce, l'y on'

a:i s 'l;s li h(istide L,:, \'
:-.'(-;o"o , avcrle (io:n x a00)c'!rc, w'lih \vould li.w'. lel!urcd Ic' to

- ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -
V 0*

her kingdom, with so much splendor *. The sudden removal of BOOK V.
the conference from York to W'estminster suspendcd, but did not '""
break off this intrigte. Mait!and and Ross were lill the Duke's
prompters, and his agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the Queen of Scots.

BUT as lie coulld ot hope, that under an adminifhration so vi- Colce:. it

:iilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long concealed, tl'o liza-
he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of opennefsand candor,
an artifice which eldom fails of success. He mentioned to her the
rumour, which was spread of his marriage with the Scotch Queen;
he complained of it as a groundless calumny; and ditclaincd all
thoughts of that kind, with mnany expreflions full of contempt,
both for Mary's charaaer, and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth
was of every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, fie ieems to
have credited these professions -. But, inllead of dilcontinuing
the negociation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and admitted
into it new afibciates. Among thee was the Regent of Scotland.
He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public accufa-
tion of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which he had
entered at York. lie was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England, was great. The
Earls of Northumberland and Wefim-orland , the moto powerful
noblemen in that part of the kingdom, threatned to revenge upon
the Regent, the ijurics which lhe had done his Sovereign. In or-
der to secure his fife retreat, he atdrlclcd himself to Norfolk, and,
after some apology for his pait conduct, le ininuated that the

* Camid. 419. IL , 57. Stai Tr ilil , . 73.

1 Ilyiics, 574. Stalt Trial:: , 1.79, 80.
VOL. . 1 i Duke's

BOOK V. Duke's scheme of marrying the Queen his fifler was no less accep-
'--~--' table to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would

1569.

concur, with tile utmost ardor, in promoting so defireable an
event . Norfolk heard him with the credulity, natural to those,
who are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to desist from any hoflile attempt against Murray, and to that he
owed his passage through the Northern Counties, without dif-
turbance.

,.lir. the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Regent, he next at-
e (,< UCnt o! tlle
,liii no- tempted to draw the Englilf nobles to approve his design. The

nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept
the question with regard to the right of fuccefiion undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
houses of York and Lancafler, was still recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deftruion, in that unhappy contest. The Scotch
Queen, though her right of fucceflion was generally held to be
undoubted, might meet with formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a Popish Prince, and bring both liberty and
religion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Englifhmnan,
a zealous Protestant, the most powerful and most universally be-
loved of all the nobles, an effectual remedy seemed to be provided
against all these evils. The greater part of the Peers, either di-
resly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary project. The Earls
of Arundel, Pcmbroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley subscribed a
letter to the Scotch Queen, written with LeiceRer's hand, in which

" And. 3. 34

they

3

they warmly recommended the match, but insisted, by way of pre- BOOK V.
liminary, on Mary's promise, that he hould attempt nothing, in 569-
consequence of her pretensions to the Engli(h Crown, prejudicial
to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that he hould content to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms; that she should
confirm the present eflablifllment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her fubjedts as had appeared in arms against
her. Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying these ar-
ticles, they engaged that the English nobles would not only concur
in restoring her, immediately, to her own throne, but in securing
to her that of England, in reversion. Mary readily consented to
all these proposals, except the second, with regard to which, she
demanded ome time for consulting her ancient ally the French
King .

THE whole of this negociation was industriously concealed from

Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scotch Queen was well known,
nor could it be expeted, that she would willingly come into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation, and to in-
crease the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much confe-
quence to the nation, the taking a few flRps without her knowledge,
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every perton con-
cerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing
should be concluded without obtaining her consent, the duty and
allegiance of fubieCts seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Those who
conducted the intrigue, had flrther and more dangerous vies. They
fawv the advantages which Mary procured by ti:> tcaty, to e jprc-
Ient and certain ; and the execution of the promiCee; which flie came

* Andl c f. vol. iii. 51. CailJ .42,,

1 i i 2 undLr,

BOOK V. under, to be diflant and uncertain. They had early communi-
'------' cated their scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and obtained

J569'

their approbation *. A treaty, concerning which they consulted
foreign Princes, while they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that the union
of so many nobles would render it necel-ary for Elizabeth to com-
ply; they flattered themselves, that a combination so strong would
be altogether irresistible; and such was their confidence of success,
that when a plan was concerted, in the north of England, for rcl-
cuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who was
afraid that if the recovered liberty, her sentiments in his favour
might change, used all his interest to diffwade the conspirators from
attempting it --.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd arrived

from England; and, besides the letters which he produced pub-
lickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the molt fan-
guine hopes. The whole nobles of England concurred, said they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjufled ; nor was
it possible that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much art,
and supported both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or
be defeated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting, but the
concluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by procuring a feentce of divorce, which would remove the only
obifacic that flood in the way. This was expected of him, in
consequence of his promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either
his interect or his fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to
fulfil thcce engagements -.

* Anclcrf. vol. iii. 13. - Camd. 4:0. Ilayncs, 520. Spots. 230o
Scc Appendix, N XXIX.

Bu r,

BUT the Regent was now in very different circumfances, from BooK V.

those which had formerly induced him to affect an approbtion of -J
Norfolk's Ichemes. lie saw that the downfal of his own power mufl
be the firll consequence of theDuke's success. And if the Queen, who
conlidered him as the chief author of all her misfortunes, hould re-
cover her ancient authority, he could never expect favour, nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a fep so fatal
to himlelf, and which would have eftablifled the grandeur of ano-
ther on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But,
as every other circumflance was fettled, the Biflhop of Ross, in name
of his Mifitrefs, and the Duke, in person. declared, in presence of
the French Ambafhador, their mutual consent to the marriage, andl
a contrad to this purpose was signed, and entrusted to the keeping
of the Ambailador .

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not long _,g, ,.
remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and Elizabeth Ilib;l:lth di-

-b~~~~~~

p-~~~~ ~cover5 tile

calling the Duke into her presence, expressed the utmofl indigna- Duike', de-
tion at his conduit, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts of j.t; t
prosecuting such a dangerous design. Soon after, Leicefler, who
perhaps had countenanced the project with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumltanccs of it to the Queen. Pembroke, Arun-
del, Lumly, and Throgmorton were confined, and examined.
Mary was watched more narrowly than ever; and IIaftings Earl
of HEuntington, who pretended to difputc with the Scotch QUeccn,
her right to the fuccefion, being joined in commiflion with Shrevw-
bury, rendered her imprifonnent more intolerable, by tlhe excels
of his vigilance and rigour 4-. The Scotclh Regent, threatened

:t Cartc, vol.iii. .t'.6. -1 II1ya1 , 575, 52 q,53o, 5 2.

\with

BooK V. with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his
'-C'-'- letters in her hands; and furnished all the intelligence in his power*.
1569' The Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-

tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprisonment of his affo-
ciates; coldly received by his friends in that countv; unprepared for
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitatcd for some
o.tubcr3. days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor.

He was first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then ent to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble submission to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scotch Queen . During the progress of Norfolk's nego-
ciations, the Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt
of their issuing in her restoration to the throne, with an increase of

Maitland im- authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of tlat
prilbned by
he R'gcntb. party, and the person, whose aivity and abilities the Regent chief-

ly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He continued to foment
the spirit of disaffection in Scotland, and had seduced from the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former aflbciates.
\Vhile he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon his own
powcr ecure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of being acceflbry to the murder
of the King; and under that prctence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would oon have been brought to trial, but was
livec( by the fiicndfhip of Kirkaldy, governor of the cafle, who,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent, got him
out of the hands of the pcrfon, to whole care lie was committed,

Scc Append. N XXX. - IInyncs, 520, 597.

andl

and conduAed him into the castle, which, from that time, was en- BOOK V.
tirely under Maitland's command. The lots of a place of lb much ' 6
importance, and the defection of a man o eminent for military 59
flkill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difreputation, for
which, however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly com-
penfated.

Tile intrigue carried on for restoring the Scotch Queen to liber- I ''

A r(bc]]ion
tv having been discovered, and disappointed, an attempt was made, aai liia-

al cthl ':' l';-

to the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better fuc- r's adlcrnts
cels. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, though
little diftinguified by their personal merit, were two of the mot
ancient and powerful of the Englifi peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they pofefled that influence over
the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and martial
families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popifl religion, and discontented with the court, where new men,
and a new fyflem prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interest, and zeal for popery, oppo-
fition to the court, and commiseration of her fuferings, had en-
gaged them in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs. They-were privy to
Norfolk's schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded (lid
not suit their ardor and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scotch
Queen was not their sole objeCt. They aimed at bringing about a
change in the religion, and a revolution in the government of the
kingdom. For this reason, they iolicitcd the aid of the King of
Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age. No-

· H.iync;, O595.

BoOK V. thing could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or

-v--V more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,
1569 than the involving England in the confusion and miseries of a civil

war. The Duke of Alva, by his direction, encouraged the two
Earls, and promised, so soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or urprifed any place of itrength, or rescued the Queen of
Scots, that lie would supply them both with money, and a strong
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, ounded the ports where it would be rmofl pro-
per to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers,
was despatched into England, on pretence of fettling fomc commer-
cial differences between the two nations; but in reality, that the
rebels might be sure of a leader of experience, to soon as thcy ven-
tured to take arms '
D!.:tL. THE condud of this negociation occasioned many meetings and

nmcliagcs between the two Earls. Elizabeth was informed of thele;
and though ie fufpeded nothing of their real design, file con-
cluded that they were amon, the number of Norfolk's confidents.
They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. Con-
fcious of guilt, and afraid of dicfovery, they delayed giving obedi-
ence. A iecond, and more peremptory order was iirued. This
they could not decline, without shaking off their allegiance. And
as no time was left for deliberation, they instantly erected their
Novcm. 9.

flandard againrf their Sovereign. The re-establishing the catho-
lic religion; the fettling the order of succession to the Crown; the
defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives they alledged to
Luftify their rebellion -. Malny of the lower people flocked to
them, with such arms they could procure; and liad the capacity of

* Cnrct, vol. iii .89, 490. Camrd. 21. Clyp(, vul. i. 5-7

the

the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it must Boot V.
have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth ated with " -"
prudence and vigour; and was served by her fubjeds with fidelity 1569
and ardor. On the first rumour of an infurretion, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of firength, which could not be taken
without a regular siege; a detachment of the rebels, which was
lent to rescue her, returned without success. Troops were assem-
bled in different parts of the kingdom ; as they advanced, the male-
contents retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their spirits funk, Despair and uncertainty whither to dire6t
their flight, kept together, for forne time, a fmiall body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland. But they were at length n
obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scotch
borderers. The two Earls, together witl the Countifs of Nor-
thumbcrland, wandering for some days in the wafies ofLiddiidale,
were plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of' the fia-
son, and left deilitute of the neceflaries of life. Wefimorland wis
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Fcrniherll, and after-
\wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by tle Regent, who had marched with tome troops towards the
borlers, t prevent any imprefiion the rebels might make on thoie
mlutinous provinces *

AMlDSTr so many surprising events, the affiirs of the church, c.,~ cal!;;:

for two year,., have alinol elfapcd our notice. Its General Afcinm-
blics were held regularly; but no b)ulirics of much ilmportance
cmpl)o edl their attenltion. As the numellr (,f tic ProteflaInt clergy
daily ciicrcafcd, tlic dtliciicy ol thc sllutis, Ict apart Jl r liclr lib-

Vt/ol0 . I. K k
I liila cce

4 T H E HISTORY .

,

BooK V. firance, became greater. Manyefforswtreimaaet6 ai'sieor
-'r-' ing the ancient patrimony of the church, or at lea sot tuch~ i,a

x 569.

as was possessed by the Popish incumbents, a race of men, who
were, now, not only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But tho'
the manner in which the Regent received their addresses and com-
plaints, was very different from that to which they had been ac-
cutfomed, no effetual remedy was provided; and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppression, and groaned under the most extreme
poverty, fair words, and liberal promises, were all they were able
to obtain *.

1570. ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping such a danger-
lizabeth re- OUS priConer as the Scotch Qeen. During the former year, the
rolvcs to give tranquillity of her government had been difturb'd, first by a secret
the Regent. combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others;

and he often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
hidtlen cause of both f-. Many of her own fubjecs favoured, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interested in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, ihe forePaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and insurrections among the former, and
might expose her to the hostile attempts of the latter. She re-
solved, therefore, to gve up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose fccurity, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from rc-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carried some length, when it was dicovered by the vigilance
of the Bishop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanif (
Ambafiadors, remonftlated against the infamy of such an ation,
and rcprcficntcd the surrendering the Qccn to her rebellious ub..

' Call. vol ii So, &c.

jects,

jects. tobe the fame thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own au- BOOK. V.
thority, condemn her to inflant death. This procured a delay; -
and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that de-
sign *.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed Guth.i;mr-

this barbarous aion, He had been condemned to death ioon as- dci'd.
ter the battle of Langlide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate had been
bestowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who fcized his house,
and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, the became furiously mad. This injury
made a deeper impression on him, than tle benefit he had re-
ceived, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged upon
the Regent. Party-rage Itrengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the enterprize.
The maxims of that age jutfified the most desperate course he could
take to obtain vengeance. tie followed the Regent for forne time,
and watched for an opportunity to firike the blow. lie resolved
at lafl to wait till his enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through
which he was to pass in is way frjii Stirling to Edinburgh. 1le
took his land in a wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the ltreet; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to hini r the noise of
his feet fi-om being heard ; hung up a black' cloth behind him,
that his fIadow might not be observcd from without and after all
this preparation, calmly expde(ed the Regent's approach, who
liad lodged tiuring the night in a houif nlot lar diflaint. Some i.--
diftind: illlrmiatiun of the danger etliiJc threatened him, liad been

* rC rte, vul. iii. 49I. Anders. vol. iii. 84

K k , conveyed

BOOK V. conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so muchre#ardito. it, that

C-^r~ he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he had en-
1570. tered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But'as the croud

about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he
proceeded directly along the itrect; and the throng of the people ob-
liging him to move very slowly, gave the aaflin time to take so true
an aim, that he shot him with a tingle bullet, through the lower part
of his belly, and killd the horse of a gentleman who rode on his ether
fide. His followers infiantly endeavoured to'break into the houie
whence the blow had come, but they found the door frongly bar-
ricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton had mount-
ed a fleet horse, which stood ready for him at a back-paflhge, and
was got far beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame night
of his wound.

THERE is no person, in that age, about whom hiflorians have

'!
7 I 1a icr.

been more divided, or whose character has been drawn with such
opposite colours. Pcrfonal intrepidity, military skill, figacity and
vigour in the adminifiration of civil affairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have p-,ffiTfed, in an eminent degree. IHis
moral qaalities are more dubious, and ought neither to be praised,
nor ccnfured, without great reserve, and many diflintions. In a
icerce age, he was capable of using victory with humanity, and of
treating the vanquilicd with moderation. A patron of learning,
whicll, among martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
'/,clous for religion, to a decree, which distinguishcd him, even
;:t a time, when profefiions of that kind were not uncommon. His
'onhnfdcncc in lls ficndls was extreme, and inferior only to his libe-

lBuch!. 3S . Crawlt . 'lmem. 124.

rt.lity

rality towards 'tini which knew no bounds. A disinterested pal- BooK V.
sion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppose the per-
nicious fyfrem, which the Princes ofLorrain had obliged the Qeen-
mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he served her
with a zeal and affedtion, to which lie sacrificed the f-iendfhip of
those wuho were most attached to his person. But, on the other
lhand, his ambition was immoderate; and events happened, that
ope:-ced to him vail profpec's, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to actions, inconsistent with the duty of a subject. His
treatment of the (Queen, to whose bounty he was so much indebted,
was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, un-
der which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. Ic
deceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness unworthy of a man
of honour. His elevation to iuch unexpected dignity, inspired him
with new pafions, with haughtiness and rcferve; and instead of
his natural manner, which was blunt and open, he affeded the
arts of diffjmulation and refinement. Fond, towards the end of
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by sooth-
ing his vanity, led him afray, while his ancient friends flood at
a dirbncc, and predided his approaching fall. But, amidst the tur-
bulence and confusion of that fadious period, he dispensed juflice
with b much impartiality, he repressed the licentious borderers with
lo much courage, and eftabliihecd such uncommon order and tran-
quillity in the country, that his administration was extremely popu-
lar, and he was long and aftfctionately remembered aong the
commons, by the name of the Goodl Rct.

'Ilhe END of the FIRiS VOLUMEl.

2"

# ERRATA in Vol. I.

E R R A Ain Vol. I.

P AGE 38. line 1 . for The read This. p. 92. 1. 3. from the bottom, for them r. i.
p p. io8. 1. 8. for Scots r. Scotch. p. iii. 1. 9. r. the Reformation. p. 123. 1. 5.
from the bottom, r. that the clergy. p. 5o. 1. 8. r. being convinced. p. 202. 1. 4. for
confederacy r. confederating. p. 240. .

1. o. for advice r. a devi, e. p. 248. 1. 7. for the Earl r.

Earl. . 253. 1. 1I. for reviewved r. revived. p. 373.1. 9. for the r. it. p. 4c4.1. 1o.
r. tvith 'which it was ea/y.

fs s s mh
B.!ITA,\i

# BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. MILLAR in the Strand, LONDON. FOLIO.

# QUARTO.

a o0 KS printed for, and fold by A. MI r LA R in te

Strand, LONDON.

F O L I 0.
I. IIE HFl/ory and A/ntiuites of Scotand, f.om the earliefl Account of 1'ime

to the Deah of J7a:es I, ano 1437. By /i/iian Mailand, F. R. S. And
fromn thl t Period to the Aceeion of ames VI. to the Cra.n of Ergland, Anno

1603. By another Hand. The whole compiled from the moll authentick Vouchers.
I/ ol t to -e '3, e/, t/at as it 'aS for n ny Centuries tIe Po/iSc, f loth England an'

Flrance, o b alied wit/. Scotlani, a/ ti.e- is no unde,/and.ng the H florj; rs t/o
Atc. ns, ,Vli/sLoe.t a thorcigh 'i.co, ce cf t.,at f the Scots, shi.h /i het', car. e
te obt ined jro. any HJrioy of /tat Pt'o/.l hit/hero ub;//led.

2. An t''cia-/al H/,ory, froml the earlielt Account of Time to te prerent, Illustrated

vith l\ias, C tr, Chronological and other Tables. In o vols. or 21 in Svo.

3. T'lie I1 lor, ot the Gr<uith and Decay of the Othman Empire, in 2 Parts, adorn 1

wiLh z2 Hec;ds of the 7u r,/l Evper. ''Translated from he Latn of LDr:eria; .,,-
;mc;r, late Prince of Moidavca. By. N. TiIIdcl, M. A.

4. A Con./'cte '/,emn of GCgra;/. Illuilrated wi' h o Alaps. In z vols.
5. I;i/c:' L', Nt 'j Hij/ory cIf / . c-Tun T:Nm!. In 2 vols. or 4 vo!s. Svo.
iJ,/ ;/ BTo-et's iT/:, r ot the R§r /,i.ation of the C7/../i .f E.g/ad. '1 he 3 Part. Being
a Sup Fll.netit to the z vols. forneily psblifl-d.

6. ]rnt:lan/z/: COr a Chorograrhiical Description of Grrat-Britain and lan i \I'ritten

by Mi,' ,:;i (l'ao.aic,, (.i/,:rcneu.-:, King at Arms; and tr:.iflated into E.g/:,. ivih

i 'do

ditions and In.provcmnents. ievilfed, digested, and published, with large Adciio:s, by
E. ,,. (,i/o, 1. D. late Lord Bishop of London. The 3d Edition. Illuirated wvith Ma1 s
of all the ounties, and Irints of thie l',i//h, Roman, and Saxen Coins. In 2 vo1s.

7. The ge,.uire ^orks of Faluzs */Jp/u,, the J!.1j/ Ilifio.ian. Translated from
the (:rigina! Gek, according to Haterco'.' s accurate Edition, into E,g/jh.

With an Account of the 7Jew-,j Coins. .Wights, and lMaiures. In 2 vo1. Rcyil

Paper. By tl s,',am Ih.'i:, M. A. onle limne P'ofllobr of the Mathematicks in the
Uliiverfity of CNt'lriidge.

The lamie Bouk in 1 vol. on a fnaller Paper, or in 4 vols. in Sro.

Q U 4 R T. O.
S. A New Hory of real Britain. In 2 voIs. Vol. I. Contining the Reigns of

j 7amets I1. and C(ar- es I. '(.1. 11. Containing the Comnmon-wealth, and the
Reigns of Cka'cs i . ; nd f7msl 11. By David Hi.t, Efq;

9. Eay and Treatises on several SujecCts, in vol. By Da'/.J' ..Ne, Efq; To which
is added, an Index.

'The fane, in 5 vols. z2mo.
1c. A!crois f the Reign of ),c n Ei'alt,, from the Year Sli, till her Dal .
By Tlhrnas B r/,, ). D. S. R. . Il 2 vols.

11. The ItItory of P ,oiply: C(ontalilig the Li./e., Os;onIs, ./'.:ons, and I.difccui,

of the l'll/ol/oes of Ceverl /l y /

i. By o.,u s/;,), I.q; The Fort ii lditioxi. In which

the tin0llriIR Ii' i a11.l s, limlb in tile 7,l . iil a idct,' of ail sorn;er Iditt!oi,s are rortlj,,;
the Cs/tatloIl a.'d R ;ir, r ' es e ict y ;dliLllicd, :ii. coltil)laicT thiougl out w:th ilic UO,,inal/
and with the I/.t/' '£,;.i /,i s.,. ili':t :it l. /.,k.

12. An 1 l'l.ric;ll A e

A, unt ol the /i,,/,. 'l'r-ilc over tle Cafpi in Sea; with the Au-

tlh r's Jo rn.dl or T I il I1 t!un i:,i.,/' / tir tugh RAiGt h into / n'

,a ; aind back thiough .

BR;/it, (; ,5' -C yn. a; dl // ' ..,,I. 'I,' w!: i1 i-c ;Idit d, t!h l Rt: i;lttOI5 o() I'ctr// durilg
the I cfclit (lnttlry, \vi ! tiec 'Pito l1' r l !l>o :Y of tlhe( rcat L'iiper A\A

; r . ,, .. j,-

]ll,;itcd witl Mll.s, ;l.d . llp [pl... I .'he ad LEtumton, Icvliid lid csor ,,c. I'n

j voli. lly lJol.

tI.':', 1, ult L 1
.

', ./" 0 L I 0,

# FOLIO.

F L 1 0.
FOLIO.

'3. 'Y C. Auguli Thuani Hfloria Jui Temporis. Edita per S. Buckley. rn 7 vols.
14.. The T'orks of the HQp. Robert Boyle. To which is prefixed, new Account

of his Life, confilling partly of Memoirs, drawn up by himself. In 5 vols.

5. The Works of Francis Bacon, Lord High Chancellor of England. With several addi-

iiunal Pieces, never before printed in any Edition of his Works. To which is prefixed,
a New Life of the Author. By Mr. Mallet. In three vols. The 3d Edition.

The Additional Pieces and L may be had alone, to complete the firlt Edition of the
4 vols. in 1730.

16 The Ocana, and other Works of James Harrington, Efq; The 3d Edition. To
which is now added, an Index.

The Aependix may be had alone, to complete those Gentlemen's Boolks, who have
bought Mr. To/and s Edition.

17. An liflrical and Politiral Discourse of the Laws and Governmint of Fnland.

By a\/hnan:ei Bacon of Gray's-Inn, Elq; The 4th Edition. Correcded and improved by
a Gentleman of tl.e Alidle. Teple.

18. The l'orks of Edmund Luclozv. Containing his llemoirs and other Tras7x, now
collced into one vol. To which is prefixed, the Life of the Author, bv the Edi;or.

19. Difojes concerning Government. By Algernon Sid',y. To which is added, some

Letters of Mr. Si.iner's never before publiihed, and a L:fe of the Author, by T'orzas
Birch, 1). D. and S. R. S. With a copious Index.

There are a few of the above Seven Books printed on a super-fine Writing-Paper.
20. All the IForks of ohn Locke, Efq; with .alphabct;cal'ilTa/ii. The 5:h Edition. In
3 vols.

21. The Ruins of Pa/lmyra, otherwifc Tezimor in the lDejrt. This \Work contalns
;9 Plates of the Ruins, and 3 of Injiriftion , chiefly in the Gek and Pa.: rian Lan-
guages, with large Expications. To which are pefixed, the Publiiher's Account of the
Undertaking. An Inquiry into the ancient State of Pa!jora, and a Journal of the Pas-
sage through the Defart.

The above Work is elegantly prin!ed in Frepc.
2 . The Ru ns of Balker, anciently Heliopolis, in Crl./rta, near the Source of the Or,,'t:,

and within ; Leagues of Damascus. This Wo:k contains Views of the Riis as athey are ac
present, with Plans and Elevations of the Buildings, from Diawing and Mea'ures talen
on the Spot, by the Gentlemen who made the 'l our of the iMditertnca's in 175o ai'd
175 1. And who ihave given the PuLbick the Ruis of Pa/myra, as a Specimen of their
Labours. To which is prefixed, an Account of the ancient and prelent St,te of ct!e
Place, uch as the Materials collected by those Gentlemen afford. The Plates are
equal to thole of i',laiyra in Number, and are engraved by the fame mafte.ly-iIad., anj
printed on the fame Size Paper.

The above \ork is allo lccatltlv printed in Frcnch.
23. i'la'cr/oai 'Ti/-''nurus DL)c/ima/i m Y A)nmz inj'l,:,nz Sco.:', c:,xit " /o. :'/!,'a l-t u,-

*.' A Dic7i'.anl' of the Eigl.S' L.n Iun7re, in which the Words are deductd frnom their

)rigina!s, and illultrated in their ditfcrcnt Sinrnfica.ions, by xan;iplcs foin the bell Wli-
ters. To hiichl a:c prefixed, a I//l/r')' of /c Lan,/,a,', and an E'n///.' (;ra.mar. Ini
z2 ols. 1Iv S i.r'o/l '/.lji'",:, A. M .

2- \ (,cir ),cra/ D'/;c/ , n li,/. nP thite Rcvccrlend MItr. '7n'

, , r.,',

l ari,!','/, the Rcv. D)r. '/',mas /);r/.', S. R. S. MI . 'j/, I'. 'vnac., and ot./'r lai s. 1'
r. vols. 'I 'li ()licrtal Lves, by the late (t c T ,i,', l1'lj;
