n .

~-? j~-~k~;,~ =-;·'
P~Mlhed lby Jame. Im<qy; B ooksisler. G1a gow'. 1800.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND,

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUJEEN MARY, AND I(ING JAMES VI,

TILL
HIS ACCESSION TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

WITH
A REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY

previous to that Period;
And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS,

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND IlIS.

TORIOGRAPIER TO HIS MAJESTY 'OR SCUTLAND.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

f

GLASGO ,

rinteti bp Cbapntmai antiJ aitta
FOR J. IMRAY, BOOKSELLEF,

| 8oQ

# BOOK FIFTH. CONTENTS. Deliberation of the Scottish Nobles. Imprisonment of the Queen. Interposition of Elizabeth. The resignation of the Queen of Scotland. James VI. crowned.  ...

HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK FIFTH.

CONTENTS.

.-peliiraion f the SM,-ti,'I Noblei. Jmpr;iftinment of
i, e rcr.

Interf eJtiun of Blizab bt. 2Ie rfiJ lt.riitn rs tle G^ucn es
Scooland. Jamre Vl. crowned. Murray FR . ate tf

thl weUll. A Parliament. Ef/mae of tscen Mary. Bat-

tL jtq Lenfase. le Te .,cn,', fJi.t into Etngla. Artand
pcrfid uof £lizaaet.. Alar; ca, ried to allton. Her rondJcf.
A IPa.liament. The confirence at 2ork. ItS removal to
NKb'/ijtifipr. frary demands an oadietlce of Algiza;b.e: The
arccuution by Murray. HnrJb treatmenJ of M1ary. Dji-
mulaziojn Edlizaetib. Iijurbaunces in Scotlsd. Sc-epe ,f
A'orfol. )ifoavered by L]iaJehtl. Secretay v iq/iilad
imprifoetd by Murray. RSdeU4'o in the north of FngtlnJd.
Confpira.y to delivet utp the utee of Srotland it Murrty.
Ha death and Characer.

IL HE confederate lords had proceeded to urch extreni-
ties againt their fovcreign, that it now became alrnoft
impolfible for them either to flop f;ort, or to purfile a
course less violent. Many of the nobles had refutfed to
concur with them in their enterprile; otlhers openhl con-
demned it. A finall rircumftance might abate that in-
dignation with whieh the multitude were at present a-
nirnated against the queen, and deprive them of that po-
pular applau:. which was the chief foundation of their
power. These consideration3 inclined some of them to
treat the queen with great lenitv.

But, on the other hand, Alary's affedion for Both-

well continued as violent as ever; Ihe obstinately refuf-
ed to learktn Lo any proposal for diffolvillg their mar-

riage, and determined not to abandon a man for whose
love she had already sacrificed so much *. If they should
allow her to recover the supreme power, the first exer-
tion of it would be to recal Bothwell and they had rea-
foi, both from his resentment, from her conduct, and
.rom their own, to expect the severest effects of her
vengeance. These considerations furmouilted every
other motive; and reckoning themselves absolved, by
Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the en-
gagements which they had comeunder when she yield-
ed herself a prisoner, they, without regarding the duty
which they owed her as their queen, and without con-
fulting the reft of the nobles, carried her next evening
under a strong guard, to the castle of Lochleven, and
signed a warrant to William Douglas, the owner of it,
to detain her as a prisoner. This castle is situated on a
small island, in the middle of a lake, Douglas, to whom
it belonged, was a near relation of Morton's, and had
married the earl of Murray's mother. In this place,
under ftri& custody, with a few attendants, and sub-
je6ted to the insults of a haughty woman, who boasted
daily of being the lawful wife of James V. Mary susser-
ed all the rigour and miseries of captivityt.

Immediately after the queen's imprisonment, the con-

federates were at the utmost pains to itrengthen their
party; they entered into new bonds of association; they
assumed the title of crdr of tiefecret council, and without
any other right, arrogated to themselves the whole re-
gal authority. One of their first acts of power was to
search the city of Edinburgh for those who were con-
cerned in the murder of the king. This (hew of zeal
gained reputation to themselves, and threw an oblique
refle&ion on the queen for her remiffilefs. Several sus-
peaed persons were seized. Captain Blackadder and
three others were condemned and executed. But no
discovery of importance was made. If we believe some
historians, they were convidced by sufficient evidence.
If we give credit to others, their sentence was unjult,

Keith, 419, 446, 449. Melv. 167. SeeAppendix,
No. XXII. t Keith, 403. Note (b.)

and they denied, with their last breath, any knowledge
of the crime for which they suffered *.

An unexpected accident, however, put into the hands

of Mary's enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence
of her guilt. Bothwell having left in the castle of Edri-
burgh a caflet, containing several sonnets and letters
written with the queen's own hand, he now lent one of
his'confidents to bring to him this precious depofite;
but, as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and
the caket seized by Mortont. The contents of it were
always produced by the party as the most ample juftifi-
cation of their own conduct, and the most unanswerable
proof of their not having loaded their sovereign with the
imputation of imaginary crimest.

But the confederates, notwithftandirig their extraor-

dinary success, were still far fiom being perfectly at ease.
Thatfo lmall apart ofthe nobles should pretend todifpofe of
the person of their sovereign, or to assume the authority
which belonged to her, without the concurrence of the
reft, appeared to many of that body to be unprecedent-
ed and presumptuous. Several of these were now as-
fembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course
they should hold in this difficult conjuncture. The
confederates made some attempts towards a coalition
with thern, but without effe&t. They employed the
mediation of the afTembly of the church, to draw them
to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but with no bet-
ter fu.'ceis. That party, however, though its numbers
were formidable, and the power of its leaders great,
soon loft reputation by the want of unanimity and vi-
gour; all its consultations evapourated in murmurs and
complaints, and no itheme was concerted for obitruca-
ing the progress of the confederates t.

There appeared some profpedi of danger from an-

other quarter. This great revolution in Scotland had
been carried on without any aid from Elizabeth, and
even without her knowledge.'. Though she was far

* Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35. t Anders. vot.

ii. 9X. Good. vol. ii. 90. t See Difiertation at the end
of the History. II Keith, 407. * Keith, 4x5.

from being displeased at feeing the affairs of that king-
dom embroiled, or a rival, whom she hated, reduced to
distress; she neither wiihed that it Ihould be in the pow-
er of the one faAion entirely to fupprefi the other, nor
could she view tie fleps taken by the confederates with-
out great offence. Notwithstanding the popular maxitr
by which (he governed her own fubjedts, her notions of
royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in htr opinion, encroached on the authority of
their fovertign, hom they had no right to controul,
and had offred violence to her person, which it was
their duty to efteeni falred. They had let a dangerous
example to other illbjelrs; and Mary's cause becaum
the common cautl of prilncest. If ever Elizabeth was
influenced with regard to the affairs of Scoland by ;he
feelings of her heart, rather than by considerations of
interest, it was on thisoccafion. She iuftantly dispatch-
etl I hrokmorton ilto Scotland, with powers to nego-
tiate both with the queen, and with the confederates.
In his inafrusions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Marv's liberty, and cven for her reputation . And
the choice of an amnbafiador, so devoted to the iuteret
of the Scottifi queen, proves this solicitude to be fim-
cere. But neither Elizabeth's friendship, nor Throk-
Inonon's zeal, were of much avail to Mary. The con-
federates forctaw what would be the effics of thefi
good offices; and that the queen, elated by the prolpedo
or pruteition, would rcjet with scorn the overture,
'hLich they uere about to make her. They, for that
rezfon, peremptorily denied Throkmorton access to
their prisoner. And what propoftions he made to
.hem in her brhalf, ihey either reluld, or eluded§.
Mlianiwhile thity deliberated with the utmost anxietg

concerning the fettletrcut of the nation, and the future
difpoial of the queen's peribn. Elizalbth, observing
that Throkmnorton made no progress in his negotiations
, ith them, and tl.at they would lihtcn to none of his
dtneanif in sMary's favour, turned towards that party of
the nobls who were assembled at lamilton, inched
tid. 412, 4t. , I1 4I1. 5 Kcith, 417, 427,

them to take arrs in order to restore their queen to li-
berty, and promised to assist them in filch an attempt to
the utmost of her powerj[. But they diflovered no great-
er union and vigour than formerly, and hehaving like
men who had given up all concern either for their queen
or their country, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part
of their body, whether we confider it with rcfptc to
numbers or to power, to fettle the government of the
kingdom, and to dispose of the queen's person at plea-
litre. Many conffltations were held, and various opi-
nions arose with regard to each of these. Some feenled
desirous of adhering to the plan on which the confede-
racy was at sirs formed; and after punifiing the mur-
derers of the king,and difliblving the marriage w ith 1B3th-
well; afteir p..vidlnr for the safety of the young prince,
and the security of the proteflant religion; they propo-
fed to re-eflablifh the queen in the poffrsTion of her legal
authority. The fuecefs with which their arms had been
accompanied inspired others with bolder and more def-
perate thoughts, and nothing less would farisfy them
than the trial, the condemnation, and punifiment of the
queen herself, as the principal conspirator againfit the
life of her husband and the safety of her son", the for-
mer was Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a
pacific and moderate spirit, to be agrceahle to the tem-
per or wiihes of the party. The latter was recommend-
ed by the clergy, and warmly adopted by many laics;
but the nobles durlt not or would not venture on fucli
an unprecedented and audacious deedt.

Both parties agreed at last upon a feheme, neither so

moderate as the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary
was to he persuaded or forced to resign the cron n; the
young prince was to be proclaimed king, and the earl of
Murray was to be appointed to govern the kingdom,

1 See Appendix, No. XXIII. - Keith, 4,0-422, 582.

t The intention of putting the q-:een to death l-onis

to have been carried on by tlme ci her fIlbjc&.s: at this
time we ofren find Eizahsth Ih,,lafOi that Mary' owed
icr life to her inrerpofitio. Dig-'s' Ci'i.!.\ ;:b. 1 4,
&c.. See Appc:nd. .No. XV!!I.

during his minority, with the name-and authority of re-
gent. sith regard to the queen's own person, nothing
was determined. It seems to have been the intention of
the confederates to keep her in perpetual imprisonment;
but, in order to intimidate herself, and to overawe her
partisans, they still reserved to themselves the power of
proceeding to more violent extremes.

It was obvious to foresee dificulties in the executiotl

of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited,
and accustomed to command. To induce her to acknow-
ledge her ovwn incapacity for governing, to renounce the
dignity and poweri which he vwas born to enjoy, to be-
come dependent on her own fubjeis, to consent to her
own bondage, and to invest thofe-peffns whom she con-
fidered as the authors of all her calamities ith that ho-
nour and'authoriry:pf which ihe herself was _tripped,
xwere points hard to begained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want means
to insure success. Mary i had endured for several weeks,
all the hardShips and terror of a prison no profpee of
liberty appeared; none of hey fuibjeds had either taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief'; no person in
whom the could confide as adnditted into her presence;
even the ambassadors of the French king, and queen of
England, were refused access to her. In this solitary
state, without a connfclloror'a friend,Cunder the pressure
of distress and the apprehcnfion of danger, it was natu-
ral for a woman to hearken al.not.to any overtures.
The confederates took advantage of heIr condition and
of her fears. They employed lord Lidfay, the fiercest
zealot in the party, to communicate their. feme to the
queen, and to obtain her fublcriptior to those papers
wlich were necessary for rendering it effehual He ex-
ecus.d his commiffien with harihnefs and brutality. Cer-
ain death was before Mary's s

ey it fe refufld to com-

ply with his demands. At the fame timn e e was in-
,crrned by fir Robert Melvil, in the name of Athol;
Mairland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
deratcs who were mofd attentive to her iptcrcft, that a

* Kieith, 42i:.

resignation extorted by fear, and granted during her in-
prifonment, was void in law, and might be revoked as
loon as she recovered liberty. 'Throkmorton, by a note
which he found means of conveying to her, suggested
the fame thingt. Deference to their opinion, as well
as concern for her own safety, obliged her to vield
to every thing which was required, and to sign all the
papers which Lindsay presented to her. By one of
these, The resigned the crown, renounlced all share in the
government of the kingdom, and consented to the coro-
nation of the young king. By another, ihe appointed
the earl of Murray regent, and conferred upon him all
the powers and privileges of that high office. By a third,
The tubftituted some other nobleman in Murray's place,
if he hotild refuse the honour which was designed for
'him. Mary, when she subscribed these deeds, was bath-
ed in tears; and while she gave away, as it were with
her own hands, the sceptre which The had fwaved so
long, ihe felt a pang of grief and indignation, one of the
severest, perhaps, which can t9uch the human heartt.

The confeder7tes endeavoured to give this resignation

all the weight and validity in their power, by proceed-
ing without delay to crown the young prince. The ce-
remony was performed at Stirling, on the twenty-ninth
of July, S6 7; with much solemnity, in prcfence of ail the
nobles of the party, aconfiderablenugmher of lefferbarons,
'nd a great assembly of the people. From that time all
public writs were issued, and the government carried on
in the name of James YI|l.

No revolution so great was ever eflT'cted with more

ease, or bv means so unequal to the cill. In a warlike
age, and in less time than two months, a part of the
nobles, who neither lpiofcfid( the chirf power nor tlh
greatest wealth in the nation, allnd w( n li ever brought
three thousand imen into the fie';, fi-izld, imprifor.:i,
anil det!hroned their qolce:, ;nr(l wiil:out fhe.dini' .
single drop cf blood, set her fonl, ;. inia:i t of a )yar ul,
on the throne.

T Kei' l, A^.- N'cc 't. i Kh:l,; . -, ','-ci.
: *,.

Vi, . !l. B1

During this rapid progfefs of the confederates, the

eves of all the nation were turned on them with afto-
nilfment; and various and contraditory opinions
were formed concerning the extraordinary Iteps which
they had taken.

Even under the ariftocratical form of government

which prevails in Scotland, said the favourers of the
queen, and notwithstanding the exorbitant privileges
of the aobles, the prince possesses considerable power,
and his person is treated with great veneration. No
encroachments fltould be made on the tormer, and no
injurs offered to the latter, but in cafes where the liber-
ty and happiness of the nation cannot be secured by any
other means. Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs
not to any part, but to the whole, or at least to a majo-
rity of the fociery, to judge of their exifence. By
what afion coold it be pretended that Mary had in-
vaded the rights or property of .er filbjeis, or wHfat
scheme had lhe formed againlft the liberty and contfi-
tution of the kingdom? Were fears, and suspicions,
and fiirmifes, enough to justify the imprisoning and the
deposing a queen, to whom the crown defrended from
so long'a race of monarchs' The principal author of
wxhatever w-s reckr, rd culpable in her condu&t was
now driven from her preftnce. The murderers of
the king .miht have been brought to condign punish-
ment, ihe safety of the prince have been secured, and
the protestant re;gin have been eflablifhed, with-
out wrcfinc" "-he ';r: tie ,ot of her hands, or condemn-
ing he- to perr'tua! 'n:-riibri!ent. l hatever right a
f,-e parlizmnt minl;t ,i.tire lhad to proceed to fu;:h a
rigorous conclusion, or whatever uanme its dettrmina-.
tiors minght have meritcd, a fentti:ce of this lnanlre
passer! y a few nol:ces, without a.r'cewledging or con-
ft:!;!-': the reit of ti" n;::;i n, mi,!t be dee'ncd a rebel-
iior a.:3inr' the '.:rr.!rr:r-, a' .l cor.fpiracy against
the :-'r:in o ].-I i '
9 .s: .:

'1 i;- r -,r '! S .,;' :!.c

' .':'. el-ratcs rea soned very diif-

fr:-:Iv. 1: J= i;'*'.i t, i:. . !hey, that Mary eirhl-r !,e-
e:,,.. >". ' - *"'-. ';' *: v
:' '.- ;'.:!.!-'s -.ercar e -r, or did .ttc.--

to Bothwell, the power and honours with which she
loaded him, the manner in which she fuirffred his trial
to be carried on, and the indecent speed with which fbie
married a man stained with lb many crinies, raile
ftu-on suspicions ot the former, and p: t-he lI.ter be-
yond all dotut. To have funfered the fuprenic power
(os continue in the hands of an airrbitiout man, capable
of the mo.fi atrocious and delperate aCtion-s, would ha\ve
.been dilgraceSul to the nation, difh.noirabie to the
queen, and dangerous to tile prince. l'ccouri w.as
therefore had to arms. The queen had been comptelled
to abandon a huiband so unworthy of lihrlclf. But her
affction toward him still continuing unabated; her in-
dignation againfi the authors of this fiparation bhein
vilibte, and often expressed in the flrongelt terms; they,
by refloring her to her ancient autlhoritv, would have
armed her .:inlh power to deltroy thlemlelves, ha.'e en-
abled her to recal Bothilwell, and have afforded her ao
opportunity of pur.suing schemes fatal to the natiocn
with greater ea;geneli, and with more filccefs. Nothing
therefore remained, but by one bold adlion to deliver
themselves and their country from all fiture fears.
The expedient they had choIi-n was no lets rclpel'eful
Lo the royal blood, than ncc:t-rary for the public laiety.
While oue prince was fee aflde as incapable ofgovern-
ing, the crown was placed on his head v.,';o was the un-
doubted rrprtleitative of their ancient kings.
* Whatever'opinion posterity may tform on comparing
the argunents of the two contending parties, whitever
fcntiments we lAvy entertain concerning the juslicr and
necessity of that course which the contederates lIeld, it
cannot be denied this their conduct, lo fau' as rega'ldcd
themselves, was extrenely prudent. Other expedients,
icls rigorous towards Mllrv, might have beTn fiouiid
for fetiling the nation; but, after the injuries wlhicl
they had already oicered the quere, there was nmll c i
efftc:alal for fcuring their ou n lal'ty or perpctuatilg
heir own power.

To a great part of the nation the conduif of the
confcderates appecaird not only s ii but ,L:t. ihe

B

king's accefion to the throne was every where pro-
claimed, and his authority submitted to without oppo-
fition. Though several of the nobles were ftiH assem-
bled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into some
combination againit his government, an afficiation for
supporting it was formed, and signed by so many per-
fcns of power, and influence throughout the nation, as
entire'i dircouraged the attempt*.

The return of the earl of Murray about this time, ad-

ded strength to the party, and gave it a regular and si-
nifned f r-n. Soon after the murder of the king, this
non'eman had retirn.:l into France, upon what pretence
hiftoriins do not mention. During his residence there,
he had Ield a clefe corrcfpondcnce with the chiefs of
the confederacy, ar.l a' their desire lie now returned.
lie seemed at firit unwilling to accept the office of re-
gent. This hesitation cannot be arcribed to the scruples
either of difEdence or of duty. Murray wanted neither
the abilities nor the ambition which entitled him to
aspire to this high dignity. lie had received the firtf
accounts of his promotion with the utmost fatisfadtion;
but by appearing to continue for frme days in suspense,
he gained time to view with attention the ground on
which he was to aa; to balance the strength and re-
sources of the two contending factions, and to examine
whether the foundation on which his future fame
and success muff reft were found and firm.

Before he declared his final resolution, he waited on

Mary at Lochleven. This visit to a sifter, and a queen,
in a prison, from which he had neither any intention to
relieve her, nor to mitigate the rigour of herconfinement,
may be mentioned among the circunftances which dif-
cover the great want of dclicaev and refinement in that
age. Murray, who was naturally rough and uncourt-
ly in his manners, expoftulated so warmly with the
queen concerning her past conduft, and charged her
faults so home upon her, that Mary, who had flattered
herself with more gentle and brotherly treatment from
him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely

*Anders. vol. ii. 2z. t Keith, 96.

to defpairt. This interview, from which Murrav could
reap no political advantage, and wherein he dilcovered
a spirit ti severe and uurelcnting, may be reclioned a-
mnong the inmef bitter circuniltances il Mary's life, and
is certainly one of the moil unjuftifiabl- steps ic his con-
dua.

Soon after his return from .ochleven, Murray accept-

ed the office of regent, and began to act in that cha-
ratler without opposition.

Amidst ib many great and unexpeAted events, the

fate of Bothwell, thec hief cause of them all, hath been
almost forgotten. Alter his flight from tle confede-
rates, he Lurked for some time amrong his vasTals in tihe
neighbourhood of Dunbar. But fiudiing it impossible
for him to make head in thatt coluntrv against his ene-
mies, or even to secure hindelf fL.io tiheir pureuit, he
fled for flelter to his kinlinlan the biriop ot Mlurray;
and when he, overawed by the confederates, u a obli-
ged to abandion him, he retired to the Orkney isles.
.llunted fromn pl:ce to place, deserted by x.is friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers as'deli)erate as him-
ielf, he' flakrcd at ol!ce the lnijeries of infamyr and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a courle wihicil
added to his infa;nm. i -le armed a se w Ijnall flips,
which had acc-mpanied him from Dunbar, and attack-
iig every vellel whichi fell in his way, endeavoured to
procure subsistence for himself and his followers by pira-
cy. , irkaldy and Murray of Tullibardin were sent out
against him by the .confldeerate; and surprising nim
while he rode at auchor, scattercd his fniall fleet, took:
a part of it, and obliged jinl to fly with a single thip
towards Nor.way. On that coal, lie fcll in Mrith a vel-
fel richly laden, and immediately attacked it; the Nor-
wegians failed with armed boats to its afliiltnce, and as-
ter a desperate fight, Bothwell and all his crew wvere
taken prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he uwas treated at first with all the indig-
pity and rigour which the odious crime ofpiLac)y m;-

IKeith, 443, 4,6.

B

rited. His real character was soon discovered; and
though it saved him from the infamous death to which
his aflfciates were condemned, it could neither procure
him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his imprison-
ment. He languihed ten years in this unhappy con-
dition; melancholy and despair deprived him ofreafon,
and at last he ended his days, unpitied by his country-
men, and unassisted by ftrangerst. Few men ever ac-
corrplifhed their ambitious projects by worse means, or
reaped from them less fatisfation. The early-part of
his life was refilefs and enterprising, full of danger and
vicissitudes. His enjoyment of the grandenr, to which
he attained, by so many crimes, was extremely short;
imbittered b nmuch anxiety, and disquieted by many
fears. In his later years he suffered the most intolera-
ble calamities, to which the wretched are subje6t, and
from which persons , ho have moved in so high a
sphere are commonly exempted.

The good effecls of Murray's arcefion to the regen-

cy were quickly felt. T'he party forming for the queen
was weak, irresolute, and disunited; and no sooner was
the government of the kingdom in the hands of a man
so rtemarkable both for his abilities and popularity,
tha- tile nobles, of whom it was compolcd( loft all
hopes cf gaining ground, and began to treat separately
wilh :h -:gent. So many of them were brought to
ackne.-iridge the king's auiority, that scarce any ap-
pearalnc' of orofit'.)n to tle established government
was left in the kingdom. Had they adlhered to the
queen with anyv irmnefs, it is probable, from Elizabeth's
difpofit'io at that tnme, that she wonld have affbrded
th-::n Inch affifiance .a might have enabled them to
face their enemies in the field. Bur there appeared so
little vigour cr harmonym in their councils, that she was
discouraged from efpoufir; their cause; and the regent,
taking advantage of their krtuation, obliged them to
submit to his government, without granting any terms,
either to themselves or to the queen ;.

The regent was no leis fi:ccefsf'ul in his attempt to

f Mtlv. 168. K Ci:0l, 447, 40 4r1·3.

get into his hands the places of strength in the king-
dom. Balfour, the deputy-governor, surrendered the
cafileof Edinburgh; and as-the reward of his treachery,
in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms of great
advantage to himself Thegovernor ofDunbarwho dif-
covered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate:
some other small forts surrendered without reliflance.

This face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the

regent to call a meeting of parliament. Nothing was
wanting to confirm the king's authority, and the pro-
ceedings of the confederates, except the approbation of
this supreme court; and atter the success which had at-
tended all their measures, there could be little doubt of
obtaining it. The.numbers that resorted to an aflTm-
bly which was called to deliberate on matters of so
much importance weregreat. The meeting was open-
ed with the utmost solemnity, and'all its adts passed
with much unanimity Many, however, of the lords
who had discovered the warmest attachment to the queen
were present. But they had made their peace with the
regent. Argyll, Huntly, and Herries acknowledged
openly in parliament that their behaviour towards the
king had been undutiful and criminal t.. Their com-
pliance in this manner, with the measures of the re-
gent's party, was either the condition on which they
were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof of
the sincerity of their reconcilement.

The parliament granted every thing the confederates

could demand, either for the safety of their own persons,
or the security of that form of government which they
had eftablilhed in the kingdom. Mary's resignation of
the crown was accepted, and declared to.be valid. The
king's authority and Murray's election were recognised
and confirmed. - The imprisoning the queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronoun-
ced lawful. The letters which Mary had written to
Bothwell were produced, and she was declared to be ac-
ceffary to the murder of the kingt. At the fame time

Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Appendix, No. XXIV.

t Good. .ol. ii. 66. Andcrf. vol. ii. 206.

all the ass3 of parliament, of the year one thousand five
hundred and fitv, in favour of the protestant religion,
were publicly ratified; new fiatutes to the fame purpose
were enated; and nothing that could contribute to
root out the remainls of popery, or to encourage the
growth of the Reformation, was neglc.'ed.

It is observable, however, that the fame parsimonious

spirit pre.ailed in this parliament as in that of the year
!560. The proteflant clergy, notwiLhltanding malny
,dio--uragements, and their extreme poverty, had for
seven years performed all religious offices in the king-
d.m. The expedients fallen upon for their fublltent e
had hitherto proved ineffeltual, or were intended to be
so. But notwithltanding their known indigence, and
the warm remonstrances of the aflemblv of the churrh
which met this year, the parliament did nothing more
for their relief, than prtfcribe forme new regu lations con-
cerning the payment of the thirds of bencfices, which
did not produce any cosfiderable change in the situation
ps the clergy.

A few days after the diffoluuion of parliament, four

of Bothwell's dependents were convi'ed of being guil-
ty of the kieig's murder, and fuffcred death as traitors.
'i heir confefions brought to light many circumitances
relative to the manner of committing that barbarous
crime; bat they were persons of low rank, and feemll
i.o: to hiave been admitted into the Izcrets ot the coiipli-
jac v .

rot-.-ithfanding the universal submission to the re-

gtnt's authority, there fiil abounded in the kingdom
many secret murmurs and cabals. The partisans of the
hocre of Hamilton reckoned Murray's promotion an in-
jury to the duke of Chatelherault, who, as first prince
of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undubted right
to be regent. 'The length and rigour of Mary's susser-
ings began to move many to commiserate her cafe. All
who leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreadet
rhe tffe6ts of Murray's zeal. And he, though his abili-
';cs Hice great, did not possess the talents reqtlilite fi'L

Aundcrl vol. ii. 165.

soothing the rage or removing the jealousfes of the dif-
ferent factions. By insinuation or address he might
have gained or softened many who had opposed him;
but he was a firanger to these gentle arts. His virtues
were severe; and his deportment towards his equals,
cfpecially after his elevation to the regency, distant and
haughty. This behaviour offended some of the nobles,
and alarmed others. The queen's faction, which had
been so easily dispersed, began again to gather and to u-
nite, and was secretly favoured by some who had hither-
to zealously concurred with the confederatest.

Such was the favourable disposition of the nation to-

wards the queen, when she recovered her liberty, in a
manner no less surprising to her friends, than unexpecl-
ed by her enemies. Several attempts had been made to
procure her an opportunity of escaping, which some un-
foreseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers, had
hitherto disappointed. At last Mary employed all her
art to gain George Douglas, her keeper's brother, a
youth of eighteen. As her manners were naturally as-
fable and insinuating, she treated him with the most flat-
tering diftinstion; The even allowed him to entertain
the molt ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expref.
sions as if (he would chufe him for her husband§. At
his age, and in such circumstances, it was impossible to
resist such a temptation. He yielded, and drew others
into the plot. On Sunday the second of May, while
his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family were
retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found
means to steal the keys out of his brother s thamber,
and opening the gates to the queen and one of her maids,
locked them'behind her, and then threw the keys into
the lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the boat
which was prepared for her, and on reaching the fIore
was received with the utmoftjoy, by Douglas, lord Sea-
ton, and fir James Hamilton, who, with a few attend-
ants, waited for her. She instantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie, lord Seaton's
feat in Weft Lothian. She arrived there that night,

t Melv. 179. § Keith, 469, 481. Note.

without being pursued or interrupted. After halting
three hours she set out for Hamilton; and travelling at
the fame pace, she reached it next morning.

On the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, whom,

in their present disposition, a much fmnaller accident
would have roafed, ran to arms. In a few days her
court was filled with a great and splendid train of no-
bles, accompanied by flch numbers of followers as form-
ed an army above fix thousand firong. In their.pirel'nce
she declared that the resignation of the crown, ajnd the
other deeds which she had signed during her impriflon-
ment, were extorted from bher by fear. Sir Robert Mci-
vil corfiFmed her declaration; and on that, as well as
on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief
men of her party pronounced all these tranfaations void
and illegal. At the fame time an alociation was form-
ed for the defence of her person and authority, znd' sub-
fcribed by nine -earls, nine bithops, eightecn lords, and
many gentlemen of diftintion0;. Among them we
find several who had been present in the last parliament,
'and who had signed the counter afiociation in defence
of the king's governmuelt; but such sudden chang-s
were then so common as t(. be no matter of reproach.

At the time when the queen madci her escape the re-

gent was at Glasgow, ho!ding a court of ijfti;e. An e-
vint so contrary to their expecstations, and so fatal to
their fi-hemes, gave a great fhotk to his adherents. Ma-
ny of them appeared wavering and irrcfrlIrte; otlierl
began to carry on private negotiations v ith the queen;
and some openly revotked to her fide. In so difficult a
junAure, where his own fame, ani} the being of the par-
ty, dependcd on his choice, the regent's most faithful
afrocites were divided in opinion. Some advised hini
to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The queen's
army was already strong, and only eight miles difitnt;
the adjacent country was fll} of the friends arld depen-
dents of the house of Hamilton, and other lords of the
queen's facion; Glasgow was a large and unfortified
uown; his own train consisttd of no greater number

than was usual in times of peace; all these reasons plead-
ed for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments
were urged of no inconliderable weight. The citizens
of GJafgow were well affected to the cause; the vassals
of Glencairn, Lennox, and SemrTle, lay near at hand,
and swere both numerous and full of zeaf; succours might
arrive from other parts of ehe -kingdom in a few days;
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as
upon numl'bers; reputation is gaincd or loft by the filr-
flep one takes. In his eircumfiances, a retreat would
be attended with all the ignominy of a flight, and wouild
at once dilpirit his fiiends, and inspire his enemies with
boldinefs. Inr such dangerous exigencies as this, the fu-
periority of Murray's genius appeared, and enained him
both to chiife with wisdom and to aóq with vigoar.
He declared against retreating, and fixed his head quar-
ters at (sllfowv. And while he amused the queen tor
inme days, by pretending to hearken to some overtures,
u hich she mnade for accommodating their differences, he
was ernployed, with the uitHofit indufiry, in drawing to-
ectl cr his adhl:rents fiom different parts of the king-
doin. 1--e was soon in a condition to take the field;
andl though far inferior to the enemy in numnbr, he
confided so much in lhe valour of his troops a.nd the et;-

-pericoee ofhis officers, that he broke off the negotiatiort
adl determintd tc, hazard a battle'.

Ar the fame time, the aq;cen's generals had commanld.

e! hcr- army to move. 'i'heir intention was to condual
.err to Diuniarton caRle, a place of great flrength,
vihich the repel hadli nnt been alie to wrest out of tl;h
bands of lord irlInii the governor; hut if the enemy
filouidl cudcvp-lr to interrupt their march, tlhcv relol--
ed not to decline an engagement. In Mary's fituatirn,
no relliitiom coulld be mre imprudent. A part only
of her loIn-cs was alltiihltl. Illuctly, ()gilvie, anil the
n:orth;ern clan., were I ion xpcdt(d; her lilirTringa had
reimoved or (tdinil!',l the prejudices oft iany among
her' liuhii' ; tlhe addril's wit h which nle fiurmlonnted
*.c ;ai.i , -. tl at olitrtroiitcd her el.ape dazz;ed and in-

"' uch.n. j39.

terested the people; the sudden confluence of so many
nobles added luitre to her cause; file might assuredly
depend on the friendship and countenance of France;
ihe had reason to expet the protection of England; her
enemies could npt possibly look for support from that
quarter. She had much to hope from pursuing flow
and cautious measures; they had every thing to fear.

But Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and

her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden
transition from the depth of distress, to such an unusual
appearance of prosperity, that ihe never doubted of fuc-
cess. Her army, which was almot double to the enemy
in number, confAted chiefly of the Hamiltons and their
dependents. Of these the archbishop of St. Andrews
had the chief direcion, and hoped, by a victory, not
only to crush Murray, the ancient enemy of his house,
but to get the person of the queen into his hands, and
to oblige her-either to marry one of the duke's sons, or
at least to commit the chief diretion of her affairs to
himself. His ambition proved fatal to the queen, to
himself, and to his family t.

Mary's imprudence in resolving to fight was not

greater than the ill conduot of her generals in the battle.
Between the two armies, and on the road towards Dum-
barton, there wai an eminence called Langfide-hill.
This the regent had the precaution to leize, and posted
his troops in a small village, and among fme gardens
and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous situation
he waited the approach of the enemy, whose fuperiori-
ty in cavalry could be of no benefit to them on such bro-
ken ground. The Hamiltons, who composed the van-
guard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that they put them-
selves out of breath, and left the main battle far behind.
The encounter of the fpearmen was fierce and defpe-
rate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were expoled
on the one flank, to a continued fire from a body oi
mufqueteers, attacked on the othe. by 'he regent's most
choice troops, and not supported by the reft of the
eueen's army, they were loon obliged to give grrund,

I' And-rf. -c!.. i", *-. M3. ·. 11?.

and the rout immediately became universal. Few vic-
tories, in a civil war, and among a barbarous people,
have been pursued with less violence, or attended with
less bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field: in the
flight very few were killed. The regent and his prin-
cipal officers rode about, beseeching the soldiers to spare
their countrymen. The number of prisoners was great,
and among them many persons of diftinstion. The
regent marched back to Glasgow, and returned public
thanks to God for this great, and on his lide, almost
bloodless victory ¶.

During the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at

,no great distance, and beheld all that passed in the field,
with such emotions of mind as are not eafilv dcl'ci-ibed.
When she saw the army, which was her lail hope,
thrown into irretrievable confusion, her spirit, which
all her past misfortunes had not been able entirely to
subdue, funk altogether. In the utmost conftlrnaion,
ihe began her flight, and so lively were her iinprliiorns
of fear, that ihe never doloed her eyes till {he reached
the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scot-
tifh miles from the place of battle 1.

These revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less

rapid than singular. In the short space of eleven days,
she had been a prisoner at the mercy of her most inve-
terate enemies: she had seen a powerful army under
her command, and a numerous train of nobles at her
devotion; and now she was obliged to fly, in the ut-
most danger of her life, and to lurj,, with a few attend-
ants, in a corner of her kingdom. She did not think
herself safe, even in that retreat; and her fears im-
pelled her to an action, the most unadvised as well as
the mofl unfortunate in her whole life. This was her
retiring into England, a ftep which, on many accounts,
ought to have appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Before Mary s arrival in Scotland, mutual distrust

and jealousies had arisen between her and Elizabeth.
All their fil)fequent tranfadlions had contributed to

l Keith, 477. jld. 48x.
Vol. II. C

exasperate and inflame these pafions. She had endea-
voured, by ferret negotiations and intrigues, to di-
flurb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to
advance her own pretensions to the English crown.
Eiizaheth, who poff'hed greater power, and aded
wi;th irs reserve, had openly supported Mary's rebel-
lious LuhieSs, and formented all the dissensions and trou-
bies in xhich her reign had been involved. The max-
ims of policy flill autherifed that queen to pursue the
fame course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion she
effri.ually fccured the peace of her own kingdom.
The regent, after his victory, had marched to Edin-
burgh; and not knowing what course the queen had
taken, it was several days before he thought of pur-
suing her*. She might have been concealed in that
retired corner, ameng subjects devoted to her interest,
un'li her party, -hlich was dilperfed rather than broken
by the late defeat, fhoul t gather such firength that Ihe
c' t'ld again appear with safety at their head. There
was not any danger wh ch fne ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throw herlelf into the hands of an enemy,
from whiom Te had already luffered so many injuries,
and who was prompted, both by inclination and by
interest, to renew them.

But, en the other hand, during Mary's confinement,

Elizabeth had declared against the proceedings of her
futibjcs, and solicited for her liberty with a warmth
which had all the appearance of sincerity She had
invittd her to take retnhe in England, and had promif-
ed to meet her in person, and to give her such a recep-
tion as was due to a queen and an allyt. Whatever
apprrenllfion Elizabcth might entertain of Mary's de-
f;ins while Ihe had power in her hands, the was at pre-
ient the nbjcel, not of fear, but of pity; and to take ad-
,antage of her situation, would be both ungeneroms
a.nd inhumane. The horrors'of a prison were fresh in
Mary's menmorv, and if she should lall A second thne in-
to the hands cf her fubje6ts, there was no irnjury to
which the presumption of luccefa might not embolden
*QCawf. Mem.59. Camid. 489.Auderf vo!.iv.99.l20.

them to proceed. To attempt eliaping into France
was dangerous, and in her situation alimolt inpoli';le;
nor could ihe bear the thoughts of appaarine as an exile
and a fugitive in that kingdom where ihe had once en-
joyed all the fplendnur of a queen England remained
her only asylum; and in spite of the entreaties of lord
Herries, Fleming, and her olhrr attenlants, who con-
jured her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was in-
vincible, and the relolved to fly thither Hi-rries, by
her command, wrote to Low thrr, the deputy governor
of Carlisle, to know what reception he would give her;
.and before his answer could return, hcr fear alnd im-
patienc were to great, that she got into a fither-boat;
and with about twenty attendants landed at Wr.rking-
ton in Cumberland, and thence the was conduced with
many marks of rclpec to Carlisle *.

So soon as Mary arrived in England, /he wrote a long

letter to the queen, representing, in the itrongit terms,
the injuries which she had liffered from her own lub-
jeuts, and imploring that pity and affitlance which her
present situation demanded t. An event Ib extrjardi-
nary, and the condu& which might be proper in con-
feqrurnce of it, drew the attention, and employed
the thoughts or Elizabeth and her council. If their
deliberations had been influenced bv cunsiderationsE of
juflice or generolity alone, they would not have tound
them long or intricate. A q(ucei, vanquished by her
own fubjccts, and threatened by them with the loss of
her liberty, or of her life, had fled from their violence,
and thrown herself into the arms of her nrareft neigh-
hour and ally, from whom she had received repeated
assurances of friendship and protection. Thelc circum-
stances entitled her to refpccct and to compalfion, ant
required that Ihe Should either be restored to her own
kingdom, or at least be left at full liberty to seek aid
from any other quarter. But with Elizabeth and her
counsellors the question was not, what was moit just

' Keith, 483. Anders. vol. iv. z. t Id. 29.

C

or generous, but what was most beneficial to herself,
and to the Engliih nation. Three different resolutions
might have been taken with regard to the queen of
Scots. To reinflate her in her throne was one; to al-
low her to retire into France was another; to detain
her in England was a third. Each of there drew con-
sequences after it, of the urmoft importance, which were
examined, as appears' from papers still extantt, with
that minute accuracy which Elizabeth's ministers em-
ployed in all their consultations upon affairs of moment.

To reflnre MIry to the full exercile of the royal au-

thority in Src,tlatd, they obftrved, would render her
more powerful than ever. The nobles who were most
firmly attached to the English interest 'would quickly
feel the utmost weight of her resentment. And as the
gratitude of princes is seldom strong or lasting, regard
to her own interest might soon efface the memory of
her obligations to Elizabeth. and prompt her to renew
the alliance of the Scottili nation with France, and re-
vive her own pretensions to the English crown. Nor
was it possible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottiih
queen by any conditions that would prevent these dan-
gers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and power.
ful. Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and cou-
rage; a single vicory might give them the superiority,
which they had loft by a tingle defeat, and render Ma-
ry a more formidable rival than everto Elizabeth.

The dangers arising from suffering Mary to retire in-

to France, were no lets obvious. The French king
could not refuse his afliflance towards restoring his
sifter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth would once
more fee a foreign army in the island, overawing the
Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the com-
motions in France, on account ot religion, were fettled,
the princes of Lorrain might resume their ambitious pro-
jeats, and the united forces of France and Scotland might
invade England where it is weakest and molt defenceless.
Nothing therefore remained but to detain her in

t Anders vol. iv. 34, 99, 1o2.

England, and to permit her either to live at liberty
there, or to confine her in a prison. The former was
a dangerous experiment. Her court would become a
place of resort to all the Roman catholics, to the di'as-
felred, and to the lovers of innovation. Though E-
lizaheth affedled to reprelent Mary's pretensions to the
English crown as altogether extravagant and ill-found-
ed, file was not ignorant that they did not appear in
that light to the nation, and that many thougiht them
preferable even to her own title. If the acivity of her
emissaries had gained her so many abettors, her ownl
perlbnal influence was much more to be dreaded; her
beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the admiratioa
and pity which they wruld excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party T.

It was indeed to be apprchcudcd that the treating

Mary as a prisoner would excite universal indlignation.
agalnil Elizabeth, and that by this iuncx.ltl l ecd Lsvcritv
towards a queen, who implored, and to whomn he iad
promised her proteclion, she would forteit the praise of
jtflice and humanity, which was hithlrto due to her
administration. But the English monarchs were o!ten
so solicitous to secure their kingdom againlt the Scots,
as to be little ferupulous about the means which they
employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had fceized the
heir of the crown of Scotland, who .wa forced by the
violence of a form to take re!uge in one of the ports of
his kingdom i and. in contempt of the rights of hol)ita-
lity, without regarding his tender age, or the tears and
intrcaties of his tather, detained him a prisoner for many
years. This action, though detefled by poftirity, Eliz-
abeth resolved now to imitate. lHeS virtue was not
more proof than that of Henry had been, againit the
temptations of interest; and the possession of a prefiint
advantage was preferred to the profpcdt of future fanit.
I'he lalisfaaion which file felt in mortitying a rival,
'whose beauty and accompliihinents he envied, had
perlaps no less influence than political considerations,

tAndcrf. vol. iv. 56, 6o.

C3

in bringing her to this resolution. But at the fame
time, in order to screen herfeif from the censure which
this condc,:C merited, and to make 'her treatment of
the Scottih queen look like the effect of necessity ra-
ther than choice, Ihe det-rniir.er to put on the appear-
ance of concern ftin her i:',trtle, and of deep sym-
pathv with her funcrines.

With this view she infitntly despatched lord Scroope,

warden of the werft marches, and fir Francis Knolulys,
her-vice-chatmbcrlain, to the queen of Scots, with letters
full of expreffons of kindness and condolence But at
the fame time they had private inliruclions to watch
all her motiow, ald to take care that Ihe should
not escape into lIer own kingdom*. On their ar-
rival, Mlary t(Iinanhled a personal interview with
the qucen, that Ihe mieht lay before her the in-
juries which Ifc thad fi:iffred, and recei';e from her
those friendriv ofilces which she had been encouraged
to expet. Tlhey asnfwered, that it was with reluctance
this honour w*as at prefint denied; that while she lay
under the imrp.tation of a crime so horrid as the mur-
der of her l-;.£band, their miflrefs to whom lhe was
so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a stain
upon her own reputation, admit her into her pretence;
but as soon as she had cleared herlelf from that asper-
sion, they pron;ifed her a reception suitable to her dig-
nity, atn aid proportioned to her distress t.

Nothing could be more artful than this pretence;

and it was the occasion of leading the queen of Scots
into the fiare in w -ich Elizabeth and her ministers
wished to entangle her. Mary exprefled the utmofl
surprise at this unexpecled manner of evading her re-
quest; but as she cculd not believe so many professions
of friendship to be void of sincerity, she frankly offered
to submit her cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth,
and undertook to produce such proofs of her own inno-
cence, and of the falsehood of the accusations brought
againfi her, as should fully remove the scruples, and
ffisfy the delicacy of the English queen. This was

A.ntC. vol. iv. 36, 70, 92. tlbid. vol. iv. 8, 55.

the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to bring the
matter. In conecquence of this appeal of the Scottish
queen, she became the umpire between her and her
fubjetls, and foresaw that she would have it entirely in
her own power to protract the inquiry to any length,
and to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties.
In the mean time, she was furniflhed with a plausible
realbn for keeping her at a distance from court, and
for refuting to contribute towards replacing her on the
throne. As-Mary's conduCt had been extremely in-
cautious, and the presumptions of her guilt were ma-
ny and firong, it was not impofliblc her fiibjects might
make good their charge againfl her; and if this fiould
be the result of the inquiry, (he would, thenceforth,
cease to be tl-e objec& of regard or of companion,
and the treating her with coldness and neglect would
merit little censure. In a matter so dark and myfteri-
ous there was no probability that Mary could bring
proofs of her innocence, Ib incontefled, as to render the
conduct of the Englifi queen' altogether culpable;
and, perhaps, impatience under refiraint, suspicion of
Elizabeth's partiality, or the dilcoverv of her artifices,
might engage her in lich cabals as would jufiify the
uling her with greater rigour.

Elizabeth early for-faw all those advantages which

would arile from an inquire into the conducA of the
Scottibh queen carried on under her direction. There
was fonie dalngr, however, that Mlary might difeover
her frcret intentions too lioon, and by receding from
the offer w hith (he had made, endeavour to difap-
point them. But even in that event, she determined
not to drop the inquiry, and had thought of several
different expedients for carrying it on. The counters
of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accefuery to the
murder of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had im-
plored Elizabeth's justice, and folicired her, with many
tears, in her own name, and in her huiland's, to bring
the Scottilh queen to a trial for that crime*. The pa-

Camd. 4X2. Hayncs, 469.

rents of the unhappy prince had a just right to prefer
this accufatien; nor could ihe, who was their nearest
kinswoman, be condemned for lifiening to so equitable
a demand. Besides, as the Scottish nobles openly ac-
cufed Mary of the fame crime, and pretended to be
able to confirm their charge by sufficient proof, it would
be no difficult matter to prevail on them to petition
the queen of England to take cognizance of their pro-
ceedings againfl their sovereign; and it was the opinion
of the English council that it would be reasonable to
comply with the requeftt. At the fame time the ob-
fo!ete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-
land began to be talked of; and on that account it was
pretended that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her subje&s belonged of right to Elizabeth t.
But though Elizabeth revolved all these expedients in
her mind, and kept them in reserve to be made use of
as occasion might require, Ihe wished that the inquiry
into Mary's condu&t should appear to be undertaken
purely in compliance with her own demand, and in
order to vindicate her innocence; and ib long as that
appearance could be preserved, none of the other ex-
pedi-l.ts were to be employed.

When Mary consented to submit her cause to Eliza-

beth. she was far from fufpeibng that any bad confc-
quencts could follow, or that any dangerous preten-
sions could be founded on her offer. She expe&ed that
Elizabeth herself would receive and examine her de-
ftncesl; she meant to confider her as an equal, for
whose fattsfaAion she was willing to explain any
part of her conduct that was liable to censure, not
to acknowledge her as a superior, before whom file
was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a
very different ftnfe on Mary's offer. She confidered
herielfas chosen to be judge in the controversy between
the Scottish queen and her subjects, and began to aat
in that capacity. She proposed to appoint commission-
ers to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wrote
to the regent of Scotland to empower proper persons

tAnderf. \ol. iv. 37 jlbi i l. Anders. cvol. iVo.

to appear before'them, in his name, and to produce
what he could allege in vindication of his proceedings
against his sovereign.

Mary had hitherto relied with unaccountable credu-

lity on Elizabeth's profcffions of regard, and expedted
that so many kind speeches would at last be accom-
panied with some suitable ations. But this proposal
entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived the
artifice of Elizabe:h's conduc, and saw what a diminu-
tion it would be to her own honour to appear on a level
with her rebellious fubjecs, and to hand together
with them at the bar of a lilperior and a judge. She
retracted the offer which she had made, and which had
been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her inten-
tion. She demanded with more earnestness than ever
to be admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote
to her in a strain very different from what she had for-
merly used, and which fully discovers the grief and
indignation that preyed on ler heart. " In my present

situation," fays she, " I neither will nor can reply
to the accusations of my fuhjee's. I am ready, of
"my own accord, and out of rieiidfhip to you, to fa-
' tisfy your scruples, and to vindicate my own con-
" dut. My fubjeEds are not mny equals; nor will I,

by submitting my cause to a judicial trial, ac-
knowledge them to be so. 1 fled into your

" arms, as into those of my nearest relation and
" molt perfect friend. I did you honour, as I ima-

gined, in choofing you, preferably to any other

"prince, to be the reflorer of an injured queen. Was
" it ever known that a prince was blamed for hearing
'in person the complaints of those who appealed to
" lis juflice againit the false acculations of their ene-
" mies? You admitted into your prelence my ballard

brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and yon
' deny me that honour! God forbid that I should be
"the occaflon of bringing any slain upon your repu-
" tation! I expected that your manner of treating me
" would have added luitre to it. Sufler me either to
"implore the aid of other princes hlolt delicacy on
" this head will be less, and their rtitntticnt of my

r" rongs greater; or let me receive from your hands

" that assistance which it becomes vou, more than any
" other prince, to'grant; and by that benefit bind me
" to vourfelf in the indissoluble ties of gratitude§."

This letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan,

but did not divert her from the prosecution of it. She
laid the matter before the privy council, and it was
there determined, notwithstanding the intreaties and
renonftrances of the Scottih quen, to go on with the
inquiry into her conduct, and until that were finilhed,
it was agreed that Elizabeth could not consistently with
her own honour, or with the fafetV of her government,
either give her the assistance which Ihe demanded, or
permit her to retire out of the kingdom. Left the
ihould have an opportunity of escaping; while she re-
fided so near Scotland, it was thought advisable to
remove her to tome place at a greater distance from the
borders '.

While the English court was occupied in there deli-

berations, the regent did not neglect to improve the
vi&ory at Langfide. That event was of the utmost
importance to him. It not only drove the queen her-
self out of the kingdom, but left her adherents dif-
perfed, and without a leader, at his mercy. lie l:emed
resolved, at first, to proceed against them with the ut-
most rigour. Six persons of some diftintion, who had
been taken prifoncrs in the battle, were tried and con-
demned to death as rebels against the king's govern-
ment. They were led to the place of execution, but
by the powerful intercession of Knox they obtained a
pardon. Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the
number, who lived to give both the regent and Knox
reason to repent of this commendable aCt of lenity t.

Soon after the regent marched with an army, con-

sifting of four thousand horse and one thousand foot,
towards the weft borders. The nobles in this part of
the kingdom were all the queen's friends; but as they
had not force sufficient to obftrudt his progress, he must

§Anders. vol. iv part i. 94. * Id. ibid. Ioa.

tCald. vol. ii. 99.

either have obliged them to submit to the king, or
would have laid waste their lands with fire and sword.
But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to keep Scotland
in confusion, by preserving the balance between the
two parties, and who was endeavouring to soothe the
Scottish queen by gentle treatment, interpored at her
desire. After keeping the field two weeks, the regent,
in compliance to the EngliSh ambassador, difniilfed his
forces; and an expedition which might have proved
fatal to his opponents, ended with a few ad{s of le-
verity t.

The resolution of the Englilh privy council, with re-

gard to Mary's person, was soon carried into execu-
tion; and, without regarding her rernonfirances or
complaints, Ihe was conducted to Bolton, a cafle of
lord Scroope's, on the borders of Yorkfllire T. ]n this
place, her correspondence with her friends in Scotland
became more difficult, and anqy profpecf of making
her escape was entirely cut off. She now felt herself
to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though treat-
ed as vet with the refpe&t due to a queen, her real con-
dition was that of a prisoner. Mary knew what it was
to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worfi of
all evils. While the remembrance of her late imprison-
ment was still lively, and the terror of a new one fil-
led her mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper juncture
to renew her former proposition, that the would susser
the regent and his adherents to be called into England,
and consent to their being heard in defence of their
own conducd '. And or her part, she promised, what-
ever Ihould be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all
her power and influence towards replacing Mary on her
throne, under a few limitations, which were far from
being unreasonable. Fear, impatience, delpair, as well
as this soothing promise, with which the proposition
was accompanied, induced the Scottifil queen to compl)-

In order to persuade Elizabeth that The desired no-

(Cald. vol. ii. 99. ¶Anderf. vol. iv. 14. See Ap-
pendix, No. XXV. *Anders. iv. part i. p. 1x, 12,

&c. Haynes, 468, &c.

thing to much as to render the union betwixt tlem as
lo{e as possible, fihe shewed a disposition to relax rf'me-
what in one point; with regard to which, during all
her pail and subsequent misfortunes, she was uniformly
inflexible. She expressed a great veneration for the
liturgy of the church of England; she was often pre-
sent at religious worship, according to the rites of the
reformed church; made choice of a protestant clergy-
man to be her chaplain; heard him preach against the
errors of popery with attention and seeming pleasure;
and discovered all the fvmptoms of an approaching con-
version'. Such was Mary's known and higotted at-
tachment to the popish religion, that it is impossible
to believe her sincere in this part of her conduct; nor
can any thing mnark more itrongly the wretchedness
of her condition, and the excess of her fears, than that
they betrayed her into diffinulation, in a matter con-
cerning which her sentiments were scrupulously deli-
cate.

At this time the regent called a parliament, in order

to proceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to ac-
knowledge the king's authority. The queen's facton
was alarmed, and Argyll and Huntly, wXhor Mary
had appointed her lieutenants, the one in the south,
and the other in the north of Scotland, began to as-
femble forces to obftruat this meeting Compafflon for
the queen, and envy at those who governed'in the
king' name, had added so much strength to the party,
that the regent would have found it difficult to with-
stand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause
to Elizabeth, ihe could not refute, at her de-ire, to
command her friends to lay down their arms, and to
wait patiently until matters were brought to a decision
in England. By procuring this cessation of arms, Eli-
zabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the regent's sac-
bun as (he had formerly given to the queen's t.

The regent, however, would not consent, even at E-

lizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of parliaiment§.

*And. vol. iv. part. i. I13. Haynes, 509. See Ap. No.
XXVI. tAnd. vol. iv. z15. §See Ap No. XXVII.

But we may ascribe to her influence, as well as to the
eloquence of Maitland, who laboured to prevent the one
half of his countrymen from exterminating the other,
any appearances of modl-ration which this parliament
diflovered in its proceedings. The most violent oppo-
nents of the king s government were forfeited; the reft
were allowed still to hope for favour[.

No sooner did the queen of Scots submit her cause to

her rival, than Elizabeth required the regent to fend to
York deputies properly inftruted for vindicating his
condua in presence of her commissioners. It was not
without hesitation and anxiety that the regent consent-
ed to this measure. HIis authority was already establish-
ed in Scotland, and confirmed by parliament. To sus-
ser its validity now to be called in queltion, and fubje&-
ed to a foreign jurifdifion, was extremely mortifying.
To accuse his sovereign before strangers, the ancient e-
pemies of the Scottifa name, was an odious taflk To
fail ip this accusation was dangerous; to succeed in it
was disgraceful. He dreaded the interposition of the
French king in its behalf. Jn his situation, and in a
matter which Elizabeth had so much at heart, her comn
mands were neither to be disputed nor disobeyed§.

The neceifity of repairing in person to York added

to the ignominy of the itep which he was obliged to
take. All his aibociates declined the office; they were
unwilling to expo'e thernfelves to the odium and danger
with which it was easy to foresee that the discharge of
it would be attended, unless he himself conlnted to share
there in common with them. The earl of Morton,
Bothwell bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn cominendator of
Dunfermling, and lo;d Linlfay, were joined with him
in commission. Macgill of Iankeilor, and Balnaves of
Hallhill, two eminent civilians, George Buchanan, Mur-
ray's faithful adherent, a man whose genius did honour
to the age, Maitland, and several others, were appoint-
ed to attend them as affillants. Maitland owed this di-
llincion to the regent's fear, rather than to his afc&tiuln.

i huch. 37r. § Buch. 37z. See Append. N.,. XXV11.
Vol. 1. I)

He had warmly remonstrated against this measure. He
wished his country to continue in friendship with Eng-
land, but rot to become dependent on that nation. He
was desirous of re-establishing the queen in some degree
of power, not inconsistent with that which the king pof-
sessed; and the regent could not, with safety, leave be-
hind him a man whole views were so contrary to his
own, and who by his superior abilities, had acquired an
influence it the nation, equal to that which others de-
rived from the antiquity and power of their families*.

Mary empowered Lefly bilhop of Ross, lord Living-

flon, lord Boyd, lord Herries, Gavin Hamilton commen-
dator of Kilwinning, fir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and
fir James Cockburn of Stirling, to appear in her namet.

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard duke of Nor-

folk, Thomas Ratcliffearl of Suffex, and fir Ralph Sad-
ler, her commissioners to hear both parties.

The 4th of October, I568, was the day fixed for o-

pening the cr.nirr-ce. The great abilities of the depu-
ties on both fides, the dignity of the judges before whom
they were to appear, the high rank of the persons whole
cause was to be heard, and the importance of the points
in dispute, rendered the whole tranfaftion no less illuftri-
ous than it was fiigular. The situation in which Eliza-
beth appeared, on this occasion, firikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an independent queen, and
the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was a prifuoer
in her hands, and appeared, by her axi,bafladors, before
her tribunal. The regent of Scotland, who represented
the majcfty, and poITeffed the authority of a king, flood
in person at her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose
power her anceflors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now absolutely at her disposal.

The views, however, with which the several parties

contented to this conference, and the issue to which they
expected to bring it were extremely different.

Mary's chief objedt was the recovering of her former
autihority. This induced her to content to a mealfur

* uch. 371. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv. x86, x88.

t Anders. vol iv. 33.

againlt which ihe had long Struggled. Elizabeth's pro-
mises gave her ground for entertaining hopes of being
restored to her kingdom; in order to which, (he would
have willingly made many conccflions to the king's par-
ty; and the influence of the English queen, as well as
her own impatience under her present Situation, might
have led her to many moret The regent aimed at no-
thing but securing Elizabeth's protection to his party,
and leems not to have had the moSt dillant thoughts of
coming to any composition with Mary. Elizaheth's
views were more va ious, and her fchelnes more intri-
cate. She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's ho-
nour, and solicitous that she hould wipe off the asper-
sions which blemished her character. This (he pretend-
ed to be the intention of the conference; amuting Mary,
and eluding the solicitations of the French and Spaniih
amhafadors in her behalf, by repeated promises of aflift-
ing her, as soon as she could venture to do so without
bringing disgrace upon herself. But, under this veil of
friend/hip and generoity, Elizabeth concealed sentiments
of a different nature. She expected that the regent
would accuse Mary of being accessary to the murder of
her huiband. She encouraged him, as far as decency
would permit, to take this delperate f ept. And as this
accusation might terminate in two different ways, she
had concerted measures for her future conduct flitable
to each of there. If the charge againfl Mary Should ap-
pear to be well-founded, (he relolved to pronounce her
unworthy of wearing a crown, and to declare that Ihe
would never burden her own confi:ience -with the guilt
of an action so detertable as the restoring her to her
kingdomn. If it Should happen, that what her accusers
alleged did not amount to a proof of guilt, but only of
mal-adminiftralion, (he determined to let on foot a trea-
ty for restoring her, but on such conditions as would
render her forever dependent on England, and the slave
of her own subjects§ As every tfep in the progress of

A Anderi. vol. iv. part ii. 33. t And. vol. iv. part ii. I .
45. Haynes,487. t And. vol. iv. part. ii. il. § Ib. i6.

Dz

the conference, as well as the final result of it, was in
E!izabeth's own power, she would flill be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses she would held; or if there
appeared to lhe any danger or inconveniencina pursuing
either of them, ihe might protrad the whole cause by
endless delays, and involve it in inextricable perplexity.

The conference, howtver, was opened with much so-

lemnitv. But the very first tep difeovered it to be Eli-
zabeth's intention to inflame, rather than to extingui/h,
the diffrenions and animofities among the Scots. No
endeavours were used to reconcile the contending par-
ties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the queen to offer pardon for what was pall, or her
fubjeAs to promile more dutiful oledience for the future.
On the contrary, Mary's commifioners were permitted
to prefer a complaint againfi the regent and his party,
containing an enumeration of their treasonable afRions,
of their seizin,, her person by force of arms, committing
her to prilon, compelling her to resign the crown, and
making use of her son's name to colour their ufurpa-
tion of the whole royal authority; and of all there enor-
mities they required such speedy and effecual redress,
as the injuries of one queen demanded from the justice
of another*

It was then expe&ed that the regent would have dif-

closed all the circuinftances of that unnatural :rime to
which he pretended the queen had been accefoiry, and
would have produced evidence in support of his charge.
But, far from accusing Mary, the regent did not even
answer the complaints brought against himself. He dif-
covered a reluctance at unde'taking that ofice, and start-
ed many doubts and scruple*, with regard to which he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herfelft. His re-
fervc and hesitation were no less surprising to the great-
er part of the Englith commniffioners than to his own as-
fociates. They knew that he could not vindicate his
own conduct without charging the murder upon the
queen, and he had not hitherto (hown any extraordina-
ry delicacy on that head. An intrigue, however, had

' Anders. vol. iv. part. ii 52. t Haynes, 478.

been secretly carried on, since his arrival at York, which
explains this mystery.

The duke of Norfolk was at that time the moll pow-

erful and most popular man in Englard. His wife wsas
lately dead; and he began already to form a project,
which he afterwards more openly avowed, of mounting
the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with the queen of
Scots. He law the infamy which would be the confe-
quence of a public accusation againtt Mary, and how
prejudicial it might be to her pretenlions to the English
succession. In order to save her from this cruel mortifi-
cation, he applied to Maitland, and expressed his afto-
niflhment at feeing a man of so much reputation for wis-
dom concurring with the regent in a meallre so diflo-
nourabie to themselves, to their queen, and to their
country; submitting the public tranlactions of the na-
tion to the judgment of foreigners; and publifliing the
ignominy, and exposing the falilts of tlhir . overeig:i,
which they were hound ir good policy, as well as in du-
ty, to conceal and to cover. It was enal for laitland,
whose sentiments were the fame with the duke's, to vin-
dicate his own conduct. He aflilred him, that he had
employed all his credit to dissuade his countrymen from
this measure, and w-ould fill contribute to the utmioft of
his power to divert them from it. IThis encouraged
Norfolk to communicate the matter to the regent. lie
repeated and enforced the fame arguments which he
had :fcd with Maitland. Ite u warn.l iin of the danger
to which he nimit expose hilmfelf ly f.,rh a violent ac-
tion as the plblir accusation o, his f-cl'.rign. Mary
would never fergive a man who l,,dl eniilavotuled to fix
fitch a Lrand of infamv on her character. If flie ever
rernvered any degree of power, his deltruclion would
he inevitable, and le would jiftlv merit it at her hanids.
N*or wvould Elizabeth screen hinl from this by a public
apli'bh:tion of his conduct. For whvatever evidence of
Mary's guilt he might produce, she was rcfolved to give
no ikfinitive fnentece in the caife. Let him only de-
man, that the matter should be 1roiilght to a decision
ininediately after hearing the proof, and lie would be

. j

fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions'
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be
for him to appear as the acc'rer of his own sovereign*.
The candour which Norfolk seemed todifcover in these
remonffrances, as well as the truth which they contain-
ed, made a deep impression on the regent. He daily
received the strongest afilrances of Mary's willingness
to be reconciled to him, if he abflained from accusing
her of such an odious crime, together with the denun-
ciations of her irreconcileable hatred, if he acted a con-
trary part t. All these considerations concurred in de-
termining him to alter his purpole, and to make trial
of the expedient which the duke had fuggefled.

He demanded therefore to be informed, before he

proceeded farther, whether the Englifl cormiffioners
were empowered to declare the queen guilty by a judi-
cial acu whether they would promise to pals fentenee
without delay; whether the queen ihould be kept under
such reflraint as to prevent her from difiurbing the go-
vernmcnt now cflablifhed in Scotland; and whether
Elizabeth. ii the approved of the proceedings of the
king's party, would engage to protec it for the future t.
The paper containing these demands was signed by
himfetl alone, without communicatin~ it to any of his
attendants, except Maitland and Miclvil§. Nothing
could appear more natural than the regent's solicitude
to know on what footing-he flood. To have ventured
on a itep so uncommon and dangerous, as the accusing
his Lovercigu, wiitLout previonfly alcertaining that he
might take it with fa.ety, would have been unpardon-
able imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expect
that he would have moved any fucl difficulty, had not
empowered her commislioners to give hin that satis-
fa-ion which he demanded. It became neceiuary to
transmit the articles to herself, and by the light in
which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to tee that he
wilhed that they fliould make no flight imprefflon on

Melv. 187. Haynes, 57., t Anders. vol. iv. part

ii. 77 Cood. vol. ii. ;57. Ste Append. No. XXIX.
.4-Andrlf. vol.i. . ' ^ ;.id, . v.l. iv. 6 iclv. 190

Elizabeth and herminifters. " Think not the Scots,"
said he, " over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us view their
c" condu&a as we would with our own to be viewed in

a alike situation. The game they play is deep; their
estates, their lives, their honour are at stake. It is

" now in their own power to be reconciled to their
" queen, or to offend her irrecoverably; and in a mat-
" ter of so much importance the utmost degree of cau-
" tion is not excessive'."'

While the Englilh commissioners waited for fuller in-

ftrutlions with regard to the regent's demands, he gave
in an answer to the complaint which had been offered
in the name of the Scottifl queen. It was expressed in
terms perfectly conformable to the system which he had
at that time adopted. It contained no insinuation of
the queen's being accessory to the munder of her hus-
hand; the hitternefs of fiyle peculiar to the age was con-
fiderably abated; and though he pleaded, that the in-
famy of the marriage with Bothwell made it neccfary
to take arms in order to diflolve it; though Mary's at-
tachment to a man so odious justified the keeping her
for some time under restraint; yet nothing more was
said on these fubjets than was barely requisite in his
own defence. The queen's commissioners did not fail
to replyt. But while the article with regard to the
murder remained untouched, these were o'tlv flirlmiih-
es at a diitance, of no confiquence towards ending the
contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her
commissioners.

The conference had hitherto been conducded in a

manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and pro-
duced none of those discoveries which (he had expected.
The distance between York and Lnmdon, and the necei-
fity of consulting her upon every difficult, which occur-
red, consumed much time. Nortolk's negotiation
with the Scottihi regent, however iecrctly carried on,
was not, in all probability, unknown to a princcTs lb re-
nr-kable for her sagacity in penetrating the dc:lig.: otr
Anders. vol. iv. 77. t i Ander. vol. iv. part ii. 6., ,o.

her enemies, and feeing through their deepest fchemest.
Intfead, therefore, of returning any answer to the re-
gent's demands, she resolved to remove the conference
to Weftminfler, and to appoint new commissioners, in
whom lhe could more abfolutelj confide. Both the
Scottiih queen and the regent were brought without
difficulty to approve of this resolution§.

We often find Mary boasting of the superiority of

her commilfloners during the conference at York, and
how, by the strength of thicr arguments, they confound-
ed her adversaries, and silenced all their cavils . The
dispute stood, at that time, on a footing which render-
ed her vitory not only apparent, but easy. Her par-
ticipation of the guilt of the king's murder was the on-
ly circumstance which could justify the violent pro-
ceeding of her fubjecs; and whilc they industriously
avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as much as
that of her adversaries by suppressing this capital ar-
gument.

Elizabeth resolved that Mary Whould not enjoy the

fame advantage in the conference to be held at Weft-
mintler. She deliberated with the utmost anxiety
how Ihe might overcome the regent's scruples, and
persuade him to accuse the queen. She considered of
the motl proper method for bringing Mary's commil-
fioners to aniwerfuch an accusation; and as the fore-
saw that the promises with which it was necessary to
allure the regent, and which it was impossible to conceal
from the Scottifl queen, would naturally exasperate her
to a great degree, she determined to guard her more
narrowly than ever; and though lord Scroop had given
her no reason to diflruft his vigilance or fidelity, yct
hecaufi he was the duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law,
ihe thought it proper to remove the queen as soon as
pcfiible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and to commit
her to the keeping of the earl of Shrewibury, to whom
that calle belongcdt.

Good. vol. ii. i60. Anders. vol. iii. 1.' § Ilaynes,

4. Anderf.vol. iv. 94. ' Good.ol. 186, 284, 35c.
ilayncs, 487.

Mary began to fufpe6t the design of this second con-

ference; and notwithstanding the satisfaction she expref-
fed at feeing her cause taken more immediately under
the queen's own eye , she framed her inltructions to her
commissioners in such a manner as to avoid being
brought under the necessity ofanfwering the acrufation
of her fubjeds, if they should be so desperate as to exhi-
bit one againfi her§. These suspicions were soon con-
firmed by a circunftance extremely mortifying. The
regent having arrived at London, in order to he prefcnt
at the conference, was immediately admitted into Eli-
zabeth's pretence, and received by her, not only with
respect, but with affcclinn. This Mary justly conrider-
ed as an o'ecn declaration of that queen's partiality
towards her adversaries. In the firfl emotions of her
rtfeiitme.t, she wrote to her conmnilfioners, and com-
m:.nde'l theln to complain, in the presence of the Eng-
lifh nobles and before the arrmbffadors of foreign princes,
of the uiFage The had hitherto met with, and the addi-
tional in;jries which The had reason to apprehend.
Her rehelli'ics fubjeiCs were allowed access to the queen,
she was excluded from her pretence; they enjoyed full
liberty, The languiihed under a long imprisonment;
they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending her-
feli fee laboured under every disadvantage. For thele
reasons fee once more renewed her demand of being
admitted into the queen's presence: and if that were de-
nied, she inflruCed them to declare, that she recalled
the consent which lhe had given to the conference at
Weltminfter, and proteltzd that whatever was done
there thould be held to he nul and invalid *.

This, perhaps, was the molt prudent refolition Ma-

ry could have taken. The pretences on which she de-
clined the conference were plausible, and the juncture
for offering them well chosen. But either the queen's
letter did not reach her commissioners in due time, or
they suffered thenmelves to be deceived by Elizabeth's

t Anders. vol. iv. 95. § Good. vol. ii. 349.

Good. voL ii. I84.

professions of regard for their mistress, and contented to
the opening of the conferencet.

To the commissioners who had appeared in her name

at York, Elizabeth now added fir Nicholas Bacon,
keeper of the great feal, the earls of Arundel and Lei-
cefter, lord Clinton, and fir William Cecil . The dif-
ficulties which obftrudced the proceedings at York were
quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given to
the regent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to
hesitate and raile objeotions as formerly. His negotia-
tions with Norfolk had been discovered to Morton bv
some of Mary's attendants, and he had communicated
it to Cecil§. His personal safety, as well as the conti-
nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By fa-
vouring Mary, the might at any time nrin him; and
by a question which (he artfully flarted, .oncerning the
person who had a right, by the law of Scotland, to go-
vern the kingdom during a minority, she let him fee,
that, even without restoring the queen, it was an easy
matter for her to deprive him of the supreme direc-
tion of affairs i. These considerations, which were
powerfully seconded by most of his attendants, at length
determined the regent to produce his accusation against
the queen.

He endeavoured to lessen the obloquy with which he

was sensible this action would be attended, by protest-
ing that it was with the utnloft relu&ance he undertook
this disagreeable talk; that his party had long suffered
their conduct to be mifccnftrued, and had bonle the
worst imputations in silence, rather than expose the
crimes of their sovereign to the eyes of fti angers; but
that now the insolence and importunity of the adverse
faction forced them to publish what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to con-
ceal'. These pretexts are decent; and had the party
discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the
queen's actions, in the reft of their conduct, might

+ Anders. vol. iii. 25. t Id. vol. iv. part ii. 99.

§ Mclv. 191. | Haynes, 484. Anders. vol. iv.pait
Ii 115.

have passel for the real principles by which they were
influenced. But their former treatment of the queen
renders it impossible to give any credit to these profef-
sions. And the regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a
situation, where no liberty of choice was left him; and
was obliged either to acknowledge himself to be guilty
of rebellion, or to charge Mary with having committed
murder.

The accusation itself was conceived in the firongeft

terms. Mary was charged, not only with having con-
sented to the murder, but with being accessary to the
contrivance and execution of it. Bothwell, it was pre-
tended, had been screened from the pursuits ofjuftice
by her favour; and ihe had formed designs no l!'s
dangerous to the life of the young prince, than fubver-
five of the liberties and conflitution of the kingdom.
Ifany of thele crimes hotild be denied, an offer was
made to produce the most ample and undoubted evi-
dence in confirmation of the charge'. '

At the next meeting of the commissioners, the earl

of Lennox appeared before them; and after bewailing
the tragical and unnatural murder of his Ion, he ins-
plored Elizabeth's jiflice againfl the queen of Scots,
u hor he acculed upon oath of being the author of that
crime, and produced papers, which, as he pretended,
would m. ke good what he alleged. The entrance of
a new acdor en the flage !o opportunely, and at ajunc-
ture so critical, can scarce he imputed to chance. This
contrivance was manifellly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy of the
Scottifi queen s.

Mary's ccmmiifloners expressed the utmoftfurprife

and indignation at the regent's presumption, in loading
the queen with calumnies which, as they affirmed, she
had so little merited. But, iiilead of attempting to vin-
dicate her h, iour, 1)v a rcIly to the charge, they had
recourse to r.n aricie in tlicir inflruAions, which they
had formerl-y I:cgldi.i to mention in its proper place.

*Andr'. .- ' l. ;r ii. i9. Id. iLbi. a2z.

They demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having
renewed their mifrefs's request of a personal interview,
they protested, if that were denied her, against all the
future proceedings of the commilffonerst. A protefla-
tion of this nature, offered jut at the critical time when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary,
and when the proofs in support of it were ready to be
examined, gave reason to suspect that ihe dreaded the
event of that examination. This suspicion received the
strongest confirmation from another circumitance, Ross
and Herries, before they were introduced to Elizabeth,
in order to make this proteflation, privately acquainted
Leicef.er and Cecil, that as their nriftrefs had from the
beginning discovered an inclination towards bringing
the differences between herself and her fubjeas to an a-
micable accommodation, so the was fill defimus, not-
n ithftanding the regent's audacious accusation, that they
should be terminated in that manners.

Such moderation is scarce compatible with the strong

resentment which calumniated innocence naturally feels,
or with that eagernfs to vindicate itself which it alwavs
discovers. In Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed
must he confidered as a confcfion of the weakness of
her cause. The known charader of her commissioners,
exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the sus-
picion of treachery. Some secret conviLtion, that the
conduel of their mistress could not bear so ftrid a fcr-u
tiny as muff be made into it, fetnes to be the most pro-
bable motive of this imprudent propoal by which they
cnideavoured to avoid it.

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded

her a pretence for rtjcicing it. She told Marv's corn
miflioners, that in the present juncture nothing con!,'
be so dishonourable to their miitrels as an accommod:.
tion; and that the matter would seem to he huddnle'
up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and ti
hide their shame; nor was it poible tha tat he could 1.

t Id. ibid. I,3, I58. &:.
I! Andcrfon, vol. iv. Fart ii. i.4. C,bba:a, ; 7.

admitted with any decency into her presence, while she
lay under the infamv of such a public accusation.

Upon thisrepilfe, Mary's conmimfioners withdrew;

and as they had declined anlwering, there seemed now
to be no further reason for the regent's -producing the
proofs in support of his charge. But without getting
these into her hands, Eiizabeth's schemes were incom-
plete; and ler artifice for this purpose a*s .as mean,
butas successful, as any she had hiliit rto emploved. She
commanded her comminlioners to tcltift her indignation
and displeasure at the regent's prelulllntion, in forgetting
so far the duty of a filbjecl as to accuil his livereign of
such atrocious crimes. ' I, in rdelr to re;.ain the good
opinion of such a powerful pl-otcclrefs, oifflrc to Ihew
that his accusations were not malicious nor ill grounded;
Then were produced and delivered to the Engliffi com-
yniffioners the at1s of the Scottifhi parliament in confirm-
ation of the regent's authority, and of thi queen's rcfig-
nation; the conteflions of the pefuons executed for the
king's murder; and the fatal calket which contained
the letters, fonnlts, and oontrascs, that have been alrea-
dy mentioned.

Elizabeth, having got these into her pofl-Tiion, began

to. lay aside the expressions of fricndihip and reliped
which she had hitherto uscd in all her letters to ihe Scot-
tiih queen. She now wrote to her in ficlh ternis, as if
the prefiumptions of her guilt had amounted almost to
certainty; Ihe blamed her for refuting to vindicate her-
self from an accusation which could not be left unan-
fwered, without a manifest injury to her charactr; alid
plainly intimated, that unllis that were done, no change
w·ould be made in her prel;.it itu.tion . She hoped
that luchl a discovery ol her Itntiments would intinlidate
Mary, who was scarce recovered from the flock of thc
regent's attack on her reputation, and force her to con-
firm her relignation of the croun, to ratify uVlurray's
authority as regent, aid to conlent that both herelfand
her son thould retGle in England, under. lEnli.l urot-i,.

6 Anders. vol. iv. 79, j83. Good. vpl. i. zv,
Vol. I, E

tion. This fchemc Elizabeth had much at heart; (he
proposed it both to Mary and to her commissioners,
and negle6led no argument nor artifice, that could pof-
sibly recomnend it. Mary saw how fatal this would
prove to her reputation, to her pretensions, and even to
her personal safety. She rejected it without hesitation.
" Death," said fle, " is less dreadful than such an igno-
'n minious ftep. Rather than give away, with my own
" hands, the -rcwn which descended to me from my
" ancestors, I will part with life; but the last words I
" utter, fall be those of a queen of Scotland '."

At the fame time she seems to have been sensible how

open her reputation lay to censure, while she suffered
such a public accusation to remain unanswered; and
though the conference was now dissolved, she empower.
ed her conmmiffioners to present a reply to the allegations
of her enemies, in which ihe denied, in the strongest
terms, the crimes ir.puted to her; and recriminated up.
on the regent and his party, by accusing them of hav-
ing deriled and executed t.e murder of the kingt. The
regent and his afforiates aftirted their innocence with
great w.varith. Mlary continued to infit on a person-
al inrtrview, a con'.ition which ihe knew would never
he granted §. ELzaheth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evi!ei:t fron. tile delays, the evasions,
and filbterfi)gcs to which both qluens had recourse by
turn, that Mair- avi:c'ed, and Elizabeth did not defirc
to make any f'urthcr progress in the inquliry.

The regent was now impatient to return into Scot-

land, wvhlie his adIverfaris vwere endeavouring, in his
absence, to raise some commotio:ls. Before he set out,
he was called into the p:-ivy council, to receive a final
declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. Cecil acquainted
him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had been
obitaed to his conduci, which she could reckon detri-
mental to his honrur, or inconfifient with his duty; nor
had he, on the other hand, produced cliy thing agaiinf

* Hayncs, 4,)7. See App. No. XXX. Good. vcl.

i. -Ib. .

:I7.
i Giccd. ii. ;.. § Ibid. : .°. Cabbai:, 57,

his sovereign, on which She could found an unfavoura-
ble opinion of her actions; and for this reason she refolv-
ed to leave all the affairs of Scotland precifelv in the
fame situation in which ihe had found them at the be-
ginning of the conference. The queen's commiflioners
were dismissed much in the fame manner'.

After the attention of both nations had been fixed so

earnestly on this conference upwards of four months,
ilch a conclusion of the whole appears at firit fight tris-
1;ng and ridiculous. Nothing, however, could be more
favourable to Elizabeth's future fchenmes. Notwithflad-
ing her seeming impartiality, she had no thoughts of
continuing neuter; nor was /he at any loss on whom to
bestow her protection. Before the regent left London,
(he supplied him with a considerable fum of money, and
engaged to support the king's authority to the utmost
of her powert. Mary, by her own condutt, fortified
this relblution. Enraged at the repeated instances of
Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which she had discovered
during the progress of the conference, and dcfpairing
of ever obtaining any succour from her, /he endeavour-
ed to rouse her own adherents in Scotland to arms, by
imputing such designs to Elizabeth and Murray as could
not fail to inspire every Scotsman with indignation.
Murray, she pretended, had agreed to convey the prince
her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the
places of gireateft strength in the kingdom; and to ac-
knowledge the dependence of the Scottish upon the Eng-
lifh nation. In return for this, he was to be declared
the lawful heir of the crown of Scotland; and at the
fame time the question with regard to the Englilh iuc-
cession was to be decided in favour of the earl of Hart-
ford, who had promised to marry one of Cecil's daugh-
ters. An account of there ild and chimerical projects
was spread industriously among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was cak ulated of purpose to bring her go-
vernment into difreputation, laboured to dellroy its es-
B Good. ii. 315, 333. t Ibid. 2i3. Carte, iii. 478.

E -t

seCts, by a counter-proclamation, and became more dif-
gusted than ever with the Scottish queen'.

The regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the

utmofi tranquiill.tv. But the rage of the queen's adhe-
rents, which had been suspended in expecation that the
confcrence il England would terminate to her advan-
tace, was now ready to break out with all the violence
of civil war. They were encouraged too hy the ap-
pearance of a leader whose high quality and pretenofns
entitled him to great authority in the nation. This was
the duke of Chatclherault, who had rcfllcdl for some
years in France, and was now efnt over by that court
with a fnial fuippl of money, in hopes that the presence
of the first nobleman in the kinllom would firengthen
the queen's party. Elizabeth had (detained lirn in Eng-
land, for rome months, under various pretences, but
was obliged at lafi tr susser him to-proceed on his jour-
nev. Biore his departure, Mary invelted him with
the high dignity of her lieutenant-general in Scotland,
together with the fantastic title of her adopted father.

The regent did not give him time to form his party

into any regular body. He-affembled an army with his
usual expedition, and marched to Glalgow. The fol-
lowers of Argyle and Huntly, who composed the chief
part of the queen's facticn,lvi.g in very distant corners
of the kingdom, and many of the duke's dependents
having fallen or been taken in the battle of Langfide,
the fpi-it and llrength of his adherents was totally bro-
ken, and an accommodation with the regent was the
only thing which could prevent the deftruftion of his
estate and vassals. This was effected without difficulty,
and on no umneafonable terms. The duke promised to
acknowledge the authority both of the king and of the
regent; and to claim no jurifdiltion in consequence of
the commiflion which he had received from the queen.
The regent bound himself to repeal the a& which had
pa-zed for attainting several of the queen's adherents;
to reflore all who would filhinit to the king's govern-
ment to the pofleffion of their eflates and honours; and

Havncs, 5oc, 5o3. See Append. No. XXXI.

to hold a convention, wherein all the differences between
the two parties should be fettled by mutual content. The
duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the
treaty; and, in token of their sincerity, he and lord
Herries accompanied the regent to Stirling, and visited
the young king. The regent set at liberty the prisoners
taken at Langfide *.

Argyll and Huntiy refused to be included in this

treaty. A secret negotiation was carrying on in Eng-
land, in favour of the captive queen, with so much filc-
cess, that her affairs began to wear a better aspect, and
her return into her owrn kingdom seemed to be an e-
vent not very distant. The French king had lately
obtained such advantages over the hugonots, that the
extinction of that party appeared to be inevitable; and
France, by recovering domestic tranquillity, would be
no longer prevented from prote.ting her friends in Bri-
tain. These circumstances not only influenced Argyll
and Huntly, but made so deep an irnpreffion on the
duke, that he appeared to be uwavering and irresolute,
and plainly discovered that he wished to evade the ac-
complilhment of the treaty. The regent saw the dan-
gerof allowing the duke to Ihake lhir.l'elf loose, in this
manner, from his engagements, and instantly formed
a relblution equally bold and politic. He command his
guards to seize Chatelherault in his own house in Edin.
burgh, whither he had come in order to attend the con-
vention agreed upon; and, regardless either of his dig-
nity as the first nobleman in the kingdom, and next
heir to the crown, or of the promises of personal fecuri-
ty, on which he had relied, committed him and lord
Ilerries prisoners to the castle of Edinburght. A
blow so fatal and unexpected dispirited the party. Ar-
gyll rfubllitted to the king's government, and made his
peace with the regent on very easy terms; and Huntly
being left alone, was at lass obliged to lay down his

aarms.
Cabbala, 16r, Crawf, Mem.,io6. '? Crawf.

MIerp. III. Mely. 20z.

£ 3

Soon after, lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and

brought letters to the regent, both from the English and
Scottish queens. A convention was held at Perth, in
order to confider them. Elizabeth's letter contained
three different propolais with regard to Mary; that she
mould ei:her be reflored to the full pofieflion of her
sorner authority; or be admitted to reign jointly with
the king her ion; or at leal be allowed to reficde
in Scotlanid in lome decent retirement, without any
ihare in the admiiiiliration of govenment. Thele
over!ures were extorted by the importunity of Fcnelonl
the French .anbaffador, an;d have lome apprarance of
being favoui-a'ie to the captive quetn. They were,
however peri-tcly luitabLc to Elizabeth's general Ify lem
wi:h egard to Scottith affairs. Among propofitiolis so
unequal and difproporiioniatz, she ea!y l'w wliere thc
choice would si-. The two lornimr were rejectdi;
and lone delays must incrfisarilv have hitcrveiced, and
many difbicuities i-.ve a;.ciln, btfore -very ci:-cuinflanic
relative to the lals could be finally aujultid '

l;i;rv. in her 'ctter, tcmamirl that her marriage

i.h B>.thv-. !l s,,oid he revic e, d lb the plopcrjudges,

and if i'rnx! .'a:ri ic, .i._'. eId i. difilvid byy a legal fen-
teureti (ix,,'rce. 'Thliis rarl .niArriagtc mas the princi-
pal lource oft .l ice raiarlicts slhe had endu:red for two
rears; adivorce v._ s the only thing .wllich couli repair
nhe injuries her reputalion had suffered by that lltp.
It was her iinerelt to have p:.ipofcd it tarly; and it is
not ealy to account for her L ng fiient e with relpeit to
this point. Her parutjular umotive for proporing it at
this time began to he io x c;l k:iown, that ihe demand
was rejeied by ifhe c''nti;vtio!l of el£ites. 'lley n-i
iuted it not so mruchl to aiv atlit;rrence f Botiiwcl,
as to her eagtrnuel to onciudici a marriag- with the duke
of Norfolk

Ihis narriage n as the ohljct of that secret negotia-

t: , in hu Leglandx whirilh e have al.-r.d nititoncd.
'I lie certile and projcc;t irz ;;:,s ( ' .vlaitiar. firlt cor-
CL;CI: :his khcm.c. Lilri:.g the ccicn1e:; at Y{,rk

_ _ _ _ _

c
I

he communicated it to the duke himself, and to the bi-
shop of Ross. The former readily cloli-d with a scheme
so flattering to his ambition. The latter confidered
it as a probable device for refloring his miltlefs to li-
berty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was Ma-
rv, vith whom Norfolk held a correfpondenceby means
of his filter lady Scroop, averse from a meafinre, which
would have restored her to her kingdom with bs much
splendour'. The sudden removal of the conference
from York to Westminster suspended, but did not break
off this intrigue. Maitland and Rols were llill the
duke's prompters, and his agents; and man) letters
and love tokens were exchanged between him and the
queen of Scots.

But as he could not hope that under an adminiftra-

tion so vigilant as Elizabeth's, filch an intrigue could
be kept long concealed, he attempted to deceive her by
the appearance of openness and candour, and artifice
which fildom fails of ficcefs. He mentioned to her
the rumeour which was spread of his marriage with the
Scottifil quecn < ie complained of it as a groundless ca-
lumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind, with
many exprtilions full of contempt both for Mary's
charadter and dominions. Jealous as. Elizabect was
of every thing relative to the queen of Scots, lhe cl;is3
to have credited these profflions 1.. But iniltcad or dti-
erntinuing the negotiation, he renewed it with great-
cr vigour, aild admitted into it new associates. Aminu:,
theflc was the regent of Scotland. He had given great
offence to Norfolk, by his public acculation ou the quten,
in breach of the concert into which he had entered at
York. He was then ready to return into Scotland.
The influence of tile duke in the north of England was
great. The earls of Northumberland and 'eftiloloe-
l.iid, the most powerful noblemen in that part of tue
kingdom, threatened to revenge upon the regent thle in-
juries which he had done his fo.vercign. In order to
itcure his Iart retreat he addressed himil'lf to Norfolk,

' Camd. 419. .laynes, 57.i. State Ti i: s, i. 3.
t I a) Uls, 5 74. Statc 'Trials, i. 79, 8;.

and after some apology for his pall conducl, he infinu-
ated that the duke's scheme of marrying the queen his
fiter was no less acceptable to him than beneficial to
both kingdoms; and that he would concur with the
utmolt ardour in promoting so desirable an event.
Norfolk heard him with the credulity natural to those
who are paffionazely bent upon any design. He wrote
to the two earls to defiR from any hoflile attempt a-
gainit Murray; and to that he owed his paflage through
the northern counties without disturbance.

Encouraged by his success in gaining the regent, he

next attempted to draw the English nobles to approve
his dcfign. The nation began to dcfpair of Elizabeth's
marrying. Her jealousy kept the question with regard
to the right of fuceefion undecided. The memory of
the civil wars, which had desolated England for more
than a century, on account of the disputed titles of
the houses of York and Lancaster, was tfill recent.
Almost the whole ancient nobility had perished, and
the nation itself had been brought to the brink of de-
ftrudtion in that unhappy contest. The Scottish queen,
though her right of succession was generally held to
be undoitbted, might meet with formidable compe-
titors. She might marry a foreign and a popish prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger. But,
by marrying her to an Englifhrnan, a zealous proteit-
ant, the mofl powerful and most universally beloved
of all the nobles, an effc&ual remedy seemed to be pro-
vided against all these evils. The greater part of the
peers, either dircfly or tacitly, approved of it, as a
jalutary proieft. The earls of Arundel, Pembroke,
Leicester, and lord Lumley, subscribed a letter to the
Scottiih queen, written with Leicefler's hand, in which
they warmly recommended the match, but infilted, by
way of preliminary, on Mary's promise, that she should
attempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions t,
the Englih crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth, or to her
posterity; that she ihould content to a league, offensive
and dCfcnfive, between the two kingdoms; that Tfh
ihould confirm the present establishment of religion in
Scotland; and receive into favour such of her sub,

jcas as had appeared in arms againfl her. Upon her
agreeing to the marriage and ratifying these articles,
they engaged that the English nobles would not only
concur in refloring her immediately to her own throne,
but in securing to her that of England in reversion.
Mary readily consented to all thele proposals, except
the Second, with regard to which she demanded some
time for consulting her ancient ally the French king ¶.

The whole of this negotiation was indiltrioufly con-

cealed from Elizabeth. Iler jealousy of the Scottih
queen was well known, nor could it be expected that
she would willingly come into a measure, which tended
tb visibly to save the reputation, and to increase the
power of her rival. But in a matter of so much conle-
quence to the nation, the taking a few fleps without
her knowledge could fearce be reckoned criminal ; and
while every person concerned, even Mary and Norfolk
themselves, declared that nothing fhouldl be concluded
without obtaining her consent, the duty and allegiance
of fulh-ects seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part ot the nobles regarded the matter in this light.
Those who condluced the intrigue had farther and more
dangerous views. They saw the advantages which
Mary procured by this treaty, to be present and certain;
and the execution of the promises which /he came un-
der, to be distant and uncertain. They had earlv com-
iunicated their scheme to the kings of France and
Spain, and obtained their approbation . A treaty
concerning which they consulted foreign princes, while
they concealed it from their own sovereign, could not
be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that the
union of so many nobles would render it necessary for
Elizabeth to comply ; they flattered themselves that a
combination so strong would be altogether irrefiltalle;
and such was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted in the north of England for refcu-
nlg Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk,
who was afraid, that if she recovered liberty, her senti-

¶Anderfon, vol. ii. 5 . Camd. 420.

'Anders. vol. iii. 63.

ments in his favour might change, used all his interest
to dissuade the conspirators from attempting it |.

In this situation did the affair remain when lord Boyd

arrived from England; and, besides the letters which
he produced publicly, brought others in cyphers from
Norfolk and Throkmorton to the regent and to Mait-
land. These were full of the most sanguine hopes.
The whole nobles of England concurred, said they, in
favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjusted;
nor was it possible that a scheme so deep laid, condudled
with so much art, and supported both by power and
by numbers, could miscarry, or be defeated in the exe-
cution. Nothing now was wanting but the concluding
ceremony. It depended on the regent to haften that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would re-
move the only obstacle that flood in the way. This
was expected of him, in consequence of his promise to
Norfolk; and if he regarded either his interest or his
fame, or even his fafery, he would not fail to fulfil these
engagements t.

But the regent was now in very different circum-

stances from those which had formerly induced him to
affedc an approbation of Norfolk's schemes. He saws
that the downfal of his own power must be the sirs
consequence of the duke's fuccels; and if the queen
who confidered him as the chief author of all her mis
fortunes, should recover her ancient authority, he conh
never expect favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No
wonder he declined a ftep fj fatal to himself, and which
would have established the grandeur of another on th
ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But
as every other circumstance was fettled, the bilhop o
Ross, in the name of his mistress, and the duke, in per
son, declared, in presence of the French ambaffado'
their mutual consent to the marriage, and a contract t
this purpose was signed, and intrusted to the keepin
of the ambassador'.

The intrigue was now in so many hands, that i
U Camd. 420. tHaynes, 5o20. Spotfw. 230. See A1

ptnd. No. XXXII. " Carte, vol. iii. 486.

could not long remain a secret. It began to he whtif-
pered at court; and Elizabeth calling the duke into her
prelence, expressed the utmost indignation at his con-
du&, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts of prose-
cuting such a dangerous design. Soon after Leicelter,
w4ho perhaps countenanced the project with no other
intention, revealed the whole circumstances of it to the
queen. Pembroke, Arundel, Lumley, and Throknior-
ton, were confined and examined. Mary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and Haitings earl of Hunt-
ingdon, who pretended to dispute with the Scottish
queen her right to the succession, being joined in
commission with Shrew-oury, rendered her iprifonl-
mcnt more intolerable, by the excess of his vigilance
and rigourt. The Scottish regent, threatened with
Elizabeth's lifpleaiure, meanly betrayed the duke; put
his letters into her hands, and flrnifihed all the inlelli-
gence in his power t. The duke himlfelf retired fir-st to
liopard-houle, and then, in contempt of the finnions
to appear before the privy-council, fled to his feat in
Norfolk. Intimidated by the imiprifbnnient of his al-
fociates; coldly received by his friends in that country;
unprepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to
rebel, he lefitated itr fonie days, and at lall obeyed a
second call, and repaired to Windsor. lie wa, firit
kept as a priibner in a private house, and theln lnt to
the 'ower. After being confined there upwa rds of
nine months, he was released upon his hurmble fib-

inffion to Elizabeth. giving her a prom;ie, on his al-
legiance, to hold no farther correlpondence with the
queen of Scots §. During the progrels of 'Norfolk's
negotiations, the queen's partisans in Scotland, who
mnade no doubt of their ifluing in her refloration to the
throne, with an inrreafl of authority, were wonder-
tully elevated. iMaitland was the foul of that party,
and the person whole acctivity and ability the regent
chiefly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that in-
iigur which had kindled such combufiion iln L.giald.

t Haynes, 525, 526, 530, 532.
See Append. No. XXXIII. § Haynes, 525, 597.

He continued to foment the spirit of diiTatisfa/tion in
Scotland, and had seduced from the regent lord Home,
Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates. While
he enjoyed liberty, the regent could not reckon his own
power ifcure. For this reason, he employed captain
Crawford, one of his creatures, to accuse him of being
acccffory to the murder of the king; and under that
pretence carried him a prifonerto Edinburgh. He would
soon have been brought to trial, but was saved by the
friendship of Kirkaldy. governor of the caRle, who by
pretending a warrant for that purpose from the regent
got him out of the hands of the person to whole car,
he was committed, and condu&ced him into the cafllt
which from that time was entirely under Maitland'
command. The lots of a place of so much importance
and the defe&tion of a man so eminent for military kill
as Kirkaldv. brought the regent into rome difreputa
tion, for which, however, the success of his ally Eliza
beth abundantly compensated.

The intrigue carried on for refloring the Scottill

queen to liberty having been discovered and disappoint
ed, an attempt was made to the fame purpose by forc
of arms; but of no better success. The earls of North
umberland and Wftmnorrland, though little difiin
guised by their personal merit, were two of the mcel
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their c
states in the northern counties were great, and the,
poffffred that influence over the inhabitants which wa
hereditary in the popular and martial families of Perc:
and of Nevil. They were both attached to the popif
religion, and discontented with the court, where nc\
men an:l a new fy\ller prevailed. Ever since Mary'
arrival in England, they had warmly elpoufed her in
terest; and zeal for popery, oppoition to the court
comnililration of her sufferings, had engaged them i
diff:rcnt plots for her relief. Notwithitanding the v
giicace of her keepers, they held a close correlpondenl
y ilh her, and communicated to her all their deligns
'!ve were privy to Norfolk's Ichemes; but the ca;

I'iaynes, 59j,

tion yith which he proceeded did not suit their ardour
anid impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottish queen
was 'not their sole objp6t. They aimed at bringing
about a change in the religion, and a revolution in the
government of the kingdom. For this reason they
solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the avowed and
zealous patron of popery in that age. Nothing could
be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or
more necessary towards facilitating his iehemes in the
Netherlands, than the involving England in the con-
fusion and miseries of a civil war. The duke of Alva,
byv his direaion, encouraged the two earls, and pro-
mifed, as soon as .they either took the field with their
forces, or-ifrpril'd any place of strength, or rclfued
-the queen of Scots, that he would supply them both
with money and a strong body of troops. La Mothe,
the governor of Dunkirk, in the disguise of a tailor,
funnded the ports where it would be most proper to
land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablilt offi-
cers, was defepached into England, on pretenet of itet-
tiing'fibne commercial differences between the two na-
tions; )hut in reality that the rebels might be iure of a
leader of experience, so loon as they ventured to take
arms.

The conduct of this negotiation occasioned many

meetings and meflTges between the two earls. Eliza-
beth was in'formed of these; and though the fufpctedd
-nothing of their real delign, the concluded that they
wereaamong the numnber of Norfolk's confidents. They
were lurmmoned, for this realbn, to repair to court.
Con!cions of guilt, and afraid of difnovery, they de-
lyved giving obedience. A fccond, and more peremp-
tory -rdler.iwas ilried. h'lis they couid not decline,
w t'out ihiking off their allegiance; and as no tilie
was left for dcliberation, they iittantly rreclerl their
flandar-d against their tovercign. The re-eltaliluin: '
the catholic irligin; the fttttini; the orcer !t fiucerl-
lio)n'to the crown; the deft-nce ot the a:icicnt ncbJim';

Carte, vol. iii. 472, 490. Canid. 42r.
Vo! II. 1'

were the motives which they alleged to jnftify their
rebellion t. Many of the lower people flocked to them
with fueh 2rnrs as they could procure; and had the ca-
pacity of their leaders been in any degree equal to the
enterprise, it must have soon grown to be extremely
formidable. Elizabeth aEted with p-rutence and vigour;
and was served by her fuhbjecs with fidelity and ardour.
On the firfi rumour of an infurreftion, Marv was re-
n:c;ovd to Coventry, a place of flrength whli,'h could
not be taken without a regular liege; a detachment lt
the rebels, which was fen: to retfene her, returned with-
out fucreis. Troops were affembied in different parts
of the kilgdom: as they advanced, the malecontents
retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their fbirits funk. Despair, and uncertainty wlli-
ther to dircc their flight, kept together for some time
a small body of them among the mountains of North.
linhtrlani d hut they wetre at length oli;g, d to difperle,
and the cl.iefs took refuge among the Scottiih borderecs
'i ie two ca: s, together with the countels of Nortll
u:mto-r!and, wandering for ibme days in the waftes ol
i.idhdfiaze, vetre plund'e-d by the banditti, expolfe
to iie rigcur of the fenfon, and left deftiiute of til
rnctziiri:-s otf life. ,'eflinorc-lard was colcaled 1:'
S.-t of BuccieC.ll and Ker iof crniherfl, and aftsr-
I'ards ccnvcyed into the Netherlands. Nortilumbhr
L:,ld was ieiized hy the regent, who had marched will

.in.e treops towards the borders, to prevent any il,

pression the rebels might make on thole mutinous lpro
vif-ces.

Amir.df so many surprising events, the affairs of tl}

churcih, for two years, have almost escaped our notice
Its gen.raI fic:mblies were lhei! regularly; but no bul;
rels of much importance employed their attention. Ar
the r:ir.ber of the protifltnt clergy daily increafl
the deficiency of the funds Jet apart for their fubfiftlc
Lecaine greater, and was more licnfibly felt. Many c:
for.s wer nmade -towards recovering the ancient p.ati
nonv of :;. hurch, or at least as imchi of it as \
4 Sryp'vc, \Cl. i. 547- Cabbala, ,;i. C4mb. 4::

poferfled by the popish incumbents, a race of men who
were now not only uicleis but burdensome to the na-
tion. But though the manner in which the regent
received their addresses and complaints was very dif-
ferent from that to which they had been accuitomed,
no effesual remedy was provided: and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppression, and groaned under the
most extreme poverty, fair words and liberal promiles,
were all they were able to obtain T.

Elizabeth now began to be weary of keeping filch a

dangerous prisoner as the queen of Scots. During the
former vear, the tranquillity of her government had
been difiurbtd, first by a lecret combination of fnme
of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others; and lhe
often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
biden rcauf of both. Many of her own iubjects favoured
or pitied the captive queen; the Roman catholic prirles
on the continent were wariniv intereited in her catile.
The detaining her any longer in Lnglant,, flie fore!aw,
would be made the pretext or occaiion of perpetual
cabals and inl'urrections among the former; and might
expose her to the hollile attempts of the latter. She
resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of
the regent, whole lecurity, no less than her own, de-
pended on preventing Mary from re ascending the
throne. The negotiation for this purpol'e was carried
some length, when it was dilsovered by the vi:ilance
of the bishop of Ross, who, together wirh the ;rench
and Spanish arnbafludors, remonilrated againlt tili in-
fainy of such an ation, and represented the lurrender-
ing the queen to her rebellious fubjecs to be the fame
thing as if Elikaheth should, by her own authority,
condemn her to instant death. This procured a dulay;
and the murder of the regent prevented the revival of
that design §.

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was the person who
committed this barbarous action. He had been con-

. Cald. vol. ii. 80, &c.
§ Carte, vol. iii. 491. Anderi. vol. iii. 84.

F

demned to death soon after the battle of Langfide, as
we have already related, and owed his life to the re-
gent's clemency. But part of his estate had been be-
flowed upon one of the regent's favourites, who seized
his house, and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night,
into the open fields, where, before next morning The
became firioufly mad. This injury made a deeper
impreflion uFon him than the benefit which he had
received, and from that moment he vowed to be re-
venged upon the regent. Party-rage flrengthened and
inflamed his private resentment. His kinlinen the
Hamiltons applauded the enterprise. The maxims of
that age iufiified the most desperate course which he
could take to obtain vengeance. He followed the
regent for rome time, and watched for an opportu-
nity to strike the blow. He resolved at last to wait
till his enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through
which he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edin-
burgh. He took his stand in a wooden gallery, which
had a window towards the street; spread a feather-bed
on the floor, to hinder the noise of his feet from being
heard; hung up a black cloth behind him, that his
fbadow might not be observed from without; and after
all his preparation, calmly expecded the regent's ap-
proach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far diflant. Some indiftina information of the
danger which threatened him hadvbeen conveyed to the
regent, and he paid so much regard to it, that he refolv-
ed to return by the fame gate through which he had en-
tered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But as
the crowd about the gate was great, and he himself un-
acrqza;rned with fear, he proceeded di/estly along the
fireet; and the throng of the people obliging him to
move very flowlv, gave the afflafin time to take so true
an aim, that he Ihot him witt a fiGr.e bullet through
the lower pzrt of his belly, and killed the horie of agen-
tleman who rode on his other fide. IIis followers in-
ftanly endeavoured to break into the house whence the
blo;- had come. but tley found the deor ftronglv b.r-
ricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
had mounted a fleet horie, which flood ready for himt

at a back-pafiage, and was got far beyond their reach.
The regent died the fame night of his wound %.

There is no person in that age about whomn hilorians

have been more divided, or whose charader has been
drawn with such oppoGte colours. Personal ilntrepidity,
military skill, sagacity, and vigour in the adtniilitratioll
of civil affairs, are virtues, which even his enemies allow
hinm to have poflefied in an eminent degree.' His moral
qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be prail-
ed nor cenfilred without great reliarve, and imny di-
lt;nRqions. In a fierce age he was capable of uilin vic-
tory with humanity, and of treating the vanqltilh. d wilh
moderation. A patron of learning, whi-h, arinnog mar-
tial nobles, was either unknown, or delpild. Zealous
for religion, to a degree which diftingui.hed him, even
at a time when prof'ffions of that kind were not uncom-
mon. His conSfi.ence in his friends was extrC-eme, and
inierior only to h;s liberality towards them, which klnew
no bounds. A difiterefted' pafflon for the liberty of
his country prompted him to oppole the pernicious fvf-
tem which tlhe princes of Lorrain had obligcd the (pic:1-
mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scoriarld,
he served her with a zeal and affution to which lie ia-
crificed the fricind!hip of those who were mfint attached
to his person. But, on the other hand, hi3 almbiti:n wa
immoderate; and events happened that opened to hlin
valt projects, which flitred his enterprisi!ng genius, a:ld
led hiiii to aliions inconil!tent with the duty of a sub-
jete. His tr:timeilit of the queen, to whol;z- b)iiy lie
was so much imuc lmted, wV. unbrothcrly anil uim ratcsil.
The dcpe' encc c:i lilza:1, Li under \\-:li.h lie bro'ghc
Scotland, was di'ira::cful to the nation. lie d-ceivel
and betrayed . ,riolk wivil a baL.iic ls un -o:-ilty a m.it
of honour. I-is elevation to flch uncxpetiecd dignitv
inlipired himis with lne paTiTons, with hauglitiilnls and
relirve; and iriltcad of his nitural manncr, vhi:h was
I'u!lt and open, he afi'cced tle arts of di'li.nclitiol and
rcticineicit. Fond, towards tile end of his lite, of fiat-

teuchlan. 385. Crawl. Memn. I14.

F3

terv, and'if iiatient of advice, his creatures, by soothing
his vanity, led him aftrav, while his ancient friends flood
at a diflance, and prediaed his approaching fall. But
amidst the turbulence and confusion of that factious pe.
riod, he dispenscd juitice with so much impartiaiity, he
repressed the licentious borderers with lo much courace,
and eflablifhed such uncoenmon order and tranquillitv
in the coumtry, that his adminifiration was extreimely
popular, and he was long and afftctiolately remember.
ed amnong the commons by the name of the Good Regent,

# BOOK SIXTH. CONTENTS. Consequence of Murray's death. Lennox elected Regent. Artifices of Elizabeth. Dumbarton castle surprised by the Regent. Archbishop of St. Andrews executed ...

THBE
HISTORY

0 F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK SIXTI-I.

CONTENTS.

Ccnwfi/uene of Alf,'rav's datlh. Lcnnox elc7ie Regent. Ar-

tfi, ej f Eli-a!,lth. 1)umbrrton caflle fartrrfd ly the :'e-
gt. , rchbfieijup Of St. lnrdrevus erxecut c. T'-o Prliia.
r/,,tti. S.,:te of f/ltifia. Rhe, nt furprfre. aId kt/led at
StihlinZ,. Alar ftUccedi him. Prot-erd:ns in England a-
rg :;? o,,en 1Vl'ary, Norfki'": :ofpireieo. I)ijcoverrc by
.Li, drt.'. le.r eturrcween Englart1 and Fr:itce. Mcfacre
a! Pari. l)Dath of the Regent Mar. Alor!tot Regent.
A4feirs of ihe Cburch. De.tb andcb araRer oj' AKnix. A
treatyl bóetern thefai'tions. Sige andfurrender of Ediinurgh
cisfle Execution of Kirkally the Governor. Odious tyran.
rv of Mortjn, Jam;es. A plot agninJf the Re;,est. Ji.i
rrnaitrion. Farther commotivns. Fall of Iit.,ton. tlis
trjli and ..rrut;on. Cofpiraey ns til nobles. Jame si:-
ed. H'is efcper. The Clergy saveu- the Cunfpirators. A
Parliament. Severe larws agcii;lq the Church.

n rE uncxpecaed blow, by which the regent fell, flruck

the king's party with the utmost conflernation. Eliza-
beth hewailed his death as the molf fatal difaller which
:ould l.ave befallen her kingdom; and was inconfola-
bic to a degree that little suited ler dignity. Mary's
adherents exulted, as if now her refloration were not on-
y cLrtain, but near at hand. The infamy of the crime

+ The references to the Appendix again commnrce
vitlt No. 1.

naturally fell on those who expressed such indecent joy
at the commission of it; and as the aflnifFi made his c-
scape on a horse which belonged to lord Claud Hamilton,
and fled diretly to Hamilton, where he was recrived
in triumph, it was concluded that the regent had fallen
a sacrifice to the resentment of the queen's party, rather
than to the revenge of a private man. On the dav as-
ter the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Kcr of Ferni-
herft, both zealous abettors of the queen's calif:, entr-
ed Eniand in an hoflile manner, and plund-red and
hurnt the country, the inhabitants of which expecTd no
filch outrage. Ir the regent had been alive, tli:v would
scarce have ventured on such an irregular incursion; nor
conld it well have happened so Iso. after his death, un-
less they had been privy to the crime.

This was not the only irregularity to which the anar-

chy that followed the regent's death gave occalion.
During such general confuilin, men hoped for univerlal
impunity, and broke out into excesses o' every kind. As
it was impossible to restrain these wi:hout a tjetlld form
of government, a convention of the nobles was held, in
order to deliberate concerning the elcetion of a regent.
The queen's adherents refuled to be present at the meet-
ing, and protested againit its proccedings.- The king's
own party was irresolute and divided in opinion. Alait-
land, whom Kirkaldv had fct at liberty, and who ob-
tained from the nobles then af-cmbled a declaration ac-
quitting him of the crime which had been laid to ilis
charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition or' tle
two parties, by prcpofing to admnit the queen tl tihe jl;iit
admliniftration of government with her Ion. Elizabeth,
adhering to her old fyftcm with regard to Scottish at-
fairs, laboured, notwith'ftandin i the solicitations of M'.
ry's friendst, to multiply, and to perp.tuiate the faations,
which tore in pieces the kiagdom. Randolph, whoi,
she dcfpatclied into Scotland on the .rs nelws of the re
gent's death, and who was her uftia! agent for fitch Ir
vices, found all parties lb cxafperatcd lhy nmutual injllti-
and so full of irreconcileab!le rancour, that it colt l..i

Sec Appceneli, No. I.

little trouble to inflame their discord. The convention
broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new
meeting, to which the nobles of all parties were invited
was appointed on the first of May, 1570.t

Mean time, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continu-'

ed to acknowledge the king's authority, were at the ut-
roft pains to restore some degree of harmony among
their countrymen. They procured, for this purport,
an amicable conference among the leaders of the two
faaions. But while the one demanded the restoration
of the queen, as the only thing which could re-eflablifh
the public tranquillity; while the other esteemcd the
king's authority to be so sacred, that it was, on no ac-
count, to be called in queltion or impaired; and neither
of them would recede in the leaf point from their opi-
nions, they separated without any profpedt of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement,
by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from
France with promises of powerful succour to the queen's
adherents; and as the civil wars in that kingdom seem-
ed to he on the point of terminating in peace, it was ex-
peLtcd that Charles would loon be at liberty to fulfil
what he promised. On the other hand, the earl of Sus-
sex was assembling a powerful army on the borders, and
its operations could not fail of adding spirit and Itrength
to the king's party .

Though the attempt towards a coalition of the sac-
tions proved ineffectual, it contributed somewhat to mo-
tlerate or liufpend tuleir rage; but they loon began to aa
with their usual aniniolity. Mutton, the molt vigilant
and able leader on the king's fide, solicited Elizabeth to
interpole, without delay, for the afcty) of a party so de-
voted to her interest, and which flood lo much in need
of her assistance. The chiefs of the queen's fadtion,
afrembling at Linlithgow, marched t ence to Edinburgh ;
and Kirkaldy,, who was both governor of the cattle and
provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens, tho' with
lome difficulty, to admit them withni th ' gates. Toge-

t Crawsf. Mem. i. t. Calderw. ii. IS7.

t CrA'. MIIcf. 134.

ther with Kirkaldy, the earl of Athol, and Maitland,
acceded almost openly to their party; and the duke and
lord Herries, having recovered liberty by Kirkaldy's fa-
vour, resumed the places which they had formerlv he!d
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition of per-
sons so illustrious hv their birth, or so eminent for their
abilities, they published a proclamation, declaring their
intention to fulpport the queen's authority, and ltemcd
resolved not to leave the city before the meeting of the
approaching convention, in which by their numbers and
influence, they did not doubt of lecuring a majority of
voicrs on their fide'.

At the fame time they had formed a design of kind-

line war between the two kingdoms. If they could en.
gage them in hoitilities, and revive their ancient enu!a-
tion and antipathy, they hoped, not only to dissolve a
confederacy of great advantage to the king's cause, but
to reconcile their countrymen to their own fovereiinn,
Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With
this view they had, immediatelv after the murder of the
regent, prompted Scott and Kcr to commence houlilitics,
and had since infligated them to continue and extend
their depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw, on the one
hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this a
national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to sus-
ser such an insult on her government to pass with impu-
nity; ihe issued a proclamation, declaring that she im-
puted the outrages which had been committed not to
the Scottilh nation, but to a few desperate and ill-lefign.
ing persons; that, with the former, ihe was resolved to
maintain an inviolable friendship, whereas the duty
which she owed to her own fibjects obliged her to chafr
tife the licentiousness of the lattert. Suflex and Scroop
accordingly entered Scotland, the one on the east, the
other on the weft borders, and laid waste the adjacenl
countries with fire and fuwordt. Fame magnified thi
number and progress of their troops, and Mary's adhe
rents, not thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, tht

* Crawf. Mem. I36. Calderw. ii. 176.
f Calderw. ii. 18I. t Cabbala, 174.

inhabitants whereof were ill affected to their cause, re-
tired to Linlithgow. ' here, they openly proclaimed
the queens's authority, and forhade giving obedience to
any but the duke, or the earls of Argyll and Huntly,
whom she had conflituted her lieutenants in the king-
dom.

The nobles who adhered to the king, though confi-
derahly weakened by the defection of lb many of their
friends, aflembltd at Edinburgh on the dav appointed.
They ifliied a counter-proclamation, declaring such as
appeared for the queen enemies of their countrv;
and charging them with the murder both of the late
king and of the regent. They could not, however,
prcfiume lo much on their own fliregiith as to venture
itlher to elcet a rcgent, or to take the field againit the
queen's party; but the assistance which they received
Irorn Elizabeth enabled thcm to do both. By her or-
der fir William Drury marched into Scotland, with a
thllfand tcot and three hundred horse; the king's ad-
!hcrnts joined hini with a considerable body of troops,
and advancing towards (Glaigow, where the adverle
party had alrcady begun hollilities by attacking the
caitle, they forced them to retire, plundered the neigh-
,lmurinig country wh Iich tehliinted to the Hamiltons, and,
alter li-z;:. I;t'Unie of tiltir calles, and razing others, re-
tLtrL'cd lo Edinbrlgh .

tInder Driury's proteclion the earl of Lenncx return-

ed into Scotland. It was natilal to cormit thegovern-
mint of the kingdom to him during the minority of
lis. gr-anJdon. Ilis iiluhtricus birth, and alliance with
,he royal family of England, as well as of Scotland
retnderled him wortllv of that honour. His resentment
agairnit Mary being implacable, as his estate lay in El;g-
laid, antd his fazmily reliding there, Elizabeth confidcr-
ed ]Lim as a nman in tho, bori fiom inclination and from
illtc('fl, would :clt in concert with her, and ardently
ul fed that he mligit il cceed Murray in the office ofre-

ig u,. hu .i maniy accounts, lhe did not think it pru-

Uilit to dilnccvr her own lfeltimcents, or to favour hi.
1' ctte'ions t(.o (pc:;ly. 'i'e civil wars in V:lrance,
| i.: h!:ad Lcul c-i; tecd by a ?rctcndcd zeal for religi-

on, and carried on with a fierceness which did it
real tiihonour, appeared now to be on the point cf
cnming to an issue; and after fnedding the best blood,
ald waiting the richest provinces in the kingdom, both
parties dcfired peace with an ardour that facilitated the
negotiations which were carrying on for that purpof.
-Charles IX. was known to be a pafionate admirer ,f
Mary's beautv. Nor could he, in honour, fuiffr a
.queen of France, and the most ancient allv of his crown,
to languish in her present cruel situation, without at-
tempting to procure her relief. He had hitherto hern
obliged to fatisfv himself with remonfnrating, by hi;
ambaflfdors, againit the indignity with which she had!
been t-eated. But if he were once at mull liberty to
pulfue his inclinations, Elizabeth would have evcrv
thing to dread from the impetuosity of his temper an .
the power of his arms. It therefore became necefitir
for her to aa with some reserve, and not to apptar i-
vowedly to countenance the choice of a regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealouiil and plrc'l-
dices of the Scots required no less management. latl
The openly supported Lennox's claim; had (he recorn-
mended him to the convention, as the candi!:ate of
.whom ihe approved; this might have roifed the inle-
perdent spirit of the nobles, antd by too plain a difrovr-
ryof her intention, (he might have defeated its ucceri.
For these reasons the hesitated lorng, and returned aml-
biguous anlfuers to all the mtefagecs which she rrcerivrr
from the king's party. A more explicit declarati(lo of
her sentiments was at last obtained, and an eCvet of a;
cxtraortinal v nature feera to have been the occa!ion ci
it. Pope Pius V. having ifTiied a bull, whereby he tx-
communicated Elizaheth, deprived her of her kingldoin,
and ahfolved her fLbjects from their oath of allt-riantc,
'Felton, an Eng:ifhmanl had the boidlnels to affix it oni
the gates of the hiffop of london's palace. I, Ifrnier
agiesa pope, moved 1by his own alnbi' ion, ol pi;'le, r
bigotrv, denounced llis fanal inntc:nc a-ni;lt ;tr i lt
powuertil monarchs, but as the auhc.ritv of tlhe c: :
Li Rome -was nTw less rrparded, i:t. i- roec'iu'ls v .re
more cz.t:ious; -iud it s .3 '.- v,- ':;;
th, e v w-,;. rcui;c

by some. powersid prince, that the thunders of the
church wele ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imput-
ed this ftep which the pope had taken to a combination
of the Roman catholic princes againtL her, and filpecA-
cd that sone plot was formed in favour of the Scottish
queen. In that event, she knew that the fafetv of her
ovn kingdom depended on preserving her influence in
Scotland; and in order to ftrcngthen this, he renewed
her promises of protcfting the king's adherents, en-
couraged them to proceed to the elecaion of a regent,
and even ventured to point out the earl of Lennox as
tlhe perobn who had the bel title. That honour was
accordiigly conferred upon him, in a convention of th:
whole party held on dre I zth of July, 15 70.

The regent's firil care was to prevent the meeting of

tile parliament which the queen's party had fummon(d
to convene at Linlithgow. Having eirecaed that, he
marched against the earl of lHuntly, Mary's lieutenant
in the north, and forced the garrison whichl he had
placed in Brechin to lirrcnder at dil:retion. Soon as-
ter, he made hiliielf mailer of fcme other callle.
Emboldened by this lfccefsful beginling of Iris almii
nillration, as well as hy the appearance of a confider-
able arinv, with which the earl of SuiTex hovered on
the borders, he deprived i.,itlaind of iis office of fl:cre-
tary, and proclaimsnie hini, the duke, Iluintly, and o;l:ce
leaders of the queenc's party, traiiors and enCmiics of
tileir country t.

In tilis defperate.fituation of their asti'-s, the queen's
adherents had recc.4irfe t h the king of Spain , with
;whonm AMary had helr.a clol, corrc:poildncie ever since
I.cr confinement inl £nglanr.d. T y pircvailcd on the
duke of Alva to lend two of his officers to take a view
of the country, and to examine its coa!tl andi harboura;
:nd obtained from him a nial!l bfupiy of niuccy and
arss, ' hich were kent to the carl of Huntly j;. But

'Spots;,. 240. Cald. ii. 186. See App;n. No. 11.
f Crawf Iem. l i9. Cald.ii. l(9. 1 See Appenlo.

No,II. [ And. iii. 12z. Craf. Me'c. '$3.
V'cl. 11.

this aid, so dirproportionate to their exigencies, would
have availed them little. They wevre indebted fri
their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carryirn
on, under colour of reioring the captive queen to her
throne. The first fieps in this negotiation were taken
in the month of May; but hitherto little progress was
made in it. The p-ace concluded between the Ra-
man catholics and hugonots in France, and her ap
prehensions that Charles would interpose with vigour
in behalf of his fifter-in law, quickened Elizabeth's mni
tions. She affeetd to treat her prilibnr with more in-
dulgence, fle lifi.ened more grTaeiotiflv to the folici:a-
tions of foreign ambfi'.idors in lier favour, and lir-ined
fully determined to rrp!ai-e l:er on the throne of her
anceflors. As a proof of her lincerity, lhe labourel to
procure a cessation of arms between the two conteudin3
fa&ions in Scotland. Lennox, elated with the tocnl
fortune which had hitherto attended his A'irniiflratiol:,
and flatttring himself with an cafv triumph over ene-
mies wxhofe estates were wafted, rnnd their forces diihi.
rited, refuted for some time to come into this mealire.
It was not safe for him, however, tn dispute the wi,!
of his prote&refs. A cefiation of hoftililies during tw,
months, to commence on the third of September, wa,
agreed upon; and, being renewed froTm time to tini:,
i. continued till the first of April next rearg

Soon after Elizabeth defpatiched Ct.il ant fir 'W:r':r

Mildmav to the queen of Scots. The dignity of thCe
ambassadors, the i'ormnr her prime mninilter, the I.iar.:
chancellor of the cx,.-he.'qa:r, anld ele of her ablel! i, ..-
fellors, convinced :i' Dprtiec that the negrtiation X..i
serious, and t:ar tlie hour of Maryv' s

iiterrti was.5 :'J:

approaclitig. The propo!iirios which tlvey nia.! ;J
her were advanta'-eois to Eli;:zbeth, hut fuchi: .
prince in M.arv's lirtat:ion had reason to exprtdc . 'I!.
ra:i5.-ation of the tr--'.- of ';iinhL:reh, the- lrnolri;'i11
any pretensions to the E:ng'ifl crown., ntlurirng liizalt i.
own life, or that of her pc;rtri-y; ti.c adhering to u.
a" .::ce hetween the .: w kn'g.,mi;s the pa:c:. :, .

Sr^- -,

fuhjels who had taken arnms against her; and her pro-
miling to hold no corrcfpondence, and to countenance
no enterprise, that might disturb Elizabeth's govern-
ment; were among the chief articles. By way of ifcu-
rity for the accomplifhir.el)t of thele, they demanded
that fonie persons of rank nhould be given as hostages,
tllat the prince her lin tiould reside in England, and
that a few catlies on the border should he put into Eli-
zalb'th's hands. To some of these propolitions Mary
ccu:ented, tonre fie endeavoured to mitigate, and others
fiie attempted to evade. In the mean time, she tranf-
mitted copies of them to the pope, to the kings of France
and Spain, and to the duke ot Alva. She insinuated,
that without some timely anl vigorous interposition in
her behalf, fle wecutld e obligced to accept of therce hard
conditions, and to purchase liberty at an)' price. But
the pope was a dilalnt and feeble ally, and by his great
effrts at this time aainhdt the Turks, his treasury v was
ertirely exhaulted. Charles had alrcady begun to me-
dlitate that conlIpirary against the hiugonots, which
marks his reign with such infamy; and it required much
Icifitre, and perfcL tranquillity, to bring that execrable.
plan to maturity. Philip was employed in fitting out
that fleet which acquired so great renowu to the Chrifl-
ian arms, by the victory over the infideL. at Lepanto;
the Moors in Spain threatened an iniurrecliun; and his
fuh.e&s in the Netherlands, provoked by much op-
preflion and many indigniics, were breaking out into
npen relrlli'on. All of theml, tor thele different reafl;ns,
adlvfled Mary, without dcencidiig on their aid, to cou-
clude th treaty on the best teiis flie could procure
itt.

Marv accordingly conrcnted to many of Elizabeth's

deimands, and dislovercd a facility of dlifofiotion which
promiled ltill lurtiier concriliins. But no conccililn
f.e could have made would have satisfied Elizalhth,
who, in spite of her repeated proteffinis of sincerity to
lorcign arobaflidors, and notv itlifaniding thefolemnity

t A.nders. vol. iii. 119, 120.

C G

with which the tarried on the treaty, had no other ob-
ject in it than to amu.e Mary's allies, and to gain timet.
After having so long treated a queen, who fled to her
for refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now dismiss her with fafetv. Under all ti e difadvan-
tages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found means
to excite commotions in England, wh;ch were extreme.
ly formidable. What derferate efiecrs of her jufi re-
fentmnt might be expected, if The were ser at liberty,
and recovered her former power? What engagements
cou!d bind her, riot to revenge the wrongs which the
had suffered, nor to take advantzge of the favourable
cor.'un&cures that might present themlfelvw.s? Was it
possible for her to give such fccurity for her behaviour,
in times to come, as might remove all suspicions and
fears? And was there not good cause to conclude,
that no future benefits could ever cbliterate the memory
of pals injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth reafcned;
thouoh she continued to a&t as if her views had been
entirely different. She appointed seven of her privy
counsellors to be commissioners for fettling the articles
of the treaty; and, as Mary had already named the
bishops of Ross and Galloway, and lord Livingflon,
for her ambassadors, she required the regent to im-
power proper persons to appear in behalf of the king.
The earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot of Dunfermling,
and fir James Macgill, were the persons chosen by the
regent. They prepared for their journey as slowly as
Elizabeth herself could have wished. At length they
arrived at London, and met the commissioners of the
two queens. Mary's ambassadors discovered the strong-
eft inclination ro comply with erery thing that would
remove the obfiacles which flood in the way of their
mistress's liberty. But when Morton and his associates
were called upon to vindicate their condu&t, and to cx-
p am the sentiments of their party, they began, in jufti-
si ition of their treatment of the queen, to advance
fuct. maxims concerning the limited powers of princes,
and the natural right of fuibjecs to resist and to controul

t Dig, s, Compl. Amb. 78.

them, as were extremely ihocking to Elizabeth, whose
notions of regal prerogative, as has been formerly ob-
served, were very exalted. With regard to the authlo-
rity which the king now pofrcfled, they declared that
they neither had, nor could polibly receive inftrutions
to consent to any treaty that tetided to subvert, or even
to impair it in the least degree. Nothing could he more
trifling and ridiculous, than such a reply from the corn.
missioners of the king of Scots to the queen of England.
His party depended abfolutclv on her protection, her
hand had feated him on the throne, and to her power
he owed the continuance of his reign. With the ut-
most ease she could have brought them to talk in a very
different language; and whatever conditions she might
have thought fit to prescribe, they wnuld have had no
other choice but to lubnmit. This declaration, however,
she affcRed to conllier as an insuperable difficulty; and
finding that thllre was no reaion to dread any danger
from the Frencih king, who had not dil'covered that
eagernels in support oi Mary which was expedcedl, the
reply made by Morton furnithed her with a pretence for
putting a 1tcp to the negotiation, until the regent
Phould fend ambalTadors with more ample powers.
Anti, after being ainufed for ten months with the hopea
of liberty, the uniiiappy queen of Scots remained tunder
firictIer culindl than erer, and without any r,"oipcct of
tlcaping frotm ii; while those fubljeIs who hill adhered
to her were expo:cd, wiithout ally or prottglor, to the
rage of enrlmics, -horn their luccels in this negotiation
rendered lill nor- inlbolentt.

On the day after the expiration of the truce, which

had been olierved Aith ihtle exaO.nefs on either lide,
captain Crawtford of Jordan-hili, a gallant and enterpril.
ing officer, performed a service of great inportance to
the regent, bIr iurl-riting the cafile of D)umbarton. This
was the only !'rirtisied place in the kingdom of which the
queen had ikept pofltiliin ever finee the commenceinenlt
* Cald. ii, 2./. Digges, 5I. -Iay!nes, 5 3, 5z4,

4 And. iii. 91, &c.

( 3

of the civil wars. Its situation, on the top of an high
and almost inaccessible rock, which rifes in the middle
of a plain, rendered it extremely itrong, and, in the
opinion of that age, impregnable; as it commanded the
river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and was
deemed the most proper place in the kingdom for land-
ing any foreign troops that might come to Mary's aid.
The firength of the place rendered lord Fleming, the
governor, more fccure than he ought to have been, con-
fidering its importance. A soldier who had served in
the garrison, and had been disgusted by obme ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the regent, endeavoured to de.
monitrate that it was practicable, and offered himself to
go the foremoit man on the enterprise. It was thought
prudenr to ri& any danger for so great a prize. Scaling.
ladders, and whatever eife might be necessary, were
prepared with the utmost fecrtcy and diipatch. All the
avenues to the castle were seized, that no inteillgence of
the drfign might reach the governor. Towards evening
Crawford marched from Glasgow with a Imail but de-
ternined band. By midnight they arrived at the bot-
tom of the rock. The moon was set, and the Iky,
which hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered
with a thick fog. It was where the rock was highelt
that the afiailants made their dttempt, because in that
place there were few centineis, and they huped to find
them least alert. The firit ladder was scarcely fixed,
when the weight and eagerness of tholi who mounted
brought it to the ground. None of the afslilants were
hurt by the fall, and none of the garrison alarrmed at
the noi"e. Their gutie and Craw for ld Ic-rabled up the
rock, and fafitncd the ladder to tlhe roots of a tree
which grew in a cleft. Ihis place they all reacilie
with the utmost difficulty, but were flill at a great tdil
tance from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was mai;
fast a second time; but in the middle of the alcent, tih:
met with an unforcleen difficulty. One oi their conipa-
rions was seizcd with obine ludden fit, and clung, Lc.:l-
ingly without life, to the laddtr. All were at a flanJ.
It V as inlpoalibii to ii. o tumble him h:.J-

vlo::g a, cru-!, anrd ii-.h:t t.ccai.:: a d.l'overv. ;ut

Crawford's presence of mind did not forsake him. He
ordered the soldier to be bound fait to the ladder, that
he might not fall when the fit was over, and turning
the other fide of tle ladder, they mounted with eale
over his belly. Day now began to break, and there ifill
remained a high wall to clale; but alter furinounting
fomany great difficulties, this was loon accompilhd.
A sentry ouoerved the firil man who appeared on
the parapet, and hadjult ti:;l to give the alarm, before
he was knocked on tle head. The oftiters and foidiers
of the garrilon ran out naked, unarmed, and more
anxious about tlieir own latety, than capable of mak-
ing rcfiftance. The ailklan.ts rushed forwa! ds, with re-
peated ihouts and with llie utmiot iury; took poffiffion
ot the llmagazine, lI .zed tUie Ca'llon; ad tuClled tlie
againll their lenemics. Lord IFlcnlng got into a limall
boat, and fled all alone into Akrgylllh'ire Crawturd,
in reward of ins valour and good conduct, remained
mailer of tile cltie; anld as lie did not lult a tingle
man in the tciitrpiile, lie enjoyed his liSiccers with un-
mixed plealure. Lady liltellng, Verac thle i rcl:' cn-
voy, and lamilton aihblihlop of St. Alidrcws, were
tle priloners of greatell tiillictionl *.

Verac's character prlotcied hinl from the utaie
'hiich he merited by his ac:lvity i, ftirri;:g u11 cnellies
againil the king. I'lhe lceg Il treated tlic .amy i.ti
great politeneis and hlIUi.i.t. But a Vt y dili_.ii'.
tate awaited the arcii)iih(op; lie was Call id 'ilder a
firong guard to Stirling; al.d asi e had ;orlcr'. been
attainttd by 3Ct of tparlil;i ehl, he x a=, ..tl!,out any
tormal trial, condc!nIcd to be h .liLcct ; aid o01 .le
tfeoitli day aiter lic ,jas laklen, thic lclitclln \xva L XC-
cuit.. ]All attenipt sas wl ade to collv'clt h Il ..l bcii r
ac.cliii-y :o the lmurder

l o

iul of the IKild ,;ii rctel.[,

bui thleic acculalions werti lupported ty 1iu prluvf.
Uit Iiiltori als olier ve, ii at lie was tile il, lt Iil.t p in
Icoltiand whli dii d byl' the lians oi til. c.xccoIniC . I lie
high; oilics he Hlad enjoycd, both in Chuicith and lh.:e,
outlit to hlave t beii.,l
;ud hli ionrllI a pui:.ttli.t11 ili-

at lhi. j54.

flifled only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for
the queen, his abilities, and his profession, rendered
him odious and formidable to the king's adherents.
Lennox hated him as the person by whose counsels the
reputationand power of the house of Hamiltan were sup-
rorted. Party rage and persona! enmity dictated that
indecent sentence, for which some colour was fought,
by imputing to him such odious crimes .

The lo!s of Dumbarton, and the severe treatment of

the archbishop, perplexed and enraged the queen's
party; and hostilities were renewed with all the fierce-
r.efs which disappointment and indignation can inspire.
Kirkaldv, who, during the truce, had taken care to in-
crease the nr.ruber of his garrison, and to provide every
thing necessary for a siege, issued a proclamation de-
claring Lennox's authority to be unlawful and usurped;
comrmanrdled all who favoured his canfe to leave the
town within fix hours; seized the arms helonging to the
citizens; planted a battery on the fleepie of St. Giles's,
repaired the wails, and f'ortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affeitions of the inhabitarnts leaned a
different way, held out the metropolis againfl the regent.
The duke, lhintly, Home, Herries, and other chiefs of
that faction, repaired to Edinburgh with their follow-
ers; and having received a small fum of money and
forre ammunition from France, form.cd no contempti-
ble army within the walls. Ou the ether fide, Morton
seized Lcith and fortified it; and the regent joined him
with a confiderahle body of men. While the armies
lay so near each other, daily fkirmiihes happened, and
with various fuccels. The queen's party was not flrong
enorgh to take the field against the regent, nor was his
superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the
caftie cr of the town t.

Some time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of

his enemies, the regent had summoned a parliament
to meet in that place, In order to prevent any objec-
rion, against the lawfulness of the meeting, the merm-
bers obeyed the proclamation as eactlly as possible; and

S* otfw. . 52. Cald. ii. z33, &c.

assembled in a house at the head of the Cannongate,
which, though without the walls, lies within the liber-
ties of the city. Kirkaldy exerted hirnfell to the ut-
molf to interrupt their meeting; but they were so
firongly guarded, that all efforts were vain. They pas-
fed an a& attainting Maitland and a few others, and then
adjourned to the althll of Augul ".

The other party, in order that their proceedings

mieht he counirenanced by the fame siew of legal au-
thority, held a meceing of parliiment soon after. I'here
was produced in this afli.mhly a declaration by the
queen of the invalliditv of that deed wher)veby fle ad re-
ined the crown, and contented to the oloinal ion of
her son. Conforniblec to this declaration, an adt was
passed, pronouncing the rtfignation to have bc'uec ex-
torted by fear; to lie null in iilelf, and in all its comiic-
quences; and enjoining all good til)ujccs to acknow-
ledge the queen alone to be their lawful lovrieign, and
to support thole who adted in her naine. The present
eflablifhment of the protestant religion was confirmed
by another flatute: aind in imitation of the adveriL
party, a new mieeting was appointed on the 2Otil of

Augiftt. Mean llile all the miseries of civil war desolated the
kingdom. Feliow-citizens, friends, brothers, took dif-
ferent fides, and ranged tllenimllves under the standards
of the contending lactin.-. In every county, and al-
molt in every town ant village, Kin.'^ mme and o atn'l
me., were nalns of dlill iCtion. Political hatred di£folv-
ed all natural ties, and t.xtinguifhed the reciprocal good-
will and corfidence which hold mankind together in so,
ciety. Religious zeal mingled itself with these civil di-
ftintions, and contributed not a little to heighten and
to inliame tienm.

1 he factions which divided the kingdom were in ap-
apearance only two. But in both thele there were per-
lons with views and principles so different from each o-
ther, that they ought to be distinguished. With some,
conliderations of religion were predominant, and they

Crawf. Memn. 7 7. t Id. ibid.

either adhered to the queen, because they hoped bI her
means to re-eflablifh popery, or they defended the king's
authority, as the best support of the proteflant faith. A-
mong these the opposition was violent and irrecornil.
able. Others were influenced by political motives onlh,
or allured by views of interest; the regent aimed at
uniting these, and did not despair of gaining by gentle
arts many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the
king's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed
the fame design of a coalition, but on Iuch terms that
the queen might be restored to ionil share in the go-
vernmernt, and the kingdom fhike off its dependence
on England. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious,
and the mofi powerful man of ihe king's party, held a
particular course; and moving only as he was p'ompled
by the court of England, thwarted every mcaftire that
t-rded towards a reconcilement cf the faqions; and as
lie ftrved Elizabeth w-ith nmch fidelity, he derived both
power and credit, from herr vowc proteciinn.

Tihe time appointed by both partics fi.r the meeting

of thir -arliaments now approached. Only three peers
and two bifnops appeared in that which was held in the
queen's name at Ediinurgh. But, contemlptible as
their numbers were, they passed an ad filr attaintit,.
upwards of two hundred of the advtrfe faction. '1 he
meeting at Stirlirg was numerous and ipler.did. Ti.c
regent had prevailed on the earls of Arevll, Eglinton,
Caf!s. and lord Boyd, to acknowlcede the king's au-
thority. ' he three earls were an!o:g the molt pow-
trri! noblemen in the kingdom, and lhadi hilherto been
zcaious in the queen's caule. Lord lovd had lbenl
one of Mary's commiffioneirs at York and 'vSetilminiiftr,
and since that time had been admitted into all her nrmtl
secret councils. But, during that tinri'lilent period, the
conduc of individuals, as well as the p-incil!es of sic-
tions, varied so often, that the fcitl- of honour, the
chief preservative of consistency in rharaAer, was en-
tirely loft; :nd, withcut any regard to decorum, entn
flddenlvahantdnrd cne party, and adopted all the vi.
oleCt iafioilst the other. lThe dcfc&tion, howcver, of

so many pcrfons of diftin'lion not only weakened the
queen's party, but added reputation to her adversaries.

After the example of the parliament at Edinburgh,

that at Stirling began with framing a(cs againfi the op-
polite faEtion. But in the midIft of all the security,
which confidence in their own numbers or diRance from
danger could inspire, they were awakened, early one
morning, by the Ihouts of the enemy in the heart of the
town. In a moaient tbe honles of every person of di-
Itincion were surrounded, and before they knew what
to thirk of so itrange an event, the regent, the earls of
Argyll, Morton, Glencainl, Caffils, Eglinton, Montrose,
Buchao, tle lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all
made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers, who were
teady to carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was tihe
author of this daring entcrpriie; and if he had not been
induced by the ill-timed anxiety of his fiiends about his
safety, not to hazard his own p-rfon in conduBcing it,
that dav would have terminated the contelt between the
two f.ta;ions, and have restored peace to his countrv. By
his direAion tour hundred men, under the comnmand ot
Hunrtl, lord Claud ilaitnilton, anti Scott of Buccleulh,
-set out from Edinburgh, and the better to conceal their
design, marched towards the south. llut they soon
wheeltd to the right, and horses having been providtd
for the infantry, rode Itraight to Stirling. By liur il
tile morning they arrived there; not one liLntry was post-
cd on the wails, nor a tingle man was awake about the
place. They met with no resistance f-roml any perlimn
they had feizetl, ex.cpt Morton. lce defending hli
liouit: with obftitintc valour, they aere obliged tol fit ii
on lire, and hl; did nmt lrtrcnder till forced out of it by
the flames. ln perfoifrning this, some time v as confurn-
ed; an,4 the private mIen, uliaccuftomcd to regular dil-
cipline, left their colours, and began to rille the liuniie.
andl !h!sp of thl ciliz:ls. T'he noite and uiproar in thl
towun reached the caill. The earl of M:r lii';id (o:
with tli;tv !oldiers; fire d briifkly upon tire ciltny, ot
wltinrt ahln,'t none but the ofiicrs kept toj-eirer in .L

bodv. T'ii.,

tcwlineil took arms to aliiIt thcil ge, vct;il:;

;. 'Id'.;. ;. .:i ti-t. [!;' ...:alts;

fuin, '.d,
:L% i

surrendered thermfnlves to their own prisoners; and had
not the borderers, who followed Scott, prevented a pur-
suit, by carrying off all the horses within the place, not
a man would have escaped. If the regent .had not un-
fortunately been killed, the loss on the king's fide would
have been as inconsiderable as the alar:n was great.
Tbink on ite arl.b.ep ns SI. AFmircvrs wasthe word among
the queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to his
memory. The officer to whom he surrendered, endea-
vouring to protect him, loft his own life in his defence.
-He was slain, according to the general opinion, by com-
mand of lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory
of concerting this plan with great fecreey and prudence;
but Morton's fortunate obflin4cy, and the want of dif-
cipline among his troops, deprived him of success, the
only thing wanting to render this equal to the mool ap.
plauded military enterprircs of the kind'.

As so many of the nobles were assembled, they pro-

ceeded without delay to the eledion of a regent. Argyll,
Morton, and Mar, were candidates for the office. Mlar
was chosen by a majority of voices. Amidst all the
fierce diflenfions which had prevailed so long in Scotland,
he had diflinguifhied himself by his moderation, his hu-
nanity, and his difinterefiednefs. And as his power
was far inferior to Argyll's, and lhis abiiities not so gre:,t
as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less formidabli
to the other nobles. His merit to.,, in having so latciy
rescued the leaders of the party si u.n imminicnt deftruc-
tion, contributed not a little to his pretl iment.

While there things were carrying on in Scotland, the

transactions in England wtre no lts intercioing to Mary,
and still more fatal to her cauwe. The parliament ci
that kingdom, which mat in April, passid an ad, 1w
which it was declared to be high trealbn to claim any
right to the crown during the life of the queen; to a5-
frm that the title of any other pcrfon w as bcier tlar.
her's, or to maintain that the parliament had not polcr
to fettle and to limit the order of fucccffion. This ;c-
r.arkable flatute was intended not only for the fecu;.;'

* clv. A?'. Crauw. MLcm. 2 c4.

of their own sovereign, hut to curb the restless and in-
triguing spirit of the Scottifn queen and ler adllerents'.

At this time a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth
and the duke of Anjou, the French king's brother, was
well advanced. Both courts seemed to desire it with e-
qual ardour, and gave out, with the utmofl confidence,
that it could not fail of taking place. Neither of them,
however, wished it success; and they encouraged it for
no other end, but because it served to cover or to pro-
mote their particular designs. The whole polic', of Ca-
therine of Medicis was bent towards the accotnpliflmcnt
of her detestable project for the defirudtion of the hugo-
not chiefs; and by carrying on a negotiation for the
marriage of her ibn with a princels who was jultly e-
fleerned the proteArefs of that party, by yielding some
things in point of religion, and by difcovcrin£. an indif-
ference with regard to others, the hopncd to anluie all the
protestants in Europe, and to lull asleep tllc jealousy e-
ven of the hugonots themselves. Elizabeth fliattercd
herrelf with reaping advantages of another kind. Dur-
ing the dependence of the negotia:icn, the French could
not with decency give any open affiltail:. to the Scotlifil
queen; if they conceived any hopes ol fucccfs in the
treaty of marriage, they would of coirfl' interCefi them-
itlves but coldly in her concerns: Mary l ucrilIf mull be
dejedcd with losing an ally, whom flie lad luithet io reck-
oned her mofl powerful protedtor; and by interrupting
her correspondence with France, one fourcc, at lI-!i, us
the cabals and intrigues which difllurbed the kintd!oin
would be flopt. Both queens lucceedd in their fihctlles.
Catherine's artifices impoltd on l'iizabeth, and blinded
the hugonots. The French difcovcred the utmofi indif-
ference about the interest of the Scottiff queen; and
Mary, conlidering that court as already united with her
rival, turned herself for protecltin wiith more eageruets
than ever towards the king of Spaint. Philip, wlhofe
(lark and thoughitfl miln deliglted in the n,yflt.ry of
intrigue, had held a secret correlpondcnce witlh M.ary for

* Camnid. 6. Digges, 144, 48. Camb. 4 24,
Vol. 11U, i

some time, by means of the bithop of Ross, and had sup.
plied both hersef and her adherents in Scotland with
fmal sims of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine gentle.
man, who resided at London under the charatqer of a
tanker, and who aAed privately as an agent for the
pope, was the person whom the bishop intrutded with
this negotiation. Mary thought it necessary likewise to
commnnicate the secret to the duke of Norfolk, whom
Elizabeth had lately reltored to liberty, upon his solemn
promise to have no farther intercourse with the queen
of Scots; which, however, he regarded so little, that
the took no ftep in any matter of moment without his
advice. She complained in a long letter, which she wrote
to him ir. cyphers, of the baseness with which the French
court had abandoned her interest, she declared her inten-
tion of imploring the afliftance of the Spanish monarch,
which was now her only resource; and recommended
Ridolphi to his confidence, as a peribn capable both of
explaining and of advancing the scheme. The duke
commanded iickford, his secretary, to decyphc-r, and
then to burn this letter; but whether he had been al-
readry gained l.y the court, orrefolved at that time to
h:trav- his nmater, he disobeyed the latter part of the or-
der, and hid the letter, together with other treafouable
papc-s, undTir the du'e's own bed.

Ridolpti., in a cor.f-erce with Norfolk, omitted none

cf these arzuTmcncr, an4 1'ared none of those promilis,
w.hichI are the ufeai Il-cntives to rebhilion. The pope,
lie told him, L-ad a great tum in reailiefs to belfow in
lo eeod a c2'zf.. T'rh dLk.: fs Alva had undertaken to
l:nd. ten th;uifnd m'rr nit far frlil London. 'lhe ca.
tl'olics to a man would rife in art-i. M!any of the no-
b!cs '-re ripe for a revoit, ,:d -wanted only a leader
ila-;f t;!e ration :ad turned their etes towards him, anl
cxpleaed hlim to '! veiige 0 li nueritcd injuries whicil
he himi.-!f had fificred; and , rtc rl'ite .n unfortunat,
qute.o', ,who c ere- .iiin her pert-I:! alni her crown as t':.
reward of his f'tc-e'. Nporfcoi' r pprovtc ol the deli
anl, tl;.'-;hl he rc.ui'-;d t') *-ive l!do¢:l;hii any lett. r .
!';: . ,4 _i c'a Ci '*.ilis -. . * ;':.- ': M~ ~:t' a:'o;: 1 0ii..;ng' ,.'

the pope and;Alva§. The bishop of Ross, who, from
the violence of his temper, and impatience to procure
relief for his mistress, was apt to run into rath and dcf-
perate designs, advised the duke to alfemble fccetly a
few of his followers, and at once to I'ize Elizabethl's
person. But this the duke rejedoed as a icheme equally
wild ardd hazardous. Mean while, the Englifa ccui c hlad
received some imperfedt information of the piot, by in-
tercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident
happened which brought to light all the circumltance3
of it. The duke had employed Hickford to tranfinit
to lord Herries some money which was to be diflribut-
ed among Mary's adherents in Scotland. A person not
in the secret was intrusted with conveying it to the bor-
ders, and he, fulpecting it from the weight to be ,gld,
whereas lie had been told that it was silver, carried it
diretlly to the privy council. The duke, his do:neflics,
and all who were privy, or could be 'ufpectcd of being
privy, to the design, were taken into cultody. Never
did the accomplices in a conspiracy dikovcr less firm.
ness, or lervants betray an indulgent inafter wirth great-
er baseness. Every one confitlied the whole of whlat
he knew. Hickford gave direchions how to find the
papers which he had hid. The duke himlelf, re!ling
at firit on the fidelity of his aflbriates, and believing all
dangerous papers io have been dellroyed, conlidently
alerted his own in.nocence; but when their depositions
and the papers thenfclves were produced, aflouilhed at
tlheir treachery, he acknowledged his guilt, andi implor-
ed the queen's merry. llis olffnce was too lheoious,
and too ofien repeated, to obtain pardon, and Elizabeth
thought it uecdlhrv to deter her fibjeifs, by his punish-
inent, from holding correspondence with the queen of
Scots, or her emilaries. Being tried by his peers, he
uas found guilty of high trealin, and, after fcvcral de-
lays, fufiered death for the crime t.
The discovery of this conlpiracy produced many es-

§ Andcrf iii 161.
* Anderl. iii. 497. State Trials, xS-.

ii 11

sets extremely detrimental to Mary's iitereft. The
bifflop of Ross, who appeared, by the confession of all
concerned, to be the prime mover in every cabal againlt
Elizabeth. was taken into custody, his papers searchcd,
himfclf committed to the Tower, treated with the ut-
most rigcur, threatened with capital punishment, and
after a long confinement, set at liberty, on condition
that he fho.ild leave the kingdom. Mary was not only
deprived of a fcrvant, equally eminent for his zeal and
his abi'iies, hut was denied from that time the privi-
lege of having an ambaflador at the English court. The
Spanish ambaiafador. whom the power and dignity of the
prince he reprefenlted exempted from such intults as
Rcfs had suffered, was commanded to leave England§.
Mary herfclf was kept under a firiler guard than (for-
merly, the number of her domestics abridged, and no
person permitted to fee her, but in presence of hei keep-
ers -

At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm

which was g:therinlg con the continent against her king-
dom, beg:in to wilh that tranquillity were restored in
Scotland: and irritated by Mary's late attempt against
her government, she determined to act, without difgnife
or ambiguity, in favour of the king's party. This rtfo-
lution ihe intimated to the leaders of both factions.
MAary, the told them, had held such a criminal corre-
fpondence with her avowed enemies, and had excited
such dangerous conspiracies both against her crown and
her life, that she would henceforth confider her as un-
worthy of protection, and would never consent to restore
her to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She
exhorted them, therefore, to unite in acknowledging
the king's authority. She promised to procure by her
mediation equitable terms for those who had hitherto
oppefed it. But if they still continued refractory, the
threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them
to rubmits. Though this declaration did not produce
an immediate effet; though hostilities continued in the

§ Digges, I63. i Strype, Ann. ii. 5o.

t See Append. No. IV.

neighbourhood of Edinburgh; though Hurldy's brother,
fir Adam Gordon, by his bravery and good conduc~,
had routed the king's adherents in the north in many
encounters; yet such an explicit dilsovery of Elizabeth's
sentiments contributed not a little to animate one party
and to depress the spirit and hopes of the other *.

As Morton, who commanded the regent's forces, lay

at Leith, and Kirkaldy fRill held out the town and caille
of Edinburgh, scarce a day pafTedr without a skirmish;
and while both avoided any decisive action, they haraf-
fed each other by attacking fniall parties, beating up
quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
tiough little memorable in therofelves, kept the passions
of both fadlions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury, which
rendered them regardless not only of the laws of war,
but of the principles of humanity. Nor was it in the
field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this im-
placable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prison-
ers they took, of whatever rank or quality, without
mercy, amd without trial. Great numbers flffered in
this shocking manner: and the unhappy viacims were
led, bv fifties at a time, to execution; and it was not
till both fides had smarted severely, that they difconti-
nued this barbarous pra.cice, so reproachful to the cha-
racrer of the nationt. Mean s hile thol in the town and
cafile, though they had received a supply of money from
the duke of Alvall, began to susser for want of provisions.
As Morton had destroyed all the mills in the neighbour-
hood of the city, and had planted finall garrisons in all
the houses of strength around it, scarcity daily encreafed.
At last all the mileries of fanine were felt, and they
must have been soon reduced to such extremities, as
would have forced them to capitulate, if the English and
French ambassadors hadl not procured a fulpenlion of
hostilities between the tw.qv parties §.
Though the negotiation for a marriage between Eli-

' Cald. ii. 289, 294. Strype, ii. 76.
Crawf. Mem. zI2, 2o. 0 i Cald. ii. 345. § Ibid. 346.

113

zabeth and the duke of Anjou had been fruitless, both
Charles and ihe were desirous of concluding a defensive
alliance between the two crowns. He confidered such
a treaty, not only as the best device for blinding the pro-
teftan.s, the conspiracy againit whom was now almost
ripe for execution; but as a good precaution likewi'e
againr. the dangerous consequences to which that atro-
cious measure might expofehim Elizabeth, who had
hitherto reigned without a single ally, now saw her king-
dom so threatened with mitftine commotions, or expo-
fed to invasions from abroad, that she was extremely so-
licitcus to fccure the assistance of so powerful a neigh-
hour. The difficuities arising from the situation of the
Scottish queen were the chief occasions of any delay.
Charles demanded some terms of advantage lor Mary
and her adhlerents. Elizabeth refused to liften to any
prcpofition of that kind. Her obfiinacy overcame the
taint efforts of the French monarch. Mary's name was
nrt so much as mentioned in the treaty; and with re-
gard 'o Scottish affairs, a short article was infcrred, in
general and ani.biguous terms, to this purpose; " That
the parties cmntrading shall make no innovations in
Sco!';:":; nor uffier any firanger to enter, and to so-
ment ti:e f.dions there; but it shall be lawful for the
queen of England to chailife by force of arms, thole
Sects xtho shall continue to harbour the Engliih rebels
now\ in Scor!arnd.''

In consequence of this treaty, France and England as-

fedied to ade in olocert with recard to Scotland, andl
Le Crcc an' i':. V\i!liatl, I)'.r, aplaricd there, in
namr.e of'their rcfpc fi.-e iloerci';-ns. Pv their nidi:.-
tic:. ;-:ier e

for *:,o mor his w.s agrced icon., and! ltr-

illn ti;at tliic c,;:! r -"cs wU.r to i)c hetId lt'lcwti ti.c
ler'.':r of the oprlofte lactimis, in ordcr to ac-onnlio-
date their cifreren. es and reltore peace to the kingcliin.
'Th- truce afi (rdcld a lealoa i',;'c inr. al of tranquiilhty
t'. the queu 's adherents i;: the eouih: but in tlh north

, rrovc:d t:; o icr nii relt. Si! Adaii (Gor.ii ;Li h
i:,ii maint ined his repination and flupcriority there. b,.-

5 D :l ':s 1 ,C, 1 19. C 4.':d. 4-

veral parties, under different officers, were sent againit
him. Some of them he attacked in the field; against
others he employed flratagem; and as his courage and
condu&t were equal, none of his enterprises failed of fuc-
cess. He made war too with the humanity which be-
came so gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no
less than by the terror of his arms. If he had not been
obliged by the truce to suspend his operations, he would
in all probability have brought that part of the kingdom
to submit entirely to the queen's authorityt.

Notwithstanding Gordon's bravery and success, Ma-

ry's interest was on the decline, not only in her own
kingdom, but among the English. Nothing could be
more offensive to that nation, jealous of foreigners, and
terrified at the prolpea of the Spanish yoke, than her
negotiations with the duke of Alva. The parliament,
which met in May, proceeded againfl her as the molt
dangerous enemy of the kingdom; and after a 'olcimn
conference between the lords and commons, both houles
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of
hligh treason, anti to deprive her of all right of fuccef-
sion to the crown. This grat ratlfe as it was then called,
occupied them during the whole fIflion, and was car-
ried on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though fne
applauded their zeal, and approved much of the couri:
they were taking, was latisfied with Ihowing Mary
what fhe'might expecl from the relkntment of the na-
tion; but as she did not yet think it time to proceed to
tlc moss violent extremity agailt her, the prorogued
the parliament .

'I hefc severe proceedings of the English parliament

were not more mortity'i.g to Mary, than the cok!incls
a*id neglcE of her allies tile relch. 'Tlie duke of
Montniorency, who came over to ratify tihe lcgue
with Elizabeth, made a shew of interefling himl'clt in
her favour; but, inllead of obliclting for her liberty, or
her reitoration to her throne, all that he demanded
was a flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprilfni-
nient. And even this finall requlct he urged u itl: lo

Crawf. IMel . * D'Evwcs, Jurn. ac6, &c.

little warmth or importunity, that no regard was paid
to it .

The alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much

fatisfacion, and he expecled from it a great increale nif
fecuritv, She now turned her whole attention to.
wards Scotland, where the animofities of the two sac.
tions were still fn high, and so many interfering intertets
to he adjufled, that a general pacification feeined to he
at a .reat distance. But while The laboured to bring
them to some agreement, an event happened which fil-
led a great part of Europe with afionifhment and with
hIrror. This was the maflacre at Paris; an attenmp,
to which there is no parallel in the history of mankinl,
either for-the dilfrmolation which led to it, or for the
cnreity and barbarity with which it was put in execu-
tion. By the moRt solemn promises of lafety and of
favour, the leaders of the proteftlnts were drawn :o
court; and though doomed to deflruction, they wrre
received with cariefrs, loaded with honours, and treated,
for seven months, u ith every pofflile mark of familiarity
and of confidence. In themidltol their fecuritv, the wasr-
rant for their deftru&cion was issued Aug. 24, r. 72, by
their sovereign, on whose word they had relied ;. and,
in obedience to it, their countrymen, their feliow-ci-
tizcns and companions, imbrued their hands in their
blood. Ten thousand proteflants, without difiinclion
of age, or sex, or condition, were murdered in Paris .-
lone. The fame barbarous orders were Tent to other
parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, xh;ch no popish writer, in the present age, men-
tions vithout deteflation, was at that time applauded in
Spain; and at Rome solemn thanksgivings were oflered
to God for its success But among the proteflants, i:
excited incredible horror; a firiking picrure of w]lich
is drawn by the French ambafiador at the court nt
Ergland, in his account of his first audience after the
m:;fa-re. " A gloomy sorrow," fays he, " fat on eve
ry lace; fcence, as in the dead of night, reigned thro'
all the chambers of the royal apartment; the lad(ic

t Jebb, ii. 512.

and courtiers were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep
mourning, and as I passed through them, not one be-
llowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to
my falultes ."

But horror was not the only passion with which this

event inlfired the protestants; it filled them with fear.
They confidered it as the prelude to some greater blow,
and believed, not without great probability, that all
the popish princes had conspired the defiruiticn of their
sea. This opinion was of no small disservice to Ma-
rv's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were
protestants; and though they wished her restoration,
were not willing, however, on that account, tto acrifice
the faith which they professed. They dreaded her at-
tachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to
violate the most folenn engagements, and prompted
them to perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A gene-
ral confederacy of the protestants seemed to them, the
only thing that could uphold the reformation, against
thle league which was formed to overturn it. Nor
could the present establishment of religion be long
maintained in Britain, but by a ftrilt union with Eli-
zabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations, in e-
fponfing the defence of it, as a common caufet-.

The regent took hold of this favourable conjuncAure
for negotiating a general peace. And as he laboured
for this purpole, with the utmost zeal, and the adverse
facion placed entire confidence in his integrity, his en-
deavours could scarce have failed of being uccefsful.
Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement
with him, that scarce any thing remained, except the
formality offigning the treaty. But Morton had not
forgotten the disappointment he met with in his pre-
tensions to the regency; his abilities, his wealth, and the
patronage of the court of England, gave him greater
sway with the party, than even the regent himself; and
he took pleasure in thwarting every mealure purlued
by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and his affo-
clates recovered any ihare in the adminifiration, his own

' Carte, iii. 522. tDigges, 244, 267.

influence *oiald be considerably diminished; and the
regent, by their means, would regain that afcendcnt,
which belonged to his station. With him, concurred
all those, who were in possession of the lands, which
belonged to any of the queen's party. And his ambi.
tion, and their avarice, frustrated the regent's pious in.
tentions, and retarded a blessing so necefllry to the king.
dom, as the eftabliument ofpeacet.

Such a difcoverv of the felfifinefs and ambition whicl

reigned among his party, made a deep impression on the
regent, who loved his country, and wished for peace
with much ardour. This inward grief broke his spirit,
and by degrees brought on a fettled melancholy, that
ended in a distemper, of which he died on the 29th of
Ocober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the king-
dom who could have enjoyed the office of regent with-
out envy, and have left it without loss of reputati.n.
Notwithitanding their mutual animofities, both faclions
acknowledged his views to be honourable, and his inte.
griyr to he uncorrupted'.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The

queen of England powerfullv supported his claim; and
notwithfianding the fears of the people, and tltejealofyv
of the nobles, he was eleded regent; the fourth wh;,
in the spare of five years had held that dangerous oflii e,

As the truce had been prolonged to the firit of January,

this gave him an opportunity of continuing the negoti-
ations with the opposite party, which had been ket on
foot by his predecessor. 'lhey produced no cffcts, how-
ever, till the beginning of the next year.

Before we proceed to these, sone events, hilherto un-
touched, deserve our notice.

The earl of Northumberland, who had been kept pri.

forer in Lochlevin ever since his flight into Scotland in
the year 1569, was given up to lord Hunldon, governor
of Berwick; and being carried to York, fuffrred there
the Tunifnmcnt of his rebellion The king's party de-
pentred so entirely on Elizabeth's protection, that it w:l
icarce possible for them to reffie putting into her hanil
t I Mlv. :;j. Crawf. Mem. 237. * Crawl. Mem. :, .

a person who had taken up arms against her; but as a
fum of money was paid on that account, and lhared be-
tween Morton and Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of
whom, during his exile in England, had been much in-
detted to Northumberland's friendlhip, the abandoning
this unhappy nobleman, in such a mannaer to certain dt-
ItruRion, was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary ac-
tionet.

This year was remarkable for a considerable innova-
tion in the government oflthe church. Soon after the
Reformation, the popish bilhops had been confirlned by
law in pofFellion of part of their benefices; the ipiritual
jurilieition, which belonged to their order, was cxrrcil-
,d hy fupcrintendents, but with more moderate autihori-
tv. On the death of the arclbilhop of St. Andrews,
Morton obtained frorn the crown a grant of the tempo-
ralities of that fee. B3ut as it was thought indecent for a
layman to hold a benefice to which the cure of ibuls was
annexed, he procured Douglas, re-tor of the nniverlity
of St. Andrews, to be chofcn archbi£shop; and, alloting
him a finall penfiron out of tl.c revenues of tle fie, re-
tained the remainder in his own ihands. The nobles,
lh)o saw the advantages they inight reap from such a
practice, supported lim in the execution of his plan.
It gave great ofielnce, loa e er, to tile clergy, who, in-
l:.ad of perpetuating ani order whole uamnl andl power
v as odious to themn, wis.hed lthat tile revenurs xihich
hd belonged to it rfight be employed in luppyisg l such
pariihes as were itill unplrovledt with fcttled pallors.
:ut, onl the one hand, it would have been ralh in the
t:-.. to Ihave irritated too nmicl noblemen, u l x\ holn
i.e crry xiittence of the pioteltaI chur:lch in .Scoi Iad
r'lpeielllcd; and Murt.n, oil the uthcr, cuit!ug'cid !,is
I iic ne wtiri itch dexterity, and managed tlhen witi lo
iIutjl art, tllhat it was at lail agried, in a convntic1o
o0mpolcd of the leading men among the clergy, t' O-
;icr with a coimnittee of privy council, '1 i!at tlie
nqnle and offiee of archbifillp aud bilhop fi!ou!Ld 'be c,-
.:,,i.d durng t the k inLgs minority, and theilei ti.:::.; i.

tCrv.f.. i:, 2:2. t_;X:J. 4- , ·

conferred upon the best qualified among ,the-,protefiant
nuinifers; but that, with regard to their fpiritual-jurif.
di&ions, -they should be fubjeft to the general.affcmbly
of the church." The rules to be observed in their, elec.
tionand the persons who were to supply theplace, alid
enjoy the privileges which belonged to the ,dean and
chapter in tim.es of popery, wvere likewise .particularly
fpccified. The whole being laid before the general as.
fembly, after some exceptions to the name p£,f,,cb/.p,
dean, dcapfrr, &c. and a protestation that.it ihould be con-
fidered only as a temporary constitution, until one nlore
perfect could be introduced, it obtained.the approbation
of that courtt. Even Knox, .x\ ho was prevented from
attending the aflembly by the ill fate of hiis health, tho'
he declaimed loudly againfl the fimoniacal paction to
which Douglas owed his preferment, and blamed the
normination of a person worn out with age and infirmi-
ties, to an office which required unimpaired vigour both
of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the convention; and, in a letter to thl
assembly, recommended some of their regulations wiil
refpeEt to the election of biflops, as worthy of bring
carefully obfervedj. In consequence of the aicniLbly'
content to the plan agreed upon in the.convcntion, Dou-
glas was installed in his office; and at the falne timr an
archbiihop of Glasgow, and a bilhop of Dunkeld, were
chosen from among the proteflant clergy. They were
all admitted to the place in parliament which belonged
.to the ecclefiafiical order. But, in imitation of the cx.
ample Let by Morton, such padions were made w;th
them by different noblemen, as gave them poiiieflon on-
ly of a very frnall part of the revenues belonging to tlicir
fees.

.Soon after the diifolution of this aflembly, Knox, the
prime infirurmnt of spreading and eftabflfiping the re-
orined r iigion in Scotland, ended his life, in the fixt)-
fzVcnth year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, difintcrc.i-
.duis, were virtues whi'ch he ptffcised in an enil!iclt:

Clid. ii .
i ' Id. 3t.-4. See Applcnd. No. V'

i! Si.tI': z51.

degree. He was acquainted too with the learning.-cul-
tivated among divines in that age; and excelled in that
species of eloquence which is calculated to rouse and
to inflame. His maxims, er,

ho erwere often too

severe, and the impetuosity of his temper exceflive.
Rigid and uncomplying himself, he thewed no indul-
gence to the infirmities of others. Regardless of the
diltinction of rank and character, he uttered his ad-
mnnitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to
irritate than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into
indecent and undutiful exprefflons with reipcft to the
queen's person and conduct. Those very qualities, how-
ever, which now render his charaIler less amiable, fitted
him to be the infirument of Providence for advancing
the Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled
him to face dangers, and to surmount oppofit.on, from
which a person of a more gentle spirit would have brenl
apt to ihrink back. By an unwearied application to
isldy and to business, as well as by the frequency and
fervour of his public discourses, he had worn out a
constitution naturally robust. During a liugering ill-
ness he discovered the utmost fortitude; and met the ap-
proaches of death with a magnanimity irnfpara-ble fin-om
his eharacter. He was conltantly employed in acts of
devotion, and comforted hinficlf with thotr profpedt
of immortality which not onih preserve good men
from desponding, but fill them with exultation in their
last moments. The earl of Morton, w.rho was prelient
2t his funeral, pronounced his ellagium in a few
worils, the more honourable for Knox as they came
from one whom he had often ceniured with peculiar
severity: " There lies He, who never feared the face
of man §."

Though Morton did not desire peace from such ge-
nerous motives as the former regent, he laboured, how-
ever in good earnest, to eflabliffi it. The public con-
furions and calamities to which he owed his power
and importance when he was only the second i.erfon

§ d. 646. Cald.iL a3.
Vol. I1. 1

in the nation, were extremely detrimental to him, now
that he was raised to be the first. While so many of
the nobles continued in arms against him, his authority
as regent was partial, feeble, and precarious. Eliza-
beth was no less desirous of extinguilhing the flaime
which (he had kindled and kept so long alive in Scut-
landt. She had discovercd the alliance with Fran',
from which he had expeded ficlh advantages, to I,
no foundat'in of iecurity. Though apptalancts ,-
friendlhip fli i fubfifecd betvween her and that court, aii;
Charles daily renewed his proteitations of inviolan e
adherence to the treaty, she was convinced, by a a:i:
example, how little f:e aught to rely on the proFi,!;
or oaths of that perfidious monarch. Her amlallE(trr
warned her that the French held ferret correfpondcnce
with Mary's zdherents in Scotland, and encouraged
them in their obfa.r.ncv; . The duke of Alva caricti
cn his intrigues in that kingdom m ith le!s dnguife. Si.e
was persuadcd that they would embrace the firfl sere',t
interval, which the commotions in F1rance and in the
NTetherl!nds ouid allow them, aid npenly attempt to
land in Sculand. She resolved, thtref're, to prev-r:
their getting zny footing in the island, and to cut off:.
their hopes of finding any affltance there by unitii.;
the two parties.

The situation of vI'rv's adherents enabled the rcgeg'

to carry on his nego:iations with them to great adva:t.
tage. They were now divided into tw.o fdCtions. A'
the head of the one were Chatelherault and Hurnev.
Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the othce.
Their high rank, their extensive property, and tl'c
numbers of their followers, rendered the former coilfi-
rierable. The latter were indebted for their importane
to their perfoial abilities, and to the strength of i:i
caitle of Edinburgh, which was in their pc.llTfiion. 'Ihl
regent had no intention to comprehend both in *r.
fame treaty; but as lie dreaded that the queen's parr,
if it remained entire, would be able to thwart and i::.r
barraft his adniniftration, he resolved to diviit a:.

-Diggcs, :499. !il.i 2d;s, 3z,

weaken it, by a separate negotiation. He made the firit
overture to Kirkaldy and his associates, and endeavour-
ed to renew the negotiation with them, which, during
the life of his predeeflror, had been broken off by his
own artifices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's views and
system of government to be very different from those
ot the former regent. Maitland confidered him as a
personal and implacable enemy. They received re-
peated afflirances ls proreelion from France; and
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French arms
at that time, the fanne hopes, which had so often de-
ceived the party, still amused them, and they expcCted
that the obltinacy of the hugonots would soon be sub-
dued, and that Charles would then be at liberty to aCt
with vigour in Scotland. Mean while, a flipply of mo-
ney was sent, and if the castle could be held out till
Whitfunday, effectual aid was promiecd*. Maitland's
genius delighted in' forming schemes that were enter-
prifing and dangerous; and Kirkaidy poTffi.fd the in-
trepidity necessary for putting them in execution. The
caltle, they knew, was so situated, that it might defy
all the regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would
not violate the treaty with France, by fending forces
to his assistance; and if the French should be able to
land any considerable body of men, it might be poffi-
ble to deliver the queen from captivity, or at leait to
balance the influence of France and England in such a
manner, as to rescue Scotland from the dishonourable
dependence upon the latter, under which it had fallen.
This splendid but chimerical project they preferred to
the friendship of Morton They encouraged the nego-
tiation, however, because it served to gain time; they
propoled, for the fame purpose, that the whole of the
queen's party Ihould be comprehended in it, and that
Kirkaldy should retain the command of the castle fix
months after the treaty was signed. His interest
prompted the regent to rejec the former; his penetra-

- Digges 314.

I

tion suggested the danger of compl-ing with the'latter;
and all hopes of accommodation vaniLhed t.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire

on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the
inhabitants whom he had expelled, was devoted as
zealoufy as ever to-the king's cause. But as the' regent
had now set on foot a treaty with Chatelherault and
Huntly, the cessation of arms till continued with
them.

They were less scrupulous than the other party, and

lftened eagerly to his overtures. The duke was natur.
ally unsteady, and the approach of old age increaled
his irresolution, and aversion to a6ioin. The miseries
of civil discord had afflicted Scotland almost five years,
a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing fernice, had been
detrimental to the queen; and more ruinous than any
foreign invasion to the kingdom. In prosecuting it,
feither party had gained much honour; both had sus-
sered great losses, and had exhausted their own eftateq,
in waftingo those of their adversaries. The commons
were in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a
peace, which might terminate this fruitless but deitruc-
tivc quarrel.

A great ftep was taken towards this desirable event,

By the treaty concluded at Perth, between the regent
on one hand, and Chatelherault and Huntly on the
other, under the mediation of Kil-egrew, Eliza,-eth's
ambafidor+. The chief articles in it were there; that
all the parties comprehended in the treaty should de-
clare their approbation of the reformed religion, now
eflablifhed in the kingdom; that they should fibruvit to
the kings government, and ownn Morton's authority
as regent; that they fhoild acknowledge every: thing
done in oppofiticn to the king, fmce his cordnition, to
be illegal; that on both fide? ,he prisoners who-had been
taken ihonld be set at liberty, and the lands reflored to
their proper-owners; that the aat of attainder paffcl
against the queen's adherents Ihould be repealed, and

4Melv. 235, &c. t See Append. No. V[.

indemnity granted for all the crimes of which they had
been guilty since the fifteenth of June, I567; and that
the treaty should be ratified by the common conlent of
both parties in parliament t.

Kirkaidy, though abandoned by his associates, who

neither discovered solicitude nor made provision for his
safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain any thoughts
of accommodation§. Though all Scotland had now
submitted to the king, he itill resolved to defend the
cattle in the queen's name, and to wait the arrival of
the promised succours. The regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Eli-
zabeth, who determined at any rate to bring the dif-
fenfions in Scotland to a period, before the French could
find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded
him sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury mahched
into Scotland with fifteen hundred foot, and ;- -oolider-
able train of artillery. The regent joined him wit
all his forces; and trenches were openeri and ap-
proaches regularly carried on agains:t he ciftle. Kirk-
aldy, though dilitouraged by the lols of - g.eat furm

f Crawf. Mem. z5 .

§ Melvil, whose brother, fir Robern, ;.. one of tl:ofe

whojoined with Kirkaidy in the defence i the caflle, and
who was himself Ilrongly attached to their party, ailcrrs
that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reasonable termn
of composition, but that all his offers were rejected by
tile regent. Mclv. 240. But as Elizabeth was, at that
time, extremely desirous of refloring peace in Scotland,
and her ambafTl ior Killercw, as well as the earl of
Rothes, used their utmolt endeavours to persuade Kir-
kaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more
credible to impute the continuanceo' hostilities to tlK-k-
aldy's obstinacy, his diltruft of Morton, or his hope of
foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe is evident from the poli-

tive teflimonyof Spotfw. z29, Z70. Camd.448. Johult.
Hilt. 3, 4. Digges, 334. Crawford's accou t ag-ees,
the main, w:th theirs, Mem. 263.

I3

d.of mniiev,'reiitted to hinj from Fraice, and which
fel'in.to the regent's hands trroUgh the treachery of
fJf :ames BilFour the most cortupt man of that age,
defeneid liimfelf with bravery, aucinented by despair.
Thiee-an,-thirtv days he refifed all the efforts of the
Scots asnd English, who pulhed on their attacks with
courage, and with emulation. Nor did he demand a
parley, till the fortifications were battered down, and
one of the wells in the castle dried up, ard the oth;.r
choaked with rubbilh. Even then, his tpirit was iuufrb-
dued, and le determined rather to fall gloriouflv be
hind the lat intrenchment, than to yield to his inve-
terate enemies. But his garrison was not animated
with the fame heroic or desperate resolution4 and, rising
ir a muriny, forced him to capirtlate. He firrendcrre
h;mrelf to Drury, who promised in the name of his
mniftrefs, that he should be favourably treated. T>o-
gether with him, James Kirkairly his brother, lor,l
Home, Maitiand, fir Robert Melvil, a few citizens or
Edinburgh, and about one hundred anrd sixty soldiers,
were made prisoners 5.

Several of the officers, who had been kept in p.y

during the war, prevailed on their men to accompany
them into the Low-countries, antd entering into the
service of the states, added, by their gallant behlaviollr,
to the reputation for military virtue, which has alayss
been the cha-raReriRic of the Scottish nation.

Thus by the treaty with Chatelherault and FHuntly,

and the farrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scot-
land were brought to a period. When we review the
state of the nation, and compare the strength of the
two faaioi s, Mary's partisans among the nobles ap-
pear, maniftetly, to have been superior both in num-
bers and in poxer. But these advantages -vere mori
than counterbalanced by others, which their antago-
nifts enjoyed. Political abilities, military iiil, and a.
the talenis which times of action form, or call forti:,
appeared chiefly on the king's fide.- Nor could t!hei:
enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrc-

C=d. ii. 4c. . Mliv. zc. Cra-'1'. lcm. 26z,

piditv of Murray, tempered with wlfdom; the pro-
fiund sagacity of Morton; the subtle genius, and in,
lintating address of Maitland; or the fticcefsful valour
of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed in lay-
ing the foundations of the king's authority. On the
one fide, meaflres were concerted with prudence, and
executed with vigour; on the other, their resolutions
were rafb, and their conduc feeble. The people, aniT
mated with zeal for religion, and prompted by indig.
nation aFainft the queen, warmly flpported the king's
cause. I'he clergy threw the whole weight of their
p pularitr into the fame scale. By means of these, as
well as by the powerful interposition of England, the
king's government was finally eftabli(hed. Mary loft
even that shadow of sovereignty, which, amidst all her
fuiffriiugs, she had hitherto retained among her own
rubiecas. And as he was no longer permitted to have
art ambassador at the court of England, the only mark
ns digtnitv which ih- had, for ibme time, enjoyed there,
ihe mnltt heiiceforth be confidered as an exile stripped
or all the enfigmns of royalty; guarded with anxiety in
the one kingdom, and totally deserted or forgotten in
the other.

Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's
cilflody, and were treated by him with great humanity,
until tihe queen of Erigland, whole prilbners they were,
iould determine their fate. Morton iufllted that they
fi/Luid susser the punishment due to their rebellion and
obhlinacy; and declared that so long as they were al-
i. wed to live, he did not reckon his own person or
au!thority secure; and Elizabeth, without regarding
Drury's honour, or his promiles in her name, aban-
doned them to the regent s disposal. He flrt confined
them to separate prilbns; and soon after, with Eliza-
beth's conlent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother,
to be hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland,
'rlio did not expec to be treated more favourably, pre-
vented the ignominy of a public execution, by a volun.
tary death, and " ended his days," fays Melvil, after

tihe old Roman fashion."
Whili tl e regent was wreaking his vengeance oq

the remains of hes party in Scotland, Mary, incapable
of affording them any relief, bewailed their- misfor-
tunes in the solitude of her prison. At the fame time
her health began to be much impaired by confinement
and want of exercise. At the entreaty of the French
ambaflador, lord Shrewsbury her keeper, was permitted
to carry her to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury,
the place of her imprisonment. Cecil, who had lately
been created baron of Burleigh, and lord high trea.
furer of England, happened to be there at the fame
time. Though no minister ever entered more warmly
into the views of a sovereign, or gave fironger proofl
of his fidelity and attachment, than this great man,
yet such was Elizabeth's diltruft of every person who
approached the queen of Scots, that her suspicions, in
consequence of this interview, seem to have extended
even to him; and, while Mary justly reckoned him
her most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty in
persuading his own mistress that he was not partial to
that unhappy queen'.

The duke of Alva was this year recalled from the

government of the Netherlands, where his haughty
and oppressive admiiiftration roused a spirit, in at-
tempting to subdue which, Spain exhausted its trea-
fures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens,
who succeeded him, was of a' milder temper, and of a
less enterprising genius. This event delivered Eliza-
beth from the perpetual disquietude, occasioned by A!-
va's negoatations with the Scottifi queen, and his zeal
for her interest.

Though the kingdom was now fettled in profound

peace, many of the evils which accompany civil war
were still felt. The restraints of law, which, in times
of public confusion, are little regarded even by civilized
nations, were totally defpiled by fierce people, unac-
ctiffomed to the regular administration of justice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become
intolerable; and, under the protection of the one or the
other fa&ion, crimes of every kind were committed

' Strype, ii. 248, 258.

with impunity. The-regent set himnfelf to redress thefeL
and by his indufiry and vigour, order and security were
re-eilablilhed.in the kingdom. But he loft the reputa-
tion due to this important service, by the avarice
which he discovered in performing it; and his own
exactions became more pernicious to the nation than
all the irregularities which he restrained §. Spies and
informers were every where employed; the remem-
brance of old offences was revived; imaginary crimes
were invented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and

.dlinquents were forced to compound for their livess

by the payment of exorbitant fines. At the fame time
the current coin was debased+; licences were fold
for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce; un-
ufial taxes were imposed on commodities; and all the
refinements in oppression, from which nations so imper-
fectly polished as the Scots are usually exempted, were
put in pradlice. None oft these were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injufice
towards the church. The thirds of benefices, out of
which the clergy received their fuhfiftence, had been
slowly and irregularly paid to collecors appointed by
the general aflmbly; and, during the civil wars, no
payment could be obtained in several parts of the king-
dom. Under colour of redressing this grievance, and
upon a promise of afligning every ninifter a fiipend

§ See Append. NoG VII.

+The corruption of the coin, during Morton's ad-
minifiration, was very great. Although the quantity
of currenit money coined out of a pound of bullion,
was gradually iricreafed by former princes; the stand-
ard o, firenefs fufcered little alteration, and the mixture
of alloy was nearly the famve with what is now used.
But Morton mixed a fourth part of alloy with every
pound of fiver, and fudk, by consequence, the value
of coin in proportion. In the year is8r, all the money
coined' by him was called in, and appointed to be re-
coined. The standard was restored to the fame purity
as fonnerly. Ruddim. Pref. to Aaderf. Diplolu.
p. 74.

within his own parish, the regent extorted from the
church the-thirds to which they had right by law.
But the clergy, inflead of reaping any advantage from
this alteration, found that payments became more irre-
gular and dilatory than ever. One minister with a
pitiful salary, was commonly burdened with the care
of four.or five parishes, and the regent's insatiable ava-
rice seized on the reft of the fund *.

The death of Charles IX. which happened this year,

was a new misfortune to the Scottish queen. Henry
III. who succeeded him, had not the fame attachment
to her person; and his jealousy of the house of Guise,
and obsequiousness to the queen's mother, greatly alien.
ated him from her interet. The death of the duke of
Chatelherault muff likewise be.confidered as some loss
to Mary. As the parliament had frequently declared
him next heir to the crown, this entitled him to great
refpeA among his countrymen, and enabled him, more
than any other person in the kingdom, to counterba-
lance the regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the usual interviews between

the wardens of the Scottish and English marches, a
scuffle happened, in which the English were worsted;
a few killed on the spot; and fir James Forester, the
warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the regent
were too sensible of the advantage which resulted from
the good understanding that fuhfifted between the
two kingdoms, to allow this flight accident to inter
rupt it.

The domelic tranquillity of the kingdom was in

some danger of being disturbed by another cause.
Though the persons raised to the dignity of bishops
poffelTed very small revenues, and a very moderate de-
gree of power, the clergy, to whom the regent and all
his measures were become extremely odious, began to
be jealous of that order. Knowing that corruptions
fleal into the church gradually, under honourable
names, and upon decent pretences, they were afraid

Crawf. Mem. z72. Spots. 273. Cald. ii. 420. 427-

that, from such small beginnings, the hierarchy might
grow in time to he as powerful and oppressive as ever.
The chief author of these suspicions was Mr. Andrew
MIelvil, a man distinguished by his uncommon erudi-
tion, by the severity of his manners, and the intrepi-
dity of his mind. But, bred up in the retirement of
an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he pur-
sued, than to the means which he employed for pro-
moting them, he often defeated laudable designs, by
the impetuosity and imprudence with which he carried
them on. A question was moved by him in the assem-
hlv, " whether the office of bishop, as now excrcifed
in the kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?"
in the ccclefiaflical judicatories, continual complaints
were made of the bilhops for neglect of duty, many of
whihl their known rcniffnels too wcil justified. The
bilhop of Dunkeld, being accured of dilapidating his
benefice, was found guilty by the alfembly. And the
regent, inflead of checking, connived at these disputes
about ecclefiaflical government, as they diverted the
zeal of the clergy from attending to his daily encroach-
ments on the patrimony of the chulrch .

The weight of the regent's oppressive adminifiration

bad, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower and
middle rank, but he began now to take such steps as
convinced the nobles, that their dignity would not long
exempt them from feeling the effect s of his power.
An accident, which was a frequent cause of dissension
amnog the Scottish nobles, occalioned a difference be-
tween the earls of Argyll and Athol. A vassal of the
former had made some depredations on the lands of the
latter. Athol took arms to punish the offender; Argyll,
to protecl him; and this ignoble quarrel they) were rea-
dy to decide in the field, when the regent, by interpo-
sing his authority, obliged them to dilband their forces.
Both of them had been gLuilty of irregularities, which,
though common were contrary to the letter of the law.
Of these the regent took advan'age, and resolved to

'CaJd. AiTemblics, ;5 74, &c. JAhilft. I-Iis. is.

found them on a charge of treason. 'This design wva
revealed to the two earls by one of Morcon's retainrs,
Tlhecommon danger to which they were exposed, aom-
pelled them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a
cdIfe confederacy for their mutual defence. Their
junction rendered them formidable; they despised the
summons which the regent gave them to appear before
a court of juflice; and he was obliged to desist from
any further prosecution. But the injury he intended
made a deep impression, and drew on hun revere ven.
geance '.

Nor was he more fuccefful in an attempt which he

made, to load lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of
laving formed a conspiracy againfl his life. Though
those who were fnppofed- to be his accomplices, were
seized and tortured, noevidence of any thing criminal
appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumftancn
discovered his innocence, as'weU as the regent's secret
views, in imputing to him such an odious defignt.

The Scomtih nohles, -who were almnft equal to their

monarchs in power, anl treated by them- with muth
difiin&cion, observed theTe arbitrary proceetlings cl a
regent with the atmof indignation. The people, who
under a form of government extremely frrple, lhd
been little accuflomed to the burden of taxes, cor.-
plained loudly of the regent's rapacity. Acd all be.
gan to turn their eyes towards the young king, from
-.wom they expeited the redress of all their grievancc,
and return of a more gentle and more equal adminiru
ftrarion.

James was now in the twelfth year of his age. The

queen, soon after his birth, had committed hixn-to the
care of 'the earl of Mar, and, during Che civil wanr
be had resided securely in the castle of Stirling. Alex
ender Erfidne, that nobleman's brother, had 'the chiel
direOion of his education. Under him svas the fanioi
Buchanan, together with three other preceptors, tht
most eminent the nation afforded for -kill in thole fca
ences which were deemed necefiary for a prince. 'li'

Crawf. Maem. z8;. tIbid. 2B7.

young-king fiewed an uncommon passion for learning,
and made great progress in it; and the Scots fancied
that they already dilcovered in him all those virtues
which the fondness and credulity of subjects usually as-
cribe to princes during their minority. But, as James
was still far from that age, at which he was permitted
by law to alWume the reins of government, the regent
did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments of the peo-
ple, nor reflec how naturally there prejudices in his
favour might encourage the king to anticipate that pe-
riod. He not only neglecEed to secure the friendship
of those who were about the king's person, and who
possessed his ear, but had even exasperated rome of
them by personal injuries. Their relentment concur-
red with the ambition of others, in infusing into the
king early suspicions of Morton's power and designs.
A king they told him, had often reason to fear, seldom
tolove, a regent. Prompted by ambition and by inte-
reft, he would endeavour to keep the prince in per-
petual infancy, at a distance from his fuhjees, and un-
acquainted with business. A inall degree of vigour,
however, was sufficient to break the yoke. Subje6ts
naturally reverence their sovereign, and become impa-
tient of the temporary and delegated jurifditlion of a
regent. Morton bad governed with a rigour unknown
to. the ancient monarchs of Scotland. The nation
groaned under his oppressions, and would welcome
the firit profped of a milder adminiflration. At prc-
sent the king s name was scarcely mentioned in Scot-
land, his friends were without influence, and his fa-
vourites without honour. But one eflbrt would dil-
cover Morton's power to be as feeble as it was arbi-
trary. The fame attempt would put himfilf in pol-
feffioh of his just authority, and reltue the nation from
intolerable tyranny. If he did not regard his own
rights as a king, let him lifltn, at least to the cries of
his people'.
These suggestions made a deep impression on the

V "l-vil, z4
VA. II~ tl

yong king, who was trained up in an opinion thg
he was born to command. His approbation of the de.
rign, however, -was of frall coafequence, without the
concurreace of the nobles. The earls of Argyll and
Athol, two of the most powerful of'that body,
'were animated with implacable resentment againfl
the regent. To them the cabal in Stirling caf
tie communicated the plot which was on foot; and
they entering warmly inco it, Alexander Erskine, who,
Gice the death of his brother, and during the minority
of his nephew, had the command of that fort, and
the custody of the king's person, admitted them fecrtt.
Iy into the king's pretence. They gave him the fame
account of the misery of his fuhjecis, unrder the regent's
arbitrary adminiftlration; they complained loudly of
the injustice with which thenifelves had been treated,
and besought the king, as the only means for redre-
sing the grievances of the nation, to call a council oi
the whole nobles. James consented, and Jetters wcr:
issued in his name for that purpo'c; hut the two ciali
took care that they should be sent c'ly to those whJ
were known to bear no good-will to Morton

The number of thele was, however, so confideralile,

that on the day appoinced, far the greater part of the
r.obles affenihled at Stir!ing; and lo highly were tin
inceuled againit Miorr. n, that, altilcug.l on receivilg
intelligence of Argyll and Athol's interview with til
king, he had made a feirt as if he would resign
the regency, they adviled the king, without regardiin
this offer, to deprive hilm tf his office, and to take th:
adminifLration of government into his own hands.
Lord Glanis the chancc<!oir, and -lerrics, were ap-
pointecd to signify tlis rIcllution to Morton, -who wii
at that time in ialkeith, his usual place of reftdenc.
Nothing could equal the joy with which this unre.
peced resolution fiHlcd the nation, but the furprile r.-
cafioncrd by the fccming ala-ritv with which the regent
descended from lb high a ftatima. He neither wanted
f.gacity to forefce the d-ngrr of resigning, nor inclina

'S ct'.2 ;.

tiot to keep poffefliort of an office, for the expiration
of which the law had fixed so distant a term. But all
the foniris, whence the facLion of which he was head,
had derived their strength, were either failed, or now
supplied his adcerlaries with the means of humbling
him. The commnons, the city of Edinburgh, thecier-
gy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multi-
plied oppressions. Elizaheth, having lately hound her-
felfby treaty to fend a considerable body of troops to
the afiRance of the inhabitants of the Netherlands,
who were RruggHing for liberty, had little leilure to at-
tend to the affairs of Scotland; and as she had nothing
to dread from France, in whose councils the princes
Iof Lorrain had not at that time much influence, she
was not diipleal'ed, perhaps, a: the birth of new sac-
tions in the kingdom. Even those nobles, who had
long been joined with Morton in fadtion, or whom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindlav,
Kuthven, Pitcairn the secretary, Murray of Tillibar-
din comptrol!er, all deserted his falling fortunes, and
appeared in the council at Stirling. So many concur-
ring circumflinces convinced Morton of his own weak-
ness, and determined him to give way to a torrent,
which was too impetuous to be resiled. He attended
the chancellor and Herries to Edinburgh ; was pretent
when the king's acceptance of the government was
ploclaimed; and, in the pretence of the people, filrren-
dered to the kiig all the authority to which lie had
any claimn in virtue of his office. This ceremony was
accompanied with luch exccffive joy and acclamations
of the multitude, as added, no doubt, to the anguifi
which an ambitious spirit mufl feel, when compelled
to renounce supreme power; and convinced Morton
how entirely he had lott the afft itions of his country-
men. He obtained, however, from the king an acd
containing the approbation of every thing done by him
in the exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the molt
ample form that his fear or caution could devise, of all
past offinccs, crimes, and trealbns. The nobles, who
adhered to the king, bound thenifclves under a great

K a

penalty, to procure the ratification -of this- a&in tile
first parliament .

A council of twelve nobles was appointed to affiff the

king in the administration of affairs. And Morton, de-
ferted by his own party, and unable to struggle with the
faction which governed absolutely at court, retired to
one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy the tranquillity,
and to be occupied only in the amusements of a country
life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with
all the uneafv refletions which accompany disappointed
ambition, and intent on schemes for recovering his for-
mer grandeur. Even in this retreat, which the people
called the Lion's De,, his wealth and abilities rendered
him formidable; and the new counsellors were so impru-
dent as to rouse him, by the precipitancy with which
they hafiened to strip him of all the remains of power.
They required him to surrender the castle of Edinburgh,
which was fill in his poffefion. He refused at firi to
do so, and began to prepare for its defence; but the ci-
tizens of Edinburgh having taken arms, and repulied a
part of the carrifon, which was sent out to guard a con-
voy of proviiGons, he was obliged to give up that import-
ant fortress, without refifance. This encouraged his
adversaries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh,
and to multiply their demands upon him, in such a man-
ner as convinced him that nothing less than his utter nt-
in would satisfy their inveterate hatred.

Their power and popularity, however, began already

to decline. The chancellor, the ablest and most mode-
rate man in the party, having been killed at Stirling, in
an accidental rencounter between his followers and thole
of the earl of Crawford; Athol, who was appointed his
fucrefior in that high ofice, the earls of Eglinton, Caith-
ness, and lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,
were either avowed papifls, or fufpefled of leaning tc
the opinions of that fe&l. In an age when the returr
of popery was so much and so jnftly dreaded, this gave
universal alarm. And as Morton had always treatn
the papists with rigour, this unfcafonable indulgenci

t Spots. 278. Crawf. Mem, 289. Cald. ii. 522.

made all zealous prdteftants remember that circumstance
in his administration with great prairet.

Morton, t6 whom. none of these particulars were un-
known, thought this the proper juncture for setting to
work the instruments, which he had been preparing.
Having gained the confidence of the earl of Mar, and
of the countess his mother, he insinuated to them; that
Alexander Erikine had formed a plot to deprive his ne-
phew of the government of Stirling castle, and the cuf-
tody of the king's person; and easily induced an ambi-
tious woman, and a youth of twentyi to employ force
t prevent this supposed injury. The earl repairing fud.
denly to Stirling, and being admitted as usual into the
eatle with his attendants, seized the gates early in the
morning, and turned out his uncle, who dreaded no dan-
ger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison sub-
umitted to him as their governor, and, with little danger
and no effusion of blood, he became master both of the
king's person, and the fortress'.

Ai. event so unexpeted occasioned great confterna.

tion. And though Morton's hand did not appear in
the execution, he was universally believed to be the au-
thor of the attempt. The new counsellors Law it to be
necefiary, for their own safety, to change their meaiures,
and, instead of purfiing him with such implacable re-
fentment, to enter into terms of accommodation with an
adversary, till so capable o creating them trouble. Four
were named, on each fide, to adjust their differences.
They met not far from Dalkeitll; and when they had
brought matters near a conclulion, Morton, who was
too sagacious not to improve the advantage which their
lecurity and their attention to the treaty afforded him,
let out in the night time for Stirling, and having gained
Murray of Tillibardin, Mlar's tllle, was admitted by
him into the castle; and managing matters there with
his usual dexterity, lie had loon Tmore the command of
the fort, than the earl himlelf. He was likewile admnit-

Spotl T-}3j. Cald. ii. 535,

3

ted to;' feat'in the privy-council, and acquired the fame
ascendent in it .t

As. the time appointed for the meeting of parliament

at Edinburgh now approached, this gave him some an-
xiety.. He was afraid of carrying the young king to a
city whose inhabitants were so much at the devotion of
the'adverfe faction. He was no less unwilling to leave
James behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this dilem-
ma, he issued a proclamation in the king's name, chang-
ing the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling
catlie. This Athol and his party represented as a ftep
altogether unconflitutional. The king, said they, is
Morton's prisoner; the pretended counsellors are his
slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may repair
without fear, and where they may deliberate with free.
dom, is absolutely nectefary for :ettliig the nation, ater
disorders of such long continuance. But in an afTembly,
called contrary to all form, held within the walls of 1
garifon, and overawed by armed ixen, what flfety could
members expeul; what liberty could prevail in debate;
or what benefit rclult to the public? The parliament
wmet, however, on the day appointed, and, notwithltand-
ing the prottftation of the earl of Mtontrofc and lord
Lindsay, in the name of their party, proceeded to bull-
ness. The king's acceptance of the government was
confirmed; the acl gral:cd to Morton, for his fecuri:y,
ratified, fonie regulations with regard to the numbcrs
and authority of the privy-council, were agreed upon;
aud a pension for life g anted to the countccs of Mlar,
who had been so inIlrumental in bringing aDour the late
revolution -.

Mean while Argyll, Athol, and their followers took

arms, upon the specious pretence of relcuing the king
from captivity, and the krigdom from oppression.
James himself, impatient of tlc i'crvitude in which he was
held, by a man whom he L d long been taught to hate,
fecrctly encouraged their ctLcrprife; though, at the fame
time, he was obhiged not nilv to disavow them in pu-
blic, but to levy forces again'! ;hera, and even to declare,

Cald. ii. 5 6. Ca.d. ii. 547. Parl. S. Jac. 6.

by proclamation, that he was perfectly free from any
constraint, either upon his person or his will. Both fides
quickly took the field. Argyll and Athol were at the
head of seven thousand men; the earl of Aikgus, Mor-
ton's fiephew, met them with an army of five thouland
trong; neither party, however, was eager to engage.
Mlorton difitrufted the fidelity of his own troops. The
two earls were sensible that a single victory, however
complete, would not be decisive; and as they were in
no condition to undertake the liege of Stirling castle,
where the king was kept, their strength would loon be
exhausted, while Morton's own wealth, and the patron-
age of the queen of England, might furnifl him with
endless refour'cs. By the mediation of Bowes, whom
Elizabeth had sent into Scotland to negotiate an accom-
modation between the two tactions, a treaty was con-
cluded, in conifquence of which, Argyll and Athol were
admitted into the king's prelnce; iome of their party
were added to the privy-council; and a convention of
nobles called, in order to bring all remaining differences
to an amicable fihe t.

So loon as James assumed the government into his
own hands, lie delpatclied the abbot of l)umicrmiing
to intorm Elizabeth of that event;, to offer to renlew the
allance between the two kingdoms; and to demand
poffclion of the eflate which haid lately fallen to him by
the death of his grandmnother the counte'l of Lennox.
That lady's second o:l had left one daubihtr, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in Eugland. And as the chief
objection ag-init the prctenllions of the Scotiilh line to
tile crown of England, was that maximl ot English law,
which excludes aliens fromi alny right of inheritance
within the kingdon, Eiiza!eth, by granting this demnand,
would have eitablillied a precedent in James's favour,
that might have been eiteenied decisive, with regard to
a point, which it had been her conilant care to keep un-
decided. Without fufrcring this delicate queftlon to be
tried, or allowing any new light to be thrown on that,
which Ihe confidcred as the great mystery of her reign,

1 Crawf. Mem. 3c7.

fie commanded the rents of the estate t6 be fequefered
by lord Burleigh, master of the wards; and by this me-
thod of proceeding, gave the Scottish king early warn.
ing how necessary it would be to court her favour, if e.
ver he hoped for success in claims of greater importance,
but equally liable to be controverted 1.

After many delays, and with much difficulty, the con-

tending nobles were at last brought to fonme agr ent.
But it was followed by a tragical event. Morton, il
token of reconcilement, having invited the leaders of
the opposite party to a great entertainment, Athol the
chancellor was soon after taken ill, and died within a few
days. The fymntoms and violence of the dieiafe gave
rife to strong suspicions of his being poiobned; and thn'
the physicians, who opened his body, differed in opiniot
as to the cause of the diflemper, the chancellor's rela.
tions publicly accused Morton of that odious crime.
And the advantage which visibly accrued to him, by the
removal of a man of great abilities, and averse from all
his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the pco-
ple, who are ever fond of imputing the death of eni-
nent persons to extraordinary causes t.

The office of chancellor was bestowed upon Argy'!,

whom this preferment reconciled, in a great measure, ro
Morton's administration. He had now recovered a.'
the authority he poflefetd during his regency, and had
entirely broken, dr baffled, the power and cabals of his
enemies. None of the great famiiies remained to I-e
the objedts of his jealousy or to obflruct his detigns, but
that of Hamilton. The earl of Arran, the eldest bron-
ther, had never recovered the shock which lie received
from the ill success of his passion for the queen, andl had
now altogether lofl his reafop. Lord Johr., the second
brother, was in ptffeffioll of the family eltate. Lord
Plaud was commendator of Paisley; both of them youn,
ieen, ambitious and enterpriting. Morton dreaded their
ihfluence in the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to fliare
their spoils among them; and as all princes naturally
View their successors withjealoufy and hatred, it was t-

t'Camd. 46.? [-SpcLtw. o0j.

fy to infuse these passions into the mind of the young
king. A pretence was at hand to justify the mofl vio-
lent proceedings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty
of Perth, did not extend to those, who were accessory
to the murder of the regent Murray or Lennox. Lord
John and his brother were fiulpeted of being the authors
of both these crimes, and had been included in a general
atA of attainder on that account. Without summoning
them to trial, or examining a single witness to prove the
charge, this attainder was now thought sufficient to sub-
jea them to all the penalties which they would have in-
curred by being formally convicted. The earls of Mor-
ton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the lords Ruthven,
Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commission to seize their
perlbns and estates. On a few hours warning, a confi.
derable body of troops was ready, and marched towards
Hamilton in holtile array. Happily the two brothers
made their escape, though with great difficulty. But
their lands were confiscated; the caffles of Ilamilton
and Draffan besieged; those who defended them punifi-
ed. The earl of Arran, though incapable, from his si-
tuation, of committing any crime, was involved, by a
shameful abule of law, in the common ruin of his fami-
ly; and as if he, too, could have been guilty of rebellion,
confined a cloi priloner. Thele proceedings, so contra-
ry to the fundamental principles of justice, were all rati-
sied in the ilbhfeqluent parliament'.

About this time Mary sent, by Naue her secretary, a
letter to her loln, together with some jewels of value, and
a vest embroidered with her own hands. But as fie
gave him only the title of prince of Scotland, the mef-
fenger was dimiiffed, without being admitted into his
pretence;t.

Though Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular rea-
son to fear any attempt of the popish princes in Mary's
favour, she still continued to guard her with the fame
anxious care. The acquisition of Portugal, on the one
hand, and the defence of the Netherlands, on the other,
fully employed the councils and arms of Spain. France,
'Crawf. em. 311. Spotiv. 306. t Craw f.Mem. 3I4.

torn in pieces by intestine comnmotrins4 af1i under a
weak and capricious prince, despised and distrusted by
his own fubjeEls, was in noconditiontto diftrtir its neigh.
bours. Elizabeth had long amused that court b) carry.
ing on a treaty of marriage with the duke of' Alengon,
the king's brother. But whether at the age of forty-five,
the really intended to marry a prince of twenty; whe-
ther the pleasure of being flattered and courted, made
her liften to the addresses of so young a lovers whom she
allowed to visit her at two different times, and treated
with the mofl diftinguifhingrefpec; or whether cons-.
derations of interest predominated in this as well as in
every other transaction of her reign, are problems in hi.
story which we are not concerned to resolve. During
the progrefsof this negotiation, which was drawn out
to an extraordinary length, Mary could expe& no afiilt-
ance from the French court, and seems to have held lit-
tle correspondence with it; and there was no period in
her reigL, wherein Elizabeth enjoyed more perfect fecu-

iorton seems at this time to have been equally secure;

but his security was not so well founded He had wea-
thered out one florm, had crufled his adversaries, and
was again in poffellion of the sole divretion- of affairs.
Bnt as the king was now of an age when the character
and disposition3 of the mind begin to unfold themselves,
and to become visible, the smallest attention to there
might have convinced him, that there was no reason to
expe&t new and more dangerous attacks on his power.
James early discovered that excessive attachment to fa-
vourites, which accompanied him through his whole
life. This pafion, which naturally arises from inexpe-
rience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his age,
far from being culpable; nor could it well be expecled
that the choice of the objedts, on whom he placed his as-
feciions, should bemade with great iU. ''he most con-
fiderable of them was Efme Stewart, a native of France,
and son of a second brother of the earl of Lennox. lie
was distinguished by the title of lord D'Aubigne* an e-
state in France, which defeended to himr from his an.ccf-
tn, on whom it khd been conferredi iareward of tbfi

valour and services to the French crown. He arrived
in Scotland about this time, on purpose to demand the
cfate and title of Lennox, to which he pretended a le-
gal right. He was received at first by the king with the
refpet due to so near a relation. The gracefiilnefl of
his person, the elegance of his dress, and his courtly be-
haviour made a great imprefion on James, who, even
in his more mature years, was little able to resist these
frivolous charms,- and his affeCion flowed with its usual
rapidity and profusion. Within a few days after Stew-
art's appearance at court, he was created lord Aberbro-
thock, soon after earl, and then duke of Lennox, gover-
nor of Dumbarton castle, captain of the guard, first lord
of the bed-chamber, and lord high chamberlain. At
the fame time, and without any of the envy or interfe-.
rence which is usual among candidates for favour, rap-
tain James Stewart, the second son of lord Ochiltree,
grew into great confidence. But notwithfianding this
union, Lennox and.captaiu Stewart were persons of very
opposite characers. The former was naturally gentle,
humane, candid; but unacquainted with the fate of the
country, and mifleQ or iniftnformed by those whom he
trusted; not unworthy to be the companion of the young
king in his amusements, but utterly disqualified for ad-
ing as a ,iiniiter,.in direatinlg his affairs. The latter was
remarkable for all the vices, which render a man forml-
dable to his country, and a pernicious counfillor to his
prince; nor did he poffefi an)y one virtue to counterba-
lance these vices, unless dexterity in conduciing his own
deligns, and an enterprising courage, superior to the
ferle of danger, may pass by that name. Unreltrained
by.religion, regardlels of d4ency, and undilimayed by
oppofiton, he aimed at objects seemingly unattainable;
bur tnder a prince void of experience, and blind to all
the defcas of thole who had gained his favour, his au-
dacity was successful; and honours, wealth, and power
were the reward of his crimes.

Both the favourites concurred in employing their

whole address to undermine Morton's credit, which a-
luie obftruaed their full poffeflion of power. And as
Janes had been bred up mith an averlion for that no-

bleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the authc
rity ofi tutor, than to a& with the obsequiousness of
miniser, they found it no difficult matter to accompli]
their design. Morton, who could no longer keep th
king shut up within the wails of Stirling castle, havin|
called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, brought hin
thither. James made his entry into the capital wit]
great solemnity; the citizens received him with th
loudest acclamations of joy, and wth many expenfiv
pageants, according to the mode of that age. After
long period of thirty-feven years, during which Scotlanl
had been fubjeced to the delegated power of regents, o
to the feeble government of a woman; and had fuffcr
ed all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence o
foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the feeptre one
more in'the hands of a king; and fond even of that fha
dow of authority, which a prince of fifteen could poflefs
they fattered themselves that union, order and tranquil
lity would now be restored to the kingdom. james o
pened the parliament, 1579, with extraordinary pomp
but nothing remarkable paled in it.

Thefedemonftrations,however,of thepeople'slove ani
attachment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourite
to continue their insinuations againf' Morton; and a
the king now resided in the palace of Holyrood-lhoiif
to which all his fubjels had acceCs, the cabal againli tl:
earl grew daily fironger, and the intrigue which oncc
sioned his fall, ripened gradually.

Morton beganr to be sensible of his danger, and endra

voured to put a flop tothe career of Lennox's prefer
ment, by representing him as a formidable enemy to thi
reformed religion, a fecrit agent in favour of popery
and a known emissary of the house of Guise. The clrr
gy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind, spread th
alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out n
con:plaifance to his mailer, or convinced-bv the arsnl
ments of fonme learned divines whom the king apeoinr
ed to inflruct him in the principles of the proteitant r'
ligion, publicly renounced the errors of poper-, in tk
church of St. Giles, and declared hin.ift' a member
the church of Scotland, by signing her Cunfeflion c

Faith. This, though it did not remove all suspicions,
nor silence some zealous preachers, abated, ln a greatkae-
gree, the force of the accusation'.

On the other. hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton
was preparing to seize the king's person and to carry
hipn into England. , Whether despair of maintaining his
power by'any ottier means, had driven him to make a-
yj overture of that kind to the Englilh court, or whether
it ,.as a calumny invented by his adversaries to render
him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty.
As he declared at his death that filch a design had never
entered into his thoughts, the latter seems to be most
probable. It afforded a pretence, however, for reviving
the office of lord chamberlain, which had been for some
time disused. That honour was conferred on Lennox.
Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy, was his de-
puty; they had under them- a band of gentlemen, who
were appointed constantly to attend the king, and to
guard his perfont.

Morton was not ignorant of.what his enemies intend-

ed to insinuate by such unusual precautions for the king's
fafcty; and as his last resource, applied to Elizabeth,
whose protesUion had often flood him in stead in his
greatef difficulties. In consequence of this application,
Boowes, her envoy, accused Lennox of praeice. -
the peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in her
name, that he ihould instantly be removed froni the pri-
vy-council. Such an unprecedented demand was confi-
dered by the counsellors as an affront to the king, and
an encroachment on the independency of the kingdom.
They lffeied to call in queition the envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence refused him farther audience.
He retired in diiguft, and without taking leave; fir Ale-
xander Home was sent to expoftulate'with Elizabeth on
the subje&l. After the treatinent which her envoy had
received, Elizabeth thought it below her dignity to ad-
mit Home into. her presence. Burleigh, to ivom he
was commanded to impart his conmiffioi, reproached

# Crawf. Tem. 319. Spots. 308.' t Crawf. Mem. 32.

Vol. 1 L
"

him with his mafier's ingratitude towards a benefaftrefI
who had placed the crown on his head, and required
him to advise the king to beware of sacrificing the friend.
flipj'6ffo neceflary an ally to the giddy humours of a
yoiing man, without experience, and strongly fufpeted
of principtes and attachments incompatible with the
happiness of the Scottifi'nation.

This accofation of'ennox, hastened, in all probabili.

ty, Morton's fall. The at of indemnity, which he had
obtained when he resigned the regency, was worded
with lhi scrupulous exacnefs, as almost screened him
from any legal prosecution. The murder of the late
king was the only crime which could not, with decency,
be inserted in a pardon granted by his son. Here Morton
Sill lay open to the penalties of the law, and captain
Stewart, who shunned no asion, however desperate, if
it led to power or to favour, entered the council-cham-
ber while the king and nobles were afiembled, and fal-
ring on his knees, accused Morton of being accessory, or,
according to the lanbdaige of the Scottif law, art aiJ
airt, in the conspiracy against the fife of his majefly's f,.
ther, and offered, under the usual penalties, to vcrify
this charge by legal evidence. Morton, who was pre-
tent, heard this accusation with firmness; and replird
with a disdainful smile, proceeding either from contiempt
of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known ze.i
in punishing those who were fufpeted "of that deteftabli
crime, might we!l exempt himself from any fufpiciu:
of being acceflory to it; nevertheless, he would cheer-
fully submit to a trial, either in that place or in any o.
ther court; and doubted not but bis own innocence, and
the malice of his enemies, would then appear in the
eleareft light." Stewart, who was still on his knees.
Began to inquire how he would reconcile his beftowin;
si many honours on Archibald Dounglas, whom he ccr
tainly knew to be one of the murderers, with his pre
tended zear against that crime. Morton. was ready t(
answer. But the k -g commanded hoth of them to bL
removed. ' he earl was confined, first -of all to his oui
house, and then committed to the calUc of Edinbu:g;'

of which Alexander Erlkine was governor; and as if it
had not been a sufficient indignity to fubjedt him to the
power of one of his enemies, he was soon after carried
to Dumbarton, of which Lennox had the command. A
warrant was likewise ifued for apprehending Archibald
Douglas; but he, having received timely intelligence of
the approaching danger, fled into England".

The earl of Angus, who imputed these violent pro-
cedings, not to hatred against Morton alone, but to
the ancient enmity between the houses of Stewart and
of Douglas, and who believed that a conspiracy was
now formed for the deftru&ion of the whole name,
was ready to take arms in order to rescue his kinfmain.
But Morton absolutely forbade any such attempt, and
declared that he would rather susser ten thousand deaths,
than bring an imputation upon his own charater by
seeming to decline a, trial t.

Elizabeth did not fail to interpose, with warmth, ia
behalf of a man who had contributed so much to pre-
lerve her influence over Scotland. The late tranfac-
tions in that kingdom had given her great uneasiness.
The power which Lennox had acquired independent of
her was dangerous; the treatment her ambassadors had
met with differed greatly from the respect with which
the Scots were in use to receive her ministers; and the
attack now made on Morton fully convinced her that
there was an intention to sow the feeds of discord be-
tween the two nations, and to reduce James into a new
alliance with France, or into a marriage with some po-
pilh princels. Full of these apprehentfions, she ordered
a considerable body of troops to be assembled on the
borders of Scotland, and del`patchcd Randolph as her
ambassador into that kingdom. He addrefed himself
not only to James, and to his council, but to a conven-
tion of efates, met at that time. He began with enu-
merating the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth
had conferred on the Scottiih nation: that without de-
manding a single foot of land for herself, without en-

' Crawf. Mem. 3jJ. t Johnft. 64. Spotfw. 3I1.

L

croaching on the liberties of the kingdom in the fmallelt
article, she had, at the expence of the blood of her fib-
jets and the treasures of her crown, rescued the Scots
fror the dominion of France, eftahlifhed among them
true religion, and put them in polfeflion of their ancient
rights: that from the beginning fle had protected those
who espoused the king's cause, and by her affifance
alone, the crown was preserved on his head, and all the
attempts of the adverse faction baffled: that an union,
unknown to their ancestors, but equally beneficial to
both kingdoms, had fuhfifted for a long period of years;
and though so many popiih princes had combined to di-
fiurb this happy fate of things, her care and their con-
Stancv, had hitherto defeated all these efforts: that she
had observed of late an unusual coldness, distrust, and
eflrangement in the Scottish council, which she could
impute to none but to Lennox, a subje&c of France, a
retainer to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of
popery, and still fufpeled of favouring that flperfiition.
Not satisfied with having mounted so fast to such an
uncommon height of power, which he exercifsed with
all the' ralhnefs of youth, and all the ignorance of a
stranger; nor thinking it enough to have deprived the
earl of Morton of the authority due to his abilities and
experience, he had conspired the ruin of that nobleman,
who had often exposed his life in the king's cause, who
had contributed more than any other fubjeft to place
him on the throne, to resist the encroachments of pope-
ry, and to preserve the union between the two king.
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among the
nobles in Scotland, if they wished for the continuance
of amity with England, if they valued the privileges of
their own order, he called upon them, in the name of
his mistress, to remove such a pernicious counsellor as
Lennox from the presence of the young king, to rescue
Morton out of the hands of his avowed enemy, and to
secure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial;
and if force were necessary towards accomplishing a
design so salutary to the king and kingdom, he promised
them the protedfion of his mistress in the enterprise,

and whatever affiance they Ihould demand, either of
menor moneys.

But these extraordinary remonfirances, accompanied

u'ith such an unulual appeal from the kirig to his sub-
jefes, were not the only means employed by Elizabeth
in f;.:ur of Morton, and against Lennox. She per-
fuaded the prince of Orange to fend an-agent into Scot-
land, and under colour of complimenting James on ace
count of the valour which many of his fubjetds had dif-
played in the service of the States, to enter into a long
detail of the restless enterprises of the popish princes a-
gainfl the ptoteftant religion; to beseech him to adhere
inviolably to the alliance with England, the only bar.
rier which secured his kingdom against their dangerous
cabals; and, above all things, to distrust the infinuationj
of those who endeavoured to weaken or to di.iolve
that union between the British nations, which all the
proteflants in Europe beheld with so much pleasure ,

James's. counlellors were too intent upon the deftruc-

tion of their enemy to liften to thel' remonstrances.
The officious interpoition of the prince of Orange, the
haughty tone of Elizabeth's message, and so avowed an
attempt to excite fubjecds to rebel againlt their fove-
reign, were confidered as unexampled insults on the
majesty and independence of a crowned head. A ge-
neral and evasive aufwer was given to Randolph.
James prepared to assert his own dignity with spirit.
All those fufpeded of favouring Morton were turned
out of office, some of them were required to fur-
render themselves prisoners; the fencible men through-
out the kingdom were commanded to take arms; and
troops were levied and pofled on the borders. The
English ambassador, finding that neither the public ma-
nifefto which he had delivered to the convention, nor
his private cabals with the nobles, could excite them to
arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland, where li-
bels against him had been daily publifed, and even at.

t Cald. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 6z2. Cald. iii. 9.

See Append. No, VIII.

L3

tempts made-upon his life. In both kingdoms every
thing wore an hoitile asped. But Elizabeth, though
she wifhed'tobhave intimidated the Scottish king by her
preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with
him, and the troops on the borders, which had given
fiuch umbrage; were soon difperfedt.

The greater fblicitude Elizabeth discovered for Mor-

ton's safety, the more eagerly did his enemies drive on
their schemes for his destruction. Captain Stewart, his
accuser, was first appointed tu' - to the earl of Arran,
and soon after both the title and cltate of his unhappy
ward, to which he advanced some frivolous claim,
were conferred upon him. The new made peer was
commanded to conduct Mortorl from Dumbarton to
Edinburgh; and by that choice the earl was not only
warned what fate he might expect, but had the cruel
mortification of feeing his mortal enemy already loaded
with honours, in reward of the malice which he had
contributed to his ruin.

The records of the court of Ju/lilcary at this period

are loft. The account which our historians give of
Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfacory. The
whole proceedings seem to have been violent, irregular,
and oppressive. Arran, in order to extort evidence,
tortured several of the earl's domestics with unusual
cruelty. During the trial, great bodies of armed men
were drawn up in different parts of the city. The ju-
ry was composed of the earl's known enemies; and
though he challenged several of them, his objections
were over-ruled. After a Ihort consultation, his peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of being art and
'part in the confpijacy against the life of the late king.
The first part of She verdic did not surprise him, but
he twice repeated the words art and part with some
vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not so."
The doom which the law decrees against a traitor was
pronounced. The king, however, remitted the cruel
and ignominious part of the sentence, and appointed

t Crawf.Mem.3;8. Strype, ii. App. 138.

that he should susser death next day, by being behead-.
ed .

During that awful interval, Morton polffeied the ut-
most composure of mind. He sipped cheerfully; slept
apart of the night in his usual manner, and employed
the reft of his time in religious conferences, and in aAts
of devotion with some miniiters of the city. The cler-
gyman who attended him, dealt freely with his confci-
ence, and pressed his crimes home upon him. What
he confessrd with regard to the crime for which he sus-
sered, is remarkable, and supplies, in some measure,
the imperfection of our records. He acknowledged,
that on his return from England after the death of Ri-
zio, Bothwell had informed him of the confpjracy a-
gainit the king, which the queen, as he told him,
knew of and approved ; that he solicited him to concur
in the execution of it, which at that time he absolutely
declined; that soon after, Bothwell himlfelf, and Archi-
bald Douglas, in his name, renewing their solicitations
to the fame purpose, he had required a warrant under
the queen's hand, authorizing the attempt, and as that
had never been produced, he had refused to be any far-
ther concerned in the matter. " But," continued he,
" as I neither consented to this trealbnable act, nor
" affited in the committing of it, so it was inmpui-
"fible for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To whornl
"could I make the dilcovery? 'Ihe queen was the au-
"thor of the enterprise. Darnly was such a change-
" ling that no secret could be fafelv communicated to
"him. Huntly and Boihwell, who bore the chice
" ifay in the kingdom, were themselves the perpetra-
"tors of the crime.' Theie'circumitances, it mu!t be
confessed, go some length towards extenuating Morton's
guilt; and though his apology for the favour he had
thewn to Archibald Douglas, whom he knew to be
one of the conspirators, be, far leIs fatistacory, no un-
easy refletions leem to have di'quieted his own milnd
on that account*. When his keepers told him that

l Spotfw. 314. Johns. 65. Crawf. Mem. 33;.

Cald. ii. 5. . Crawl. Mem. Append. iii.

the guards were attending, and all things in readiness,
c' I praise my God," said he, " I am ready likewise."
Arran commanded there guards; and even in those
moments, when the most implacable hatred is apt to
re ent. the malice of his enemies could not forbear this
inulit. On the f-affold, his behaviour was calm; his
countenance and voice unaltered; and after some time
spent in devotion, he suffered death with the intrepidi-
tv which became the name of Douglas. His head was
placed on the public gaol of Edinburgh; and his body,
after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, covered with a
begs-arlv cloak, was carried by common porter. to the
ufiul burial-place of criminals. None of his friends
durst accompaiy it to the grave, or direover their gra.
titude and refpee by any symptoms of forrowt.

Arran, no kss profligate in private life, than audaci-

ous in his public condu&, soon after drew the attention
of his countrymen, by his infamous marriage with the
countess of March. Before he grew into favour at
court, he had been often entertained in her husband's
house, and without regarding the laws of hospitality or
of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the
wife of his benefaaor, a woman young and beautiful,
hut according to the description of a contemporary hi-
ftorian, " intolerable in all the imperfections incident to
" her sex." Impatient of any restraint upon their mutu-
al desires, they, with equal ardour, wibhed to avow
their union publicly, and to legitimate, by a marriage,
the niffpring of their unlawful passion, The countels
petitioned to be divorced from her husband, for a rea-
fc.n -which no modest woman will ever plead. The
jd.iges, over-awed by Arran, pafied fentenee without
delay. And this infamous scene, was concluded by a
marriage, solemnised with great pomp, and beheld by
all ranks of men with the utmost horror f.

A parliament was held this year, at the opening of

wahich some difFutes arose between Arran and earl now
creared duke oq Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature,
and puffhd on by his wife's ambition, began- to affect
Crawf. Merm 334. Spotfw. ;l. Spotfw. 3t5,

an equality with the duke, under whofe.protection he
had hitherto been contented to place himself. After.
various attempts to form a party in the council against
Lennox, he found him fixed so firmly in the king's as-
feclions, that it was impossible to Ihake him; and ra-
ther than lore all interest at court, from which he was
banished, he made the most humble submissions to the.
favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This.
rupture contributed, however, to render the duke Iill
more odious to the nation. During the continuance of
it, Arran affected to court the clergy, pretended an ex-
traordinary zeal for the proteflant religion, and labour-
ed to confirm the suspicions which were entertained of
his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a fa-
vourer of popery. As he was supposed to be acquaint-
ed with the duke's most secret designs, his calumnies
were listened to with more credit than was due to his
character. To the fame cause we must ascribe several
acts of parliament uncommonly favourable to the
church, particularly one which aboliihed the pracRice
introduced by Morton, of appointing but one minister to
several parishes

No notice hath been taken for some years of ecclefi-
aflical affairs. While the civil government underwent
so many extraordinary revolutions, the church was not
free from convulsions. Two objects chiefly engrossed
the attention of the clergy. The one was, the forming
a system of discipline, or ecclefiafiical polity. After
long labour, and many difficulties, this was at last
brought to some degree of perfection. The assembly
solemnly approved of it and appointed it to be laid be-
fore the privy-council, in order to obtain the ratifi.a-
tion of it in parliament. But, Morton, during his ad-
minifiration, and those who, after his fall, governed the
king, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into exe-
cution; and by fiarting difficulties, and throwing in ob-
jecTions, prevented it from receiving a legal faneCion.
The other point in view was, the abolition of the epif-
copal order. The bishops were so devoted to the king, to
whom they owed their promotion, that the function it-
self was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty.

Being allowed a feat in parliament, and diflinguifhed
by titles of honour, these not only oceafioned many a-
vocations from their spiritual employments, but loon
rendered their characEer and manners extremely differ-
ent from those of the clergy in that age. The nobles
viewed their power with jealousy; the populace con-
fidered their lives as profane; and wiihed their down-
fal with equal ardour. The personal emulation he-
treen Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, and
eminent for his popular eloquence, who was promoted,
on the death of Douglas, to be archbilhop of St. An-
drews, mingled itself with the pafions on each fide,
and heightened them. Attacks were made in every
assembly on the order of bishops; their privileges were
gradually circumscribed; and at lalf an a& was passid,
declaring the office of bishop, as it was then exercised
within the realm, to have neither foundation nor war.
rant in the word of God; and requiring, under pain
of excommunication, all who now possessed that of-
fice, inflantly to resign it, and to abstain from preach-
ing or administering the sacraments, until they should
receive permission from the assembly. The court did
not acquiesce in this decree.

A vacancy happening soon after in the fee of Glasgow,
Montgomery mininfer at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,
presumptuous, and more apt, by the blemishes in hin
charalcer, to have alienated the people from an order
already beloved, than to reconcile them to one which
was the ebjedc of their hatred, firuck up an infamous
bargain with Lennox, and on his recommendation was
chosen archbishop. The presbytery of Stirling, of
which he was a member, the presbytery of Glalgow,
whither he was to be translated, the general alIenbly,
vied with each other in prosecuting him on that ac-
count. In order to screen Montgomery, James inade
trial both of gentle and of rigorous mealures, and both
were equally ineffeual. The general assembly was
jut ready to pronounce against him the sentence of ex-
communication, when a herald entered, and com-
manded them in the king's name, and under pain of
reblllibn, to flop further proceedings. Even tlhi in'

juntion they despised; and though Montgomery, by
his tears and seeming penitence, procured a short re-
spite, the sentence was at last issued by their appoint-
ment, and published in all the churches throughout the
kingdom.

The firmness of the clergy in a colledive body was
not greater than the boldness of some individuals; par-
ticularly of the ministers of Edinburgh. They inveigh-
ed daily against the corruptions in the adminifiration;
and, with the freedom of speech admitted into the pul-
pit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief
authors of the grievances under which the church and
kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, com-
plained to the king of the insolent and leditious spirit
of the clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
discourses, James issued a proclamation, commanding
Dury, one of the most popular ministers, not only to
leave the town, but to abfiain from preaching in any
other place. Dury complained to the judicatories of
the church, of this encroachment upon the immunities
of his office. They approved of the dotrine which
he delivered; ant he determined to difi-egard the royal
proclamation. But the magistrates being determined
to compel him to leave the city, according to the king's
orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after
protesting publicly, at the crols of Edinburgh, against
the violence which was put upon him. The people ac-
companied him to the gates with tears and lamenta-
tious ; and the clergy denounced the vengeance of bea-
ven againfi the authors of this outrage'.

In this perilous situation flood the church, the autho-

rity of its judicatories called in question, and the liberty
oi the pulpit restrained, when a sudden revolution in the
civil government procured them unexpeEted relief.

The two favourites, by their ascendent over the king,

poiefrcd uncontrolled power in the kingdom, and exer-
ciled it with the utmost wantonness. James usually re-
fided at Dalkeith, or KInneil, the feats of Lennox and
of Arran, and was attended by such company, and era-

'Cald. Affilm. s76-xS. 58 pot. 277, &c-

ployed.in such amusements, as did not iuit.hisrdignity,
The frcices of those who' had contributed most to place
tlie rowi on his head.were but little remembered. Ma.
%n who had opposed him .with. the .greatest- virulence,
enjoyed the rewards and honours to whichl the other
were entitled. Exalted notions of regal prerogative, ut.
terly inconsistent with the conflitution of Scotland, be.
ing infiled by them into the.mind of the young mo.
narch, unfortunately made, at that early -age, a deep
imrpreffion there, and became the fourre of almost all his
fiuture errors in the government of both kingdoms'.
Courts of juifice were held in almost every county, the
proprietors of land were called before them, and upon
the.flighteft neglet&afanv of the numerous forms which
are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were .fined with un.
usual and intolerable rigour.. The lord chamberlain re.
vived the obsolete jurifdicion. of his office over the bo.
roughs, and they were subjected to exa6cions no les
grievous. A design seemed likewise to have been bormn
ed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolv.e :the alliance
with her, which all good protestants esteemed the chiel
security of their religion in Scotland. A close correfpou.
dence was set on foot between the king and his mother,
and considerable progress made towards uniting thrir
titles to the crown, by .such a treaty of'aflociation aJ
Maitland had projeced; which could not fail 'f endan.
e ering or diminiihing his authority, and mull have prov.
ed fatal to those who had aacd against her with greatef
vigourt.

All these circumfiances irritated the impatient. spirit

of the Scottiff nobles, who relblved to tolerate no long
er the insolence of the two minions, or to stand by
while their presumption and inexperience ruined.b.ei
the kin and- kingdom. ElTzabetb, who, during the'.;
riniffration of the four regents, had the.entire diredion
of the affairs of Scotland, felt herfelf.deprived of all in.
fluence in that kingdomnever fince.the death of Mortoq,
and was ready to countenance .any attempt.. to refiue
the king out of the hands of favourites who .were. lead

'Cald. iii. 5a. t Cald. iii. 'j7.

in him into measures so repugnant' to all' her views.
The earls of Mar and Glencairn, lord Ruthveh, lately
created earl of Gowrie, lord Lindsay, lord Boyd, the
tutor of Glamis, the master of Oliphant, with several
barons and gentlemen of distinction, entered into a corm-
hination for that purpose; and as changes in adminiftra-
tion, which, among polifled nations, are brought about
lowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effected suddenly and by violence, the king's
ituation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged
the conspirators to have immediate recourse to force.

James, after having resided for tome time ill Athlol,
where he enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting,
was now rerurning towards Edinburgh. with a finall
train. He was inited to Ruthven cafle, which lay in
his way; and as hl fiif'eóed no danger, he went thi-
ther in hopes of fartmer sport. The multitude of firan-
gers whom he found there gave him fiome uneafinef;
and as those who were in the secret arrived every mo-
ment from different parts, the appearance of so many
new faces increased his fears. He dissembled, however,
and next morning made ready for the field, expeting
to find there some opportunity of making his escape.
But the nobles entering his bed chamber presented a
memorial against the illegal and opprefllive acions of
his two favourites, whom they represented as molt dan-
gerous enemies to the religion and liberties of the na-
tion. James, though he received this remonstrance with
the complailfarce which was necessary in his present l-
tuation, was extreinely impatient to be gone; but as he
approached the door of the apartment, the tutor of Gla-
ris rudely flopped him. The king complainPd, cxpof-
tulated, threatened, and Ending all tihefe without cffect,
burt into tears: " No matter," laid Clamis fiercely,
" better children weep than bearded men." Thhefi
words made a deep imprefficn on the king's mind, and
Acre never forgotten. The conspirators, withtout re-
g;rding his tears or indignation, difnitfed flich of his
ol!owers as the) f:fpcCtedl; allocwed none Lbut their own\
party to have accei' to him; and, tlthouglh it ttlitt
Vul. II. M

him with great reipet, guarded his person with the ut-
moftl care. This enterprise is usually called by our his.
torians, rLe raid of Rutven*.

Letinox and Arran were aflonifhed to the last decree

at an event so unexpected, and so fatal to their pouer:
The folrmer endeavoured, but without success, to excite
the inhabitants of Edinburgh to take arms in order to
refeue their sovereign from captivity. The latter, with
his usual impetuosity, mounted on h rfeback the moment
he heard what had befallen the king, and with a few
followers rode towards Ruthven castle, and as a confl-
derable body of the conspirators, under the command
of the earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose him,
he separated himself from his companions, and with tvwo
attendants arrived at the gate of the castle. At the filht
of a man so odious to his country, the indignation of
the conspirators rose, and instant death muff have hecn
the punif.ment of his rashness, if the friendship of Gow.
rie, or some other cause not explained by our historians,
had hot f, ved a life so pernicious to the kingdom. IHt
was confined, however, to the cafile of Stirling, without
being admitted into the king's presence.

The king, though really the prisoner of his own fib.

jeoes, with whose conducA he could not help dilcoverilg
nany iymptoms of difgull, was obliged to publish a pro-
clamation, signifying his approbation of their enterprise,
declaring that he himself was at full liberty, without any
restraint or violence offered to his perlon; and forlilti
ding any attempt againlt thole concerned in the R':.' j
Ruh^tr-, under pretence of refeuing him out of their
hands. At the fame time, he commanded L.nnox to
leave Scotland before the twentieth of Septemberj.

Soon after, fir George Carey and Bowes arrived as

ambalTadors from Elizabeth. The pretext of their erm
baffy was to inquire after the king's safety; to euncc
rage and to countenance the conlpiratcrs was the rzl
nmotive of it. By their intcrceffion, the earl of Anig:is
who, ever finec the death of his uncle Morton, had liv

Cald. iii. 134. Spotfw. 320. Melv. 357.

t Cald. iii. i33, 1?8.

ed in exile, obtained leave to return. And the accession
of a nobleman so powerful and so popular strengthened
the facRion t.

Lennox, wlhofe amiable and gentle qualities had pro-
cured him many friends, and wh6 received private affur-
ances that the king's favour towards him was in no de-
gree abated, seemed resolved, at first, to pay no regard
to a command extorted by violence, and no less difa-
greeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to
himself. But the power of his enemies, who were maf-
ters of the king's person, who were secretly fipported
by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the clergy, de-
terred him from any enterprise, the success of which was
dubious, and the danger certain, both to himself and to
his Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure,
however, by various artifices, in expectation either that
Jaines might make his escape from the conspirators, or
that fortune might present ibrue more favourable oppor-
tunity of taking arms for his relief.

On the other hand, the conspirators were extremely

solicitous not only to secure the approbation of their
countrymen, but to obtain tome legal sanCtion of their
enterprise. For this purpose they publifled a long de-
claration, containing the motives which had induced
them to venture on such an irregular itep, and endea-
voured to heighten the public indignation against the
favourites, by reprefellting, in the strongest colours, their
inexperience and insolence, their contempt of the nobles,
their violation of the privileges of the church, and their
oppression of the people. They obliged the king, who
could not with safety refuse any of their demands, to
grant them a reiniffion in the most ample form; and
not satisfied with that, they applied to the assembly
of the church, and easily procured an asc, declaring,

that they had done good and acceptable service to
God, to their sovereign, and to their native coun-
' try, and requiring all sincere protestants to concur
with them in carrying forward such a laudable enter-

t Cald. iii. 1 2.

M a

prise. And in order to add the greater weight to this
ad. every minister was enjoined to read it in his own
pulpit, and to inflic the censures of the church on thore
who set themSelves in opposition to so good a cause.
A conventidn of estates assembled a few days after,
palsed an ac to the fame effet, and granted full in-
demnity to the conspirators for every thing they had
done '.

James was conducted by them, first to Stirling, and

afterwards to the palace of Holyrood-houfe; and though
he was received every where with the external markl
of refpea due to his dignity, his motions were care.
fully observed, and he was under a restraint no less
firid than at the first moment when he was seized by
the conspirators. Lennox, after eluding many corn.
matds to depart out of the kingdom, was at last obli.
ged to begin his journey. He lingered, however, for
oime time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if
he had flill intended to make one effort towards re-
floring the king to liberty. But either from the gen-
tlenefs of his own difpofiion, averse to bloodihed and
the disorders of civil war, or from some other caulc un-
known to us, he abandoned the design and set out for
France, by the way of England. The king issued the
order for his departure, with no less reluctance than
the duke obeyed it; and both mourned a separation,
which neither of them had power to prevent. Soon
after his arrival in France, the fatigue of the journey,
or the anguish of his mind, threw him into a fever.
In his last moments he discovered such a firm adller-
ence to the proteifant faith, as fully vindicates hi. me-
mory from an imputation of an attachment to popery,
with which hehad been uncharitably loaded in Scotlanda.
As he was the earliest, and bcft beloved, he was, perhaps,
the molt deserving, though not the most able, of a;!
James's favourites. The warmth and tenderness of hi.
mailer's affection for him was not abated by death itfeli.
By many acts of kindness and generolity towards hii
*Cald. iii. Ix;, 187, :oo. Spotfw. 32z. tSpotf,.

324. Cald. iii. 17z.

poterity, the king not only did great honour to .tec
memory 6f Lennox, but set his own character in one
of.the most favourable points of view.

The success of the conspiracy which deprived James
of liberty made great noi e over all Europe, and at last
reached the ears of Mary in the prison to which ihe
was confined. As her own experience had taught her
what injuries a-captive prince is exposed to susser; and
as many of those who were now concerned in the enter-
prfe against her son, were the fame persons whqm she
confidered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it
was natural for the tenderness of a mother to apprehelnd
that the fame calamities were ready to fall on his head;
and such a profpectl did not fail of adding to the difIrefs
and horror of her own situation. In the anguilh of her
heart she wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterelt
terms of the unprecedented rigour with wLich fhc hcilf
had been treated, and beseeching her not to abando: her
son to the mercy of his rebellious fuhjcts; nor permit
him to be involved in the fame misfortunes under whili:h
ihe had so long groaned. The peculiar vigour and
acrimony of ityle, for which this letter is remnarkable,
dilcover both the high spirit of the Scottish queen, un-
fuhdued by her ifufirings, and the violence of her in-
dignation at Elizabeth's artifices and flveritv. B1ut it
was ill adapted to gain the end The had in view, and
accordingly it neither procured any mitigation of the
rigour of her own confineiment, nor any interpufition
in favour of the king §.

Henry III. who, though he feared and hated the prin-

ces of Giuiil, w-s oft. obliged to court their favour, in-
teipofed with w;rlrir, in order to extricate James out
of the hands of a party so entirely devoted to the EngLih
intcreft. -eI co:nnanded M. de la Motte lFenclon, his
ainbasitdor at the court of England to repair to Edin-
burgh, and to cuit.;;'iute his utminc er.leavours 'ov a:ds
pl.cing James in a fit uatin miore fuitablc to his dignitv.
;A L £izabeth could not, wtili decency, refuse hint liber-

Calld. 489. S;e Appendix, No. IX.

M
.

tyto execute this commifimon, she appointed Davison to
attend him into Scotland, as her envoy, under colour of
concurring with him in the negotiation, but in reality
,to-be a spy upon his motions, and to ohbtrut his-f.ccef.
James, -whose title to the crown had not hitherto been
rerognifed by any of the princes on the continent, was
extremely fond of such an honourable embaffv from the
French monarch; and on that account, as wvell as for
the fake of the errand on which he came, received Fe-
nelon with great refpet. The nobles, under whose
power the king was, did not relih this interposition of
the French court, which had long loft its ancient influ-
ence over the affairs of Scotland. The clergy were a-
lanned at the danger ;o which religion would be expos.
eId, if the princes of Guise, lhould recover any ascendent
over the public councils. And though the king tried
every method for restraining them within the hounds
of decency, they declaimed againfi the court of France,
against the princes of Guirf, againfi the ambassador, a-
ainfi entering into any alliance with luch notorious per-
fecutors of the church of God, with a vehemence which
no regular government would now tolerate, hut which
n-a.s then extremely common. The ambassador watch-
cd by Davison, distrusted hv tie nobles, and expostd lo
the insult6 of the clergy and of the people, returned in-
to England without procuring any change in the kin,'z
situation, or receiving any answer to a propolal whi.ii
he made, that the government hould be carried nn i;.
the joint names of James and the queen his mother .

Meanwhile James, though he dissembled with gr,.t

art, became every day more uneasy under his c.nfil:e-
menit; his uneasiness rendered him continually attetivie
to find out a proper opportunity for making his efcaplr;
and to this attention he at last owed his liberty, which
the king of France was not able, nor the queen of Eng-
land willing, to procure for him. As the conrlfiiratoi5
had forced Lennox oat of the kingdom, and kept Ar.
ran at a distance frcm court, they grew secure, and
§ Cald. ii. 2G7. Spotif. 324. Murdin, 37Z, &c. Sec AS-

pendis. No. IX.

imagining that time had reconciled the Icing to them,
and to his situation, they watched him with little care.
Some oceafions of discord had arilen among themselves;
and the French amhaffador, by fomenting there during
the time of his residence in Scotland, had weakened the
union, in which alone their safety consisted*. Colonel
William Stewart, the commander of the band of gen-
tlemen who guarded the king's perfbn, being gained by
James, had the principal merit in the scheme for reftor-
ing his master to liberty. Under pretence of paying a
visit to the earl of March, 'his grand uncle, James was
permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrews. That
he might not create any filfpicion, he lodged at first in
an open defencclefs house in the town, but pretending a
curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was he entered
with some of his attendatits whom he could trust, than
colonel Stewart commanded the gates to be shut, and ex-
cluded all the reft of his train. Next morning the earls
of Argyll, Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with
others to whom the secret had been communicated, en-
tered the town with their followers, and though Mar,
with several of the leaders of the faction, appeared in
arms, they found themtielves so far outnumbered, that
it was in vain to think of recovering poffeifion of the
king's perlon,..whlich had been in their powr o fiomewhat
longer than ten months. Janmes was naturally of so soft
and dei&ile a temper, that those who were near his per-
lon commonly made a deep impreflion on his heart,
which was formed to he under the fliav of favourites.
And as he remained during lb long a time, and at a pe-
riod of life when relintments are rather violent than
lalting, implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators,
thev, milt either have improved the opportunities of
ir;fi:uating themselves into favour with little dexterity.
or the indignation with which this first infillt to his per-
lbn and authority filled him, mult have been very great,

tiis joy at his efeape was youthful and excessive:
He resolved) however, hv the adtvihe of fir James Mel-
vil. and his wideit counnfillols, to act with the utmost

*Camd. 482.

moderation. Having called into his presence the lead.
ers of both factions, the neighbouring gentry, the de-
puties: of the adjacent boroughs, and the ministers,
and the heads of colleges, he declared, that although
he had been held under refiraint for some time by vio.
lence, he would not impute that as a crime to any
man, but, without remembering the irregularities
which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pafi a general aft of oblivion, and govern all his filb-
jeCts with undiftinguifhing and equal affection. And
as an evidence of his sincerity, he visited the earl of
Gowrie at Ruthven castle, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime com-
mitted in that very place t.

But James did not adhere long to this prudent. and

moderate plan. His former favourite, the earl of Ar-
ran, had been permitted for some time to reside at Kin-
neil, one of his country feats. As loon as the king
felt himflf at liberty, his love for him began to revi:e,
and he expressed a firong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, wolfe
insolent and overbearing temper they dread:ed, as much
as the nation detested his crimes. James, however,
continued his importunity, and promising that he
fnould continue with him no longer than o:le day, tley
were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled an-
cient affection; the king forgot his pronlife; Arran re-
gained his ascendant over him, and within a few days
resumed the exercise of power, and all the arrogance
of an undeferving favourite, and all the rashness pecu-
liar to himself§.

The first effet of his influence was a proclamation

with regard to those concerned in the Raid of oRts, ,.-.
They were required to acknowledge their crime in t!ic
humblest manner; and the king promised to grant thmc
a full pardon, provided their future conduct wo:e
such as did not oblige him to remember pafl mil' iar
riages. The tenour of this proclamation was cxtr-n ce
ly different from the aa of obliyion which the cou,,?i

tMelv. 17a. §Ibid. 274.

raiors had been encouraged to expedt. Nor did any
of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise clogged
with such an equivocal condition, and granted by .a
young prince under the influence of a minister, void
of faith, regardless of decency, and transported by the
deire of revenge even beyond the usual ferocity of his
tenper. Many of the leaders, who had at first ap-
peared openly at court, retired to their own houses;
ind, foreseeing the dangerous storm which was ga-
thering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign coun-
tries t.

Elizabeth, who had all along proteded the confpi-
rators, was extremely disgusted with measures which
tended so vilibly to their dcftrucion, and wrote to the
king a harlh and haughty letter, reproaching him in a
Itvle very uncommon among princes, with breach of
faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence
in proceeding so rigorously against his best and most
faithful fubjecs. James, with a becoming dignity, re-
plied, that promilfs extorted by violence, and condi-
tions yielded out of fear, were no longer binding,
when these were removed; that it belouged to him
alone to chufe what milifters he would employ in his
k'rvice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it was
nclcriarv, for the support of his autlority, that such
an inlhilt on his person Ihould not pasq altogether uncei-

liredl. Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed by Walfing-
ham her secretary, whom the appointed her ambaf-
fador to James, and who appedred at the Scottifi
court with a splendour and magnificence well calcu-
lated to please and dazzle a young prince. Walflng-
ilam was 'admitted to several conferences with James
himnf-lf, in which he insistcd on the lame topics con-
tained in the letter, and the king repeated his former
ans.wers.

After suffering several indignities from the arrogance
of Arran and his creatures, he returned to England,
IMcIdv: zS8. Spotfw. 326. Cald. iii. 33o. UI Mclv. :8.

without concluding any new treaty with the king.
Walsingham was, next to Burleigh, the minister on
whom the chief weight of the English administration
refted_ and when a person of his rank ftept so far out
of the ordinary road of business, as to undertake a long
journey in his old age, and under a declining slate of
health, some affair of consequence was supposed to be
the cause, or some important event was expected to be
the effect of this measure. But as nothing confpicu.
ous either occasioned or followed this embassy, it is
probable that Elizabeth had no other intention in em.
ploying this sagacious minister, than to discover, with
exactness, the capacity and disposition of the Scottil
king, who was now arrived at a time of life when,
with some aegree of certainty, conjectures might be
formed concerning his characer and future conduld,
As James possessed talents of that kind, which make
a greater figure in conversation than in action, he gain.
ed a great deal by this interview with the Englilh `ecre.
tary, who, notwithstanding the cold reception he met
with, gave such an advantageous representation of his
abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, hence.
forward, with greater decency and refpet '.

Elizabeth's eagerness to protect the conspirators ren.

dered James more violent in his proceedings againf
them. As they had all refused to accept of pardon
upon the terms which he had offered, they were re-
quired, by a new proclamation to surrender themselves
prisoners. The earl of Angus alone complied; the
reft either fled into England, or obtained the king's li.
cence to retire into foreign parts. A convention of e
states was held, the members of which, deceived b)
an unworthy artifice of Arran's, declared those con
cerned in the Raid of Rutbven to have been guilty o
high treason; appointed the adt paifed las year appror
ing of their conduct to be expunged out of the records
and engaged to support the king in profccuting the iv
gitives with the utmost rigour of law.

The conspirators, though far from having done an

Melv. z93. Cald. iii. 258. Jebb. ii. 536.

thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age, among
mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled itate of go-
vernment, muf be acknowledged to have been guilty
of an aL of trealon againit their sovereign; and James,
who confdered their condud in this light, had good
realbn to boast of his clemency, when he offered to
pardon them upon confessing their crime. But, on the
other hand, it mult be allowed that, after the king's
voluntary pronilie of a general oblivion, they had ibme
rcalbn to complain of breach of faiti, aaid could not,
without the most unpardonable imprudence, have put
their lives in Arran's power.

The interest of the church was considerably affcded
by thele contrary revolutions. While the conspirators
kept pofTcffion of power, the clergy not only recovered,
but extended, their priyileges. As they had formerly
leclared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they took some
bold meafilres towards exterminating the episcopal or-
irr out of the church; and it was owing more to A-
amfbon's dcexteclit in perplexing and lengthening out
ile process for that purpole; than to their own want
If 7al, that they did not deprive, and perhaps excom-
lt.nicate all the biflnips in Scotland. When the king
'ccovcre(l his liberty, things put on a very different a'-
iec. The favour beoiowed upon Arran, the enemy of
:very thing decent and iacred, and the rigorous profecu-
ion of those nobles wlho had been the moss zealous de-
cndci-s of the proteflant cause, were confidered as sure
?rcl.gcs of the approaching ruin of the church. The
:Irl.y could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view
li impending danger in silence. Drury, who had
ren reltored to his office as one of the ministers of
Mdinburghl, openly applauded the Raid of Rutbvei in
le pulpit, at which the king was so enraged, that not-
'hliftanding fbine fymptoirms of his fiubmilion, he com-

ritled him to relign his charge in the city. Mr. An.
Icew Melvil, being fumoilnlocd before the privy-council,
b answer for the doftrine he had uttered in a sermon
t'St Andrews, and accused of comparing the pre-
:nt grievances of tlhe nation with thiolc under James
!. and of iltimating obl!iiu. y that the) ought to be

rirerfed. .f the fame manner, thought it;itacumbent
ron hin to 'behave w ith.great firmncefs. -Ie declined
tie'lurifcdiion of a civil court, in a cause .prely eccle,
fi~aical; he presbytery of, which he was a member,
had, as 'ie contended, the sole right to call him to ac-
count for'words spoken in the pulpit; and.neither the
ing nor council could judge, in the first instance, of
the doctrine delivered by preachers, without violating
the immunities of the church. This exemption from
civil jurifdidion was a privilege which the popih ec-
clefiaftics, admirable judges ofwhatcver contributed to
iiicreale the lustre or power of their body, had long
struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame
plea had now been admitted, the proteflant clergy
would have become independent on the civil magi-
ftrate; and an order of men extremely useful to so.
ciety while they inculcate those' duties which tend to
promote its happiness and tranquillity, might l;ave be-
come no less pernicious, by teaching, without fear or
controul, the molt dangerous principles, or bv exciiii.g
their hearers to the most desperate and lawle'ss aqoiiis.
James, jealous to excefs'cf his prerogative, was alarm-
ed at this daring encroachment on it; and as Mclvil,
hy his learning and zeli,'had acquired the reputation
and authority of head cf the parts, he resolved to pu.
nilh him with the rigour which lhat pie emintuie
rendered necclEarv, and to difrourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Micl-
vil, however, avoided his rage, by flying into England;
and the pulpits resounded with complaints that r.e
king had extinguiflied the light of learning in the kill-
dom, and deprived the church of the ablcfi, and nmoll
faithlul guardian of ils liberties and difeiplinlet.

Theie violent declanations of the clergy againfl the

measures of the court were extremely acceptable to the
people.' Tlie conspirators, though driven out of ;t.
kiniidomm, still pfcf-ifed great influence there; ai',l as
the had evern tling to fear from the refentniem i;
youig prince, irritated :y the furious coun!,es o!' Ar

SptZ:. 3- .c. Ca!d. iii. ;04.

ran,'they nevercceafed soliciting their adherents to take
arms in their defence.' Gowrie, the only person a-
mong thetn who had' submitted to the king, and ac-
cepted of a pardon, soon repented of a flep which loft
him the efleem of one party, without gaining the coi-
fidence of the other; and, after ftu'cring many morti-
fications'frbbm the'king's ncglect, and the haughtiness
of Airari, he was at lait commanded to leave Scotland,
and to reside in France. While he waited at Dundee
for an opportunity to embark, he was informed that
the earls of Angus, Mar, arid the tutor of Glamis, had
concerted a scheme for flirpr-ifmg the castle of Stir-
ling. Irn his fitnation, little perflafion was necessary
to draw him to engage in it. Under various pretexts
he put off his voyage, and lay ready to take arms on
the day fixed by the conlpirators for the execution of
their enterprise. lis lingering fb long at Dundee,-
uithout any apparent realon, awakened the ftiliicion
of the court, proved fatal to himself, and disappointed
the fuceefs of the confpiracv. Colonel William Stew.-
alt firrounded the house where he nloged . ith a bo.
dy of soldiers, and, in spite of his rcfill;uce, took him
p-iloner. -l'o days alter, Angus, Mar, and (;lanis
frized the-cafle ot' Stirling, and erTc2ing their standard
there, publihied a manifesto, declaring that they took
arms tor' no other reason but to remove from the king's
presence a minion who had acquired power by the
mofi unworthy aAtions, and who exerciled it mith the
moll intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrle's
imprilotiment firuck a damp upon their Ipirits. They
imnputed it to his own treachery, and lufpected, that
as lih had formerlv defirted, he had now betrayed
them. At the lame time, a furn of money, with which
:lizberlth had promised to fupplv them, not beingi duly
paid, and t-heir friends and vassals coming in fiow; y,
'hev app-ared irresolute and difleartened; and as the
ki:vg, who acted with great vigour, advanced towards
tani at the- head of twenty thousand men, they fled
lrcipitately towards England; and with difficulty
\l.l- - -- .N

made their escape*. This rafh'and- feeble, attempt
produced such effces ,as usually follow disappointei
conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause for which i:
was undertaken, but added strength and reputation to
the king: confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them
to pursue their meafcurecwith more boldness and great.
er uccefs. Gowrie was the first viitim of their reltent.
ment. After a very informal trial, a jury of pten
found him guilty of treason, and he was publicly bt.
headed at Stirling.

To humble the church was the king's next ftep.

But as it became nrceffary, for this purpose, to cal m
the aid of the legislative authority, a parliament va
hallily summoned; and while so many of the i)obltl
were banished out of the kingdom, or forhidden to ap-
,pear in the king's presence; while Arran's hauglitintfi
kept sone at a distance, and intimidated others; tli
meeting conrifled only of tllofe who were abfoluttey at
the devotion of the court. In order to conceal the Iówi
which were framing from the klnowledge of the cle-r,
the lords of the articles were sworn to secrecy; anil
when some of the minifler'., who either fufpeelcd or
were informed of the daager, deputed one of thcir
number to declare their apprehensions to the king, ht
was seized at the palace-gate, and carried to a dilblnt
prison. Others, attempting to enter the parliianmcst
hoirie, were refuscd adlnittancet; and such laws wvet
pasTed, as totally overturned the con4tiiution and dii
cipline of the church. The restsing to ackluowledte
the jurifdicion of the privy-couneti.--the pretendiiing
exemption from the authority of the civil courts; ti
attempting to dirriuifh the rights and privileges of ary
of the three estates in par!iarment, were declared to 1
high treason. The holding afli-mLiies, whether civi! r
ecclcfialtical, without the king's pI.criiflion or appo nt.
mcnt; the uttering either privaecly or publicly; ir l.r
mons or in declamations, any fallie and feandalous re-
* Home's Hilt. of House of DI)oig}.'79.' Spu.tL 3;

t Caldiu. 36^.

ports agait. the king, his ancestors, or ministers were
pronounced capital crimes t.

When these laws were published at the cross of Edin-
burgh, according to the ancient .ciiom, Mr. Robert
Pont, miniiter of St. Cuthberts, and one of the lords
of session, solemnly protested againit them, in the namni
of his brethren, because they had been palled without
the knowledge or consent of the church. lvcr since
the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclefiaflical judicato-
ries had both been esteemed sacred. In the former,,
the clergy had been accuflomed to censure and adrio-
btIh with unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exer-
cired an uncontrouled and independent jurifticqion.
The blow was now aimed at both these privileges.
These new flatutes would have rendered churchmen as
inconsiderable as they were indigent: and as the ava-
rice of the nobles had stripped them of the wealth, the
Idng's ambition was about to deprive them of the pow-
er, which once belonged to their order. No wonder
the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud. All
the miniflers of Edinburgh forsook their charge and
fled into England. The most eminent clergymen
throughout the kingdom imitated their example. De-
folation and aRonifhment appeared in every part of the
Scottish church: the people bewailed the lofi of pastors
whom they esteemnd; and full of conlternation at an
event ib unexpecerd, openly exprefred their rage against
Arran, and began to fulpecl the king himself to be an
enemy to the reformed religion ¶.

t Parl. 8. Jac. VI. Spotfw. 333.

N

# BOOK SEVENTH. CONTENTS. Throkmorton's conspiracy. Designs of Mary's adherents. Severe proceedings against the banished Lords. Against the Clergy. Conspiracy against Elizabeth. O ...

TEE
HISTORY

OP
SCOTLAND.

BOOK SEVENTH.

CONTENTS.

brolmortrn'j confpiray. DefigJs of Mary's adherett

Severe proreedinz-s againfi the banibed Lards. Agailo iA
Clergy. Conipiracy againf Eliza6etb. Opposition to Mary
Gray, a nev favourite. His inter es. Arran's corruption
Parry's conspiracy. Severe flatute againf Mary.
kague againfI Eli=a6ret. Her vise condu8. Arran'
power undermined. The bunijihd Lord: return to Sco!l,,nd
A parliament. Church 'Ajair:. League with Eng Irnd
Sabiagton's confpiraey. Difsovered. liaryv accrued. fin
domelicr and papers r i=ed. Her l. Hertal. defence. Hti
fentne caonjfirmed by parliament. E/iza6, t'l disiz.ulJh ' t
France interpofis in 6absf of Mary. _7ames endeavours t
save his mother. Mary's flntence publijbed. l¥ary treatti
with grejt rigour. james solicits in her behtlf Of lisc.r
bdebl anxiety. Warrant for Mary) s'executionjigned. Ht
bebaviour at her death. Her charater. Elizabeth endea
voDtrs tofo6tbe Jame,. D/ifrace of Gray. Annesatio oj
church lands. Of the Ietr Bjronj. Of the Span.lh ar.ma-.
Conduit of James on that occafon. A national covrean!,
Tfh armada dfeated. Intrigues of Philip and the Popti
roles,. yamel', lenity to the conspirators. Hi tarriage.

W HILE -Scotland was torn by those intefline sac-
tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the'rumour of a pro.
jecl in agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Franchi

Throkmortpn, a Cheshire gentleman, was fufpefcc in
being deeply concerned in the design, and on that sus-
picion he was taken Into custody. Among his papers
were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in
the kingdom, with an account of their situation, and
of the drpth of the water in each; the other, of all the
em ncent Roman catholics in England This circum-
fance confirmed the fulpicion against him, and some
drk and desperate conspiracy was luppofed just ready
to break out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence,
and declared that the two papers wire forged by the
qleen's ministers, in order to intimidate or ensnare
him; and he even endured the rack with the utmost
fortitude. But being brought a second time to the
place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not
only acknowledged that he had held a secret correfpon.
dence with the queen of Scots, but discovered a design
that was formed to invade England. The duke of
Guise he hlid, undertook to furifhh troops and to con-
ilu& the cnterprife The pope and king of Spain were
to fltpply the money neceffa.v for carrying it on; all
the English exiles w'ere eager to take arms; many of
the catholics at home would he ready to join them at
thtir landing; MNndoza, the Spanilh ambanlEdor, who
was the life of the conspiracy, sparcd no pains in so-
menting the spirit of dinfaffction among the English,
or in haflening the preparation on the conrincnt; and
bh his command, he made the two lifts, the copies
whereof had been found in his pcfrifrioni. 'This con-
session he retra6ted at his trial; and returned to it again
after sentence was passed upon him; and retradted it
once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming
our opinion of this matter, by the light which time
and hlftory have thrown upon the deligns and charac-
:ers of the princes of Guise, many circurnitances in
Throkmorton's confession appear to he extremely rc-
.oate from truth, or even from probability. 'The duke

* Holinshed, a -o.

N 3

of Guise tas at that juncture, far from being in afitua.
tion to undertake foreign conquests. Without either
power or office at court; hated by the king; and per.
fecuted by favourites; he had no leisure for any
thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neighbouring states;
and his vast and ambitious mind was wholly occupied
in laying the foundation of that famous league which
Ihook the throne of France. But about the time Eli.
zabeth detected this confpiracv, the close union be-
tween the house of Guise and Philip II. was remarka-
ble to all Europe; and as their great enterprise againfl
Henry III. was not yet disclosed, they endeavoured
to conceal that under their threatenings to invade
England. Throkmorton's discovery appeared to be ex-
tremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ar-
dently all the parties mentioned by him wilhed her
do-nfal, thought that she could not guard her king-
dom with too much care. The indiscreet zeal of the
Englilh exiles increased her fears. Not satisfied with
inceflant outcries against her feveritv towards the Scot-
tilh queen, and her cruel persecution of her catholic
subjects, not thinking it enough that one pope hal
threatened her with the sentence of excommunication,
and another had actually pronounced it, they now
began to disperse books and writings in which they en-
deavoured to- persuade their disciples, that it would be
a meritorious aaion to take away her life; they openly
exhorted the maids of honour to treat her as Judlth
did Holofernes, and, by such an illustrious deed to
render their own names honourable and sacred in the
church throughout all future ages'. For these realons,
Elizabeth not only inflicted the puniiniment of a traitor
on Throkmorton, but commanded the Spanish ambal-
fador instantly to leave England; and that she might
be in no danger of being attacked within the ifiani,
ile determined to uife her utmost efforts, in order to
recover that influence over the Scottiih councils, whcic
fle had for fbme time entirely loft.

There were three diffcrent methods by which E'iz;

' Card. 497.

beth might hope to accomplih this; either by Turnih-
ing such effectual aid to the baniihed nobles, as would
enable them to resume the chief direction of affairs;
or by entering into such a treaty with Mary, as might
intimidate her Ion, who being now accustomed to go-
vern, would be apt to'agree to any terms rather than
resign the sceptre, or admit an associate in.the throne;
or by gaining the earl of Arran, to secure the direc-
tion of the king his malfer. The last was not only
the easiest and 'peedieft, but the most certain of fuc-
cess. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without
laying the other two altogether aside. With this view
fte sent Davison, one of her principal Secretaries, and
a man of abilities and address, into Scotland. A mini-
lter so venal as Arran, hated by his own countrymen,
and holding his power by the molt precarious of all
tenures, the favour of a young prince, accepted Eliza-
beth's offers without helitation, and esteemed the ac-
quifition of her proteclion to be the molt solid founda-
tion of his own greatness. Soon after he consented to
an interview with Lord Hundlon, the governor of Ber-
wick, and being honoured with the pompous title of
lieutenant-general for the king, he appeared at the
place appointed with a Iplendid train. In Hunfdon's
pretence he renewed his promises of an inviolable and
faithful attachment to the English interelt, and affur-
ed him that James should enter into no negotiation
which tended to interrupt the peace between the two
kingdolns; and as Elizabeth began to entertain the
fame fears and jealousies concerning the king's mar-
riage, which had formerly disquieted her with regard to
his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from
liflening to any overture of that kind, until he had pre-
vioufly obtainel the queen of England's content '.

The banilhcd lords and their adherents soon felt the
efeias of Arran's friendihip with England. As Eliza-
bethl had pcrnmi;ted them to take refuge in her domi-
nions, and ii!veal of her mini!ters were of opinion that
he ought to employ her arms in defence of their cause,

Cald. iii. 4 Mrl. 3r5. See Apped. No. X.

bhefear of thil was the only thing which restrained
James and his favourite from proceeding to foch ex.
trnmities against them, as might have excited the pity
or indignation of the English, and have prompted them
to exert themselves with vigour in their behalf. But
every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to call' a parliament, in which an aft
was Bassed, attainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a
greatpumber of their followers. Their estates devolved
to the crown, and according to the praEtice of the
Scortifh monarchs, who were obliged to reward the
faTi:on which adhered to them, by dividing with it
the spoils of the vanquinied, James dealt out the great-
er part of thele to Arran and his associates t.

Nor was tie treatment of the clergy less- rigorogs.

All mninifters, readers, and proifelbrs in colleges, wre
enjoined. to lubferihe, within Ilort days, a parpr leili-
fying their approbation of the laws cmnceruing tl.:
church ena&ed in last parliament. Many, overawed
or corrupted by the court, yielded obedience; others
flood out. The stipends of the latter were tequeitrat-
ed, some of the more active committed to priibn, and
numbers compelled to fly the kingdom. Those wlho
complied, fell under the suspicion of acing from 1ir.-
cenary or ambitious motives. Those lho lufifrcd
acquired high reputation, by giving fi:ch convincrin
evidence of their firmnel; and finceritv.. The judiik..-
tories of the church were almost entirely fupprefl:d.
In some places fearce as many minifiers remained. as
to perform the duties of religious worship; they loon
funk in reputation among the people, and being pro-
hihited not only from diliourfing of public affairs, bItl
obliged, by the jealousy of the administration, to frame
every sentiment and expression iFs-luch a manner as to
give the court no offence, their fermens were deemrd
languid, infiid, and contemptible; and it became ti.,
general opinjon, that, together with the molft viriuo;s
of the nobles and the molt faithful of the clergy, thi

+Cald. i5i.527

power. and vigour of religion were now banished out.
of: thekingdom t.

Mean while, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those
fruitless negotiations with the queen of Scots, which
ithad become, almost matter of form to renew every
year. They served not. only to amuse that unhappy
princess with some profpecdt of liberty; but furnished
an apology for eluding the solicitations of foreign pow-
ers in her behalf, and were of use to overawe James, by
thewing him that she could at any time set free a dan-
gerous rival to dispute his authority. These treaties
Ihe suffered to proceed to what length she pleased, and
never wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when
they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on
foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which
preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered it
ineffectual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton, a jesuit, was failing from Slanders
towards Scotland, the ship on board of which he was
a passenger happened to be chased by pirates, who, in
that age, often infested the narrow seas. Crichton, in
great confulion, tore in pieces some papers in his cuf-
tody, and threw them away; but, by a very extraordi-
nary accident, the wind blew them back into the ship,
and they were immediately taken up by some of the
pafflngers, who carried them to Wade, the clerk of
the privy-council. HIe, with great industry and pa-
tience, joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot formed by the king of
Spain and tlhe duke of Guise, for invading England.
The people were. not yet recovered from the fear
and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy. in which
Throkmorton had been engaged, and as his discoveries
appeared now to be confirmed by additional evidence,
not only all their former apprehensions recurred, but
the consternation became general and excessive. As all
the dangers, with which England had been threatened
for some years, flowed either immediately from Mary
herself, or from those who made use of her name to

tCald. iii. 589.

juflify their. infurresions and conspiracies, this gradu.
ally diminished the compassion due to her situation,
and the Engliih, instead of pitying, began to fear and
to hate her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and pacfic
reign the Englih enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened
sources of wealth unknown to their ancetfors, was ex-
tremely beloved by all her people; and regard to her
safety, not less than to their interefl, animated them
against the Scottilh queen. In order to discourage her
adherents, it was thought necessary to convince them,
by some public deed, of the attachment of the Englift
to their own sovereign, and that any attempt against
her life would prove fatal to her rival. With this
view an A.ffJciaion was framed, the subscribers of which
bound themselves by the moll solemn oaths, " to de-
-' fend the queen againfs all her enemies, foreign and
" domestic; and if violence should be offered to her lile,
"' in order to favour the title of any pretender to the
" crown, they not only engaged never to allow or
'& acknowledge the person or persons by whom, or for
" whom, such a detestable ac should be committed,
" but vowed, in the presence of the eternal God, to
" prosecute such person or persons to the death, and
4' to pursue them, with their utmost vengeance, to
'" their utter overthrow and extirpation t." Persons of
all ranks subscribed this combination with the greatest
eagerness and unanimity l[.

Mary confidered this combination, not onlv as an

avowed design to exclude her from all right of fuccef-
sion, but as the certain and immediate forerunner of
her deftruftion. In order to avert this, Ihe made iuch
feeble efforts as were still in her power, and sent Nauc,
her secretary, to court, with offers of more entire refig-
nation to the will of Elizabeth, in all points, which
had been the occasion es their long enmity, than her
pals fuferings hitherto had been a.le to extort§. But
whether Mary- adhered inflexibly to her privileges as
an independent sovereign or yielding to the neccflity
of her situation, endeavotred, by concessions, to soothe

State Trials, i. an. A Card. 499. § Id. ibid,

her rival, (he was equally unsuccessful. Her firmnnefi
was imputed to obftiiacy, or to the secret hope of
foreign,aflftlance; her concessions were either believed
to be insincere, or to flow from the fear of some pre-
sent danger. Her willingness, however, to comply with
any terms was lb great, that Walsingham warmly ur-
ged his miflrefs to come to a final agreement with
her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that it was the
spirit raised by the afrociation which had rendered her
so palive 'and compliant. She always imagined that
there was something myfierious and deceitful in all
Mary's acions-, and suspected her of carrying on a
dangerous correspondence with the English catholics
both within and without the kingdom. Nor were her
suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to fir Francis Inglefield,
urging him to haften the execution of what Khe calls
lie Great Plat or DJf,,nrm.!, without hesitating on ac-
count of any danger in which it might involve her life,
which file would most willingly part with, if, by that
sacrifice, she could procure relief for to great a num-
ber of the opprefled children of the church *. Instead,
therefore, of hearkening to the overtures which the
Scottifli queen made, or granting any mitigation of
the hardships of which she complained, Elizabeth re-
solved to take her out of the hands of the earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint fir Amias Paulet and fir
Drue Drury to he her keepers. Shrewsbury had dif-
charged his trust with great fidelity, during fifteen
years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary with
gcntlenefs and repect, and had always sweetened harsh
commands by the humanity with which he put them
in execution. The fame politencfs was not to be ex-
pected from nmen of an inlerior rank, whose revere vi-
gilance, perhaps, was their chief recommendation to
thatemplovmtcnt, and the only merit by which they
could pretend to gain favour or preferment t.

As Jarme was no lrst eaFgr than ever to deprive the
bauilh, d nobles of Elizabeth's protetion, he apil,,iltetd

'~il.atre, In, !'u. } diUIJ.
A w.

.the mnafter.-oGray his ambaffador'to the court of Eng.
land, andintrufted him with the-conduct&of a negotia.
tion for that purpose. An honour for which he was in.
-debted to the .envy and jealousy of the earl of Arran.
;Gray possessed all the talents of a courtier; a graceful
-person, an infnuating address, .boundless ambition, and
arerilefs and intriguing spirit. During his refidencein
France, he had been admitted into the most intimate
familiarity with the duke of Guise, and in order to
gain his favour, had renounced the proteftatrreligion,
and professed the utmost zeal for the captive. queen,
who carried on a secret correspondence with him, from
which fhe.expe&ed great advantages. On his return
into Scotland, he paid court to James with extraordli
paryy affidutty, and his accomplihments did not fail to
.make their usual impression on the king's heart. Ar.
ran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread
his growingfavour; and flattering him/elf, that abencte
would efface any fentimtnts of tenderneis- from the
mind of a young prince, pointed him out, by' his ma-
'licious praises, as the moil proper person in the king-
dom for an embassy of'fuch importance; and contribut-
ed to raise him to that high dignity, in order to haficn
his fall. Elizabeth, wh'ohad an admirable-dexterity in
dif-overing the proper initruments for carrying on her
designs, endeavoured, by carefies, and by presents, tn
-secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered lii'
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profure.
ntfs, which was flill greater. Heabandoned himfelfwith.
.out reserve to Elizabeth's direction, and not only un.
dertook to preserve the king under the influence ol
England, but a&ed as a spy upon the Scottish queen
and betrayed to her rival every secret that he coiil
draw trom her by his high pretensions of zeal in h0
service'.

Gray's credit with the English court was cxtremncl

galling to the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longel
thought of employing her power to reflore then; 1iI
found it easier to govern Scotland by corrupting tE

Strype, iii 30o. Melv. 316.

kiig's favourites; and, in compliance with Gray's so-
liitations; Ihe commanded the exiles to leave the n6rlh
of England, and to remove into the heart of the king-
dom. 'This rendered it difficult for them to hold'aily
.correspondence with their partifis in Scotland; and al-
moit impoflible to return thither without her permiffidii.
Gray, by gaining a point which James had so much at
heart, riveted himself more firmly that ever in his fa-
,your; and by acquiring greater reputation, became ca-
pable of serving Elizabeth with greater luccefst.

Arran had now possessed for some time all the power,

the riches, and tire honours, that his immoderate am-
bition could desire, or the fondness of a prince, who
set no limits to his liberality towards his favourites,
tcould berlowv. The office of lord chancellor, the high-
elt and moil important in the kingdom, was conferred
iupon him, even' during the. life of the earl of Argyll,
wvhofucceeded Athol in that dignityf; and the public
beheld, with astoniihment and indignation, a.man e-
ducatd,.as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and a
contemner.,of justice,. appointed to preside in parlia-
menrtini the privy-council, in. the court of session- and
intruited with the supreme disposal of the property of
his fellakw-ubjeEts. ife was, at the fame tiinr, govern-
or of the castles of-Stirling' and Edinburgh; the wo
principal forts in Scotland; provost of the city of
Edinburgh; .and as if by all these accumulated
dignities his merits had not been lufficiently recom-
pensed,. he was. created lieutenant-general over the
whole kingdom. No person was admitted into the
kiig's presence without his permission; no favour
could. be obtained but by his mediation. James,
occupied with youthful amusements, devolved upon
him the whole. regal authority. Such unmerited
elevation increased his natural arrogance, and rendered
it intolerable.- He was no longer content with the con-
dition of a iibjie&, but pretended-to derive his pedigree
from Murdo. duke of Albany; and boasted openly,

C Cald. iii. 643. t Crawf. Offic, of State, App. 447.
i X/J.IIn. ' Q

that his title to the.crown was pieferable' t-that of the
king himfetf. But, together with these thoughts of
royalty, he retained the meanness suitable to his primi-
tive state. His venality as a judge was scandalous, and
was exceeded only b that of -his wife, who, in defiance
of decency, made herself :a party in amnbft every que-
stion which came to be decided, employed her influence
to corrupt or to overawe thejudges, and almost openly
-di&ated their decisions'. His rapaciousness as a mini-
ser was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of
so many offices; with the eflate and honours which he-
-longed to the house of Hamilton; or with the greater
part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his filare;
he grasped at the pofieffions of several of the nohlts.
He required lord tMaxwell to exchange part of his c.
slate, for the forfeited lands of KIirmeil; and hecaule he
was unwilling to quit art ancient inheritance for a pol:
session so precarious, he flirred up againfl him his old
rival, the laird of Johnston, amn involved that corlner o
the kingdom in a civi war. lie committed to prifrtn
the earl of Athol, lord Home, and the malter of Caffls;
the firit, becanfe he would not divorce his wife, a
daughter of the earl of Gowrie, and entail his estate on
him; the second, because he 'was unwilling to part
with some lands adjacent to one of his etlarts; and the
third, for refusing to lend him money. His 'spies and
'infirmers filled the whole cotmtry, and intruded them.
selves into every company. The nearest neighbours
distrusted and feared each other. All familiar forcicl
'was at an end. Even the common intercourses o0 hul-
manity were interrupted, no man knowing in 'whom to
confide, or where to utter his complaints There is not
perhaps in -hifory an example of a minifler so univer-
'lally deteflable to a nation, or who more jlttly delfrved
its detestation -.

Arran, notx ithflamding, regardless of the sentiments,

and despising the nlurmurs of the people, gave a loole
to his natural temper, and proceeded toadls ltill motr

* Cad. iii. Scotflarvet's Staggering Statc, 7.

1 Sot[fw. 337, 3;8, 331.

violent, David Home of Argaty, and Patrick his bro-
ther, having received letters from one of the banished
lords, about private business, were condemned and put
todeath, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cun-
ninghame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two
gentlemenof honour and reputation, were accused of
having conspired with the exiled nobles to seize the
king's person. A single witness only appeared: The
evidence they produced of their innocence was unan-
fwerable; their accuser himself not long after acknow-
ledged that he had been suborned by Arran; and all'
men believed the charge against them to be groundless:
they were found guilty, notwithfianding, and suffered
the death of traitors, Feb. 9, I585.t

About the fame time that these gentlemen were pu-
nilbed for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was
endangered by a real one. Parry, a do6or of laws,
and a member of the house of commons, a man vain
and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit, had lately been
reconciled to the church of Rome; and fraught with
the zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonltrate the
sincerity of his attachment to the religion which he had
embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Alien had
publilhed a book, to prove the murder of an excom-
municated prince to be not only lawful, but a nierito-
rious adtion. The pope's nuncio at Venice, the jesuits
both there and at Paris, the Englih exiles, all approved
of the design. The pope himself exhorted him to per-
severe; and granted him for his encouragement a ple-
nary indulgence, and remission of his fins. Cardinal
di Como wrote to him a letter to the fame purpose.
But though he often got access to the qeeen, fear or
Bome remaining sense of duty, relfrained him from per-
petrating tb.e crime. Happily his iltention was at last
discovered by Nevil, the only person in England to
whom he had communicated it; and he himfelt. having
voluntarily confessed his guilt, he fuffred the punilh-
mrnt which it deserved*.
tIbid. 338. Cald. iii. 794. 'State Trials, vol. i. Ioj.

0

Th".e. repeated conrpiracies against their sovereign

awakened the indignation of the Englifi parliament,
and produced a very extraordinary statute, which, in
the end, proved fatal to the queen of Scots. By this law
the aflociation in defence of Elizabeth's life was ratifi-
cd, and it was farther enacted, " That if any rebellion
r" fhaI be excited in the kingdom or any thing at-
" tempted to the hurt of her majeftv's person, by or or
C" any person pretending a title to the crown, the queen
" ihallempower twenty-four persons by a commission
" under the great feal, to examine into, and pass fen-
" tence upon such offences; and after judgment given,

'a proclamation shall be issued, declaring the persons

" whom they find guilty excluded from any right to
c the crown; and her majesty's fubjcas may lawfully
" pursue every one of them to the death, with all their
" aiders and abettors: and if any design againfi the life
" of the queen take effec, the persons by orfor whom
" such a detestable atS is executed, and their ifuet, being
" .in any wife assenting or privy to the fame, shall be
" disabled for ever from pretending to the crown, and
" be pursued to death in the like manner t." This at
was plainly levelled at the queen of Scots; and whether
we confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal and
concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether
we impute it to the influence which that artful princesl
preserved over her parliaments, it is no easy matter to
reconcile it with the general principles ofjuftice or hu-
manity. Mary was thereby rendered accountable not
only for her own aEtions, but for those of others; in
consequence of which, the might forfeit her right of
succession, and even her life itself.

Mary justly confidered this aC as a warning to pre-

pare for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's miniflers,
t is probable, had resolved by this time to take away
her life; and suffered books to be published, in order to
persuade the nation that this cruel and unprecedented
measure was not only necessary but just i. Even that
short period of her days which she remained, they

t Ibid. 23. i Strype, iii. 299.

rendered urncomfortable, by every hardihip and indig-
nity which it was in their power to inflict. Almost all
her servants were dismissed, she was treated no longer
with the refpec due to a queen; and, though the rigour
offeventeen years imprilonment had broken her con-
fitution, she was confined to two ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer by
reason of cold. Notwiftflanding the scantiness of her
revenue, she had been accustomed to diflribute regularly
some alm. among the poor in the village adjoining to
the castle. Paulet now refused her liberty to perform
this pious and humane office, which had afforded her
great consolation anidft her.own sufferings. The caitle
in which (he resided was converted into a common pri-
son; and a young man, fiifpected of popery, was con-
fined there, and treated with such rigour under her eye,
that he died of the ill ulage. She often complained to
Elizabeth of there multiplied injuries, and expoftulated
as became a woman and a queen; but as no political
reason now obliged that princess, to amuse her any long-
er with fallacious hopes, far from granting her any re-
dress, he did not even deign to give her any answer.
The king of Prance, closely allied to Elizabeth, on
whom he depended for alfitance, was afraid of efpouf-
ing Mary's cause with any warmth; and all his folici-
tations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and ineffica-
cious. But Caftelnau, the French ambassador, whose
rompaffion and zeal for the unhappy queen hfpplied
the defecs in his instructions, remonltrated with such
vigour against the indignities to which the was exposed,
that, by his importunity, he prevailed at length to have
her removed to Tuthbury; though (he was confined the
greater part of another winter in her present wretched
habitation '.

Neither the insults of her enemies, nor the neglect of

her friends, made such an impression on Mary, as the
ingratitude of her son. James had hitherto treated his
mother with filial refpeet, and had even entered into

' Jebb. v. .. 576.--598.

0 3

negotiations with her, which gave umbrage to Eliza-
beth. But as it was not her interest that his good cor-
refpondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return
in Scotland found his favour with the king greatly in.
created by the success of his embassy, persuaded him to
write a har/h and undutiful letter to his mother, in
which he expressly refused to acknowledge her to be
the queen of Scotland, or to confide' his affairs as con-
nedled, in any wife, with hers. This .cruel requital of
her maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for.
row and derpair. " Was it for this," said the, in a let-
ter to the French ambassador, "that I have endured so
" much, in order to preserve for him the inheritance,
4' to which I have a just right? I am far from envying
" his authoritv in Scotland. I desire no power th'ere;
a" nor wifth to set my foot in that kingdom, i£ it were
'C not for the pleasure of once embracing a ion, whom
" -I have hitherto loved with too tender affection.
" Whatever he either enjoys, or rxpelts, he derived it
" from me. From him I never received assistance,

a fupplv, or berefit of any kind. Let not my alli's
" treat him any longer as a king: he holds that digni.
" tybv mv content; and if a speedy repentance do
" not apprafe mni jifI.rcrntment, I will load him with
-L a parent's curse, and surrender my crown, with all
4" my pretensions to one who will receive them with
c" gratitude, and defend themu with vigour'." The
love which James bore to his mother, whllom he had
never known, nay, whom he had been early taught
to confider as one of the most abandoned persons of
her sex, cannot be supposed ever.to have been ardenti
and he did not now take any pains to regain her favour.
But whether her indignation at his undutiful behavionr:,
added to her bigotted attachment to popery, prollpted
Marv at any time to think fcrioufly of dilinheriting in r
Ion; or whether these threatenilgs were uttered in a fud-
det fatlyv of diiappointed affeciion, it is now no easy
.matter to detefi:ii;e. Some papers which are iliil
' Murdjn, 566.. Jebb. ii..57I. See Append. No. XIl.

extant seem to render the former not improbable.
:Cares of another kind, and no less difquieting,.occu-
pied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm Which Ihe had
long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end; and such
lornns were gathering in every quarter, as filled her
withjuft alarm. All the neighbouring nations had un.
dergone revolutions extremely to her disadvantage.
The great qualities which Henry III. had displaycd in
his youth, and which raised the expectations of his sub-
jeas so high, vanished on his ascending the throne; and
his acquiring supreme power seems not only to have
corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his under-
standing. He loon loft the esteem and affeftion of the
nation; and a life divided between the auRterities of a
luperltitious devotion, and the extravagancies of the most
dissolute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as
he was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his pro-
fusion, and the fondness with which he doated on two
unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother,
those sentiments of the people burst out with violence.
Henry had no children, and though but thirty-two
years of age, the succession of the crown was already
conlidered as open. The king of Navarre, a distant
drfcendent of the royal family, but the undoubted heir
to the crown, was a zealous protestant. The prolpecl
of an event so fatal to their religion, as his alcending
the throne of France, alarmed all the catholics in Eu-
rope; and the duke of Guise, countenanced by the pope,
and aided by the king of Spain, appeared as the defend-
er of the Romish faith, and the affertor of the cardinal
of Bourbon's right to the crown. In order to unite the
parts', a bond of confederacy was formed, diftingluilh.d
by the name of the Holy Leaue. 'All ranks of men join-
ed in it with enulation. The spirit spread with the ir-
rciltible rapidity which was natural to religious pafiioos
il that age. The deftruftion of the Reformation, not
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be the
olhiea and wish of the whole party; and the duke of
Giilc, the head of this mighty and zealous budy, ac-

t See Append. XIII.

quired authority in the kingdom far superior to that
which theking.himfelf possessed. Philip II. by the con-
quct of Portugal, had greatly increased the naval power
of Spain, and had at last reduced under his dominion all
that portion of the continent which lies beyond the Py.
reneanr mountains, and which nature feerms to have def.
tined to form one great monarchy. William prince of
Orange, who first encouraged the inhabitants of the
Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whefe wisdom
and valour formed and proteaed the rifiug common-
wealth, had fallen by the hands of an assassin. The fu-
perior genius of the prince of Parmn had given an entire
turn to the fate of the war in the Low Countries; all his
enterprises, concerted with consummate ikill, and exe-
cuted with equal bravery, had been attended with unin-
terrupted success; and the Dutch, reduced to the lail ex-
tremivy, were on the point of falling under the dominion
of their ancient master.

None of thoe circumflances, to which Elizabeth had

hitherto owed her security, existed any longer. She
could derive no advantage from the jealousy which had
subsisted between France and Spain; Philip, by means of
his confederacy with the duke of Guile, had an equal
wiay in the councils of both kingdoms. The hugonots
were unable to contend with the power of the leaguei
and little could be expelced from any diversion they
niglht create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands
ec:dd long occupy the arms, or divide the firength of
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it hbe
came necessary for Elizabeth to form a new plan of con-
dunt; and her wxifdom in forming it was not greater
than the vigour with which {he carried it on. The inea-
furcs molt suitable to her natural temper, and which flie
had hitherto pursued, were cautious and safe; those Iht
pow adopted were enterprising and hazardous. She pre-
ferred peace, but was not afraid of war; and was capa-
ble, when compelled by necessity, not qnly of defend-
ing herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness which averted danger from her own do.
minions. 'She immediately fuirifled the hngonots witb
a colfiderable supply in money. .She carried on a pr-.

vate negotiation with Henry III. who, though compel.'
led to join the league, hated the leaders of it, and wish-"
ed for their deftrucion. She openly undertook the pro-
teftionof the Dutch commonwealth, and sent a power-
ful army to its assistance. She endeavoured to form a
general confederacy of the protestant princes, in oppo-
fition to the popish league. She determined to proceed
with the utmost rigour against the queen of Scots, whose
sufferings and rights afforded her enemies a specious
pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved to
redouble her endeavours, in order to effeel a closer union
with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate her influ-
ence over the councils of that nation.

She found it no difficult matter to induce most of the
Scottish courtiers to promote all her designs. Gray, fir
John Maitland, who had been advanced to the office of
secretary, which his brother formerly held, fir Lewis
Bellenden, the juffice clerk, who had succeeded Gray
as the king's resident at London, were the persons in
whom she chiefly confided. In order to direct and
quicken their motions, she despatched fir Edward Wot-
ton along with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was
gay, well-bred, and entertaining; he excelled in all the
exercises for which James had a pafion, and amused
the young king by relating the adventures which he had
met with, and the- observations he had made during
along residence in foreign countries; but under the
veil of these superficial qualities, he concealed a danger-
ous and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high fa-
vour with James; and while he was seemingly attentive
onlyto pleasure and diversions, he acquired influence
over the public councils, to a degree which was inde-
cent for a stranger to possess '.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to the
nation, than the proposal he made of a firi6t alliance be-
tween the two kingdoms, in defence of the reformed
religion. The rapid and alarming progress of the po-
pish league seemed to call on all protestant princes to u-
nite for the preservation of their common faith. James

*Melv. 3 17

embraced the overture with warmth, and a convention
of elares empowered him to conclude such a treaty,
and engaged to ratify itin parliament*. The alacrity
with which James concurred in this measure must not
be whollv ascribed either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's
addreis;it was owing in part to Elizabeth's liberality
As a mark of her motherly- affedtion for the young king,
&he fettled on him an annual pension of five thousand
pounds; thefame fum which her father had allotted her
before she ascended the throne. This circumltance,
which Ihe took care to mention, rendered a rum, which
in that age was far from being inconsiderable, a very
acceptable present to the king, whose revenues, during
long minority, had been almost totally diffipatedt.

But the chief object of Wotton's intrigues was to nm-

in Arran. While a minion so odious to the nation con.
tinued to govern the king, his affitance could be of lit-
tle advantage to Elizabeth. And though Arran, ever
since his interview with Hunfdon, had appeared ex-
tremely zealous for her interest, {he could place no
great confidence in a man whose condu& was Ib capri.
cious and irregular, and who, notwithstanding his pro.
teflations to the contrary, still continued a secret cor-
refpondence both with Mary and with the duke ls
Guise. The banihied lords were attached to England
from affection as well as principle, 'and were the only
peribns among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exi-
gency, he could thoroughly trut. Before Bellenden
left London, they had been summoned thither, under
colour of vindicating thenfelves from his aceufations,
hut, in reality, to concert with him the most proper
smearures for refloring them to their country. Wotton
pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for exe-
eItion; and it was greatly facilitated by an event nei-
ther uncommon nor considerable. Sir John Forfler,
and Ker of Ferniherft, the English and Scottihf war-
dens of the middle marches, having met, according to
the cutom of the borders, about nuidfummer, a tray
aiuf, and lord Ruffil, the earl of Bedford's eldest son,

* Spotfw. 339. - Cald. iii. 505.

happened to be killedi This Scuffle was purely acci-
dental, but. Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design
formed by. Ker, at the initigation of Arran, to involve
the two kingdoms in war. She infiited that both
of them. (hould be delivered up to her; and though
James eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine
Arran in St. Andrews and Ker in Aberdeen. During
his absence from court, Wotton and his afiociates carp
ried on their intrigues without interruption. By their
advice, the banilhed nobles endeavoured to accommo-
date their differences with lord John and lord Claud, the
duke of Chatelherault's two bons, whom Morton's vio-
knce had driven out of the kingdom. Their common
fuflerings, and common interest, induced both parties
to bury in oblivion the ancient discord which had sub-
fifred between the hou'es of Hamilton and Douglas.
By Elizabeth's permiflion, they returned in a body to
thle borders of Scoland. Arramn who had again reco-
vered-favour, infifld on putting the kingdom in a po;
flure of-defence: but Gray, Bcllenden, and Maitland
lecretly thwarted all his meatures. Some necessary
orders they prevented from being ifiued; others they
rendered ineflectual by the manner of execution; and
all of therm were obeyed slowly, and with reluc'tance'*.

Wotton's fertile brain was, at the lime time, big with
another and more dangerous plot. He had contrived
to seize the king, and to carry him by firce into Eng-
land. But the design was lappily dii:uovered; and,
in order to avoid the pullifhment his treachery merited,
he departed without taking leave t-.

Mean while the banished lords hastened the execution
of their enterprile; and as their friends and vaflils were.
now ready tojoi them, they entered Scotland. Wherer
ever they came, they wvere wrelcomed as the deliverers of
theif country, and the most fervent prayers were put up
to heaven for thle fuccels of their ars. '1'hey advainced',
without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at tlfe head
of ten thouinnd men. 'I he k'ng, thoug!] he had afitln-
bled au army fiperior in number, could not venture to

i Spotfw. 340. t Mciv. 3,5

meet them in the field, with troops whose loyalty was
extremely.dubious, and who at heft were far from being
hearty in the cause; nor was either the town or cafile
provided for a siege. The gates, however, of both were
flnt, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninians. That
fame night they surprised the town, or more probably it
was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had un.
dertaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself by a
precipitate flight. Next morning they invested the cal.
tie, in which there were not provisions for twenty-four
hours; and James was necessitated immediately to hcark-
en to terms of accommodation. They were not so elat.
ed with success as to urge extravagant demands, nor v.as
the king unwilling to make every reasonable concrfeion.
They obtained a pardon, in the most ample form, of all
the offences they had committed; the principal torts in
the kingdom were, by way of security, put into thrir
hands; Crawford, Montrole, and colonel Stewart, were
removed from the king's presence; and a parliarnell
was called, to cftabliih tranquillity in the nation t.

Though a great majority in this parliament confiflei

of the confederate nobles and their.adherents, they wer
far from discovering a viidi&tive spirit. Satisfied widt
procuring an a&t, restoring them to their ancient ho
nours and eflates, and ratifying the pardon granted li
the king, they seemed willing to forget all past errors ir
the administration, and spared James the mortification
of feeing his ministers branded with any public note a
infamy. Arran alone, deprived of all his honours, firip
ped of his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy ti
his country by public proclamation, funk back into ob
fcuritv, and mutt henceforth be mentioned by his primi
tive title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been
during his unmerited prosperity, the objec of the, hatre
and indignation of his countrymen, they beheld his fa
without pity, nor did all his sufferings mitigate their re
fentment in the least degree.

The clergy were the only body of men who obtaine
ao redress of their grievances by this revolution. 'lt

t Cald. iii. 795.

The 'cnfederate nobles had all along affeie'd tb be cin-
fide'rel as guardians of the privileges and discipline of
the church. In all their manifcftos they hid declared
their resolution to eftore these, and by that popular pre-
tence had gained many friends. It was now nal'-ral
toexpect some fruit of these promises, and fame rretrns
of gratitude towards many of the molt eminent preilh-
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who demanded
the repeal of the laws passed th 'preceding vear. The
king, however, was resolute to maintain these laws in
fall authority; and as the nobles were extremely folici-
tous not to disgust him, by inflifing on any difagreeahle
requelt, the claims ns the church in this, as well as in
many former initances, were fac-ificed to the intrcleft of
the laity. The miniflers gave vent to their indignation
in the pulpit, and their impatience under the disappoint-
mient broke our in some exnrefiior's extremely diireipec-
ful even tnwards the king liimfelfll.

The archbifh,-p of St. Andrews, too, felt the effects
of their anger. The provincial fvnod of Fife funimon-
ed him to appear, anl'to a-.fwer for his contempt cf the
decrees of fornmer an0lnb!ies, in prefuring to cxercile
the iuncuion of a bifnop. And though he :- ifcl tn ac-
knowledge the jujifdii(tion of the cou.t, and appealell
from it lo the k:ing, a feitence of excommurnicaion, e-
utally indecent and irregul.lr, was pronoii,:d agaiilft
hlim. Adamson, vwith no leI! indecency, thliiiierchl his
archiepil'copal cxcommunication agairlit MIlvil, and

nime other of hi_ opponents.
Soon after, a generl affemblv was hcl,, in which the
king, with fotne difficulty, obtained an ;li, permitting
the name anrd office of a bifhnp till to continue in the
church. The oower of the ordrr, hou-ever, was conili-
derably retrenched. The exer 'ife of disc(ipline, and the
illfpreion of the life and doctrlne of the clergy, were
coinmikted to pref)vterirs, in which bithnyp flion!d he
Plinwed no other pre-niinenhc but that of presiding as
Fe:petual 'mdtlerators. They thlemfelvee were declared

- . I! Spotlw. 343.
V!. I. P

to be fiubjet, in the fame manner as other pastors, to tht
jurisdiction of the general assembly. And as the diliuf.
sion of the arrl.bilhop's appeal might have kindled uu.
usual heats in the assembly, that affair was terminated
y a comprolmile. He renounced any claim of fuprecma.
cy over the church, and promised to demean hiimli !f lit.
ahlv to the character of a hilhop, as dcfcriied hv So.
Pa]l. The afiembly, without examining the fo;nda-
tiors of the sentence of excommunication, dieclarte! thai
it shotld be held of no efiRct, and rtetored him to all th;
privileres which he enjoyed betore it was pruolouncti.
INo\withftanding the extraordinary tcndernefs flewn for
the honour of the fvinod, and the delicacy and relpctc
wilh which its ju ildiation was treated, ifveral menlliers
were so zealous as to protest againlt this decilion *.

The court of Scotland was now filled with perlbns so
'armtily attached to Elizabeth, that the league hetween
the two kingdoms, which had been propoltd last yean
met ith no interruption, but fi-om D'Efneval t.h
Fren Is envov. James himself first proposed to renew
the negntiaticn. Elizabeth did not fulfer such a favcl.r.
ahle opportunity to flip, and inflantly defpatlied Rai..
dolph to conclude a treaty which fie tb much del;rd.
The danger to which the proteifant religion was exp.;.
ed, by the late combination of the popish powers for i.s
deflru&ion, and the necessity of a ltrict confederacy a-
moong thole wv-ho had embraced the Reformation, in or-
de. to obf5ruct their pernicious defigrls, were mentioned
as the foundation of the league. Tile chief articles in it
were, that both parties should hind themfelvcs to dcfend
the evangelic religion; that the league should he ofic,.
five and defensive grainft all who shall endeavour to> d,
fturb the exercise oi religion in eithcr kingdom; that :
one of the two parties he invaded, the other, not\ iliil
franding any former alliance, fhouil not, dire&tly cr in
trirtclyv, Efiift the invader; that if England be inrlj(i
in an- part remote from Scotland, James should afi:t tl.
qucen with two thousand horle and five rhouland f.'
'hat if thne enemy landed or approached within 1;':

Cal: . :;i. ES¢. Spe:f, . a6.

miles of Scotland, the king should take the field witlt
his whole forces, in the lame manner as he would do in.
defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return, un-
dertook to act in defence of Scotland, if it should be in-
vaded. At the fame time she assured the king that no
ltep Ihould be taken, which might derogate in any de-
gree from his pretensions to the English crown*. Eli-
zabeth expressed great fatisfa&ion with a treaty, which
rendered Scotland an uleful ally, instead of a dangerous
neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that
fide, which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of
them had been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, toge-
ther with the blessings of peace, which both kingdoms
had enjoyed during a considerable period, had so far a-
bated the violence of national antipathy, that the king's
conduct was universally acceptable to his own peoplet.

The acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time, ex-
posed James to much and delerved censure. This man
was deeply engaged in the conspiracy againfl the life of
the king his father. Both Morton and Binny one of
his own servants, who ilffered for that crime, had accul-
ed him of being present at the murders. He had efcap-
ed punilhment by flying into England, and James had
often required Elizabeth to deliver up a peribn so un-
worthy of her protection. He now obtained a licence,
from the king himself, to return into Scotland; and as-
ter undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal, ra-
ther than to detect his guilt, he was not only taken into
favour by the king, but sent back to the court of Eng-
land, with the honourable character of his 'ambaflidor.
James was now of such an age, that his youth and inex-
perience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this indecent
transaction. It must be imputed to the exceflive facili-
ty of his temper, which often led him to gratify his
courtiers at the expence of his own dignity and reputa-
tion§.

Not long after, the inconsiderate affedion of the Eng
'Spotfw. 351. tCamd. S3. t See Append. No. X.

Spotfw. 348. Cald.iii. 9i7.

P X

lih catholics towards Mary, and their implacable reflnt-
ment again-f Eli7abeth, gave rife to a conspiracy which
proved ratal to the one queen, left an indelible Riain on
the reputation of the other, and presented a fpeatacle to
Europe of which there had hitherto been no example ia
the hifory of mankind.

Doclor Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priefils

educated in the seminary at Rheims, had adopted an
extravagant and enthusiastic notion, that the bull of
Pius V. againfi Elizabeth was di&ated immediately by
the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion they instilled into
Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his fu-
rious zeal and daring courage; and persuaded him that
no service could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take
away the life of an excommunicated heretic. Savage,
eager to e!tain the crown of martyrdom, bound himlelf
by a bolemn vow to kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a traffic-
ing pr!eit of that frmirarv, had at that time come over
to Pcris, and fclicited Mendoza, the Spanifn anibaflhdor
there, to procure an invaiion of England, while the as-
fairs ci the league were so profpercus, anld the kingdom
left naked by fend(illg so many of the queen's best troops
into the N.therlar.ds. Pa^et and the Englilh exiles de-
mon!rated th- fruitlessness cfluuch an attesnpt, unle3ii E-
lizat-:h were firfl c::: off, or the invade:s iecured of a
power'ill concurrence on their landing. ih it could be
hopedtha! eithtr cf these events would happen, ed-.:clu-
al a;d was promised; and in the mcan time Ballard \as
fen. back to renew his intrigues.

I-e commiuni ated! his designs to Anthony Eahington,

a young gentleman in l erbdbhire, of a plentiful foit tunr,
and niany aisn'-le qualitics, who having contracld,
during l.is refidcnce in Fralcc, a famili;arity with t!i
arcnbilfiop of Giafgoew, had b.en recommendec by l.in
to the queen of Scots. le concurred vwith Pa.g.t, in
cons5dtr:i;g te death of Elizabeth as a ntcefTalv pi.li-
minary to any invasion. Ballard gave him hopes ti.;.
an end would Icen be put to her days, and inmpartc t,;
him Savage's vow, who was now in Lonidon v\aiting
for an, opportui:ity to flrike the Llow. But Babiit,',L
thouht the attempt ol too much importance, te rely on

a tingle hand for the execution of it, and proposed that
five resolute gentlemen should he joined with Savage in
an enterprise, the success of which was the foundation
of all their hopes. He offered to find out perrans wil-
ling to undertake the service, whose honour, secrecy, and
courage they might safely trust. He accordintlv open-
ed the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salitbury,
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry
Dun, John Jones, and Polly; all ofthem, except Polly,
whose bustling forward zeal introduced him into their
society, gentlemen of good families, united together in
the bonds of private friendship, strengthened by the
more powerful tie of religious zeal. Many confi;lta-
tions were held; their plan of operations was at last set-
tied; and their different parts assigned. Bahingtlo
hliiifelf was appointed to rescue the queen of Scots; Sa-
lilbury, with some others, undertook to excite several
counties to take arms; the murder of the queen, the
muof dangerous and important of all, fell to Tichhourne
and Savage, with four associates. And so totally had
their bigotted prejudices eitinguifled the principles of
honour, and the sentiments of humanity suitable to their
rank, that without feruple or compunction, they under-
took an a-'ion which is viewed with horror, even whein
committed by the meanest and mast profligate of man-
kind. This attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them
no lets honourable than it was desperate; and in order.
!) perpetuate the memory of it, they had a picture
dlawn containing the portraits of the fix afFliTins, witll
that of Babington in the middle, and a motto intimat-
i;tg that they were jointly embarked in some hazardous

eliigu.
The conspirators, as appears by this wanton and im-
prudent initance of vanity, lfemn to have tlhiuht a d.:-
covery scarce poffble, and neither diitrulled the si ic!rtr-
t their, companions, nor doubted the fu(cecl of th. r
nddertaking. But while they believed that their Ii.,-
Ihinaiious were carried on with the molt prof.., 1nu

i:d ilnrenrlable secrecy, every flep they took w.Y4 'l'U-

P3

lv known to Walsingham. Polly was one of his spies,
anid had entered into the conspiracy, with no other de.
sign than to betray his aFobciates. Gilbert Gifford too,
having been sent over to England to quicken the mo-
ticns of the conspirators, had been glined by Waling-
ham, and gave him fule intelligrnce of all their pro-
jecs. That vigilant mniiiter inlned'.tly impart d
the discoveries which lie had made to Elizabeth; anil
without communicating the matter to any other of ilic
counsellors, they agreed, in order to understand the i:ot
more perfe'tlv, to wait until it was ripened into 1tlnc
form, and brought near the point of execution.

At lafi, Elizlaeth thought it dangerous and criminal

to cexofe her own life, and( to tempt Providence anv
farther. Baliaid, the pline mover in the whole con-
fpiracy, was arret.d. His alTociates, disconcerted andl
Pfrdcl with ailL'i.m:-nt, endcavouired to save thenl-
felvesby figrt. But within a few davs, all of them,
except Windlor, were fe.zed in difiFei nt places of the
kingdom. and committed to the Tower. Though
they had under;aken the part, they wanted t.h firnl aurl
-deter.mied spirit of aafafins; and, ilf.u.-n-ed by fear or
by hope, difeuvercd all they knew. The indignation
of the people, and their impatience to revenge sith an
exc-r-ble combination againlf the life ,f their sovereign,
aftened their trial, and all of them fulfered the death
of traitors *.

iThis far Elizabeth'ó conduct may he pronouinced

both prudent and lIudablI. nor an she be acc;'ied of
violating any law of huniaity, o: of taking a;ny prrrau-
tinos beyond w'at were nectfrrv for her own . t.;itv.
But a tr;ica! i t're fuio'.'t d, vt'i;ti regard to which pa-
flerity ';vil psis a \cry difret jud.nra-.nt.

The s-antei zeal of a few .afit yrunn men accou";
fi:f.crintlv fcr ai the wild andt wicked d*Iqgns whi.h

they had formed. Btt hLis , as not the light in w;i:-h

lizabScth and Lher ininifisc-s chose to plare the coifu.ira
cv. They reprefer.ed Babi.tgt(ln andl his associates i
be inflrurments employed by tie queen of S:-s,. :..

' C;r.d. ,;5j. State T'rii.ls, vcl. i. tl:.

real though secret author of so many attempts againlt
the life of Elizabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms.
They produced letters, which they ascribed to her in
support of this charge. These, as they gave out, had
come into their hands by a very singular and myflerious
method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into
England, had been intruded with letters to Mary; but
in order to make a trial of his fidelity and address, they
cwre only blank papers made iup in that form. These
being fafelv delivered by him, he was afterwards em-
ployed without farther scruple. By Walsingham's
pirmffion, and the connivance of Paulet, he bribed a
tradefinan in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whither
Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the letters in a
hole in the wall of the catfle, covered with a loose stone.
Thence they were taken by the queen, and in the fame
manner her answers returned. All thele were carried to
Walfnlgham, opened by him, decyphered, fealed a-
gain so dexterously that the fiaud could not be per-
cived, and then transmitted to the persons to whom
they were directed. Two letters to Balington, with
frveral to Mendoza, Paget, Engelficld, and the Eng-
I!ia fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It was
Si:en out, that in there letters MIary approved of the
c',mlpiracy, and even of the afathnation; that she di-
rcdled them to proceed with the utmost circumfpectlio.,
altd not to t;ake arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to
join them; that she recommlended the earl of Arundel,
his brothers, and the young earl of TNrthumberland,
: l per(ns proper to conduct and to add reputation to
tlicir enterprise; that she advised them, if pofiible, to
excite at the lame time foinm commotion in Ireland;
::'d above al!, eollught them to concert with care the
ricans of her ef:ape, fuCge.ting to them leveral expedi-
cnts for that pmrpofe.

All these circumRances were opened at the trial of
:e confpiratprs: and while the nation was under the
i::lucnce of those terrors which the association had raif-
', and the late danger had augmented, they were he-
i. rd \ ithout hesitation or enquiry, and spread a gene-
.i alarni. Mary's zcal for her religion wus well

known; and in that age, examples of the violent and
sanguinary spirit w-hich it inspired were numerous. All
the cabals against the peace of the kingdorn for many
years had been carried on in her name; and it now ap-
pears evidently said the English, that the safety of the
one queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why,
then, added they, fhould.the tranquillity of England le
sacrificed for the fake of a flranger? Why is a life ft
dear to the nation exposed to the repeated aflults of an
exasperated rival? The cafe supposed in the alflciation
has now happened, the sacred person of our sovereign
has been threatened, and why should not an injured
people execute thatjuft vengeance which they had vow-
ed?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to

Elizabeth and her ministers. They thenifelves ha:l at
firit propagated them among the people, and they now
served both as an apology and a motive for their pro-
ceeding to such extremities against the Scottish qlleen
as they had long meditated. The more injuries Eliza-
beth heaped on Mary, the more she feared and Iated
that nnhappy queen, and came at last to'be pcrfuadcl
that there could be no other fecuritv for her own lif.,
but the death of her rival. Burleigh and Walfingliaml
had promoted so zealously all her nieafures with regard
to Scottish affairs, and had acted with so little referie
in oppoftion to Mary, that they had reason to dread
the most violent effects of her refentmnrt, if ever f::
would mount the throne of England. Anld thilcrf,'
they endeavoured to hinder an event lb fata! to thr.'-
selves, by confimrnng their milLrefs's fear and halredo 'f
the Scottifli queen.

Mean while, Mary was guarded with inufual v;'-

lance, and great care was taken to keep her ignorant u'
the dilcovery of the conlpir-ay. Sir Thl'lonas (;e"or-i
was at last sent from court to acquaint her, both o' it
and of the imputa ion with which shIh was load.d ia ai-
(.efiry to that crime; and he furpriifcd her w'.i: tli ' -
coutijuft as she had got on horlfb.n ;k r ride o(;r .,
x, ith her kctpe-rs. She was fltuck witrl a..ilonli: .
a.xc'. - : ::

::
-'- ,
,

not permitted; and in her absence, her private closet
,ras broken open, her cabinet and papers were seized,
fealed and sent up to court. Her principal domestics
too were arrested, and committed to different keepers.
Naun and Curie, her two secretaries the one a native of
France, the other of Scotland, were carried prilbners to
London.. All the money in her custody, amounting to
little more than two thousand pounds, was secured.
And after leading her about for some days, from one
gentleman's house to another, she was conveyed to So-
theringay, a strong castle in Northamptonihire '.

No farther evidence could now be expedted against
Mary, and nothing remained but to decide what ihould
be her fate. With regard to this, Elizabeth, and those
ministers in whom Ihe chiefly confided, seem to have
taken their resolution; but there was fill great variety
of sentiments among her other counsellors. Some
thought it sufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants,
and to keep her under fuchclofe refiraint, as wouldcut of
ail ioffibility of corrcfponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her coiftitution, broken by long con.
finernent, and her spirit dejeded with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the
tiuecn and nation would soon be delivered fiom all their
tears. But though it might be easy to secure Mary's
(-wn person, it was irnpofFille to diminish the reverence
\ lich the Renan catholics had for her name, or to ex-
tinguiOl the compassion with which they viewed her
lufl'rintgs, while filch Ientiments continued, infurrec-
tilns and invarion3 would never be wanting for her re-
lit, and the only effcLR of an) new rigour would be to
rner them nlmere frequent and dangerous. For this
cafon the expedient was objeed to.
A public and legal trial, though the most unexam-
!,kd, was judged the molt unexceptionable method of
lpLc(ctding; and it had, at the fame time, a femblnce
'jiulice, accompanied with an air of dignity. It was
in vain to search the ancient records for any fiatute or
t;ccdent tojulliiy such an uncommon flcp, as the trll of

Camd. 5 i.

a foreign prince, who had not entered the kingdom iR
arms, but had fled thither for refuge. The proceed.
ings against her were founded on the act of last parlia.
ment, and by applying it in this manner, the intention
of those who had framed that severe statute became
more apparent .

Elizabeth resolved that no circumflance of pomp or

folemuity ftould be wanting, which could render this
tranfation such as became the dignity of the perfbn to
be tried. She appointed, by a commission under tlhe
great feal, forty persons, the mofl illufirious in the kin,-
dom by their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Man) dif-
ficulties were flarted by the lawyers about the nanl!e
and title by which Mary fhuuld be arrainged; and
while the effintials of jufice were so grossly violated,
the empty forms of it were the objects of their care.
They at length agreed that she should le ityled " Mary,

daughter and heir of James V. late king of Scots,
commonly called queen of Scots, and dowager of
" France t."

After the many indignities which (he had lately fu-

'sered; Mary could no longer doubt but that her de-
ftrucsion was determined. She expected every mo-
ment to end her days by poison, or by some of tl;ofe fc-
cret means usually employed against captive princes.
Left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time that it
deprived her of life, should endeavour likewise to blait
her reputation, she wrote to the duke of Guise, and vin-
dicated herself, in the strongest terms, from the impu-
tation of encouraging or of being accessary to the con-
fpiracy for assassinating Elizabetht. In the solitude of
her prion, the itrange relblution of bringing her to a
public trial had not reached her ears, nor did the ide.i
of any thing so unprecedented, and so repugnant to re-
gal majefsy, once enter into her thoughts.

On the eleventh of October, the commissioners ap-

pointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next
*Camd5Ls9. Johns. Hilt. 113. tStrype,iii. 36;.

J Jebb, ii. 28j.

morning they delivered a letter from her to Mary, in
w hikh, after the bitterest reproaches and accusations, lhe
tformed her that regard to her own safety had at last
rendered it ncefTry to make a public inquiry into her
condlll, and therefore required her, as fie had lived so
i,,ng under the protection cl the laws of England, to
;ilinit now to the trial which they ordained to be taken
of ihr crimes. Mary, though l'urprifed at this meflage,
was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmindful of
her own digitvy. She protestcd, in the most solemn
nanner, that The was innocent of the crime laid to her
charge, and had never countteanced any attempt a-
gainiit the l.fe of tie queen of England; but at the fame
time refuled to acknowledge the juritdlilion of her com-
niifioners. " I came into the kingdom," laid ihe, '" an

independent lovereign, to implore the queen's affilt-
' ance, not to lubijhca mvfelf to her authority. Nor is
"my spirit so broken by its palt misfortunes, or bo in-

timidated by present dangers, as to sloop to any thing
" nnbeomirig the majdety of a crowned head, or that

A ill digrace the anteftors fron whllomn I am descend-
edr, and the lfn to whom I shall leave my throne.
It 1 rrilfl be tried, princes alone can lie my peers.
, '1 !Ie qiiern of iEngiandl's fibhjecS, however noble
r :clr hirth may lie, are of a rank inferior to mine.

. Ever since c ni arr-ival in this kingdom I have been
"cnfinled as a prilbncr. Itslaws neverafforded me
"any proteciion. Let them not now be perverted, in

L' nicr to take o. ;;a ny life."
T'he comnlmillio.trs enmployed arguments and intrea-
I:'s ti onverlolie Mary's reloiltion. They even threat-
.cil in proceed according to the forms of law, and to
.,as bnitcnce acainfl her on account of her contumacy
'i reailing to plead: frie persisted, however, for two
*!avs to decline their jurifditiion. An argument urged
:!; la.:tol, the vice-rlalaitberlaili, at las prevailed. Iie
:0i llier, that, hb avoiding a trial, she injured her own
rplltatifn, and dtlrivcd hlerfelf of the only opportuni-
" ot iti.rt'g helr innacticc ill a clear light; and that no-

: l w ,ini1 lI) n;'e r acrrIal lc to them, or more ac-
* i' . j:l., .: :;!:c; n, l r!-ss, til;til to bc cnkivuil-

ced. by undoubted evidence, that he had been unjuflly
loaded with there foul aspersions.

No1f wonder pretexts so plausible should irnpofe on

the unwary queen, or that The, unaffiifed at that time
by any friend orcounfellor, should not be'able to dettd
and elude all the artifices of Elizabeth's ablest ministers.
In a situation equally melancholy, and under circutm.
fiances nearly similar, her grandson, Charles I. refifed,
with the utnmoQ firmness, to acknowledge the ufurpql
jurifdi6lion of the high court of justice; and pofterilv
has approved his condut&, as fuita')le to the dignity of a
king. If Mary was less confant in her resolution, it
must be imputed solely to her anxious dcfire of vindicat.
ing her own honour.

At her appearance before the judges, wvho were feat-

ed in the great hall of the castle, w-here they rereived
her with much ceremony, she took care to protest, that
bycondefzending to hear and to give an answer to the
accusations which should be ofrt.r; a ainfl her, she nei
ther acknowledged the ju.-i'!tiin, of the co rt, nor ald
mitted of the valiility andjt.tice of those acAs by v'hich
they pretended to try ihr.

'the chancellor, by a counter-p'nteftation, endla.
voured to vindicate the authority of the ccurr.

Then the queen's attornev ai;, Obli.itc:r opened till

charge againit her, with all the circumntances onl' I;
late conspiracy. Copies of her lettcrb to iendoza, P'a.
bington, Engelfield, and Paget, were produced. li.
bingtou's colnfeffoiio , those o:' Bsllarc, Savagc, and ti.
other conspirators, together with tle declarati"ns I:
Nau and Curic, her secretaries, x-cre read, and t':
whole ranged in the most fpeciios order which tlie
art of the lawyers could devire, and heightened by evre
ry colour their eloquence could add.

Mary liisned to their harangues attent-ivel., al'!

without eno:ion. But at the mention of the c(1rl o
Arundei's name, who was then cortined in the Tov.,r,
cn fufpieion of being accearv to the conlfirac;, *:
brcle out into this tender and rnercrous ex: ar::^;':,
" Aas! how nruclh ihat the nob!. h-oufi- us I-ioc;:.
*; iufi.red for n.y !kei''

When the queen's rounfel had finilhed, Mary flood
up, and with great magnanimity, and equal prelence of
mind, began her defence. She bewailed the unhappi.
ness of her own situation, that after a captivity of nine.
ten years, during which she had suffered treatment no
less cruel than unmerited, fle was at lafl loaded with an
accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her
right of succession, and to deprive her of life itself, hut
to tranlmit her name with infamy to future ages: That,
without regarding the sacrcd rights of sovereignty,
Phe was now fuljircqed to laws framed against private
persons; though an anointed queen, commanded to ap-
pear before the tribunal of subje&s; and, like a com.
non criminal, her honour expoled to the petulant
tongues of lawyers, capable of wrefling her words, and
of mificprefenting her actions: that, even in this dif.
honourable fituaton, fme was denied the privileges u-
fuaily granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake
her own defence, without the prelence of any friend
with whom to advise, without the aid of counsel, and
without the use of her own papers.

She then proceeded to the particular articles in the
accusation. She ablolutely denied any correspondence
with Balington or Ballard: copies only of her pretend-
ed letters to them were produced: thoulgh'nothing less
than her handwriting or ful)hfription was fufficirnt to
convi' her of such an odious crime: no proof could he
brought that the letters were delivered into her hands
rr that any answer 'as returned by her diredtion; the
ruiieflipns of wretches condemned and executed for
such a detestable a.tion, were of little weight; fear or
hope might extort from them many things inconsistent
with truth; nor ought the honour of a queen to be Itaini
ed by fich vile testimony. The declaration of her fe-
cretaries was not more conclusive: promiies and threats
might easily oveclome the reoblution of two firangers;
inorder to screen tbemlelves, they might throw the
blalne on her; hut they could discover nothing to her
presudicc, withuut violating, in tl!h: sirs place, the oath
C .

h Iclitv; and their perjury, in ene Lli;na.ce, redered
~,01 A0..

them unworthy-of credit in another: the letters to the
Spanish ambaffader were either nothing more than co-
pies, :or contained only what was perfetly innocent:
'L I have often," continued the, " made such cffor:s
" for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to a
" human creature. Convinced, bv the fad experience
c of so many years, that it was vain to expect it from
" the juflice or gencrofity of the queen of England, I
" have frequently solicited foreign princes, and called
' upon all mv friends to employ their whole interell
' for my relief. I have lilewie endeavoured to pro-
" cure for the English catholics some mitigation oi the
' rigour with which tlcey are no-,. treated; and if I
" could hope, by my deaih, to deliver them from op-
" prliion, i am willing to die for their .ake. I wilh,
"however, to im:t.ie the examp!e of Either, not of
C' Judith, and world rather make intercefilon for my
- people, than h.rd the blood of the meanefi crrarur,
" in order to lare them. I have citen checked the
" intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either the
" severity of their os n perfecutiors, or indignation a;
" the unheard-of iniijries which I have endured, wrre
a apt to precipira'e them into violent councils. I have
" even warned the oucen of dan.ecrs to whi>.h theel
" h-rfh proceedings exposed hereif. And worn o;:,

as I now. am, x ith cares and fi:'.crings, the prolped

' of a crcvn is not so inviting, ;hat I thould ruin ry
" foul in t:rder to 6btain it. I am no frranger to tle

feelings of l hunain:v, nor unacquainted with the
duties of re;igin, and abhor the detefiable crilil

" of aflalfnation. as qc:!aiil rcpugnant to both. A11-,
" if ever i have .ivlee consent by my words, or even
' by my thoughts, to any attempt against the life ot
" the cocenl of Engla:n, far from declining the juel;
" men! of men, I fh-ii not even pray for the mercy 0i
" God ."

Two dififrent days- did ?Marv appear before the juil-
es: a;id in evenr, part of her behaviour maincaincJd t!e

C;;.b. 5 2o, &c.

magnanimity of a queen, tempered with the gentle-
nels and modefly of a woman.

The commiflioners, by Elizabeth's express command,
adjourned, without pronouncing any lentence, to the
Star.Chamber in WReftrinfler. When assembled in that
place, Nauc and Cirle were brought into court, and
confirmed their declaration upon oath; and as-
ter reviewing all their former proceedings, the com-
mifioners unaninoufly declared Mary " so be accef-

fary to Babington's conspiracy, and to have imagined
, diverse matters tending to the hurt, death, and de-

fitruiion of Elizabeth, contrary to the express words

" of the flatute made for the security of the queen's
" life f."

It is no cafy matter to determine whether the injuf-
tice in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in con-
during it, were greatest and most flagrant. By what
right did Elizabeth claim authority over an indepen-
dent queen? Was Mary bound to comply with the
laws of a foreign kingdom? How could the fubjeCs of
another prince become her judges ? or if such an insult
on royalty were allowed, ought not the common forms
of jullice to have been obfcrved? If the teiiimony of
Babington and his afolciates w-:'- s(o explicit, why did
not Elizabeth spare them ft r a few weeks, and by con-
fronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with the full
conviftion of her crimes? Naue and Curie were both
alive, wherefore did they not appear at Foth-ringay?
and for what reason were they produced in the Star-
Chamber, where Mary was not present to hear what
they deposed? Was this fufpiciuus evidence enough to
condemn a queen? Ought the meanest criminal to
have been found guilty upon such feeble and inconcll-
five proofs?

It was not, however, on the evidence produced at
her trial, that the sentence against Mary was founded.
That served as a pretence to juliify, but was not Oliu

J Camb. 55.

QL

cause of the violent steps taken by Elizabeth and her
miniiters towards her deftruclion; and was employed
to give some appearance of jufticc to what was the
offspring of jealousy and fear. The nation, blinded
with reientment against Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own sovereign from every danger, ob.
ser-ed no irregularities in the proceedings, and attended
to no defeEs in the proof, but grasped at the suspicions
and probabilities, as if they had been irrefragable dc.
nmonftrations.

The parliament met a few days after sentence was

pronounced against Marv. In that illuflrious assembly
more temper and discernment than are to be found a-
mong the people, might have been expected. Both
lords and commons, however, were equally under the
dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and the
fame excesses of zeal, or of fear, which prevailed in
the nation, are apparent in all their proceedings. They
entered with impatience upon an inquiry into the con-
fpiracy, and the danger which threatened the queen's
life as well as the peace of the kingdom. All the pa.
pers which had been produced at Fotheringay, were
laid before them; and after many violent inverives
againit the queen of Scots, both houses unanimoufl
ratified the proceedings of the conmilfioners by whom
ihe had been tried, and declared the fentencc againlt
her to be just and well founded. Not satisfied with
this, they presented a joint addrcfs to the queen, be.
feeching her, as she regarded her own [atety, the pre
fe-ration of the protestant rcligion, the welfare and
wifhcs of her people, to publish the sentence; and with
out farther delay to inflit on a rival, an less irreclain
able than dangerous, the punishment which ihe hat
merited by so many crimes. This requeit, dictated b)
fears unworthy of that great alTembly, was enforced b1
reasons fill more unworthy. They were drawn no
fromjuflice but from conveniency. The mol rigorou
confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary'
intriguing spirit; her address was found, by long ex
perience, to be an overmatch for the vigilance ani
jealousy of all her ketpere: the feverefi penal law

could not restrain her adherents, who, while they be-
lieved her person to be sacred, would despise any dan-
ger to which themselves alone were exposed: several
foreign princes were ready to iecond their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading the
kingdom, and afterting the Scottifli queen's title to the
crown. IHr life, for tlefe reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's fafcty; and if she were spared out of
a false clemency, the queen's perlon, the religion and
liberties of the kingdom, could not be one moment fe-
cure. Necessity required tha.t ihe Ihould be lfarificed
in order to preserve tlhefe; and to tprcve this sacrifice
to be no less juit than n -slri- tv, fceral examp!es in
history were produced, and lmany texts of firipture
quoted; but both the one and the other were ilifap-
plied, and distorted from their true meaniig.

Nothing, however, could he mcre accep:able to E!i-

zaitcth, than an adldrcf; n this ilra;n. 1; extricated
her out of a situation cxtrejeily enr.ilrrafirng; and
nitl:out depriving lier ct the poni cr of tparin[, it ela-
bled her to punifn her rival Mith less appearance cf
blane. If fle chose the so-n-.er, the whole honour
\:oud rtdound to her own citr.enrv. if iile dtcrmin-
t' onl the latter, whatever was rigi.r os niglht now
fetm to be extorted hb the iolicirations of her pe.ple,
rarher than to flow i, om ler own inclil.ation. -ier
anlwer, however, uas in a ii le hl:ich fie often uled,
ambiguous and evalve, ucdcr the apFrtairaic e

oi pen-

ness and candour; full of fuci: plioteftions of lezard
fJr her people, as fcr\-d tor l;:e/l!:en thi.ir Iyalty; of
FLCh coinplaints ot ';.iry' iigr'etliLe, !e S were cal-
culated to excite t.heir indipi;a:io;:; aii;l es llich ifirnu-
ations that her own life v.as in di:t C-r, as cculd not
fail to keep alive their tea:s. in the end f.Ce )efi. ght
tl:cni to lave J:er the ins':iir;y and the pain cl ti ievtrilng
up a queen, her nearelt klii!t r (.;;au, to yunifhn l-nt; and
toconfider whether it nlight nct fiill be Si 1ilhle to pro-
vide for the publiio l urity, xiko.io iuli'cing her to in:-
b;ue her hanrs in rvoyal bI, ld.
1 he true incanirb. oi itlis rci py wvs c fil! underfiood.

_3

The lords and commons renewed their former request
rwith additional importunity, which was far from being
either unexpected or offensive. Elizabeth did not re.
turn any anfwver more explicit; and having obtained
such a public fantlion of her proceedings, there was
no longer any reason for protracting this scene of dif.
simulation; there was even some danger that her feign.
ed difficulties might at last he treated as real ones; she
therefore adjourned the parliametrt, and reserved in her
own hands the sole disposal of her rival's fate '.

All the princes in Europe obfcrved the proceedings

against Mary with aftonifhinent and horror: and even
Henry 11. notwithstanding his known aversion to the
house of Guise, was obliged to interpose in her behalf,
and to appear in defence of the common rights of roy-
alty. Aubefpine his resident ambaiiador, and Bellievre,
vwho was sent with an extraordinary commission to the
fime purpose, interceded for Mary with great appear.
ance of warmth. They employed ail the arguntnu
which the caufc naturally fuggefled; they pleaded friom
justice, from generosity, and humanity; they inter-
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all tlefe Eli-
zabeth continued deaf and inexorable, and having re-
reived Come intimation of Henry's real unconcern a-
bout the fate of the Scottiih queen, and knowing hs
antipathy to all the race of Guise, that she trufled thtid'
loud rmcnonftrantces would be followed by no violi;:
rekintment t.

She paid no greater regard to the solicitations of the

Sco:tiof king, which, as they were nrged vwith n',,c
linccrirv, mcrited Irolre atte'ilion. 'hout:h her coil-
mir.iiclerl- had been c.xcrtrc.ivy careful to flo;he Jan:c,
Tv pubiiihing a declaration thlat their sentence agtZinll
Mlarv did, in no degree, derogate fronm hili loncur, Ir
in:va'idate any title which he irrmerly pT^fRfTcd; he b-
held the indir.lnies to ,wich his iloti: r had been cx.
poir.- with filial concern, and V ih the fentiim.ras
whi.h blcamt- a kln;,. The priv;- or the Sro-tiih :.,
tiuil . as rou:.Id, Ly tle iiiflt tI.!r'ed to the bloodl U!

their -monarchs, and called upon him to employ the
most vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to revenge
the queen's death.

At filr, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would
venture upon an atfion so unprecedented, which tended
lb visibly to render the persons of princes less sacred in
the eyes of the people, and which degraded the regal
dignity, of which, at other times, The was so remark-
ably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary steps
which she took discovered her intention, he despatched
fir William Keith to London; who, together with
Douglas his ambassador in ordinary, remonstrated, in
the firongeft terms, againll the injury done to an inde-
pendent queen, in fubjeaing her to be tried like a pri-
vate person, and by laws to which she owed no obe-
dience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this in-
jury, by fiifering a tentence unjust in itself, as well as
dithonourable to the king of Scots, to be put into exe-
cution %.

Elizabeth returning no anfwoer to there remonstrances
of his ambaflador, James wrote to her with his own
hand, complaining in the bitterelt terms of her con-
dul, not without threats that both his duty and his
honour would oblige him to renounce her friend-
ship, and to a& as became a son when called to re-
venge his mother's wrongst. At the fame time he as-
frebled the nobles, who promilfed to Hland by him in
so good a caule. ie appointed amballadors to France,
Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore the aid of
thele courts; and took other fleps towards executing
his threats with vigour. Tlhe higll flrain of his letter
enraged Elizabeth to Iuch a degree, that Ihe was ready
to dilmifs his ambafladors without any reply. But his
preparations alarmed and emlailrafl'.d her minilters,
and at their entreaty she returned a libt and evasive
anllver, promiling to lillen to any) overture from the
ling, that tended to his Inother's safety; and to luf;cid
*See Append. No. XVI. Murdin, S,7, &:. BU:'h.

L.Itsm. i. ei. { i .

the execution of the sentence, until the arrival of new
ambeffadors from Scotland t.

Mean while fne commanded the sentence against Ma.

ry to be published, and forgot not to inform the people,
that this was extorted from her by the repeated entrea-
ties of both houles of parliament. At the fame time
the despatched Lord Buckhurft and Beale to acquaint
Mar. with the sentence, and how importunately the na-
tion demanded the execution of it; and though The
had not hitherto yielded to these solicitations, the ad-
vised her to prepare for an event which might become
necessary for securing the protestant religion, as well as
quieting the minds of the people. Mary received the
mesSage not only without symptoms of fear, but vith
expressions of triumph. " No wonder," said fht,
" the English should now thirst for the blood of a
" oreign prince, they have often offered violence to
" tleir oun monarchs. But after so many luffering-,

death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am

- proud to think that my life is esteemed of imporn-
" ance to the catholic religion, and as a martyr lor it
" I am now willing to die i."

After the publication of the sentence Mary was strip.

ped of every remaining mark of royalty. The qanopy
of slate in her apartment was pullt d down; Paulet r,-
tered her chamber, and -approached her perlon xilhh;u:
any cerreony; and even appeared covered in !ier pre-
fence. Shocked with there indignities, and offcinidtd
at this gross familiarity, to which fie had never bccn
accuflcmed, Mary once more complained to Elizabeth;
and at the fame time, as her lalt requefl, entreated that
fhc would permit her servants to carry her dead body
into France, to be laid among her ancestors in hallowed
ground; that some of her dcrltftics might be prcl nt :
her death, to bear witness oi her innlcence, and iirm ad-
herence to the catholic faith; that all her servants miglit
be fuficred to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy thole small
l;gacies which fhefiould btlowv ol, them,as tcifinoiiicbGf
Spctf'. z;i. Cald. iv, . 5 Carmd. 523. Jebb, zT1.

her affrcion; and that, in the mean time, her almlon:r,
or some other catholic priest, might be allowed to at-
tend her, and to assist her in preparing for an eternal
world. She belbught her, in the name of Jesus, by the
foul and memory of Henry VII. their common proge-
nitor, by their near consanguinity, and the royal dig-
nity with which they were both invested, to gratify
her in these particulars, and to indulge her so far as to
lignifv her compliance by a letter under her own hand.
Whether Marx's letter was ever delivered to Eliza-
beth is uncertain. No answer was returned, and no
regard paid;.o her requefls. She was offered a protest-
ant bihop or dean to attend her. Them she rejected,
and without any clergyman to diredt her devotions, she
prepared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of
death, which fle now believed to be at no great dif-
uance '.

James, without losing a moment, font new ambaf-
fadors to London. These were the master of Gray,
and fir Robert Melvil In order to remove Elizabeth's
fears, they offered that their matier would become
hound that no conspiracy thould be undertaken against
her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's
consent; and for the faithful performance of this,
would deliver time of the molt considerable of the
Scottifl nobles as hoflages. If this were not thought
fufficlent, they propufed that Mary should resign all
her rights and pretcnlions to her son, from whom no-
thing injurious to the protestant religion, or inconsistent
with Elizabeth's tafety, could be feared. The former
propolal Elizabeth rejeced as insecure; the latter, as
dangerous. The ambafhadors were then inftru&ed to
talk in a higher tone; and Melvil executed the com-
miion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with
his ufial perfidy, deceived his matter, who trusted him
with a negotiation of so much importance, and betray-
ed the queen whom he was employed to save. He en-
couraged and urged Elizabeth to execute the sentence
aginlt her rival. He often repeated the old proverbi-

Camnd. 58. Jebb. ii. 2z5.

al sentence, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever
flould happen, he undertook to pacify the king's rage,
or at least to prevent any violent efiets of his resent.
ment.l.

Elizabeth, mean while, difeovered all the fvmpioms

of the most violent agitation and difqutietide of mind.
She shunned society, the was ofter. found in a mIlan-
choly and musing posture, and repeated with mruch
emphasis there lentences which file borrowed from
some of the devices then in vogue; Aut fcr at,; fcri, ne
feriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent unea-
finess must be imputed to dissimulation; itEwas irepof.
fible, however, that a princrfs, na;ura.:-'fb cautious
as Elizabeth, fieuld venture on an a£:ion. which might
expose her memory to infamy, and her iife and king-
dom to danger, without reflec'ing deeply, and hefitat-
ing long. The people waited her determination in
suspense and anxiety; and leaR their fear or their zeal
lould subside, rumours of danger were artfully invent-
ed, and propagated with the utmost indufiry. Aubcf-
pine, the French ambassador, was accuied of having
suborned an assassin to murder the queen. The Spanilh
fleet was said by some to be already arrived at bliihord-
haven. Others affirmed that the duke of Guitl had
landed with a firong army in Suffex. Now, it was re-
ported that the northern counties were up in arms;
next day, that the Scots had entered England with all
their forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was
on foot for seizing the queen and burning the city.
The panic grew every day more violent; and the pto-
ple, aflonifhed and enraged, called for the execution
of the sentence against Mary, as the only thing which
could reflore tranquillity to the kingdom t.

W'hile these sentiments prevailed among her fubjels,

Elizabeth thought 1he might fately venture to firike the
blow, which she had so long meditated. She com-
manded Davison, one of the secretaries of Itate, to
bring to her the fatal warrant, and her behaviour on tha!
£ccaflon plainly shewed, that it is nQt to humanity thai

4 See Append. No. XVII. L Cauid. 533, 534.

we must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very
moment Jhe was fuhfcribing the writ which gave up a
woman, a queen, and her own nearest relation into
the hands of the executioner, she was capable of jelling,

Go," fays she to Davison, " and tell \ralfingharn
" what I have now, done, though I am afraid he will

die for grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety
was how to secure the advantages which would arise
from Mary's death, without appearing to have given
her consent to a deed so infamous. She often hinted
to Paulet and Drury, as well as to forne other cour-
tiers, that now vas the time to discover the sincerity
of their concern for her safety; and that ihe e:.pcited
their zeal wouid extricate her out of her present per-
plexitv. But they iwer e wie

: n.,ugh to leem not to

underfiand her muc.a:i.;:. Even aft.r the war-nt w.as
signed, /he co:nninded a letter to be written to Paulet,
in less ambiguous terms, co )[l.:iinng of hii !ermniinefl
in lfparir.n so Inng the life of h'er capital ene'ny, and
bhgging him to r'-nemiTh:r at lft what v.as incumbent
on him as an afi;ctionate fui3 at, and to dlciver his
sovereign fron! c'-ntninal c.

- ani ]

dar 'e:, by l!hitcll-

ing the days of his prltcilcr. Pa,!et!. t ol.;ih ,i:;oI,.u5
a:d harlh, and oftt. bartttl in the ;U:ll.l^gre (f ',h.lt
lc thought hi ity, Ms

dit z s kee , .':'. n':..':;-

Icfs a man of holnolr an, iiic:!;t. .. !-e r eJt 1' il e
proposal with disdain aInd i.in. :;iii :,;.t lie ii'.; l
ever have been deen-'.l ' "iil Jl :i;.'n ;;e p :

olf

analFafin, lie de'rlar,,d that t',:P ' i.

.- i

i -:.'

." :'l '. of

his life at her plr!fur-. !ut t!:it ihe i- ,:! n.e:cr si .in
his own honoui-. nr l,;it n-'r ;.rlii ni ark o in-
fimy on his pofterit. .:, .'!t;i.g iii !i!'d to perpe-
trate so foul a crinmic. ):1 t3;e r .*ipt .r this ani r,
Elizabeth becan.e ec-iretrliy pc-' ;l'. anR.1 i :;llr.; ':;l
ia di.,i and p:. ,.'ii,,, who v.u-id p:'o:n:I; mi-!:,
ibt perform iri . , .le Fi;:op.i',; to cpiiv 'oi
lingfield, whn i:. t hi co.arg. anl in'liiu,. 1,oa t.,

prike the blow I:. iS. t lvin rcroir.:l'. , :..;:l'
tism etliod as; 1:, is l 'n:r;'olls tli.i i iioi ,:.',.;

again declared her intention that the sentence pro-
nounced by the commissioners 1hould be executed a-.
cording-to law; and as she had already signed the war-
rant, Tfe begged that no farther application might be
made to her on that head. By this the privy-counfel.
lors thought themselves sufficiently authorised to pro-
ceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for
the queen's safety, or instigated, as is more probable,
by the apprehension of the danger to which they
would themfclves be exposed, if the life of the que,
of Scots were spared, they assembled in the colniil
chamber; and by a letter under all their hands, empow.-
ered the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, together uiil
the high Iheriffof the county, to fee the ientence pa:
in execution 5.

On Tuesday the 7th of February, 1587, the two ear:;

arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded access to tle
queen, -ead in her pretence the warrant for exccltinn,
and required her to prepare to die next morning. i,4i
rv heard them to the end without emotion, and crl,.
sing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Sen,
and of the Holy Ghost, " That foul," said Ihe, t" is not
" orthy of the joys of heaven, which repines hecau;e
"the body must endure the stroke of the cxecuti( ner:
" and though I did not expect that the queen of Eln,
' land wou!d set the firfi exraple of violatin l:(

lacred person of a sovereign prince, I willingly si!,
" mit to that which Provident:x has decreed to hli m1

lot," and laying her hand on a Bihle, which happenr.

to be near her, she solemnly proteltcd that she was i.
nocent of that conspiracy wlhich Babington hal calTiri
on against Elizabeth's life t. She then mentioned t!'
requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but obtai,;
no fatisfactorv answer. She entreated with partl:'.-
earneltnefs, that now in her lafl roments her ahl.n.
might be suffered to attend her, and that the mili, c:
ioy the conl/lation of those pious institutions prtclei i;.

yher religion. Even this favour, which is u'ti i

granted to the vilest criminal, was al;olultely- denil.
§Caird. 534. Str)ype, 'ii. .'·I, 364. t *JeLb. ii;

Her attendants, during this conversation, were bath-
ed in-tears, and though overawed by the preelnce of
the two earls with difficulty iuppreflld their auguilh;
but no sooner did Kent and Shrewlbury withdraw, than
they ran to their mistress, and burit out into the molt
paflionate expressions of tendernels and sorrow. Mary,
however, not only retained perifct compofilre of mind,
but endeavoured to moderate their excessive grief;, and
falling on her knees, with all her domeltcrs around
her, the thanked Heaven that her lutierings were now
so near an end, and prayed that file might be enabled
to endure what fill remained with decency and with
fortitude. 'The greater part of the evening ihe employ-
ed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote her testa-
nlent with her own hand. Iler money, her jewels,
and her clothes, she distributed among her .frvants,
according to their rank or merit. She wrote a short
letter to the king of France, and another to the duke
of Guise, full of tender but magnanimous feitiments,
and recommended her foul to their prayers, and her
affliEted servants to their protedlion. At lupper lie
ate temperately, as uiual, and convcrlfd not only with
cafe, but with cheerfulnels; The drank to every one of
her servants, and asked their forgivenels, if ever /he
had failed in any part of her duty towards th;em. At
her wonted time she went to bed, and fiept calmly a
tew hours. Early in the morning she retired into her
rlnlet, and emplotyed a considerable time in tevotion.
At eight o'clock the high Iheriftand officers eptered her
:hamber, and found hter Itill kneeling at the altar.
She immediately Itarted up, and with a majgltic mitin,
rnd a copntenance undil'i:ayed, and even chleertul, ad-
vanced towards the place oi execution, leanzig on two
as Paulets attelndants. She was drfled in a mourning
habit, but with an elegance and Iplendour which tit;
lad long laid alide, except on a few iellival da) s. A.
tdg., Jlei hung by a pomander chali at her neck; her
leads at her girdle; and in her hand she carried a cruri-
.x of ivory. At the foot of the stairs the two earls,
ttenled bv fevcral gentlemen from the ncighloutlit
Vol. Ji. R

counties, received her; and there fir Andrew Mielvi!,
the mailer of her houfhold, who had been secluded for
some weeks from her presence, was permitted to take
his last farewel. At the fight of a mifirefs whom he
tenderly loved, in such a fituation,he melted into tears;
and as te was bewailing her condition, and complaining
of his own hard fate, in being appointed to carry the
accoorut of fich a .mournful event into Scotland, Mary
replied, " Weep not, good MIelvil, there is at preleint
" great caule for rejoicing. Thou flialt this day fee
" Mary Stewart delivered frm all her cares, and such
"an end put to her teriotus lusTerings, as she has long
" expec1ed. Bear witners that I die constant in my re-

ligion; firm in mv fideiitv towards Scotland; and un-

" changed in rny afifeion t,. France. Commend me to
" my son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious to

his kingdom, to his honour or to his rights; and God

" forgive all those who have thirsted without cause for
"; In blood."

sWith much difficulty, and after many entreaties, she

prevailed on the two earls to allow Melvil, together
with three of her n-ern servants and two of her maids, to
attend her to the scaffold. It was erected in the fame
hall where she had been tried, railed a little above the
floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the culhion, and
blcck, with black cloth. Marymounted the iteps with
alacrity, beheld all this apnaratus of death with an un-
altered co-Jntenance, and signing herself with the cross,
fie fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant for
execution with a leti voice, to which fh:- litlcned with
a ca.elefs air, and like one eccupled in otlhe: thought.l
Then the dean of Pcterbnor ugh began a devout dil:
eourfc, fliitMaie to lier prelent condition, and cfiered up
nravers to Heaen in her behalf; but she declared that
she couid not in conl'ienc'e hearken to the one, nor jin
with the other; and faliing on her knees, reprattd a
L.atin praytr,. 'hen the dean had finished his devo.
tions, &e, with an audille voice, and in the En:lh
tor.cue, recotr.mzllndt uito God the anfilied fza:c cl
thlr cirhrch, and ptnved :tr p:-cii ritv to her son, : .
ter a iong li.'c :.i l.a:ctabi'c :cig; L lizabeth. Si',

declared that ihe hoped for mercy only through the death
of Christ, at the foot of whose image he now willingly
lied her blood; and lifting up and kifling the crucifix,
fhethus addressed it: " As thy arms, O Jesus, were ex-
" tended on the cross, so witl the outstretched arms of
ui thy mercy receive me, and forgivc my fiGs."

She then prepared for the block, by taking off her
veil and upper garments; and one of the executioners
rudely endeavouring to affint, fle gently checked him,
and said with a finile, that site had not been accustomed
to undress before lb many tiectators, nor to be served
by such valets. Wilh calm but undaunted fortitude,
she laid her neck on the block; and iwhile one execution-
er held hcr hands, the olhei-, at the hLcond ftLokc, cut
off her head, li!ich falling out of its attire, difcovcred
her hair alrealy grown quite grey with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up fti!l ftreamini: .vith
blood, and the dean crying out, " So perih ail queen
"Elizabeth's enemies," the earl of Kent alone answercd
Amen. The reft of the fipectators contiinud si!.:nt, and
drowned in tearsi being incapable, at that nionent, of
any other fentinments but thole of pity or admniral.oi -.

Such was the tragical death of Mary queen of ;-ots,

after a life of iforty-four years and two limolths, aimnoft
nineteen years of which The pafied in captivity. The
political parties which were fcirmed in the kir:.gomr dur-
ing her reilgn have lu.ilt.e:l, undcr various Linoiina-
tions, ever since that tinie. The rancour witii which
they were at first animated, hath descended to lucceed-
ing ages, and their prejudices as well as their rage, have
been perpetuated, ald even aiugniented. Animog hilto-
riuiis, who wv e under the domsinion of all thoie passions,
and who have either afc ibcd to her every virtuous and
amiable quality, or have imputed to her all the vices of
which the hunman heart is luli:cptible, we fcarch in vain
for Mary's real chara&er. She neither meritcd the ex-
*Camd. 534. Spotfw. 3.r. jebb, ii. 300. Strype, iii.

58j. See Appei;ix, No. \V11.

R

aggeratel praises of the one, not the unJiftinguifhillg
censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance

of external form, lhe added those aciomplifhments which
render their impression irrefiftable. Polite, affable, ini-
nuatine, sprightly, and capable of speaking and of writ.
ing with equal ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and
violent in all her attachments; because her heart was
warm and unfiufpicious. Impatient of contradilliom;
because she had been accuflomed from her infancy to be
treated as a queen. No firanger, on rome occasions, tu
dissimulation; which, in that perfidious court where fl,
received her education, was reckoned among the needc-
fary arts of government. Not insensible of flattery, or
unconscious of that pleasure with which almoit e;ery
wioman beholds the influence of her o.wn beauty. Form-
ed with the qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; she was an agreeable woman, rather
than an illustrious queen. The vivacity of her fpilit
not sufficiently tempered with found judgment, and he
warmth of her heart, which was not at all times ui.lcr
the restraint of discretion, betrayed her both into errors
and into crimes. To fay that hie was always unfortu-
nate, will not account for that long and almost uninter-
rupted succession of calamities which besel her; we mu't
likewise add, that she was often imprudent. Her pal-
sion for Darnlv was rafl, youthful, and excessive; and
though the sudden tranfitioh to the opposite extreme,
was the natural effcft of her ill-requited love, and of his
ingratitude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither therl,
nor Both well's artful address and important services can
justify her attachment to that nobleman. Even the man-
ners of the age, licentious as they were, are no apology
for this unhappy passion; nor can they induce us to
look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a
veil over this part of her characQer which it cannot ap-
prove, and may, perhaps, prompt rome to impute some
of her ations to her situation, more than to her difpo
fitions; and to lament the unhappiness of the former, ra
ther than accuse the perverlenefs of the latter. Mar 's

sufferings exceed, both in degree and in duration thote
tragical distresses which fancy has feigned to excite fir-
row and commiseration; and while we survey them, we
are apt altogether to forget her frailties, we think of her
faults with lels indignation, and approve of our tears, as
if they were flied for a person who had attained much
nearer to pure virtue.

With regard to the queen's person, a circumfiance

not to he omitted in writing the hiltory of a female
reign, all contemporary authors agree hi ascribing to
Mary the utmost beauty of countenance, and eleance
of fiape, of which the human form is capable.- Her
hair was black, though according to the fashion of that
age, flie frequently wore borrowed locks, and of diffe-
rent colours. Her eves were a dark grey; her complex-
ion was exquisitely fine; and her hands and arms re.
mnrkably delicate, both as to fliape and colour. I-eir
flature was of an height that role to the majetlic. She
danced, she walked, and rode with equal grace. Ilcr
t,ilte for music was jufi, and hce both lung and played
upon the lute with uncommon skill. Towards the end
or her life file began to grow fat, and her long confine-
ment, and the coldness of the houles in which file war
imprisoned, brought on a rheumatifin, which often de-
prived her of the ule of her limbo. No man, lays Bran-
tome, ever beheld her perlbn without admiration and
love, or will read htr ittolry without sorrow.

None of her women were suffered to come near her
dead body, which was carried into a room adjoining to
the place of execution, where it lay for some days, co-
vered with a coarse cloth torn from a biliard table,
' lie block, the lcaffold, the aprons of the executioners,
and every thing stained with her blood, were reduced
to aflies. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body
to be buried in the cathedral of Peterborough with roy-
al magnificence. But this vulgar artifice was eirpioyed
in vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did not es-
face the memory of those injuries which laid Alary in
Iher grave. James, soon after his accession to the Eng-
lisl throne, ordered her body to be removed to Wtel-

K3

minfler-abbey, and to be deposited among the monarchs
of England.

Elizabeth affec.ed to receive the accounts of Mary's

death with the most violent emotions of surprise and of
concern. Sighs, tears, lamentations and mournilng,
were all employed to difplav the reality and greatness of
her sorrow. Evident marks of dissimulation and arti-
fice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings againit the life of the Scottish queen. The
commifion for bringing Mary to a public trial was fetin-
ir.gly extorted from her by the intreaties of her privv-
counsellors. She delayed publilhing the sentence againit
her till fie was twice solicited by both houres of parlia-
ment. Nor did Ihe sign the warrant for execution with-
out the utmofl apparent reluaance. One scene more
of the boldest and most solemn deceit remained to be ex-
hibited. She undertook to make the world believe that
Mary had been put to death without her knowledge
and zgainft her will. And Davison, who neither ful'
peAed her intention nor his own danger, was her in-
firument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a vicitn
to it.

It was his duty, as secretary of state, to lay before her

the warrant for execution, in order to be signed; and by
her command, he carried it to the great feal. She pre-
tended, however that The had charged him not to conm-
municate what she had done to any perlfn, nor to fui-
ser the warrant to go out of his liands, without lier cx-
press permission; that, in contempt of this order, Ile lid
not only revealed the matter to teveral of her miniltrs,
hbt had, in concert with theiml, afcmbled her privy-couul-
ellors, by whom, without her content or knowlrdge,
the warrant was issued, and the earls of Shrewlburv ald
Kent impowered to put it in execution. Thoulh l)avi-
obn denied all this, and with circumliatces which htu,,
the ftrogell marks of truth and credibility; tliouti: it
can fearcei. be conceived that her privy-cotincil, ,i,-
j.oied of the persons in whotl fie most confided, ou 1.
uiniflers and favourites, would afiemble within tlhe . a',
of h r palace, and vcn.ure to transac't a matter ot !t
I:.U. i. th:.r

i.
i,'.i.a. a:;hr ri.;; and tont::r- '.

lier inclination; yet so far did lhe. carry this diffimula
lion, that with all the signs of displeasure and of rage,
Ihe banilhed most of her counsellors out of her presence;
and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harshly, and with
such marks of disgust, that he gave himself up for loft,
and in the deepest affliction wrote to the queen, begging
leave to resign all his places, that he might retire to his
own estate. Davilon she inflantly deprived of his of-
fice, and committed him a close prisoner to the Tower.
He was loon after brought to a folenmn trial in the Star
Chamber, condemned to pay a fine of ten thousand
pounds, and to be imprisoned during the queen's plea-
lure. He languished several years in confinement, and
never recovered any degree of favour or of power. As
lierjealoufv and fear had bereaved the queen of Scots of
life, in order to palliate this part of her conduct, Eliza-
beth made no scruple of lacrificing the reputation and
halppitieli of one of the mioft virtuous and able men in
her kingdom .

This folenin farce, for it deserves no better nane,
furniihed Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the
king of Scots. As the profpeC of his mother's danger
had excited the king's filial care and concern, the ac-
tount of her death filled him with grief and relentment.
Hiis subjects felt the dilhonour done to hii and to the
nation. In order to ioothe both, Elizabeth inlltantly
despatched Robert Carey, one of lord Huinfdon's sons,
a ith a letter exprcfiting her extreme afflickion on accounr
It that miserable accident, which as she pretended, had
ihappened far contrary to her appointment or intcntion.
James would not permit her mcitlnger to enter ScoL-
Laid; and with Ibme difficulty received a memorial he
iLnt from Berwick. Jt contained the tale conceruing
I)avilobl, dresscd up with all the circumflances which i;-
teirded to exculpate Elizabeth, and to throw the whole
l!anie on his rafhnels or treachery. Such a defence gave
i'rle atfihacionul, and vas conlidered as mockery added
tc itlult; and nsany of the nobles, as well as the king,
'Caund. 5G6. SIrvpe, iii. 37o. See Append No. XIX.

C.b, 2la9, -, &c.

breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extreme-
ly solicitous to pacify them, and wanted neither inftru-
ments nor reasons to gain her end. Leicefler wrote to
the king, and UWalfingham to secretary Maitland. They
represented the certain deftrution to which James would
expose himself, if, with the forces of Scotland alone, he
f1ould venture to attack a kingdom so far superior in
power; that the history of past ages, as well as his mo-
ther's fad experience, might convince him, that nothing
could be more dangerous, or deceitful, than dependence
on foreign aid; that the king of France would never
wish to fee the British dominions united under one mo-
narch, nor contribute to invest a prince so nearly allied
to the house of Guise with such formidable power; that
PhiiF nmight be a more active ally, but would certainly
prove a nore dangerous one, and, under pretence of al-
filling him, would assert his own right to the Engiifh
crown, ihich he already began openly to claim; that
the lame flatute, on which the lentence of death agai[il
his mother had been founded, would juftifv the exclud-
ing him from the succession to the crown; that the Eng-
lif., naturlly averse from the dominion of itrangers,
would not fail, if exasperated by his hostilities, to apply
it in that manner; that Elizabeth was disposed to repair
the wrongs which the mother had suffered, by her tcn-
dernefs and affecrion towards the son; and that, by en-
gaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive himfelt of a
noble inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendflip,
he must infallibly obtain. These reprelentations, added
to the consciousness of his own weakness, to the finall-
ness of his revenues, to the mutinous spirit of lbme o:
the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that facion which was entirely at Elizabeth's
.devotion, convinced James that a war with England,
h:ox ever jufl, would in the present jun&ure be alto.c-
ther impolitical. All these considerations induced him
to ftife his resentment; to appear satisfied with the pu-
nif-.ment irfii&ed on Davison; and to prelerve all the
fcmblances of frier.dfip with the Englifi court i. 1:

I Spotlw. 36z. Cald. iv. i, 14. Strype, ii. 577-

this manner did the cloud which threatened such a flori
pass away. Mary's death, like that of a common cri-
minal,'remained unavenged by any prince; and what-
ever infamy Elizabeth might incur, she was exposed to
no new danger on that account.

Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the master of
Gray, and loft him that favour which he had for tome
time pofflfled. He was become as odious to the nation
as favourites, who acquire power without merit, and
cxercife it without discretion, usually are. The treach-
erous part, which he had acted during his late embafry,
was well known, and filled the king, who at length
came to the knowledge of it, with surprise. The coup-
tiers observed the symptoms of disgust arising in the
king's mind, his enenies seized the opportunity, and fir
W\illiam Stewart, in revenge of the perfidy with which
Gray had betraved his brother captain James, publicly
accused him before a convention of nobles, not only of
having contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to
take away the life of the queen, but of holding corrc-
fpondence with popish princes, in order to subvert the
religion ellablifhed in the kingdom. Gray, unfupport-
ed by the king, deserted by all, and conkcious of his
own guilt, made a feeble defence. He was condemned
to perpetual banishment, a punilhment very unequal to
his crimes. But the king was unwilling to abandon
one whom he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour
ofjuftice, and lord Hamilton, his near relation, and the
other nobles who had lately returned from exile, in gra-
titude for the zeal with which he had served them, in-
terceded warmly in his behalf.

Having thus accomplished the deftrusion of one of
his enemies, captain James thought the juncture favour-
able for prosecuting his revenge on them all. He sing-
led out secretary Maitland, the moif eminent both for
abilities and enmity to him; and offered to prove that
he was no less acceflary than Gray to the queen's death,
and had even formed a design of delivering up the
king himself into the hands of the English. But time
and absence had, in great measure, extinguished the
kilg's affecdion for a minion who so little deserved it.

All the courtiers combined against him as a common
enemy; and inflead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of chancellor conferred
upon Maitland, who, together with that dignity, en.
joyed all the power and influence of a prime minister.

In the assembly of the church, which met this year,

the fame hatred to the order of bishops, and the fame
jealouly and fear of their encroachments, appeared.
But as the king was now of full age, and a parliament
was summoned on that occasion, the clergy remained
satisfied with appointing some of their number to re.
present their grievances to that court, from which great
things were expected.

Previous to this meeting of parliament, James at-

tempted a work worthy of a king. The deadly feuds
which subsisted between many of the great families, and
which were transmitted from one generation to an.
other, weakened the strength of the kingdom; con-
tributed, more than any other circumfiance, to prefer'-e
a fierce and barbarous spirit among the nobles; and
proved the occasion cf many disasters to themselves and
to their country. After many preparatory negotiations,
he invited the contending parties to a royal entertain-
ment in the palace of Holyrood-houfe; and partly by
his authority, partly by his intreaties, obtained their
promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he condu&ced them, in solemn procession,
through the fireets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs,
each hand in hand with his enemy. A collation of
wine and sweetmeats was prepared at the public cross,
and there they drank to each other, with all the signs
of reciprocal forgiveness and of future friendihip. The
people, who were present at a fpecacle so unusual, con-
ceived the most finguine hopes of feeing concord and
tranquillity established in every part of the kingdom,
and testified their fatisfaicon by repeated acclama-
tions. Unhappily, the effects of this reconciliation
were not correfpandent either to the pious endeavcur:
of the king, or the fond wishes of the people.

1 e firit care of the parliament was the security er
the protefiant religion. All the laws passed in its ti

vour, since the Reformation, were ratified; and a new
and revere one was ena&ced against seminary priests and
Jesuits, whose restless induflry in making proselytes,
brought many of them into Scotland about this time.
Two acts of this parliament deserve more particular
notice on account of the consequences with which they
were followed.

The one refpeced the lands of the church. As the
public revenues were not sufficient for defraying the
king's ordinary charges; as the administration of the
government became more, complicate and more expen-
five; as James was naturally profuse, and a I'ranger to
economy; it was necessary, on all these accounts, to
provide rome fund proportioned to his exigencies. But
no considerable fum could he levied on the commons,
who did not enjoy the benefit of an extensive com-
merce. The nobles were unaccustomed to bear the
burden of heavy taxes. The revenues of the church
were the only source whence a proper supply could be
drawn. Notwithflanding all the depredations of the
lair since the Reformation, and the various devices
which they had employed to seize the church lan's,
sone considerable portion of them remained fiill una:i-
enated, and were held either by the biihops who pus-
ltfird the benefices. or were granted to laymen during
picafure. All thefc lands were, in this parlianment, an-
ncxed, by one general law', to the crown, and the
king was empowered to apply the rents of them to his
own use. The tithes alone were reserved for :he main-
tenance of the pertlbs who lerved the cure, and the
principal manfion-lioufe, with a few acres of land, by
iray ot glebe, ailoted for their relidence. By this great
acecflion of property, it is natural to conclude that
the king must have acquired a valt increase of power,
and the influence of the nobles have fufiered a propor-
tional diminution. The very reverse of this Iccitis,
however, to have been the cafe. Aimoft all grants of
crlhlrc-lanlds, prior to this aci, were thereby confirmed;
alJl liLs, which were formerly rec:konid prccarious,

'Parl. II. Jac. VI. c. 29.

derived from thence the fancrion of parliamentary au-
thority. James was likewise authorised, during a li-
mited time, to make new alienations; and such was the
facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the Iblirita-
tions of his servants, and to gratify their most ex rava-
gant demands, that not only during the time limited,
but throughout his whole reign, he was continually em-
ployed in bestowing, and his parliament in ratitviig,
grants'of that kind to his nobles; hence little advantage
accrued to the crown from that which might have been
so valuable an addition to its revenues. The bishops,
however, were great sufferers by the law. But at this
junture neither the king nor his ministers were iblici-
tons about the interest of an order of men, odious to
the people, and persecuted by the clergy. Their ene-
mies promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The
profpcl of sharing in their spoils induced all parties to
rcnfent to it; and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and
power of the dignified clergy, it was no difficult nlai-
trr to introduce that change in the government ot the
church which soon after took placet.

'he change which the other statute produced in the

rivil conflitution was no less remarkable. Under the
feudal Ifltcm, every freeholder or vassal of the crown
had a right to be present in parliament. These tree-
holders were originally few in number, hut possessed of
great and extensive property. By degrees these raft
poffTzfions were divided by the proprietors themselves,
or parcelled out lhy the prince, or split by other acci-
d-nts. The number of freeholders became greater,
and their condition more unequal: besides the ancient
barons, who prelerved their estates and their power un-
impaired, there arose another order, whose rights wtre
the lame, though their wealth and influence were lar
interior. But, in those rude ages, when the art of go-
vernment was extremely imperfect, when parliaieuiits
me re ieldom assembled, and deliberated on matters lit-
tle intercfting to a martial people, lew of the tlq t, .
Vr..i took tlher feats, and the whole parliamentary 'ut\

t Spo:fw. 365,

diction-was exercised. by the greater bartns, together with
the ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the
forms of the, Engliih conffitution, to which he had been
long accustomed, and desirous of providing a counter-
poise to the power of the great nobles, procured an a&
in the year one thousand four hundred and twenty-
seven, dispensing with the personal attendance of the
lcffer barons, and empowering thlole in each county to
choose two comriflioners to represent them in parlia-
ment. This law, like many other regulations of that
wilfe prince, produced little effect. All the king's val-
fals continued, as formerly, polIeffed of a right to ;e
present in parliament; but, unless in some extraordina-
rvconjuntures, none but the greater barons attended.
Bult, by means of the Reformation, the constitution had
undergone a great change. .The ariftocratical power
of the nobles had been much increased, and the influ-
ence of the ecclesiastical order, which the crown uftially
employed to check their ufsrpations, and to balance
thent authority, had diminilhed in proportion. Many
ofthe albies and priories had been eredCed into tempo-
ral peerages; and the protestant bishops, an incl-
gent race of men, and odious to the nation, were far
from poffefling the weight and credit which their pre-
deceffors derived from their exorbitant wealth, and the
fuiperfitioius reverence of the people. In this situation,
the king had recoture to the expedient employed hb
James I. and obtained a law reviving the t:atutc of one
lhouland four hundred and twenty-feven; and fron
that time the commons of Scotland have feat their rc-
prcdintativfs to parliament. An a't, which tended so
vifiblv to abridge their authority. did not pass without
olp!ofitiorn rom many of the nobles. But as the king
had a right to funinion the lefllr barons to attend in
ptrion, others were aplrt(lenlilve of ':cing the houlo
filled with a irnfiltitude of his depen!en.%, and conlcnt-
dl thle more willine'y to a law whicl laid thiem under
lihe reftriciun of appearingl only by trecir reprelenta-
irves.

Th11e ear one thousand five hundred and eig!}t--
\'Ci. 11. S

eight beganwithan universal expectation throughout al1
Europe, that it was to be diltinguifhed by wonderful
events and revolutions. Several astrologers, according
to the accounts of contemporary hifiorians, had pre-
dicted this; and the situation of affairs in the two prin-
cipal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a sagacious
obfcrver, without any fupernatiural intelligence, niilit
have hazarded the prediiion. and have foreseen the al-
proach of fonie grand crilis. In France, it was cvilci.
from the astonishing prugrref of the league, contdutlel
hy a leader whose ambitioii was rtllraiined by no feru-
pies, ant whole genius had hitherto funinounted all
dificulties; as well as fiomn the timid, variable, andl
inmrolitic councils oi Henry 1II. that either that n:o-
naich must fubniit to abandon'the throne, of wlhi il he
was unworthy, or lv fiobr ludden and daring blow cut
off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the begin-
ning of the year, the duke of Guise drove his mailer
out of his capital city, and forced him to con.';(le a
peace, which left hin oniV the fnadow of royalty; ail;
before the year expir-d, ie !Limfelf fell a victim to 1lcl-
rr's f;.ars, and to hii oo\ n fccurity. In Spain the ope
rati:ns were tlhch as prcmnild fonistliing Itill inore l1n-
coniisonl. Dl)ui.g th:.e xc.rrs Philip had empihlv,!
all the power of his European domirions, and exhllli.
dr the trcaiurts of th, inrliis, in vafl preparationis i'o
n::r. A llet:. the gr. 2teiit t.a: evr had appcard 1i tl.
(oe nl, wzs rI-adv to lail '. on Liftion, and a :iuinerIIs
iind a-nnv was afir.-tiCid toj embark un Laa;'d oit li

ll. dct nri inlon w^-s ftil dn -iosn, no~ dli mrn:mn cir ,l'.'
l.inces nrr.de it prohbaile :hat i!t: hlow was ain.it, ,n
2Tc irft piace, a.-ainst E£:gl. ,. Eliizabth hi..d o;In:'

ijven secret aid to lhe revolted provincet in tlhe I.ow
Coounries, and new openly trk

-d.A. them htrl : re

lit.on. AnumiCro:s hr'dy iof r troops. v.z., in tl:,r !;:
vice; the earl of I.eictiter conninaniiled their ariniio;
fh.c had great fwvay in the civ:ii government of the rc;'
iiic; and som.e oi its moit coniiderable tow:!s werc .!1

:. :- rccff . Iler fleets had .:fit.c'. :i." ., ::Is W!

S:-;... ::',:-.epted th- sallec.ns irom the \i.'.! i ...
; ' ,.i '.,:.- :.. t:c col...ies th ::c. R ,: f.:r;,' .. ......

injuries, allured by views of ambition, and animated
by a fiperftitious zeal for propagating the Romish re-
ligion, Philip resolved not only to invade, but to con-
quer England, to which his descent from the hoitfe of
Lancaster, and the donation of pope Sixtus V. gave
him in his own opinion a double title.

Elizabeth law the danger approach, and prepared to
encounter it. The measures for the defence of her
kingdom were concerted ap31 carried on wirh the wis-
dom and vigour which distinguishcd her reign. lier
chief care was to secure the friendship ,,f the king of
Scots. She had treated the queen his mother with a
rigour unknown among princes; she had often uted
himself harhlvy, and with contempt; and tlough he
had hitherto prudently fuippreled his reif'cnnent of
these injuries, she did not believe it to be altoyr qher ex-
ringuifhed, and was afraid that, in her prel'nt lituation,
it might burf out with a fatal violence. Philip, sei-
fibl how much an alliance with Scotland would facili-
tate his enterprise, courted James with the utmost affi-
duitv. He excited him to revenge his mother's wroligs;
he flattered him with the hopes of sharing hi:. con-
quests; and offered him in marriage his daughter the
infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland ifwarmed
with prietis, his emissaries, who seduced fbmon of the
nolles to popery, and corrupted others with bries and
promiles. Huntlv, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of
a fation which openly efpoiled the interest of Spain.
Lord Maxwell, arriving trorn that court, began to as-
femble his followers, and to take arms, that he might
be ready to join the Spaniards. In order to counter-
balance all these, Elizabeth made the warmeti profef-
sions of friendship to the king; and Afhby, her ambaf-
fador, entertained him with magnificent hopes and pro-
mises. He aflured him, that his right of fucceflion to
the crown should be publicly acknowledged in England;
that he mhould be created a duke in that kingdom; that
he hould be admitted to some thare in the govern-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually,
James, it is probable, was too well acquainted with Eli-

S

zabeth's arts, to rely entirely on these promises. But
he underflood his own interest in the present juncture,
and pursued it with much steadiness. He reje&ted an
alliance with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to ad-
mit into his presence an ambassador from the pope.
He seized colonel Semple, an agent of the prince of
Parma. He drove many of the trafficking priests out
of the kingdom. He marched suddenly to Dumfries,
dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a convention of the nobles, he declared his refolu-
tion to adhere inviolably to the league with Englaln!;
and, without listening to the suggestions of revenge,
determined to act in concert with Elizabeth, agaitilt
the common enemy of the proteltant faith. He put
the kingdom in a poflure of defence, and levied troops
to obftruc the landing of the Spaniards. He oflred
to fend an -armn to Elizabeth's affiflance, and toll hcr
ambassador, that he expescd no other favour from the
king of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had pro-
milfd to Ulysses, tha: when he had devoured all his
companions, he would make him his last morsel*.

The zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not in-

ferior to that of the king; and the extraordinary dan-
ger, with which they were threatened, fuggefled to
them an extraordinary expedient for their fecuritv. A
bond was framec; for the maintenance of true religion,
and the defence cf the king's person and government,
in opposition to all enemies, foreign and domellic.
This contained a confeftien of the protestant faith, a
particular renunciat:on of the errors of popery, ai:d
the most solemn promises, in the name, and through
the -trength of God, of adhering to each other in lup-
porting the former, and in contending againfl the lat-
ter, to the utnloft of their powert. The king, the
nobles, the clergy, and the people, fublribed it with
equa alacrity. Strange or uncommon as such a con:-
bination may now appear, many circumstances colt
tributed at that time to recommend it, and to rcndel

* Camd. 44. Johnft. 3.9. Spotfw. 369.
, Dunlop's Collcdt. of Conlftf. vol. ii. IcS.

the idea familiar to the Scots. When roused by any
extraordinary event, or alarmed by any public danger,
the people of Israel were accuflomed to bind themselves,
by a folernn covenant, to adhere to that religion which
the Almighty had established among them; this the
Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it be-
came them to imitate. In that age, no considerable
clterprife was undertaken in Scotland, without a bond
of mutual defence, which all concerned reckoned ne-
ceffary for their security. The form of this religious
confederacy is plainly borrowed from those political
ones, of which so many initances have occurred; the
artices, tfipulations, and peculiar modes of expression,
are exa&tly the lame in both. Almost all the conrider-
able popifll princes were then joined in a league for ex-
tirpating the reformed religion, and nothing could be
more natural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter
into a counter affociatinn, in order to oppose the pro-
grefs of that forlni:dable cunipiracy. To these cauii's
did the Covein.inl, which has become so famous in hillo-
ry, owe its origill. It was renewed at different times
!inring ile reign of Jamest. It was revived with great
lIlenlmitv, in the vear one thousand fix hundred and
thirty ciglht. It was adopted by the Englifn in the
year one thousand lix hundred and forty-three, and en-
frl'ced by the civil and ecclesiastical authority of buth
khagdoms. The political purpoies to which it was
thin made ftiubcrvient, and the violent and unconititu-
!;'i'al IrirLil!rc8 which it was tlhint cinployLo' d to pro-
mo;c, it is i,,t oui province to explai.l. Uut at Ith
inicturc in whiciii it VwaI (irlt intro.!uced, we inay pro-
Ioui.cc it to have hbeen a prudenlt _nd laudable device
for the defence of the r.ligion and lilr-rties of the in'-
tinl;; nor welre thle te ris inll which it .'s couceive.-!,
':il-r than ini llt hi:vt I.ecun cxpi l .l

c fI:om nmen alarmn-

,l, with the irnipe'ling dlanucr tf p"l":-\- and threat-
'i: with an inali,,'i iV thIe molt. big ittedtand moit
i';.'crfuil p.'in'Ce 1i Iuri..ipc.

C l . iv. I ).
:S; r

Philip's eagerness to conquer England did not infiire

him-either with the vigour or despatch neccflarv to en-
sure the success of so mighty an entcrpritr. His flett,
which ought to have failed in April, did not enter tile
English channel till the middle of July. It hovered
many das on rhe coafr, in expe1ation of being joined
by the prince of Parnma, who w.as blocked up in the
ports of Slanders bv a Dutch fqnadlron. Continual
r:l'afters peL'rifu tile Spaniards cdring that time;, fiL
reffive ftrorma and hati-es, whirlh are xe ll known, cnrn.
spired with their own ill condtii to iifappoint tllir
enterprif.. And, by the blefling of Providence, l hi,.h
x-atchcd with remarkable care over the protcriant reli-
. ona and the liberties of Britain, the FInglifih aio;r
icattered and dellroved the armada, on whii-l they hli
arrogantlv beflowued the iame of invincible. Alter lI,
itg driven out of the Ernlifh seas they were forced to
. tr their course toward Spain, round Scotland and
Ireland. Many of them suffered shipwreck on tlI:;e
'.-.nerou: and unknown co;ils. Though James. iis:
his filhjeCts iun!er anns, to watch the motictni of ti1
.Spaniards, and to prevent their anuding in anr:.:
Irrai'rr., ie recei-'.ld seven hundred wi.n wc-e iortr'
r.lore *Lv a tempelt, and after fupp!iing thiel miiit
iccefraries, permitted them to return into their cU!i
countrv.

On the retreat of tle Sianiards, Flizabeth fe: t an

ambassador to ronrrt:!a: e uwith James, and to (.;l--
*r'tmner; hinm on tile firmn;i- and gtlerolitv hi :i1..
cilcovertd during a conjuncAure so rans'lot. lii.
r.one of Ah.bv's promifles ;ere any lo.ger '. !nirl. c:-
cd; that miniller was even accuftl of havirn exc:-.!
ed his powers, by thrie teo) ii.eral ofc:-.: an.i , -
IC-ious iss i own fa!fehood, ur a.an'cd of bci.' :

I:

o(nied by his court, he xithdre'w i:crc!v o:u of S .t-
lanr.d.

Phi:in, convinced by fatal expe;ilne of i;is o'i:.

ra-finefs in a:tempting the conquct of Enlan.li,
; - naval aranr.;enr, equipped at si great a nii.;. '.

' jrinft. T- . Carmd. 548.

and fubjecded, in alljts operations, to the delays, and
dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and winds,
resolved to make his attack in another form, and to a-
dopt the plan which the princes of Lorrain had long
meditated, of invading England through Scotland. A
body of his troops, he imagined, might be easily waft-
ed over from thi Low Countries to that kirgdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure assistance
there, thie frontier of England was open and defence-
lell, and the northern counties full of Roman catholics,
uho would rei'l:ive them with open arms. Mean while,
a defeent might lie threatened on the southern coast,
wlich would divide tlhe English army, difra& their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrihle
convulfinlns. In order to prepare the way for the exe-
cutitn of this design, he remitted a considerable fum
of money to Bruce, a feminlary priefL in Scotland, and
empljoyed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, Scottifn jesuits, to gain over as many persons
cf distinction as pocliile to his interest. Zeal for po-
Iwrry, ?nd the artful ilfinuations of thele eminirics, in-
,luced Ibvernl of tle nobles to favour a measure which
tended lo nanifcftly to the dLftruclionl of their coulntry.
Hunty!h, toiolih the king had lately married him to the
Iluechter of his favourite, the duke of Lennox, con-
n;ueid Mwarmlv attached to the Roinifn church. Craw-
forl and I.:':'.!1 were animated xith the zeal of new
cunverts. 'htyc\ all engaged in a correspondence xwith
tle prince ons l'arn a, and, in their letters to him, of-
Irced their fi'rvi;ce it the king of Spain, and unlder-
took, with the aid ,o; 6h3oo men, to render him nialtcer
.' Scotland, andl to b, ill io many of their valTals into

i:- lield, tlih.t le fi,,ulld be able to enter England with

ia rttlrouts armt. Jrl:':rlcis Siewart, grand!on of James
V. whoml the kihi:g Id (rel rated earl of Bothliwll, tho'
i.iluenit'ed h!t- n v

il)tiv: c t' re!i.ion, for lie Itill adicred

ti the prot ll.tnt i: ah,

was prompted merely by ca-.

pli;e, an! Ill. r'.llf, RT i, or l;is naurie, to join in this
:e.t\fotjt 'lt t'.rtci:iln 'lt ]t . c.

All !',-!. 1 ', =' :

. ].,;hter. eplt:d in England. Eli-
:. .ii: , .t;.:' '. a; ;.1 d :ig'r *;ichl thlirate;icd her

own kingdom, sent them immediately to the king, and,
reproaching him with his former lenity towards the
popih party, called upon him to check this formidable
conspiracy by a proper severity. But James, though
firmly attached to the protestant religion, though pro-
soundly versed in the theological controversies between
the reformers and the church of Rome, though lie
had employed himself at that early period of life, in
writing a commentary on the Revelation, in which lie
proved the pope to be antichrist, had neverthclefs a-
dopted already those maxims concerning the treatment
of the Roman catholics, to which he adhered through
the reft of his life. The Roman catholics were at that
time a powerful and active party in England; tlhey
were far from being an inconsiderable faction in his ownl
kingdom. The pope and king of Spain were ready to
take part in all their machinations, and to second ever\
effort of their bigotry. The opposition of such a body,
to his succession to the crown of England, added to tile
averseness of the English from the government of lraln-
gers, might create him many difficulties. In order to
avoid these, he thought it necessary to soothe rather t hl,.
to irritate the Roman catholics, and to reconcile ther;
to his fuccefiion, by the hopes of gentler treatment, :iid
tome mitigation of the rigour of those laws, whici
were now in force azainft them. This attempt to gaill
one party by promiles of indulgence and ads of crc-
mency, while he adhered with all the obflinacv of a
disputant to the do&rilns and tenets of the other, h;;,
given an air of myftrv-, and even of contradicion, to
this part of the king's character. The papifis, wi:li
the credulity of a lct firuggling to obtain power, Ib-
lieved his heart to be whoily theirs; and the protarl-
ants, with the jcaloufy inieparable fi-om thole whlo arj
a;lrcadv in pfli-ffio:, viewed every ad of lenit)y :a a
mark of imJiffeirence, cr a fynpltomn of apoftacy. Am!
Pi order to pl.ale both, James often aimLed at an cxc. 1f
five refinement, minglleld with ditilTlulation, in wV llti
r- inmagii-(d !lc pj.recdtioli or govcrnn.mllnt and of ki;iy-

il- :d r o this ofn
i

a areee to

t'i!i.
Ili bi- i; c-r on this occailn ; as agrecable tio t!:Ci

general maxims. Notwithstanding the solicitations of
the queen of England, enforced by the jealous remon-
firances of his own clergy, a ihort imprisonment was
the only punifhmlnnt he inflicted on Huntly and his as-
fociates. But he soon had reason to repent an ac of
clemency so inconsistent with the dignity of govern-
ment. The first use which the conspirators made of
their liberty, was to assemble their followers, and, un-
der pretence of removing chancellor Maitland, an able
minister, but warmly devoted to the English interest,
from the king's councils and presence, they attempted
to seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly bMaitland's vigilance, and partly by their own
ill conduct, they were forced to retire to the north,
where they openly eredted the standard of rebellion.
But as the king's government was not generally unpo-
pular, or his miniiters odious, their own vaflals joined
them slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. The
king, in person, advancing against them with such
forces as he could suddenly levy, they durst not rely so
much on the fidelity of their troops, which, though iu-
perior in number, followed them with reluctance, as to
hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they
surrendered to the king, and threw themselves on his
mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell, were
all brought to a public trial. Repeated acts of treason
were easily proved against them. The king, however,
did not permit any sentence to be pronounced; and,
after keeping them a few months in confinement, he
took occafiun, amidst the public festivity and rejoicings
at the approach of his marriage, to set them at li-
berty *.

As James was the only descendent of the ancient

monarchs of Scotland in the dire&c line; as all hopes
of uniting the crowns of the two kingdoms would
have expired with him; as the earl of Arran, the pre-
lilmptive heir to the 'throne, was lunatic; the king's
marriage was, on all these accounts, an event which
the nation desired with the utmost ardour. He hinifelf

Spottlw. 373. Cald. iv. 103-I30.

was no less desirous of accomplishing it; and had made
overtures for that purpose to the eldest daughter of
Frederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jea.
lons of every thing that would render the accession oi
the house of Stewart more acceptable to the Englih,
endeavoured to perplex James in the fame manner file
had done Mary; and employed as many artifices to de-
feat or to retard his marriage. His nminifters, gained
by bribes and promises, seconded her intentions; and
though several different ambassadors were sent from
Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so limited,
or infifled on conditions so extravagant, that Frederick
could not believe the king to be in earnest; and ills-
pe&ing that there was some design to dtceive or amuse
him, gave his daughter in marriage to the duke of
Brunswick. Not discouraged by this di:appointmpent,
which he imputed entirely to the conduct of his owr
ministers, James made his addresses to the princctf
Anne, Frederick's second daughter. And though Eli-
zabeth endeavoured to divert him from this, by re-
commending Catharine, the king of Navarre's fifler,
as a more advantageous match; though she prevailed
on the privy-council of Scotland to declare against the
alliance with Denmark, he perfifltd in his choice; and
despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of his own ni-
nifters in any other manner, he secretly encouraged the
citizens of Edinburgh to take arms. They threatened
to tear in pieces the chancellor, whom they accused as
the person whose artifices had hitherto dilappointed the
wishes of the king, and the expectations of his people.
In consequence of this, the earl Marifhal was font into
Denmark at the head of a splendid embassy. He re-
ceived ample powers and inllrucions, drawn with the
king's own hand. The marriage articles were quickly
agreed upon, and the young queen set fail towards Scot-
land. James made great preparations for her reception,
and waited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover; when the unwelcome account arrived, that a
violent tempest had arisen, which drove back her fleet
to Norway, in a condition so shattered, that there was
little hope of its putting again to sea before the spring.

This unexpected disappointment he felt with the ut-
most sensibility. He instantly fitted out some ships, and
without communicating his intention to any of his
council, failed in person, attended by the chancellor, fe-
veral noblemen, and a train of three hundred persons, in
quelt of his bride. Ile arrived fafcly in a fnall harbour
not far distant from Upflo, where the queen then refid-
el. There thc nmrriage was solemnized; and as it
wauld have been rash to trust those boifierous seas in the
winter fealon, James acepted the invitation of the court
of Denmark, and repairing to Copenhagen, passed feve-
ral months there, amidlt continual fealling and amule-
ments, ill which both the queen and himlt'lf had great
delight. .

No event in the king's life appears to be a wider de-
viation from his general characler, than this sudden fal-
rl. Iis son Charles I. was capable of that excessive ad-
miration of the other sex, which arises from great fenli-
hility of heart, heightened by elegance of talle; and the
iomalnitic air of' hisjouricy to Spain suited tlch a dilpo-
iti,,n. Butt James was not fiufrcptible of any refined gal-
lantry, and always exprcefld that contempt for the female
chaacter, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with
olirticefs, is apt to inlirie. He was fretted, however,
at the many obstacles which had been laid in his way.
le -was anxin.ais to li.cure the political advantages which
lie expefted from marriage; and fearing that a delay
nlight a ffird Elizabeth aid liis own minilters an opportu-
nit) of thwarting hinm by new intrigues, he suddenly took
the resolution of preventing- them, by a voyage from
which he expetced to return in a few wecks. The na-
tion seemed to applaud his contduiC, and to be pleased
with this appearance of amorous ardour in a youlng
prince. Notwithfianlldiig his absence so long beyond

eic time he exptctcd, the nobles, the clergy, and the
people, viel with one another in loyalty and obedience
;tnd no period in the king's reign was more remarkable
;(lr trantquillitv, or mio'l-e lfre trom any eruption of tholf
aitionls lwhich.lo o ften difitH'be(l the kingdorm.

..i.;;,, ;. t.
377,. o. ;. Mlurdiii, 637.

# BOOK EIGHTH. CONTENTS. The King and Queen arrive in Scotland. Disorders in the kingdom. An attempt of Bothwell's against the King. Presbyterian Church Government established.  ...

THE
HISTORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK EIGHTH.

CONTENTS.

'Te King and _yjeen arrive in Scotland. Disorders iLn tl

£ingdonm. An attenpt of Btb

B 'ell's againfl tbc King. Pref.

bytericn Church Government eflablijred. Confiiracy of It/
Popi/b Lords. Tbe people's eal, and the King's procederc.
Bctbvell firprifes the King. He recovers hil liberty. .-f
peed effavorring tbe PoepiS Lords. His lenity. A n:-
attempt of B6thwelrl'. Fre/h dangersfrouw the P<.pif Lo, d,
Battle of' Gleniisat. Pop;Jh Lords driven out of the li,.'?i,'.
Bs bvell flies to Spain. Chay:ge in admini/fration. Voic, .:.
of the nation againfi the PopiJ Lords. RaoJ p.roceedinlg Lj
the Clergy. Of Blac'rl seditious doltrine. Elpoufed bv ti
Clergy. Tumult in Edinurgh. The cing's danger. H' t
proceelings agairft the Citizens. Power of the Church Lun-
bled. Citi=ens trivileget aLtlged. Regulaions in the Chur.l.
Pfqpirb Lordr pardened. Eccfejaficsl reflored to Purliar :'.
Jatsel gains a party in Erland. Accused of corrrfpoo,,:,,
-'ith the Pope. Eideasours to gain the Ronan Cal6l....
Go-vcrie's conrfpiracy.. Sprot's d;ifcovry. Conjec7uresr c...ern-
ina the Coa.fpirators. The i':ne's uacont dibelieved. Pr'.
credings of the Par/lianent. E/Tx's conspiracy again El:..-
Icrt. His correspondence with Jamesl. Cautiour con,/dt 'j
James. / Wild attempt of fj x. His death. Jam.es rer-
tintes his intrigrue. Attepts to civilize the Hfihbla,.' ,
Elizabeth't illn:fs and death. Her charafter. Yane /'; I
claimed Kin'r of Entland. Takes pof-lion of the thr '.
Firev of the Revolutions in Scotland.jnce the accroon of J ...
IVr.

O N the firt of May ;90, the king and queen arliv!
at Leith, and were received by ti;.lr subjec- vith evi :

polfible.expreffion ofjoy. The solemnity of the queen's
coronation was conducted with great magnificence; but
so low had the order of bishops fallen in the opinion of
the public, that none of them were present on that oc-
ration, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a prefiytcrian minister
of great reputation, Jct the crown on her head, aditi-
rillircd the liacred unction, and performed the other
cultoinary ccrenlonies.

The zeal and liuccefsv wilth wlich many of the clc;cy

11hai contributed towards pirrriving peace and order in
the kingdom, lduring his abiunce, reconciled James, in
a great degree, to tlieir pcl ius, and even to the prei-
bt.lcerian nrlin of governinent. In pire-litcc of an aflin-
h'y, which met this year, ):e made high encomiums on
Ille (liiliplinc as well as the dec&tr'ne o the church, pro-
iili cd to adhere inviolably to botili, .;: perlnitetd the
affellibllv to iamre u ch ali a5 g'radlially ab,.lilt'id all the
remains ot cpilcopal j.'ltilcton, and paved the way
fir a full and legal cital)li'lhilcnt of the plclbltcri.an tno-
ik'lt-

An event happened soon after, which alloarded the
dce:gy no finall triuinph. Arclhihop A.dailoln, th ir

l..,'inct enciny, having fallen urnditr tle king's dilplea-
li:'c, lhaviil been deplrived ot the revecies of his fee in
ci tlr(uieuoce of the act of annexation, and hein.g opprcf-
I,1 with age, with poverty, and dileafe, mTadc t lie nmean-
It ;ul;nillion to the clergy, and deliveri d to the afirm-

i:;. a iirm;l recantation of all hib opinions concerning
i!c:rch govcrmcn:, whih hiad been ma;tter of ofiic::e.
' h a colif:lfion, from the roil: learned person of the
·.:, was

15 Coli red as a tcltimuny whlich the force of

:il:, iha-l extorted fromi an adverl-ary'.
;iran whiic, t!:e king's excefive clemency towards

r'.' -::ers multiplied criines of all kinds, a:id e;ncouraged
:. acs oi violence, as brought his govennellt ulnder
*:inclipt, and proved fatal to manlv of his liibjccts.
'
. hitlory of leveral years, ahout this time, is fircd

;

.; accuunts of the deadly qualrels btwceni the great

- Cald. iv. 2 J4. .

Spow.\. 38j. Cld.1. iv. zI4.
', 1. 1I. '1'

families, and of murders and aff-flinations perpetrated
in the most audacious manner, and with circumitanceq
of the utmost barbarity. All the defedts in the feudal
ariflocracy were now felt more sensibly than at any
other period in the history of Scotland, and universal li-
cence and anarchy prevailed to a degree scarce confifknt
with the preservation of society: while the king, troo
gentle to punish, or too feeble to adc with vigour, furi
sered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

But though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft,

which is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his at-
tention, and those fufpecied of it felt the whole weight
of his authority. Many persons, neither extremely old
nor wretchedly poor, which were usually held to be cer-
tain indications of this crime, but mafiers of families,
and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age (
life, were fcized and tortured; and though their con!';:-
lions contained the most absurd and incredible cir-ur--
stances, the king's prejudices, those of the clergy ad Id
the people, conspired in believing their extravaganr'i-:
without hesitation, and in punifnlng their persons wit:-
out mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers acceir-l
Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know
the time of the king's death, and of having employ i
their art, to raise the lsorms which had endangered :..
queen's life, and had detained James so long in Denmark.
Upon this evidence that nobleman was committed tc
prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit could neitil:
submit to the restraint, nor bronk fich an indignit'
Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, ard ir.
puting the accusation to the artifices of his enemy, i:
chancellor, affimh!ed his followers, under pretence *!
driving him from tle king's councils. Being favonlr-c
by some of the king's attendants, he was admitted 1;P.
secret passage under cloud of night into the co'-rt of t:
palace of Holyrood-lloufe. He advanced diredily :
wards the royal apartment, but happily before he ton',.
ed, the alarm was taken, and the doors fhtit. Whilc i:
attempted to burst epe f: omc of thcem, and to Ift :i: i;
others, the citizens of Edinburgh had time to 1 un to 1lt',
arms, and he elcapcdi with the utiaoft diificulty; o;'!:;

his safety to the darkness of the night, and the precipi-
tancy with which he fled t.

He retired towards the north, and the king having
anadvifedly given a cominiflion to the earl of Iluntiy
to pursue him and his followers with fire and sword, he,
under colour of executing that commiifion, gratified his
private revenge, and surrounded the Ihoule of the earl of
Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray him-
self. The murder of a young nobleman of such pro-
mifing virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the
darling of the people, excited univerlal indignation.
The citizens of Edinburgh role in a tumultuous man-
ner; and though they were reflrained, by the care of
the magiltrates, from any act of violence, they threw
aflde all rcilpec for the king and his ministers, and o-
penly infuized and threatenld both. While this muti-
nous spirit continued1, Janes thought it prudent to
withdraw fromn the city, and fixed his rrfidenlce for
lllrie time at Glalgowt. IThere Huntly firrendered
himlfelf tojuftice; and, notwitliftanding the atrocious-
,cts of his crime, and the clamours ot the people, the
iower of the chancellor, with u lilm he was now close-
lr confederated, and the king's regard for the memory
of the duke of l.ennox, whole daughter le Lad married,
int only protected Iim from the littcnle whichl such
an odious action meritcd, but cxempted himl evenl from
the formality of a public trial t.

A Ifep of much importance was taken soon after
with regard to the government of the church. The
clergy had long complained of the encroachments
niade upon their privileges and jurifdidtion by the acts
of the parliament one thousand five hundred and eighty-
four, and though these laws had new loft much of their
force, they reiblved to petition the parliament, which
was approaching, to repeal them in form. The junc-
ture forpufiing filch a mealure was well chosen. The
king had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity
towards the popish faclion, and fill more by his re-

Melv.388. Spotfw. j86. t' Spotfw. 587.

T a

miffnefs in pursuing the murderers of the earl of Mur.
ray. The chancellor had not only a powerful party
of the courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, who imputed to him every false
flep in the king's condut. Bothwell flill lurked in the
kingdom, and being secretly supported by all the ene-
mies of Maitland's adminifiration, was ready every mo-
ment to renew his audacious enterprises. James,
for all these reasons, was extremely willing to indulge
the clergy in their request, and not only consented to a
law, whereby the ads of one thousand five hundred
and eighty-four were rescinded or explained, but he
caTried his complaisance fill further, and permitted the
parliament to establish the presbyterian government, its
general assemblies, provincial iynods, prefbytcries, and
kirk sessions, with all the different branches of their
discipline and jurifdiiion, in the most ample manner.
All the zeal and authority of the clergy, even under the
adminiflration of regents, from whom they might have
expeted the most partial favour, could not obtain the
fanclion of law, in confirmation of their mode of ic-
clefiaftical government. No prince was ever leis dil-
posed than James to approve a fyflem, whole republli-
can genius inlpired a passion for liberty, so reputpiiitlt
to his exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor rouili
any aversion be more inveterate than his, to the aultere
and uncomplving character of the prefbvterian clergy
in that age; who, more eminent for zeal than for poli-
cy, often contradi&,ed his opinions, and censured his
condut, with a freedom equally offenlive to his dng-
matifm as a theologian, and to his pride as a king. His
situation, however, obliged him frequently to conceal,
or to dissemble, his sentiments; and as he often dil-
gusted his fubjecs, by indulging the popihi facsion
more than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this by conceflions to the prefbvterian clergy, more li-
beral than he himself would otherwise have chosen'.

In this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents
were attainted. But he loon made a new attempt te

' Cald. iv. .24, 252 Spotfw. 388.

seize the king at Falkland; and James, betrayed by
lome of his courtiers, and feebly defended by others,
who w.ihced well to Bothwell, as the chancellor's avow-
ed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance
of fir Robert Melvil, and to the irresolution f Both-
well's alffTciatest.

This danger was scarce well over, when the natior
was alarmed with the discovery of a new and more
formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the lord New-
lattle's brother, being fcized as he was ready to set fail
for Spain, many ifpiicious papers were found in his
cuflody, and among thele, several blanks signed by the
earls of Angus, lillutly, and Errol. By this extraordi-
nary precaution they hoped to escape any danger of
dilcovery. But Ker's rlbolution shrinking when tor-
ture was threatened, he confcffrd that he was employed
by these noblemlen to carry on a negotiation with the
king of Spain; that the blanks fublcribed with their
namnes were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie;
that they were intLrucled to offer the faithful fcrvice of
tlle three earls to tlat monarch; and to solicit him to
land a body of hlis troops, cither in Galloway, or at the
nmouth of the Clyde, with which they undertook, inl
llie irilt place, to eltablillt the Roman catholic religion
ii Scotland, and then to invade England with the
whole torccs of tle kingtlom. David Graham of Fin-
;;v, and Barclay of Ladyland, whonm he accused of be-
i:!, privv to tle coiifplrary, were takcen into custody,
:!,d confirmed all tie c ircutimfances of his confclfion *

T'liht nation lhaxiug been oso onme time in continual

::-rol-; di agitation by to many fuccefirve conspiracies,
;.e diii.'ovLry of this new danger completed the panic.
.\il ranks of nien, as if the enemy had already been at
:.eir gates, thought theinfeives called upon to fland
'.,:th in defence of their country. The miniftera of
L:!inburgh without iwaiting for any warrant from the
i w:,, who happened at that time, to be abfcnt from the
'..,aa; and vwihout having received any legal cuotn

M C;iv. 4ca. · Rymer, xvi. 19o.

T.

mission, afnembled a considerable number of peers and
barons, in order to provide an instant remedy against
the impending danger. They seized theearl of Angus,
and committed him to the castle; they examined Ker;
and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the king,
concerning the fiate of the nation, and the necessity of
prosecuting the conspirators with becoming vigour.
James though jealous of every encroachment on his
prerogative, and offended with i;ubjtes who, inflead of
petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, found it ne-
cefEar-, during the violence of the ferment, not only to
adopt their plan, but even to declare that no confi(dra.
tion should ever induce him to pardon those who had
been guilty of so odious a trealbni. He summoned til;
earls of Huntly and Errol to furreidlcr thetmltlves to
jnftice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers pronoi;:,-
ed to he guiilty of rreaion, he commanded to be p'i-
hlicly beheaded; and marching into the north at lilt
lead of an army, the two earls, together with Alili.-,
who had escaped out of prison, retired to the :r;t.!;-
tains. He placed garrdfons in the caltles which beijol:;-
ed to them; compelled their vassals, and the barcns i.,
the adjacent countries, to fuilicribe a bond contaiir,.
professions of their loyalty towards him, and oi ;l....
firm adherence to the proteflant faith; and the hr;::r
to secure the tranquillity of that part of the kingid n,
conflituted the earls of Athol and Marifhal his ieu: -
slants thrret.

1'aving finished this expedition, James returned :.j

Edinburgh, where he found lord Borough, at ext::at
dinary ambassador from the court of Eligland. L',.-
beth, alarmed at the diicovery of a conlpiracv t.. :
she confidered as no less formidable to her o'n lr;.. -
dom than to Scotland, reproached James with li ti.-:
mrr rcmiffncir, and urged him as he regarded tlr p -
ft-lvation of the protefiarrt religion, or the digniiy it
his owvn crown, to punish this repeated ticalon v...t .
rigour; and if .ce could not app;elicnd the p-rlui. ..
jift to confilcate the eflatts, ot Ioclh altd.c:lu: rIcL.. .

IJ Srcti W. 3yI.Cal. adiv. :,i.

She weakened, however, the force of these requefis, by
interceding at the lame time in behalf of Bothwell,
whom, according to her ufial policy in nourishing a
faaious spirit among the Scottish nobles, she had taken
under her protection. James absolutely refused to
litlen to any interceffioln in favour of one who had so
often, and with so much outrage, infilted both his
government and his perfbn. With regard to the popish
conlpirators, lie declared his resolution to prosecute
them with vigour; but that he might be the better a-
ble to do so, he dcinanmlcd a small film of money from
.lizabetlh, which lhe, diflrutlful perhaps of the manner
in which he might apply it, fllewed no inclination to
grant. Ilie zeal, however, and importunity of his
uon luhbjc'fs obliged him to call a parliarmet, in order
tc p aln an of attatinder againll the th tree earls. But
tdlore it met, Kcr made his efcicpe out of prilbn, and,
n1 pretence that legal evidence ol their guilt, could not
,* produced, n¢othing was concluded againllt themn.
'Il;e king hiirlklf was iuliverlally illfrpeilcd us having
(iur.ved this artific, oll purpole to clutie tle requefls
ct the queen of England, and to dilappoilit the wilhics
cr is 'own people; alnd, tciriore, ill order to lothe
:..c clers-, who cx.clailred loudly agaillit his contdct,
:.c gave vay to the paifing of an act, whLicl ordaiu(-d
rl.i . vwho ulltinatcly co:ldcinecd the eufillrc3 of hlle
.;.i Lh to be declaled outiav.ws .

\\'ilc ithc tclrolr extincd by ti:e lppifh conifpiracy

r,,jii irbd the i.ation, thlr court had i-eni divlc(<l} by t'o U
r ,A l.,tiliLS, vihidch cclittei;;t' iir ilc c Ilf

duhtdtio,

Jt ;:slais. At tle hcad ot o.!- ws the chancellor, in
l.,im tthe lkig lt pu;id cire ic Lt:lidnece. 'For that

i.y .i.i'oln l h,

peh , d

. ialitn e;uly undir tl'.0

.t .' tli b i icltafilrt' '1 ,i (id ki- oh L'- iI) x, the CaIrl ui
.i i !, loid tcl i ice, c;.,l ;:1. tlic t e o. Stewarr,

I.' J':>5d l .c' gla;lt.!, : .1!;'' ..:i, l

;i t Ill bl ,c'.e hi. Jaiir .

t. ti no iel;s f ;i, ;,c!,y tra i !

J .l i tth

rn o) priuli.

:r-ec-, advili-d his tax\leri e to ctlil. icr ; ,

t:e tlle, i!:
r.: I s that tle (u cm I''c r,-lUU'imf:i, ' .:!d ilhiluc. 'u ,

;,!. i '
} ..7J.:.
. :. s:.V-

as he flood in need, in the present junaure, of the as-
fdlance of an able minifler, he had recalled him to
court. In order to prevent him from recovering his
former power, the Stewarts had recourse to an ex-
pedient no Jess illegal than dreperate. Having com-
bined with Bothwell, who was of the fame surname,
they brought him back secretly into Scotland; and
leizing the gates of the palace, introduced him into
the royal apartment with a numerous train of armrd
followers. James, though deserted by all his courtiers,
and incapable of rcfiftance, dilcovered more indignatio.
than frar, and reproaching them for their treachery,
called on the earl to finifl his trcafons, by piercing Ins
lovereign to the heart. But Bothwe!l fell on his knee,.
and implored pardon. The king was not in a col.'.-
tion to recfife his demands. And a few days after, i
signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, io
w;hom he was really a prisoner, whereby he boouil
hiilstlf to grant a remission for all pall o(ffe;ces, al,d
to procure the ratification ot it in parliament; and in ithe
encan time to dismiss the chanccl'or, the maftcr of (;!,:-
mis, lord Hlome, and fir George llome, from his cou'-
ils and pretence. Boihvcli, on his part, consented ,,
remove from court, though he left there as many v!
his associates as he thought sufficient to prevent thi re.
turn o. the adverse faclioh.

But it was now no cafe rratter to kcep the kic iiu:

der the fame kind of hond v, to 'hich he had b.
often subje1t during his Inuiorlit. lie tiifcovered
much impatience to snake ofl' lis fctters, thal; 1:!
-aho imposed, durnl not continue the refirillt. T'l. l
permitted him to call a conventina of the inobl.s :
Stirling, and to reptair th'ithcr himlclf. All Bullot ii'
nermies, and all who were dceircus of gaiinig tl ku,.'
favour by appearing to be so, obeyed the fiimonso . 'i ..
pr.nounced the insult offered to the king's perli: .
authority to be high trcafon, and dc !ared him alii;n', .
from any ohligatiou to olhferve con'.itios 'cxort.-i ;'.
force, and which vio!ated fT, cr;i.iia.y i:is ryi a ;i -
gativr. James, houwcer, Pl;ll

u.i:fif' ed ;:l'.; .. '
provided he wculJ lI.c io. i; as n -!l t: I,..:

promise to retire out of the kingdom. Theft condi-
tions Bothwell rejected with disdain, and betaking him-
self once more to arms, attempted to surprise the king;
but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders.

The king's ardour against Bothwell, compared with
his flow and evasive proceedings against the popish
lords, occasioned a general disgust among his fubjeas;
and was imputed either to an excessive attachment to
the persons of those conspirators, or to a secret partiali-
ty towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no
unrealbnable fears. The clergy, as the immediate
:tardians of the proteflant religion, thought them-
selves hound, in such a juncture, to take extraordinary
steps for its preservation. And the provincial fynod
of Fife happening to meet at that time, a motion was
made to excommunicate all concerned in the late con-
fpiracy, as obfiinate and irreclaimable papists; and
though none of the conspirators resided within the
bounds of the fynod, or were fubjedc to its jurisdiction,
such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced the sentence of ex-
communication, to which the adc of last parliament
added new terrors. Left this should he imputed to a
few men, and accounted the adt of a imall part of the
church,' deputies were appointed to attend the adjacent
Ilnods, and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

An event happened a few weeks after which increased
the people's suspicions of the king. As he was march-
ing on an exptdliiiocl against the borderers, the three
popilh earls comning liddenly into his pretence, offered
to filbmit themfelvcs to a legal trial; and James, with-
out committing them t(o custody, appointed a day for
that purpose. The conspirators prepared to appear
with a formidable train of their friends and vassals.
But in the mean time the clergy,-together with many
peers and barons, aflkmbling at Edinburgh, remonfirat-
ed against the king's extreme indulgence with great
boldnels, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular course of juflice, to commit to sure cuflody per-
ions charged v ith the highest adcs of treason, who
could not be brought to a legal trial, until they were

absolved from the censures of the church; and to call
a convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding against them. At the fame time
they offered to accompany him in arms to the place of
trial, left such audacious and powerful criminals should
overawe juffice, and diciate to the judges to whom
they pretended to submit. James, though extremely
offended, both with the irregularity of their proceed-
ings, and the presumption of their demands, found it
expedient to put off the day of trial, and to call a
convention of efates, in order to quiet the fears and
jealousies of the people. By being humoured in this
point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and
the chancellor managed the convention so artfully, that
he himself, together with a few other members, was
impowered to pronounce a final sentence upon the con-
fpirators. After much deliberation they ordained, that
the three earls and their associates should be exempted
from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account'of
their correspondence with Spain; that, before the lirll
day of February, they should either submit to the
church, and publicly renounce the errors of popery, or
remove out of the kingdom; that, before the firfl of
January, they lhould declare which of these alternatives
they would embrace; that the)y hould find furcey lo:
their peaceable demeanour for the future; and that if
they failed to signify their choice in due time, they
should lose the benefit of this ad of abolition, and re-
main exposed to ail the pains of law.

By this lenity towards the conspirators, James incur.

red much reproach, and gained no advantage. De-
voted to the popish fuperfiition, submissive to all the
di&ates of their priers, and buoyed up with hopes and
promies of foreign aid, the three earls refused to ac-
cept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable
correfpondente with the court of Spain. A conven-
tion of estates pronounced them to have forfeited the
benefit of the articles which were offered; and the
king required them, by proclamation, to furrendec
themselves to jut;ice. The pretence of the Englilh am-
baflador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of thcie

proceedings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to James's mo-
tions, and imputing his reludlance to punif the popifi
lords to a secret approbation of their designs, had lent
lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to
which he exposed himself, by this false moderation;
and to require him to exercise that rigour which their
crimes, as welt as the polture of affairs, rendered ne-
cefrary. And though the Iteps now taken by the king
silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, for-
getful of his characer as an ambassador, entered into
p:ivate negotiations with such of the Scottish nobles
as dlifapproved of the king's measures, and held almost
an open correl'pondenlce with Bothwell, who, according
to the usual artifice of malecontents, pretended much
fi,licitude for reforming the diforlers of the common-
wealth: and covered his own aimbition with the fpe-
Cious veil of zcal againf those counlellors who restrain-
ed the king from purtiling the avowed enemies of the
protestant faith. Zollchc encouraged him, in the name
of his miftre!'s, to take arms against hiis sovereign.

Mean while, the king and clergy were filled with
mutual distrust of each other. They were jealous, per-
haps, to excess, that his aficreions leaned too much
towards the popiih faction; he fifpeated them, with-
out good rcalfn, of prompting Bothwell to rebcllion,
an.d even of fupplving him with mnnme for that pur.
pufc. Little inlligation, indeed, v.as waniting to rouli
such a turbulent Ipirit as Bothwcll's to any daring en-
*erprile. Ile appeared fuddenlv within a mile of Edin-
htrShl, at tle head of four hlniid:'-d horl't. The pre-
trTlecs, by which he endcav:lired to jiflify this inllur-
r'l:i n, were extremely popular; zeal for rrligion,
enriuty to popery, concern for lhi king's honour, and
fur thr cilierties of the niti':n. J.ams 'as t(ta!!5y un-
provided for his owun d.'s. i.e:P ha ld no infantry,
anJ wvs accompanied onhly w'i:h a stw horfemeui of
lord Honme's trail. In this xtrclltlv he implored the
aid of tihe cii.zelns of I:l.,:lur:.., ah , . in os-der to
encoalrayc themn to act \.'i;l z e.dl, lie promilicd to pro-
crtd .:.i!'lf the popill I,..,'Is with the tillolf rigour
o. la,:. Animated b; :b..i: midilt t: thcy .'an checr-

fully to their arms, and advanced, with the king at
their head, against Bothwell; but he, notwithstanding
his success in putting to flight lord Home, who had
rashly charged him with a far inferior number of caval-
ry, retired to Dalkeith without daring to attack the king.
Iis followers abandorned him soon after, and discouragcd
by so many fucceflive disappointments, could never after-
wards he brought to venture into the field. He betook
himself to his usual lurking-places in the north of E;,;
land; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the king's ri-
monstrances obliged him to quit that retreat .

No fnoner was the king delivered from one dang(cr,

than he was called to attend to another. The p(,pi,5
lords, in consequence of their negotiations with Spnilu,
received in the spring a supply ot money from Phil;,.
LWhat bold designs this might infpirc, it was no c.ilv
matter to conjecture. From men uluter the dominiiit
of big(tcry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
the molt desperate actions were to be drcaded. TIn-
assembly of the church immediate:y took the alarm;
remonitrated against them with mure bitterness tli.i
ever; and unanimously ratified the fentellc of excoii,
munication pronounced by the fynod of Fife. Jani
himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitu!:,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not ,, i
be generally difpleafii:g to his own fu'jecó;, but i1:.
rife to unfavourable suspicions anlo.g the Elnglifl, i.
erted himself with unuthal vigour. lle called a ; il..!.
meut; lald before it all the circumilanies .ndl aggrav'.t-
tiots of the conspiracy; and though there wcec but ficw
members present, and several of telec toni>.L... x i:,
the conspirators by blood or fricedlhip, he prevailed on
them, by his influence and importu ity, to p:no'.:
the most rigorous sentence which the law can illi,:.
They were declared to be guilty of high trear, n, ;,i,
their estates and honours forfcited. Ai th.- fame -i: ,
flatutes, more severe than ever. w-;'c enacci a;:,..
the profcfiors of the popifli rtciiimn.

' Spt'ti'. 4c3. C..;! . ...

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter
of great difficulty. Three powerful barons, cantoned
in a part of the country of difficult access, surrounded
with-numerous vaflals, and supported by aid from a
foreign prince, were more than an overmatch for a
Scottish monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eliza-
beth to advance the money necessary for defraying the
expences of an expedition against them. To attack
them in person, with his own forces alone, might have
rxpofed James both to diltgrace and to danger. He
had recourse to the only expedient which remained in
fich a situation, for aiding the impotence of sovereign
authority; he delegated his authority to the earl of
Argyll and lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at en-
mity with the conspirators; and gave them a commission
to invade their lands, and to seize the castles which be-
longed to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all his
high pretensions of zeal for the proteitant religion,
having now entered into a close confederacy with them,
the danger became every day more urgent. Argyll,
solicited by the king, and roused by the clergy, took
the field at the head of teven t!houland men. HIuntly
and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far insei i-
or in number, but composed chiefly of gentlcmen of the
low countries, mounted on horfcback, and who brought
along with them a considerable train of field-pieces.
They encountered each other with all the fury which
hereditary enmity and ancient rivalihip add to undil-
ciplined courage. But the IIighlanders, disconcerted
by the firit discharge of the cannon, to which they were
little accuitomed, and unable to refif the impression of
cavalry, were soon put to flight; and Argyll, a gallant
young man of eighteen, was carried by his friends out
of tlie field, weeping with indignation at their dilgrace,
and calling on thenl to fland, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of their name*,

On the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though
obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raile moinucy4

* Cald. iv. 408. t Birch, Mem. i. i°6.
Vol. IJ. U -

aflembled a small body of troops, and marched towards
the north. He was joined by the Irvines, Keiths, Les-
lys, Forbeses, and other clans at enmity with Huntly and
Errol, who having loft several of their principal followers
at Glenlivat, and others refifing to bear arms against the
king in person, were obliged to retire to the mountains.
James wafted their lands; put garrisons in some of their
castles; burnt others, and left the duke of Lennox as his
lieutenant in that part of the kingdom, with a body ot
men sufficient to restrain them from gathering to any
head there, or from infesting the low country. Rrdu-
ced at lat to extreme distress, by the rigour of the
season, and the defertiorr of their followers, thev oh-
tained the king's permifflon to go beyond seas, and
gave fccurits that they should neither return without
his licence, nor engage in- any new intrigues againlt
the priteftant religion, or the peace of the kingdom'.

By their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the

north of Scotland; and the finnrcfs and vigour which
James had displayed in his last proceedings acainlt
them, regained him, in a great degree, the confidtnrc
of his protefiant finbji)j s. But he funk, in the fane
proportion, and for the fame reason, in the elirem ot
the Roman catholics. They had aflerted his mother's
right to the crown of England with Ib much waanrmh,
that they could not, with anv decency, reject hi-; and
the indulgence, with which he affected to treat the prn-
fefiors of that religion, infpiircd them with ilch hopes,
Tl.at they viewed his accefflon to the throne as no unlde
firahle event. But t'ie rigour with which the king had
lately purlued the- cllpirators, and the levere ltatutri
agaiiift popery, to which he had given his c ci!tnt, con.
vinced them that thrl' hopes were visionary; and thrv
br-in to look about in quest of fonle new filccr'r,
w!hose rights they might oppose to his. The En]li!',
papifls turned tllir eyes tur ards the earl of Elil ',
, ho-- generous mind, 'lioygh firmly eflabli.ed in th:
proeftant faitl, abhorrid ti.e l veritics iniliijed in t:

Spots-. 4C4. (c'-ld. 3;7 , &c.

age on account of religious opinions.. Those of the
fame fedC, who were in exile, formed a bolder scheme,
and one more suitable to their situation. They advanc-
edthe claim of the infanta of Spain; and Parsons the
jesuit pnblifmed a book, in which, by false quotations
from hiftorv, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd ar-
guments, intermingled with bitter inveclives against
the king of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the infanta's
title to the Englifl crown to be preferable to his. Phi-
lip, though involved already in a war both with France
and England, and scarce able to defend the remains of
the Burgundian provinces against the Dutch common-
wealth, eagerly grasped at this airy project. The
dread of a Spanish pretender to the crown, and the op-
polition which the papilts began to form against the
king's succession, contributed not a little to remove the
prejudices of the proteflants, and to prepare the way
tor that event.

Bothwell, whose name has been so often mentioned
as the disturber of the king's tranquillity, and of the
peace of the kingdom, was now in a wretched condi-
tion. Abandoned by the queen of England, on account
of his confederacy with the popith lords; excommuni-
cated by the church for the fame rcafon; and deserted
in his diftrcfs by his own followers; he was obliged to
fly for safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy,
wihere, alter renouncing the proteflanw faith, he led ma-
ny years an oblicure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The king though
extremely ready to lacrifice the firongeft rclentment to
the 1lightest acknowledgements, could never be softened
by his submission, nor be iuduced to liften to any inter-
ctciion in his behalf'.

This year the king loft chancellor Maitland, an able

minister, on whom lie had long devolved the whole
weight of public aflairs. As Jan:cs loved him while a-
live, he wrote, in honour of his memory, a copy of

Winw. Mem. i. t Spotfw. 4I0.

U X

vcrfes, which, when compared with the compositions
of that age, are far from being inelegant.

Soon after his death, a considerable change was ma(le

in the administration. At that time, the annual charges
of government far exceeded the king's revenues. The
queen was fond of expensive ainulments. James him.
self was a firanger to economy. It became neceffarv,
for all these reasons, to levy the public revenues -witl
greater order and rigour, and to husband them xi:h
more care. This important trust was rolnmittred t.
eight gentlemen of the lawv, who, from their numllhr
xere called Oclav'r.J. The powers vefled in them
were ample, and almost unlimited. The king bounil
himself neither to add to their number, nor to lihippil
any vacancy that might happen, without their conient:
and knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed
that no alienation of his revenue, no grant of a pel-
sion, or order on the treasury, Thould be held valid,
unless it were ratified by the fublcription of five oi
the commiflioners; all their ats and decisions were
declared to be of equal force with the sentence of judg-
es in civil courts; and in consequence of them, and
without any other warrant, any person might be ar-
refted, or their goods seized. Such extensive jurifdic.
tion, together with the absolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the govern.
maent into their hands. United among themselves,
thev gradually undermined the reft of the king's mini-
flers, and seized on every lucrative or honourable oi-
fire. The ancient servants of the crown repined at
being obliged to quit their stations to new men. Tie
favourites and young courtiers murmured at feeing the
king's liberality fhinted by their prescriptions. And
the clergy exclaimed against some of them as known
apofiates to popery, and suspected others of secretly

t Alexander Seaton prefidcnt of the session, Waltei

Stewart commendator of Blantyre lord privy feal, Da
vid Caniegy, John Linfday, James Elphingfton, T:o
nias Hamilton, John Skcne clerk register, and Petl
Young elcmofynar.

favouring it. They retained their power, however,
notwithilanding this general combination against them;
and they owed it entirely to the order and economy
whieh they introduced into the administration of the
finances, by which the neceflhry expences of govern-
ment were more easily defrayed than in any other pe-
riod of the king's reign .

The rumour of vafi preparations which Philip was

said to be carrying on at this time, filled both England
and Scotland with the dread of a new invasion. James
took proper measures for the defence of his kingdom.
But there did not latisfy the zeal of the clergy, whose
ui'picions of the king's sincerity began to revive; and
as he hlad permitted the wives of the banished peers to
levy the rents of their eflates, and to live in their
houses, they charged him with rendering the al of
forfeiture ineffecuil, by filpporting the avowed ene-
mies of the protestant faith. The alsembly of the
churhl took under consideration the state of the king-
dom, and having appointed a day of public failing,
they solemnly renewed the covenant, by which the na-
tion was bound to adhere to the protestant faith, and
to defend it againli all aggressors. A committee, con-
sifting of the most eminent clergymen, and of many
harons and gentlemen of dilinftion, waited on the
I:ing, and laid before him a plan for the security of the
kingdom, and the preservation of religion. They ur-
ged him to appropriate the estates of the baniflied lords
as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers; to take the
firicclft precautions for preventing the return of such
turbulent flibjcAs into the country; and to pursue all
who were fulpecled of being their adherents with the
utmolt rigour.

Nothing could he more repugnant to the king's

fiheines, or more difagreeahle to his inclination, than
thefle propoliti(ons. Averse, through his whole life, to
anv courts where he expected opposition or danger;
idl fond of attaining his ends with the characer of

* Spotfw. 413X 435-

U 3

moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed
with concern the prejudices against him which were
growing among the Roman catholics, and resolved to
make Ibme atonement for that part of his conduet
which had drawn on him their indignation. Eliza-
beth was now well advanced in years; her life had late-
ly been in danger; if any popish competitor should a-
rife to dispute his right of fucceffon, a faftion so pow-
erful as that of the banished lords might be extremely
formidable; and any division among his own fubjecis
might prove fatal at a junsture which would require
their united and nloft vigorous efforts. Instead, there-
fore, of the additional severities which the assembly pro-
posed, James had thoughts of mitigating the punifil-
ment which they already fufiered. And as they were
surrounded, during their residence in foreign parts, by
philip's emissaries; as resentment might difipolf them
to liften more favourably than ever to their lug.ef-
tions; as despair might drive them to still more atro-
cious actions; he reiblvcd to reCal them, under certain
condi:iona, into their native country. Encouraged by
these sentiments of the king in their favour, of which
they did uot want intelligence, aud wearied already of
the dependent and anxious life of exiles, they ventured
to return secretly into Scotland. Soon alter, they pro-
sented a petition to the king, begging his pcrnlflion to
rtfide at their own hout-s, and oiicrug. to give security
2or their peaceable and dutiiul behaviour. James cal-
led a convention of eilates to deliberate on a matter of
such importancet and by their advice he granted the
petiion.

So loon as they were informed of this, the members

of a committee, appointed by the last aflenibly, nmet at
..dinburgb, and with all the precipitancy of tear, ;n:l
ot ceal, tcok such relolutiors as they thought neceli.ry
4ui ti.e iaic:y of the kingdom. 'lhey wrote circul.r
Irttcrs to all the prclbyterics iu Scotland; they warnie
them ot the approachinlg danger; they exhorted tilc.;
:u iir up their peole to tl c dretncr ot theirjuli rihll,;
*-Ly Lonxzandcd them ;o pubiiih, in all tlUir pu.pI;,

the am of excommunicating the popish lords; and en-
joined them to lay all those who were fufpedled of fa-
vouring popery under the fame censure by a summary
sentence, and without observing the usual formalities of
trial. And as the danger seemed too pressing to wait
for the itated meetings of the judicatories of the church,
they made choice of the most eminent clergymen in
different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to re-
fide conflantly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day
with the ministers of that city, under the name of the
Standig Counil oJ he Church, and veiled in this body the
fipreme authority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the an-
cient Roman form, to take care that the church should
receive no detriment.

These proceedings, no less unconstitutional than un-
precedented, were manifcft encroachments on the royal
prerogative, and bold fleps towards open rebellion. 'The
king's conduOt, however, justified in fume degree such
exceiles. His lenity towards the papists, so repugnant
to the principles of that age; his pardoning the conlpi-
rators, notwithitanding repeated promiles to the con-
trary; the rellpedt he paid to lady Huntly, who was at-
tached to the Romish religion no less than her huiband;
his committing the care of his daughter, the princels
Elizabeth, to lady Levingion, who was infe6lcd with
the fanmc uperltition; the contempt with which lie talk-
ed, on all occasions, both ot the character of minillers,
and of their function; were circulltances which might
have filled minds, not prone by nature to jealouly, vx ith
lome fulpicions; and might have precipitated into iafl
counlels, thlule \\ ho were fair removed from iltermpe ate
zeal. But, however powerful the motives might be
which influenced the clergy, or however laudable the
end they had in view, they conduceted their nieafures
with no address, and eve i with little prudtnce. James
iidcovered a firong inclinationt to avoid a rupture with
the church, and jealous as he vwas of his prerogative,
\sould willingly have made mnany conctci:ons lr the
'aIke of peace. Bv his conlniand lbni 1ol'ifle p;rivv-
tuunli.llors had an interview wvith the imlore Iulo(,C ate
utoitig tiw ch-l'gy, and inquired hi.tlltr l!-'t ly ;and

his associates might not, upon making proper acknow-
ledgments, be again received into the bosom of the
church, and be exempted from any further punishment
on account of their pall apoflacy and treasons. They
replied, that though the gate of mercy flood always
open for those who repented and returned, yet as tllhef
noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime delerving
death both by the law of God and of man, the civil
magiitrate could not legally grant them a pardon; and
even though the church should absolve them, it was his
duty to infiiA punishment upon them. This inflexibi-
lity in those who were reckoned the motl compliant of
the order, filled the king with indignation, which the
imprudence and obstinacy of a private clergyman
heightened into rage.

Mir, David Black, minister of St. Andrews, difcourf-

ing in one of his sermons, according to cuflom, concern-
ing the state of the nation, affirmed that the king had
permitted the popish lords to return into Scotland, and
hy that acion had discovered the treachery of his own
heart; that all kings were the devil's children; that
Satan had now the guidance of the court; that the
queen of England was an atheist; that the judges were
miscreants and bribers; the nobility godless and dege-
nerate; the privy-counfellors cormorants, and men of
no religion; and in his prayer for the queen he used
these words, we mull pray for her for fashion's fake,
but we have no cause, she will never do us good. James
commanded him to be summoned before the privy-
council, to answer for fucli seditious expressions; and
:.:e clergy inftcad of abandoning him to the punilh-
ment which such a petulant and criminal attack on his
luptriors deservcd, were b1 imprudent as to espouse his
caule, as if it had been the common one of the whole
urder. The controversy concerning the immunities of
thepulpit, and the right of the clergy to teflify against
vices of every kind, which had been agitated in one
thouland five hundred and eighty-four, was now reviv-
ed. It was pretended that, with regard to their sacred
lunction, ministers were fubjedt to the church alone;
that it belonged only to their eeclefiaftical luperiors ot

judge of the truth or falsehood of the doftrines deliver-
ed in the pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever,
the king usurped this jurisdiction, the church would,
from that moment, fink under servitude to the civil
magifIrate; that, instead of reproving vice with that
honest boldness which had often been of advantage to in-
dividuals, and salutary to the kingdom, the clergy would
learn to flatter the passions of the prince, and to con-
nive at the vices of others; that the king's eagerness to
punish the indiscretion of a protestant minister, while he
was ready to pardon the crimes of popish conspirators,
called on them to stand on their guard, and that now
was the time to contend for their privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachment on those rights, of which the
church had been in possession ever since the Reforma-
tion. Influenced by these considerations, the council
of the church enjoined Black to decline thejurifdidtion
of the privy-council. And he, proud of such an op-
portunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that
purpose, and with the utmost firmness refused to plead,
or to answer the questions which were put to him. In
order to add greater weight to there proceedings, the
council of the church transmitted the declinature to
all the prefbyteries throughout the whole kingdom, and
enjoined every minister to subscribe it, in testimony of
his approbation.

James defended his rights with no less vigour than
they were attacked. Senlible of the contempt under
which his authority mull fall, if the clergy should he
permitted publicly, and with impunity, to calumniate
his ministers, and even to cenfilre himself; and know-
ing, by former examples, what unequal reparation for
such offences he might expect from the judicatories of
the church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's con-
duct, and issued a proclamation, commanding the mem-
bers of the council of the church to leave Edinburgh,
and to return to their own parishes. Black instead of
submitting, renewed his declinature; and the council,
in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they
met by the authority of the church, obedience to it was
a duty Rfill more faered than that which they owed to

the king himself. The privy-council, notwithstanding
Black's refusing to plead, proceeded in the trial; and,
after a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the
crimes of which he had been accused; but referred it to
the king to appoint what punishment he ihould susser.

Mean while, many endeavours were used to bring

matters to accommodation. Almost every day produced
some new scheme of reconcilement; but through the
king's fickleness, the obstinacy of the clergy, or the in-
trigues of the courtiers, they all proved ineffeaual.
Both parties appealed to the people, and by reciprocal
and exaggerated acrufations endeavoured to render
each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were
the crimes with which James charged the clergy, while
they made the pulpits resound with complaints of his
extensive lenity towards papifls, and of the no less ex-
ceffive rigour with which he oppressed the established
church. Exasperated by their bold invecives, he, at
last sentenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and
to rcfide there during his plealure; and once more com-
manding the members of the standing council to depart
from Edinburgh, he required ail the ministers in the
kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to sub-
mit, in the fame manner as other fubjess, to the juril-
diciion of the civil courts in matters of a civil nature.

This decisive measure excited all the violent passions

which possess disappointed fafions; and deeds no lel;
violent iamediately followed. These must be imputed
in part to the artifices of some courtiers, who expected
to reap advantage from the calamities of their country
or who hoped to lessen the authority of the Ostavians,
by engaging them in hostilities with the church. On
one hand, they informed the king, that the citizens of
Edinburgh were under arms every night, and had plant-
ed a strong guard round the houles of their minitiers.
James, in order to put a stop to this imaginary insult on
his government, issued a proclamation, commanding
twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave the town
within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to
the m'niflers advising them to look to their own iafety,
as Huntly had been secretly admitted to an interview

with the king, and had been the author of the severe
proclamation against the citizens of Edinburgh §. They
doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than
the king had done of that which he received, and fell
as blindly into the snare. The letter came to their
hands just as one of their number was going to mount
the pulpit. They resolved that he should acquaint the
people of their danger: and he painted it with all the
Irongeft colours which men naturally employ in defcrib-
ing any dreadful and inflant calamity. When the ser-
mon was over, he delired the nobles and gentlemen to
affcmble in the Llitle ChJtrch. The whole multitude,
terrified at what they had heard, crowded thither; thely
promised and vowed to Iland by the church; they drew
up a petition to the king craving the redrtfs of their
grievances, of which the clergy complained, and be-
feeching him to deliver them froin all future apprehen-
fious of danger, by removing such of his counfcllo-s as
were known to be enemies of the protcflant religion.
Two peers, two gentlemen, two burgeflfs, and two mii-
nifters, were appointed to present it. The king hap-
pened to be in the great hall of the tolbooth where the
court of ferfion bwas fitting. The manner in which the
petition was delivered, as well as its contents, offcnded
him. He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners insist-
ed with warmth; and a promiscuous multitude prefing
into the room, James retired abruptly into another ;a-
partment, and commanded the gates to be shut behind
him. The deputies returned to tile multitude, who
were ftiil afle:mbled, and to whom a miniit.lr had been
reading, in their abfenice, the lury of Haman. XVlin

§Thou-.h matters were induftriou:fl aggravated by

persons, who wished both parties to pursue- violent nea-
lurcs, neither of these reports was altogether destitute
of foiindation. As their minilters were luppofd to be
in danger, some of the more zealous citizetls had dettr-
nlined to defetd them by force of arms. Birch, Merm.
ii. ,o. Iithmtly had been privately in Edinlurgil,
where he had an intervi-:w, iv not with the king, at
::-ll with lomni oi lhis n,iilftcrs. B3irchl, Ibid. 30o.

they reported that the king had refused to liften to their
petitions, the church was filled in a moment with noise,
threatenings, execrations, and all the outrage and con-
fusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms,
some to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried,
" The fwordof the Lord and of Gideon;" and rulhing
out with the most furious impetuosity, surrounded the
tolhooth, threatening the king himnfif and demanding
some of his counfcllors, whom they named, that they
might tear them in pieces. The magiftratcs of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to
quell the tumult; the king attempted to soothe the male-
contents, by promising to receive their petitions, when
presented in a regular manner; the miniflcrs feniible of
their own rafinefs in kindling such a flame, feconddl
both; and the rage of the populace subsiding as fiudden-
ly as it had risen, they all diJperfed, and the king return-
ed to the palace, happy in having escaped from an in-
furreCtion, which through the inflantaneous and uncol-
rerted effect of popular fury, had exposed his life to
imminent danger, and was confidered by him as an un-
pardonable affront to his authority .

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon-

tents assembled in order to prepare their petition. The
punishment of the popilh lords; the removal of thoiu
couinillors who were suspected of favouring their pcr-
nnr.s or opinions; the repeal of all the late ats of coun-
cil, fubverlive of the authority of the church; together
wvith an aCt approving the proceedings of the flanding
council; were the chief of their demands. But tlih
king's indignation was fliil so high, that the deputies
cholen for that purpose durfl not venture that night to
prefcnt requefls, which could not fail of kindling his
rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all his
attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session and
other courts of justice, were required to leave a city
wlhere it was no longer consistent either with their fatc-
y, or their dignity, to remain; and the noblemen and
* Spotfw. 417, &c. Cald. v. 54, &. Birch, Micm

ii. 235.

barons were commanded to return to their own holles,
and not to reaflcmble withcut the king's permission.
The vigour with which the king acted, firtck a damp
upon the spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, leln-
fible how much they would susser by his ahfcnce, and
the removal of the courts of juitice, repented already
of their conduct. The miniflers alone resolved to main-
tain the contest. They endeavoulred to prevcnt th.
nobles from dil'Jerfing; they inflamed the petple by
violent invectives against the king; thev la!)ured t;)
procure fubhcriptions to an affiriation for tlcir mutual
defence; and conlcious what luftrt and power the jun.-
tion of fibmc of the greater nobles would addl to tlir
cause, the miniflers of Edinburgh wrote to lord I.i-
mrilron, that the people, moved by tlt wM:-d of Ciod,
aldl provoked by the injuries offlred to the chur.'h, had
taken arms; that manv of tih nob;rs had, dcte:-riTnld
to proteel the proteitant religion, uhliih o'.vcd its
fiahliflh. 'nt to th. pretv and valour of til.i; anIC!hl';c
tliat thev wanted onlv a ea!der to unite litni., and to
inrfiire them with vigour; that his zt-al fr! the g:. !.
(aul", no lers tl:an his nblle hirthi, c:li'i J- him I that
holinur: thcv cuiIi.cd him, the.'ci'or, nilt to dlil;p-
point their hopes a:;d wish:;, nor ro refufi the li.fi'ririg
ch.irch that aid which the lo m.ch needed. I.ord la-
milton, inicad of conpl) inr with tlrilr desire, carricd
the letter dir'(tly to the king, wkl;rn this new i;.l' ll
irritated to filch a dtr-ee, that he ,oirmaincd the nia-
FilRrates of Edinburgh inftantiv to fiiz, their riitiitte-,
a r- ni 'ei incendiaies, anl i ico'loragers re recl.lio;i.
'liie iragiafli-ates, in crd;er to rigain :he lkii's favour,
x'. I-c prep-ring to obey; and the tr:nift-.rs whlu tw
I;t uther hit ne of Iafetv, fled to w

iards lEnl :nd l

Tl: unf (r cl .;'iil iilurreilion, iniltad of ovcrturning,

relabliihied the king's auhhl-ilt. ThIole on.crttd i1
it wl( Ic clnifoi.' iad and ('l'i-id. '.Andi th:l rilt of bis
tji. '.l, i, or!der to avoid :'fpi'ion, or to rai;n I;is f:.-
Vcur i ctnter ndd v:lIo fliould be iIolt r lturw d to xt;ilte

"oSpc. . C- . v. 1.6.
Vol. II. X

his vengeance. A convention of cltates being called'
pronounced the late insurrection to be high treason;
ordained everv minifier to fuhfi:ribe a declaration of hi'
fubmilfin to the king'sjurifdiiion, in all matters civii
and criminal; impoxuercd niagiftrates to comnlit, il-
flantly, to prison any nir.ifler, who, in his fermrii,,
ihould utter indecent rcflecions oil the king's crmond I:
prohibited any ecclesiastical juidicato. w to meet wi;i,.tt
the king's li tce; comlnantded that no perl;on flio.;!d
be elecr.d a nmagllrate of Edilil t-gl:, ir the fultl:-
without the king'. approbation ; and that, in thll:e n I.
time, the prt-fent magifirates ihould tither discover iit!'
infli cu:: 'ii;n punifimncnt on the authors of the !ail
tunutr, or the city itself ihould be subjected to all th
penatitic of that treatonable aCtio lt.

Armed vith the authori:v of thtfe dcrees, Jamrr'

resolved to crush er.tirelv the mutinous 'pirit of 1 i
fuhjeas As the cl(rgy had hitherto derived tllir
chief credit and ilrength from the favour anti zeal l!
the citizens of Edinburgh, this first care was to hnnl-
ble them. Though the magistrates filbmittcd to linir
in the mnoft abjeet terns ; though they vindicated thcn.-
iclves, and their ftllowu-citizcs, from the most di!l.;.
intentiin of violating his most roval lerrlbn or auti!o
ritv; tlough, afcr 'the flriEtel fcrutinv, no cirt !:m-
fla!l-es that co-id tix on them the suspicion of ;"''-
incdiated r-bellion had been difcovr:ed; though nla;.v
of the nchils and fuich of the cl:-rgy as ftiil rctai:l.,d
anv degre" of favour, interceded ii, ti.eir behal; 1'K.-
'lhtr .Lzknr.: ledgmtn:s nor interceiTions were of ti.r
Itaft avail .The king continued inexorable; the city
was dcclared to have forfeited its privileeges as a core-
ration, zn.d to be liihle to all the penalties of trealrn.
The capit-' of the kingdom, deprived of magiftratc:,
deterted by its ninifttrs, abandoned by the courts o:
iuflice, and proscribed by the king, remained in deio.
iation and despair. The courtiers even threatened to
raze the citv to the 'foundation, and to ere' a pil'i:
m!iLrc it fltodi, ae an e-erlafting monument oi .

.: C a d. V. 1 47. l'i Ibh:d. -v. i ').

king's vengeance, and of tle guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed
in their favour, and moved hy the cotillulal fblicita-
tions of the nobles, James ab(o!ved t ihe citizens from
the penalties of law, hut at thr fame time he itrl')ped
them of their moll important privil. :es; th.v were
neither allowied to elec their .ow.n niagilirates ncr their
own ministers; many new e:-dens were inrpofed on
them; and a great futm of money was exalted by way
of peace-offering if.

James was, mean while, equally assiduous, and no

less successful, in circumfcribinll the jurililiclioh of the
church. Experience had ds!t:overed that tn attempt
this, by adts of parliament, and sentences of privy -oun-
cil, was both inefFlcrtual and odious. lie had recourse
now to an expedient more artfil, and better cal.'ulated
for obtaining his end. The ecclesiastical judicatories
were composed of many members; the majority of the
clergy were extremely indigent, and unprovided .f le-
gal flipends; the ministers in the neighhourhood of
Edinburgh, notwithstanding the purity established by
the prefbvterian government, had aflilmcd a leading in
the church, which filled their brethren with envy
every numerous body of men is fiufleptible of fildden
and strong impreifions, and liable to be influenced, cor-
rupted, or overawed. Induced by these considerations,
James thought it poflible to gain the clergy, whom he
had in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were
set to work all over the kingdom; promises, flattery,
and threats, were employed; the usurpations of the
brethren near the capital were aggravated; the jealousy
of their power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different general as-
femblies were held, in both which, notwithstanding the
zeal and boldness wherewith a few leading clergymen
(defended the privileges of the church, a majority de-
clared in favour of those measures which were agree-
able to the king. Many practices, which continued

II Spotfw. 434, 444.

X

since the Reformation, were condemned; many points
of discipline, which had hitherto been reckoned sacred
and uncontroverted, were given up; the licence, with
which miniiters discoursed of political matters, was re-
strained; the freedom, with which they inveighed a-
gainft particular persons, censured; sentences of lum-
mary excommunications declared unlawful; the con-
voking of a general affemb!y without the king's pernirf-
sion, prohibited; and the right of nominating mini-
fiers to the principal towns, veited in the crown. Thus,
the clergy tlhcmfclves firrendered privileges, w;hich it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily
submitted to a yoke mr re intolerable than any James
would have veintured to impose by force; while thole
who continued to oppose his meaful-e;, inflead of tl.eir
former popular topic of the king's violent encroach-
ments on a jurif.-'tion which did not belong him. were
obliged to turn tieir outcries againit the corruptions Io
their own order --

B, ;i:e authll-ity of these general assemblies, the po-

pilh earls were allowed to make a public recantation
of their errors ; wrt- ahfnioved from the sentence of
excomlnunication; and received into the bofbn of tli
church. But, not minly years after, they relapsed into
their lnner erro-s, were again reconciled to the chuirh
of Rome, and by their apoltacy juft;fied, in some de-
gree, th- fca;'s and icruples of the clergy a ith regard
to theis ahfolution.

The mi;l.ters of Edinburgh owed to the intercJfiio

of thcfr aflcirblies the liberty of returning to their
charges in the city. But this liberty was clogged in
fich a manner as greatly abridged their power. The
city was divided into difrind parishes; the number ui
ministers doubled; perlbrs on whole fidelity the king
could rely wertefixed in the new parifbes; and thrle
circumfiancts, added to the authority of the late de.
crets of tile church, contributed to confirm that aboiliitt
dominion in ecclesiastical affairs, whicl James plofitEis
during the reinaindcr of his reign.

*Sjt';.w. -,j.- Cald. v. 189, 23.;

The king was so intent on new modelling the

church, that the other. tranfacions of this period scarce
deserve to be remembered. The OCtavians, envied by
the other courtiers, and splitting into fadions among
themlelves, reigned their commlifflon; and the admi-
niftration of the revenue returning into its former
channel, both the king and the nation were deprived
of the benefit of their regular and frugal economy.

Towards the end of the year a parliament was held,

in order to restore Huntly and his aflociates to their
cflates and honours, by repealing the act of forfeiture
palTed againtt them. The authority of this supreme
court was likewise employed to introduce a farther in-
novation into the church; but, conformable to the
fvltem which the king had now adopted, the motion
for this purpose took its rife fiom the clergy thenlfclvcs.
As the act of general annexation, and that eftablilhing
the prefbvterian government, had reduced the few
biihops, who Rill lurvived, to poverty and contempt;
as those who potiefied the abbeys and priories were
mere laymen, and many of them temporal peers, few
or none of the ecclesiastical order remained to vote in
parliament, and, by means of that, lth influence of
tilr crown was conliderably diminished there, and a
proper balance to the power and numbner of the nobles
vwas wanting. But the prejudices the nation had con-
crived against the name and character of bilhops were
so violent, that James was obliged, with the utmost
care, to avoid the appearance of a dcfign to revive
that order. He prevailed therefore on the comiuflll on
appointed by las afcemhly to complain to the pariia-
ment, thar the church was the on'y body in the king-
don deltitute of its reprelcntativcs in that ilprinme
court, where it so nearlv concerned every order to have
lome, who were bound to defend its rights; and to
crave that a competent number of the clergy should be
admitted, according to ancient custom, to a feat there.
In compliance with their requeRt, an ad was pailedl, by
w\tlKhl thoule miinifter-, on whom the king flIould, confer
the vacant bi(hoprlcs and abbeyv, c'ri; cntitlcd to a

X ,

vote in parliament; and that the clergy might conceive
no jealotify of any encroachment on their privileges, it
was rem;tt d to tlhe general aflemljly, to determine what
spiritual jurifdition or authority in the government ot
the church tl.rfe per-fos fbould pcfiefs -.

The king, hou ever, found it no cafy matter to ohtai:"

the cencurrence ot the ecclcfiatical judicatories, i,
v.hich the acd of parliament met with a fierce opplrli.
tion. Though the clergy perceived how Imuch hi'l;.:
this new privilege would refircl upon their old(r,
though they were not infernible of the great accefl.,,
of perfcnal power and dignity, which many of tl,;
would acqulir, hy being admitted into the fulpr,:,!w
council of the nation, their abhorrence of epicolopa,
was extreme; and to that they sacrificed every coil.-
deratiort of intereit or ambition. All the king's prof(:
sions of regard fur the present constitution ot the churci
did not convince Lhenl of his sincerity; all the devic(l
that could !e invented '.;r reflraining ant circunlfcrii-
ing the 'urifdiEtion of those who were to lie raifi(c! t
this new honour, did not diminish their jeal(,ily it.
fear. TI'hir own experience had taugit thenm, V;i;
what inillnuating progress the hicrarchy advances, a;i
thougli admitted at sir-s with moderate authlority, a:! i
iinder fpeciotis pretrnces, how rapidly it extenils i
di mini'nl. " Varnih over this i;-hemr,'' said o:, . '
the tlading clcryvn:en, c" -;ith what colotrs you pilt;.
at-k the i. er

t he i tbe utinnlt art; uniier all t' s

dii~::'i", I fee the honm of his initre " The i.Ine i.!-
tirierns prevail-d amung many of his brcthl.n, a,:
induced thenl ro rejei power and honotrs, wi:it s
rnurh zeal as ever thofc of their order courted themn. .:..-
nv, howe-ve-, -.ere allured by the hopes of preferriitl,!;
the kini: himself and his rrinife:-s er.tloved the famen
Ints, which they had tried so fuccefsful!y lait year; and
aftcr icng debates, and much oppofirion, the genera
afTernmbl declared that it was lawful for ministers !c
accep: us a feat in parliament, that it would be hig'r:;

, S.pc:F ·40.!'- P.

4o t.

- ; Jac.
P'. t . . :-..

beneficial to the church, to have its representatives ill
that fupreine court; and that fifty-one persons, a ntm-
ber nearly equal to that of the ecclesiastics who we re
anciently called to parliament, should be chosen firbn
allonsg the clergy for that purpose. The manlnerl of
their election, together with the powers to be veiled in
them, were left undecided for the prefcnt, and furiifdl-
ed matter of future deliberation t.

As the profpeit of succeeding to the crown of Eiug-

laud drew nearer, James multiplied precautions in or-
der to render it certain. And as he was allied to many
of the princes of Germany by his marriage, he font
ambassadors extraordinary to their several courts, in
order to explain the juflncfs of his title to the English
throne, and to desire their affillance, if any competitor
fliould arise to dilpute his undoubted rights. These
princes readily acknowledged the equity of his claim;
but the aid they could afford him was diflant and fee-
hle. At the fame time, Edward Bruce, abbot of Kin-
loss, his ambaflador at the English court, solicited Eli-
zabeth, with the urmnoit warmth, to recognize his title
h? Ibme public deed, and to deliver her own subjects
iromn the calamities which are occasioned by an uncer-
:;in or disputed fucelfiort. But age had strengthened
ail the pallions wlsihli had hitherto induced Elizabeth
1 e: keep this great quellion obscure and undecided; and
a general and evasive answer was ail that James could
iobtain. As no impretlion could be made on the queen,
ihe amlbaffador was commanded to found the diliofi-
tiin of lher subjects, and to try swiat progress lie could
iiike ill gaining them. Bruce poffcfled all the talents
oi fccrecv, judgmnent, and address, requisite for con-
ssiliting a negotiation no Itss delicate, than important.
i nilinifier- of this character was intitlcd to the confi-
'.Il e of the Englifr. Many of the ilighelt rank un-
,olomlned themselves to him without reserve, and gave
him repeated alfirancec of their resolution to assert his
im.,ler's right, in opipofition to every pretender t. And
,. i:eral pamplilllcts were dispersed, at this time, in

S'u'tl\ve 4;3. Cald. v. 27 tJolhift. ^242.

England, containing objections to his title, James em-
ployed some learned men in his kingdom to answer
these cavillers, and to explain the advantages which
would result to both kingdoms by the union of the
crowns. These books were eagerly read and contri-
buted not a little to reconcile the Englifl to that event.
A book published this year by the king himself, produ-
ced an effee fiill more favourable. It was intitled
fA;aflicn Doron, and contained precepts concerning the
art of government, addressed to prince Henry his son.
Notwithstanding the great alterations and refinements
in national taste since that time, we must allow this to
be no contemptible performance, and not to be inferior
to the works of molt contemporary writers, either in
purity of style or justness of composition. Even that
vain parade of erudition with which it abounds, and
which now disgusts us, raised the admiration of that
age; and, as it was filled with those general rules
which speculative authors deliver for rendering a people
happy, and of which James could difcourle with great
plausibility, though often incapable of putting them
in practice, the Englifl conceived a high opinion of his
abilities, and expected an increase of national honour
and prosperity, under a prince so profoundly skilled in
politics, and who gave such a specimen both of hi'
wisdom and of his love to his people %.

The queen of England's sentiments concerning

James, w-ere very different from those of her subjects.
iis excessive indulgence towards the popish lords; the
facility with which he pardoned their repeated trea-
sons; his restoring Beaton, the popish archbishop of
Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time
of the Reformation, to the poffcffion of the tempora-
lities of that benefice; the appointing him his ambarli-
dor at the court of France; the applause be h eflowerd,
in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
queen his mother; Elizabeth confidered as so many
indications of a mind alienated from the proteflant rc-
iigion; and fufpedeed that he would loon revolt from

Caiud Spotlw. 45 7.

the profession of it. These ful'picions seemed to be
fully confirmed by a discovery which came from the
Malter of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and
who, rather than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle,
demeaned himself so far as to a& as a spy for the English
court. He conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a letter,
written by James to pope Clement VIII. in which the
king, after many expressions of regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm re-
solution to treat the Roman catholics with indulgence;
and in order to render the intercoufe between the court
of Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he
lolicited the pope to promote Drummond, bishop of
Vailbn, a Scotsman to the dignity of a cardinal t. Eli-
zabeth who had received by another channelt, some
ilnperfec intelligence of this correfpondcnre, was fil-
led with jufl surprise, and immediately despatched
Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the
truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an ac-
tion so unbecoming a protestant prince. He was no
lrfs astonished at the accusation, and with a confidence,
which nothing but the conlfciolfilefs of innocence could
inlpire, affirmed the whole to be a mere calumny, and
the letter itself to he forged by his enemies, on purpose
to bl ing his sincerity in re:igion to be fufpecte d. El-
plinglton the fccretary of irate denied the matter with
equal tolemnity. It came to be known by a very fingu-
lar accident, which happened fort;e years after, that the
information which Eliz;abetl had received was well
founded, though at the tlme time the kmig's declara-
tions of his own innocence were perfelly confilent
with truth. Cardinal Bellarmnle, in a reply which he
pt blifhed to a controversial treatile, of which the king
was the author, accused him of having abandoned the
favourable lenthnents which he had once entertained of
the Ronman catholic religion, and as a proof of this,
quoted his letter to pope Clemenlt VIIl. It was
inipoflible, any longer, to helieve this to be a fie.
tion; and it was a nattrr too delicate to be passed over

t Ca!d 33. W in-.
V e Vm. vol. i. 37, 5 2.

without firict inquiry. James immediately examined
Elphingflon, and his confession unravelled the whole
melterv. He acknowledged that he had fhnfflcd in
this letter among other papers, which he laid before the
king to ire signed, who, fufpcring no such deceit, fib-
fcrihed it together with the reft, and without knowing
what it contained; that he had no other motive, how-
ever, to this acion,but zeal for his majcftlv' service: and,
by flattering the Roman catholics with hopes of indul-
gence under the king's government, he imagined that he
was paving his way for the more easy accession to the
English throne. The privy council of England entertain-
ed very different sentiments of the lecretary's condhil.
In their opinion, not only the king's reputation had hben
exposed to reproach, but his life to danger, by this raflh
imposture; they even imputed the gunpowder treaion
to the rage and disappointment of the papifls, upon
finding that the hopes which this letter inspired were
frustrated. The fecretarv was sent a prilbner into Scot-
land, to be tried for high treason. His peers found
him guilty, but, by the queen's intercession, he obtain-
ed a pardon t.

According to the account of other historians, James

himself was no stranger to this correspondence with the
pope; and, if we believe them, Elphingfton, being in-
timidated by the threats of the English council, and
deceived by the artifices of the earl of Dunbar, con-
cealed some circumstances in his narrative of this tranf-
aCtion, andfalfified others; and at the expence of his
own fame, and with the danger of his life, endeavour-
ed to draw a veil over this part of his mailer's con-
dut *.

But whether we impute the writing of this letter to

the secretary's officious zeal, or to the king's com-
mand, it is certain, that, about this time, James was at
the utmost pains to gain the friendship of the Roman
catholic princes, as a necessary precaution towards fa-
cilitating his accession to the English throne. Lord
j Spotfw. 456, 507. Johnft. 448. * Cald. vol. v. 322.

vi. 147.

Home, who was himself a papist, was entrustcd with
a fecrct commiflion to the pope ¶; the archbishop of
;lalgow was an aEtive infirument with thole ol his
mvn religion *. The pope exprefled such favourahle
; ntinments both of the king, and of his right to the
crown of England, that James thought himself bound,
!fine years after, to acknowledge the obligation in a
public manner 3. Sir Jarnes Lindsay made great pro-
reis in gaining the English papifls to acknowledge his
l;icfity's title. Of all thlee intrigues Elizabeth receiv-
,1 obli'tre ]ints from differcnt quarters. The more
impliclcfly fihe knew, the inore violently he fufpedced
the king's designs; and the natural jealousy of her

mnlper incrcafing with age, she observed his conduc
w ith greater solicitude than ever.

The qucflions with regard to the election and power
,f the reprcfientatives of the church, were finally decid-
ed this year at the general air'mblly, which met at
Montrose. That pl.ce was chosen as mlofl convenient
!or tht mlinillers ot the uorth, aimong whom the king's
inflicencc rhicfly lay. Andailthoughgreat numbers resort-
.'1 from the northrcrn provinces, and the king employed
!!iv whole interefi, atn tle authority of his own pre-
Itnict, to gain a nimajority, thec following regulations
were with difliculty agreed on: That the general as-
I'nibly ihall reconimend fix persons to every vacant
lhnefice, which gave a title t a a i.t in parliament, out
,t whom the king lhall nominiate one; that the person
:) ,lccted, after obtaining his feat in parliament, shall
n-ithlr propo!e nor coi.lent to any thing there, that
mny aifiet the intereit of tlir clhurch, without special
isflruStioiis to that pil-ole; that lie flall be answer,
.l!c for his conduic to ce cry gec'ral affnlibly; and flub-
niit to its ceiitre(, withont appal, upon pain of infa-
my and excommunl;icatio n ; that he shall tdiharge the
dlties of a paflor, in a particular congregation; that
c shall nr iifirp an er.'&f.iitical jiiili(liaion, superior
i), ti :t of hi;i otihr hrt-tl,'-l; tl.at if tile church in-

' \\"inw. Mtcm. v'r . ii 7- * Cald. vol. vi. 147.

(lii.!. \ol. v.6;.t.

fliC on him the censure of deprivation, he fiull thereby
forfeit his feat in parliament; that he ihall annually
resign his commission to the general afiembly, which
may be restored to him, or not, as the afTembly, with
the king's approbation, ihall judge most expedient for
the good of the church '. Nothing could be more re-
pugnant to the idea of episcopal government, than
thele regulations. It was not in consequence of rights
derived from their office, but of powers conferred by a
commission, ihat the ecclfiaftical persons were to be ad-
mitted to a feat in parliament; they were the reprcfcn-
tatives, not the flperiors of the clergy. Destitute of all
spiritual authority, even their civil jurililiiion was temn-
porary. James, however, flattered himnfelf that they
would soon be able to ihake off tllefe fetters, and gra-
dually acquire all the privileges which belonged to the
episcopal order. The clergy dreadled the hfme thing;
and he contended for, and they oppolcd the nominatinn
of these comn:ifiolrers, not so much on account of Ihe
powers then veiled in them, as of thoi; to which it .as
believed they would soon attain+t.

During this summer, the kingdom en.joyed an unufl-

al tranquillity. The clergy, after many firuggles, u cre
brought under great subjection; the popifn carls wcI-
restored to their estates and honours, by the authority
of parlia.ent, and i'th the conll:nt of the chulrch; the
reft of the nobles were at peace among thenml'lvcs, and
obedi-nt to the royal authority; when, in the miidft of
this fecur'tv, the kirg's life was expofli to the utr.clt
danger, by a conlfiracy al:ogether r.ilcxpccled, anr:
alnuft ir.rxpl;.lble. The authors of it were John Ru!h-
yen, earl of GCoowrie, and his brother Alexander, tht.
sons of that earl who was hche-.adt(l in the year l. Sl.
Nature had adorned both there young nien, efpccially
the eider brother, u ith many accomplihmrn-ts, to x il;ich
educaion had added its noi, elegant improvcnlecns.
More learned than is ufi.al ainong pcl sons of their rank;
more religious than i comiumon at their a.e of life; gc-

e 3r';-. 4 .
: -. Cald. v ol. v. 3g. _pctfw.. 454

nerous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far from
thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceiv-
ed the most fangulne hopes of their early virtues. Not-
withstanding all these noble qualities, some unknown
motive engaged them in a conlpiracy, which, if we
adhere to the account commonly received, mut be
transmitted to poftcrity, as one of the nloft wicked, as
well as one of the worlt concerted, of which history
makes any mention.

On the fifth of August, I6oo, as the king who re-

fided during the hunting feafln in his palace of Falk-
land, was going out to his sport earle in the morning,
he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruthven, who with
an air of great importance, told the king, that the
evening before, he had met an unknown man, of a sus-
picious afpe&, walking alone in a by-path, near his
brother's house at Perth; and on fearclling him, had
found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a vail quan-
tity of foreign gold; that he immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and, without communicating the
matter to any person, had kept him confined and bound
in a Iblitary house; and that he thought it his duty to
impart such a singular event first of all to his majeftv.
Jamnes immediately fufpeled this unknown person to
be a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin, in
order to excite new commotions in the kingdom; and
rctloved to imrpower the magiflrates of Perth to call the
perlbn before themc and inquire into all the circum-
ianr,'es of the itorv. Rutliven violently oppoled this
rcu!lltion, and with many arguments urgcd the king
to ride dircelHy to Perth, and to examilne the matttr
w! th his own eves. Mean while the chacc beg.ta';
and James. notwithflanding his palfion for that ainull'-
Irenr, could not help ruminating. O

upon the itrangtiic'lCf

of the tale, and on KRthven's iinportunity. At last he
,.:iled himu, and promisid him, when tihe lport was over
:o let out for i'erth. The chacc, however, continued
.ong; and Ru!hiven, who all the while kept cole by the
-:;n -, was itill calling on him to make hafle At the
l-a:ll of the buzk Lc would no: a!'ow James to flay
\e: 1L '

a frefn horse was brought him; and obfervidg the duke
of Lennox and the earl of Mar preparing to cdCompany
the king, he intreated him to countermand themn. This
James refused; and though Rothven's impatience and
anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation in his
whole behaviour, raised some suspicions iti his mind;
yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, pre-
vailed on him to set out for Perth. When within a
mile of the town, Ruthyen rode forward to inform his
brother of the king's arrival, though he had already de-
fpatched two messengers for that purpose. At a little
difiance from the town, the earl, attended by seVeral of
the citizens, met the king, who had onlo twenty per-
sons in his train. No preparations were tiade for the
king's entertainment; the earl appeared peiifive and
embarrafled, and was at no pains to atone, by his courte-
fy or hofpitalitv, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guefis. When'the king's repast was over, his at-
tendants were led to dine in another room, and he being
lefr almost alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was
the time to go to the chamber where the unknown per-
son was kept. James commanded him to bring fir
Thomas Erikine alcng with them; but, instead of that,
Ruthven ordered him not to follow: and conduc'ing
the king up a stair cafe, and then through several apart-
ments, the doors of which he locked behind him, led
him at last into a small fiudy, in which there flood a
man clad in armour, with a sword and dagger by his
fide. The king, who expected to have found one dif-
armed and hound, started at the fight, and inquired if
this was the person; but Ruthven snatching the dagger
from the girdle of the man in armonr, and holding it to
the king's breafi, " Reemember," said he, " how unjust-
"l y

my father sufferrd by your command; you are now

" my trifloner; submit to my disposal without refitance
" or outcry, or this dagger shall instantly avenge his

blood." James expoflulated with Ruthven, intreat-

ed, and flatte-ed him. The man whom he found in
the tfudy ftocd, all the while, trembling and dirmlayel,
w-itholut courge either to aid the king, or to fecund his
aggressor. Ruthver protested, that if the king railedt

no outcry his life liould be safe; and, moved by some
unknown reason, retired in order to call his brother,
leaving to the man in armour .the care of the king,
whom he bound by oath not to make any noise during
his abfeilce,

While the king was in this dangerous situation, his

attendants growing impatient to know whither he had
retired, one of Gowrie's attendants entered the room
hastily, and told them that the king hadjuft rode away
towards Falkland. All of them rushed out into the
street; and the earl, in the ntinoft hurry, called for
their horses. But by this timehis brother had returned
to the king, and swearing that now there was no reme-
dy, he must die, offered to bind his hands. Unarmed
as James was, he corned to submit to that indignity;
and closing with the assassin, a fierce struggle ensued.
The man in annour flood, as formerly, amazed and
nm)tionlefsi and the king dragging Ruthven towards a
window, which, during his ahfence, he had perluadetl
the perobn, with whom he was left to open, cried, with
a wild and affrighted voice, " Treason! Treason!
" Help! I am murdered!" His attendants heard, and
i;new the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand,
which grasped the king's neck with violence. They
flew with precipitation to his assistance. Lennox and
Mar, with the greater number, ran up the principal
flair-cafe, where they found all the doors hutt, which
they battered with the utmofl fury, endeavouring to
burst them open. But fir John lRamfay, entering by
a back-ltair, which led to the apartment where the
king was, found the door open; and ruffling upon
Ruthven, who was still (truggling with the king, struck
him twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the
flair-cafe, where fir Thomas Erskine and si Hlugh lier-
ries met, and killed him; he crying with his last breath,
"Alas! I am not to blame for this action." During
this scuffle, the man who had been concealed in the Itu-
dy escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsay, Er-
fkine, and Herries, one Willon, a footman, entered the
room where the king was, and before they had tinu

y

to shut the door, Gowrie ruihed in with a drawn sword
in each hand, followed by seven of his attendants well
armed, and with a loud voice threatened them all with
instant death. They immediately thrust the king into
the little"fludv, and ihutting the door upon him, en-
countered the e..-t. Notwithstanding the inequality of
numbers, fir John Ramsay pierced Gowrie through the
heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word;
his followers having received several wounds, immedi-
ately fled. Three of the king's defenders were like-
wife hurt in the conflict. A dreadful noise continued
fill at the opposite door, where many persons laboured
in vain to force a passage; and the king being as-
fured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other
friends, it was opened on the inside. They ran to the
king, whom they unexpectedlv found safe, with trauf-
ports of congratulations and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants around him, offered fblemn
thanks to God for such a wonderful deliverance. The
danger, however, was not yet over. The inhabitants
of the town, whose provost Gowrie was, and by whom
he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the houfc,
threatening revenge, with many insolent and opprobri-
ous speeches againfi the king. James endeavoured to
pacify the enraged multitude, by speaking to them
from the window; he admitted their magistrates into
the house; related to them all the circumfiances of the
fat; and their fury subsiding by degrees, they difperf-
ed. On searching the earl's pockets for papers that
might discover his designs and accomplices, nothing
was found but a small parchment bag, full of magical
characters and words of enchantment; and if we may
believe the account of the conspiracy published by the
king, " while these were about him, the wound of
" which he died bled not; but as soon as they were
" taken away, the blood gulhed gut in great ahun-
" dance." After all the dangerous adventures of this
bufv day, the king returned in the evening to Falkland,
having committed the dead bodies of the two brothers
to the custody of the magistrates of Perth.

Notwithfianding the minute detail which the king

gave of all the circumstances of this conspiracy againit
his life, the motives which induced the two brothers to
attempt an adion bs deteflable, the end they had in
view, and the accomplices on whose aid they depend-
ed, were altogether unknown. The words of Rutilven
to the king gave some grounds to think that the desire
of revenging their father's death had infligated them to
this attempt. But, whatever injuries their father had
suffered, it is scarcely probable that they could impute
them to the king, whose youth and fhujcction at that
time to the violence of a faiction exempted him from
being the objet of reenntmenit, on account of actions
which were not done by his commlland. James had e-
ven endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the father
had fufiered by benefits to his children; and Gowrrie
himself, sensible of his favour, had acknou ledged it with
the warmest expressions of gratitude. 'Ihree of the
earl's attendants, being convidted of affifling him in
this assault on the king's tlervants, were executed at
Perth; but they could give no light into the motives
i hicl had prompted their mailer to an ation sI repug-
nant to thele acknowledgemenets. Diligent search was
maide for the peTfun concealed in the lludy, and from
)iml great dilcovcries were expec'ted. But Andrew
Ilcnlderlon, the Lal l's fieward, who, upon a promise of
pard'in, cont.nTcd l:h.iplilf to be tht man, was as much a
ltraHger to his mailer's delign as the reft; and though
placed in the fludy by Gowrie's command, he did not
vten kno'w for what end that fiation had been assigned
hi.. 'I'he whole traufaStion remained as impenetrably
dark as ever; and the two brothers, it was con luded,
had coi.certid their l'chemc witijut either confident o;
ac omplice, witlh unexampled fccrlcy as weli as wki ked-

An accident, no less strange than the other circum-

fiances of the flory, and which happened nine years as-
'cr, diicovcred that this opinion, iiowever plaulible, was
i;i-f'lunded; and that the two brothers had not carried
La theLr mlachinatiops all alone. One Sprot, a notary.

Y3

having whispered among some persons, that he knew
some secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy-
council thought the matter worthy their attention, and
ordered him to be seized. His confession waspartly vo-
luntary, and partly forced from him by torture. Ac-
cording to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman
of an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was privy
to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice in his
crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with Logan, in order to concert the plan of their opera-
tions; the earl had corresponded with him to the fame:
purpose; and one Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted
with the 'secret, and carried the letters between them.
Both Logan and Bour were now dead. But Sprot as-
firmed that he had read letters written both by Gowrie
and Logan on that occasion; and, in confirmation of
his testimony, several of Logan's letters, which a curio-
fity fatal to himself had prompted Sprot to teal from a-
mong Bour's papers, were produced'. These were
compared by the privy-council, with papers of Logan's
hand-writing, and the resemblance was manifest. Per-

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour,

another to Gowrie, and three of them without any di-
redtion; nor could Sprot dicover the name of the per-
son to whom they were written. Logan gives him the
appellation of Riibt Honctrable. It appears irom this,
however, and from other words in-the letter, Crom. 95.
that there were several persons privy to the confpiracv.
The date of the first letter is July iSth. Mr. Ruthven
had communicated the matter to Logan only five davs
before, Ibid. It appears from the original /immons of
fcrfaulturc against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he
had letters addressed to him with regard to a conipiracy
equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that
he could not read. " Jacobus Bour, literarum prorlus
ignarus, diaci Georgii opera in legendis omnibus lcriptis
ad eum missis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is al-
together strange; and nothing but the capricious charac-
ter of Logan can account for his choofing iuch a cotfi-
dent.

sons of undoubted credit, and well qualified to judge of
the matter, examined them, and swore to their authen-
ticity. Death itlelf did not exempt Logan from prose-
cution; his bones were dug up and tried for high trea-
fun, and by a sentence equally odious and illegalt, his

t By the Roman law, perlbns guilty of the crime of

high treatbn might be tried even after death. This
pratice was adopted by the Scots, without any limita-
tion, Parl. I54o, c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of
this power was loon conceived to be dangerous; and the
crown was laid under proper reftriations, by an act
A. D. 1542, which has never been printed. The words
of it are, " And because the said lords (i. e. the lords of
articles) think the said a& (viz in 1540) too general, and
prejudicial to the barons in the realm, therefore statutes,
and ordains that the said a&t ihall have no place in time
coming, but againit the heirs of them that notoriously
commit, or ihall commit lete majeity against the king's
perlbn, againlt the realm for averting the fame, and a-
gainfi them that shall happen to betray the king's army
allenarly, and being notoriously known in their time;
and the heirs of these persons to be called and judged
within five years after the decease of the said perlbns
committers of the said crimes; and the said time being
hypafi, the said heirs never to be pursued for the fame."
The sentence againil Logan violated this statute in two
particulars. Ile was not notourly known during his life
to be an accomplice in the crime for which he was tried;
and his heir was called in question more than five years
after his death. It is remarkable that this statute leems
not to have been attended to in the parliament which
forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance deserves
notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no perlon can
be tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious
of their forms, and often absurd in their devices for pre-
serving them, they contrived that in any process against
a dead person, his corple or bones fliall be prtcented at
the bar. Examples of this occur frequently in the Scot-
tifh hiitory. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead bo-
dy of the earl of sluntly was presented in parliatmenu,

lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared infa-
mous. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for mifpri.
sion oftreafon. He adhered to his confession to the last,
and having promised, on the fcpf'old, to give the fpecaa-
tors a sign in confirmation of tLe truth of what he had
deposed, he thrice clapped his hands after he was thrown
oflfthe ladder by the executioner'.

before sentence of fofa,,lture was pronounced against
him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie and
his brother were prefcrved, in order that they might be
produced in parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance
with the fame rule, were dug up. lIackenz Crimn.
Law, book i. tit. 6. § zz.

' It appears that archbishop Spotfwood was present

at the execution ofSprot t rom. I15. and yet he Lerms
to have given no credit to his discoveries. The malner
in which he speaks of him is remarkable. " Whctli,.
r,r not 1 should mention the arraignment and execution
of George Sprot, who suffered at Edinburgh, I aml
doubtful. His confession, though voluntary and con-
slant, carrying fmnall probability. The man depolftl,
&c. It seered to be a very fiction, and a mere inven-
tion of the man's own brain, fur ncither did he flicw
the Itner, nor could any wife man think that (ow ic,
who went about the treafoil lo f-crctiy, would lha'
commutiicated the matter to luch a man as Loganl v.xis
known to be." p. so'. Spotlftool could not he igir.-
rant of the iolemnitv with which Luigan haid lbce; trld,
and of the proof brought of theaut clluicityof his -tti; c-.
lie Limifelt was probably prf-lut in pa3iiinclii at ii.
trial. The earl of Dunbar, of wlhom he always i],:i, s
with the highest refpei, was the perion wilo dhil' ecd
the proccts againll Logan. Such a peremptory iLc!lara-
tion against the trutil of Sprot's evidence, notlwithllanl-
uin ail these circumllances is i'urprifiu. Sir 1'l ons
Hamilton, the kilEg's advocate at th.At timne, and aitr;-
wards earl of iaddmlrgton, reprofel:s the pirooif :':cicc'i
at Logan's trial as extrnmlty convincing, .n;d in an o:-
ginal lctier of his to 1l.c k';:'g, the gift o: J ;ne icg, i:;

But though it be thus unexpetedly discoverer that

Gowrie did not a& without afrociates, little additional
light is thrown by this discovery on the motives and in
tention of his conduct. It appears almost incredible
that two yonng men of such distinguished virtue should
revolt all at once from their duty, and attempt a crime
so atrocious, as the murder of their sovereign. It appears
flill more improbable that they ihould have concerted
their undertaking with so little foresight and prudence.
If they intended that the deed Ihould have remained
concealed, they could not have chosen a more improper
scene for executing it than their own house. If they
intended that Henderson should have itruck the blow,
they could not have pitched on a man more deflitute of
the courage that miift direct the hand of an afa ffin; nor
could they expeet that he, unsolicited, and unacquainted
with their purpose, would venture on such a delperate
acion. If Ruthven meant to stab the king with his
own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it
was pointed at his breast? How could he leave the king,
after such a plain declaration of his intention? Was it
not prepoflerous to commit him to the keeping of filch
a timid and false associate as Henderson? For what pur-
pose did he waste time, in binding the arms of an un-
armed man, whom he might ealily have despatched with
the sword? Had Providence permitted them to emhrue
their hands in the blood of their sovereign, what advan-

Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the manner in
which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on:

" When the probation of the filmmons was referred

to the lords of articles votes, they found uniformly all
in one voice, the said summons to be lo clearly proved,
that they teemed to contend who should be able molt
zealously to express the satisfaCtion of his heart, not on-
ly by the most pithy words, but by tears of joy; diverse
of the best rank confessing, that that whereof they doubt-
ed at their entry into the house was now so manifest,
that they behoved to esteem them traitors who should
any longer refuse to declare their assured resolution of
the truth of that treason."

tage could have accrued to them by his death? and
what claims or pretensions could they have opposed to
the rights of his children* ? Inevitable and instant ven-
geance, together with perpetual infamy, were the on-
ly consequences they could exped to follow such a
crime.

On the other hand, it is impossible to believe that the

king had formed any design against the life of the two
brothers. They had not incurred his indignation by
any crime; and were in no degree the objects ofhisjca-
lousy or hatreds; nor was he of a spirit so sanguinary,

It has been aflerted, that in confcquence of the king's

death, the earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the
crown of England, as the Ion of Dorothea Stewart,
daughter of lord Methven by Margaret of England,
who, after her divorce from the earl of Angus, took
that nobleman for her third husband. Burnct, Hill. of
his own Times. But this assertion is ill founded. It
appears, from undoubted evidence, that lord Methven
had only one child by queen Margaret, which died in
its infancy, and Dorothea lady JRuthven was not the
daughter of queen Margaret, but of Janet Stewart, lord
Methven's second wife, a daughter of John earl of A-
thol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had real-
ly been delended from the blood-royal of England, the
king at that time had a son and a daughter: and besides
them, lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles earl
of Lennox, had a preferable title to the crown of Eng-
lard.

+ Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Win-

wood, imputes the death of the two brothers to a cause
not mentioned by any of our hiflorians. " Out of Scot-
land e hear tr'at there is no good agreement, but ra-
ther an open diffidence betwixt the king and his wife,
and many are of opinion that the difcovcry of some as-
fe&tion between her and the earl of Gowrie's brother
(who was killed with him) was the truer cause and mo-
tive of that tragedy." Winw. Mern. vol. i. 274. Whe
ther the following passages in Nitholfon's letter be any
confirmation of that fuipicion, is fubtlntted to the read-

or so noted for ra(h and clefperate valour, as to have
attempted to murder them in their own house, where
they were surrounded with many domestics, he only
with a slender and unarmed train; where they could
call to their assistance the inhabitants of a city, at the
devotion of their family, while he was at a distance
fiom all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for
his aflbciates in such an enterprise, the earl of Mar and
the duke of Lennox, the former connected in close
friendihip with the house of Gowrie, and the latter mar-
ried to one of the earl's filters.

Whichlbever of these opposite fvftems we embrace;

whether we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie
or to the king, insuperable difficulties arile, and we are
involved in darkness, myltery, and contratiction. P.r-
haps the lource of the whole confpiracv ought to be
searched for deeper, and b1 deriving it from a more re-
mote canfe we may dlilfover it to he less criminal.

'To keep the king of Scots in continual dependence,

was one great object of )lizalcth'a poliyv. In order to
this, the sometimes soothed him, and sometimes bribed

er. In his letter, Sept. zz, 16oa, he mentions the return
of Gowrie's two younger brothers into Scotland, and
adds, " The coming in of there two and the queen of
Scots dealing with them, and fending away and fur-
nifhing Mrs. Beatrix [their sift r] with fiuch informatinn
as fir Thomas Erlbine has given, bath bred great filui-
cion in the king of Scots, that they came not in hut up-
on some dangerous plot." In another letter, January
I, 160o. " The clay of writing my last, Mrs. Beatri:
Ruthven was brought by the lady Paifly and Mrs. or
Angus, as one of their gentlewomen, into the court in
the evening, and !towed in a chamber prepared for her
by the queen's direcAiol, where the queen had mniuch
time and conf'icncre with her. Of this the king got no-
tice, and fl(wed his dislike thereof to the queen, gently
reproving her fur it, andexaniniiiing quietly of the queens
servants of the fltme, and of ether matters thereunto be-
longing, wibh fi:lh difi'retion and lecrccv as requlres
!i':h a ma;r."

his ministers and favourites; and when ihe failed of at-
taining her end by these means, she encouraged the
clergy to render any administration which ihe difirult-
ed unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up some fafion
of the nobles to oppose and to overturn it. In that
fierce age, men little acquainted with the arts of under-
mining a ministry by intrigue, had recourse to the rud-
er practice of rendering thcmfelves masters of the king's
person, that they might thereby obtain the direction of
his councils. Those nobles, who seized the king at the
Rard of Rutbhe n, were intfigated and supported by her.
Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her protec-
tion, and when they mifoarried, he was secure of retreat
in her dominions. The connexions which James had
been forming of late with the Roman catholic princes,
his secret negotiations in England with her fubjeds,
and the maxims by which he governed his own king-
dom, all contributed to excite her jealoufv. She dread-
ed Ibme great revolution in Scotland to be approaching,
and it was her intcrest to prevent it. The earl of Gow-
rie was one of the most powerful of the Scottish nobles,
and descended from anceflors warmly attached to the
English intereiL He had adopted the fame fyitem, and
believed the welfare of his country to be inleparably
connected with the subsistence of the alliance between
the two kingdoms. During his relidence at Paris, he
had contracted an intimate friendship with Sir Hlenry
Nevillc, the queen's ambassador there, and was rc'rnl-
mended by him to his court, as a perfun of whom .g:l at
use nighc be made. Elizabeth received hiln, as he pai-
fed through England, with diffinguiflxed marks ol rc-
lpect and iavour. From all these circumitances a luipi-
cion may arite, that the plan of the conlpiracy againit
the king was formed at that time, in concert wvith her.
Such a fulpicion prevailed in that age, and front the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland i.
appears not to be defitute of foundation. An En:.i;! it
ihip was observed hovering, for tome time, in the nmoutli
of the frith of Forth. The earl's two younger brothers
fled into England after the ill fucccl- ot the conspiracy.
:iwd were protected by Elizabcth. i.:n.- ini.

he prudently concealed it, took great umbrage at her
behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's intrigues
in Scotland tended to hurt the king's person, but only
to circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his s'chermes.
His life was the surest safeguard of her own, and rc-
firained the popish pretenders to her crown, and their
abettors, from desperate attempts, to which their impa-
tience and bigotry might, otherwise have urged thein
on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his so-
vereign, would, on her part, have been an as of the
utmost imprudence. Nor does this seem to haXe been
the intention of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven, first
of all, endeavoured to decoy the king to Perth, without
any attendants. When these proved more numerous
than was expected, the earl employed a stratagem in
order to separate them from the king, by pretending
that he rode away towards Falkland, and by calling
hastily for their horses that they might follow him. By
their shutting James up, mean while, in a distant corner
of the houle, and by attempting to bind his hands, their
design seems to have been rather to seize than to affaffi-
nate him. Though Gowrie had not collectedhis fol-
lowers in such numbers as to have been able to detain
him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom, by
open force he might soon have been conveyed aboard the
Englilh ship, 'which waited perhaps to receive him, and
he might have been landed at Faft-caitle, a houie of Lo-
gan's, in which, according to many obscure hints in his
letters, some rendezvous of the conspirators was to be
held. Amidst the surprise and terror, into which the
king muit have been thrown by the violence offered to
him, it was extremely natural for him to conclude that
his life was fought. It was the interest of all his follow-
ers to confirm him in tris belief, and to magnify his dan-
ger, in order to add to the importance and merit of their-
own services, Thus his fear, and their vanity, aided
by the credulity and wonder which the contemplation
of any great and tragical event, when not fully under-
food, is apt to inlpire, augmented the whole tranfac-
tion. On the other hand, the extravagance and imprgc
Vol. l, 'Z

babilitv ofthecircumftanceswhich wereadded, detracted
from the credit of thofewhich really happened; and even
furnished pretences for calling in question the truth of
the whole conspiracy.

The account of what had happened at Perth reach-

ed Edinburgh next morning. The privy-council com-
manded the minitlers of that city instantly to assemble
their people; and after relating to them the circum-
fiances of the conspiracy formed against the king's life,
to return public thanks to God, for the protection
which ':e had so visibly afforded him. But as the first
accounts transmitted to Edinburgh, written in a hurry,
and while the circumnftances of the confpiracv were
but imperfetly known, and the passions which it ex-
cited ftronglv felt, were indiflincA, exaggerated, and
rontraditaorv, the mii.ilcers laid hold of this; and
though thev offcrl-d to give public thanks to God for
the king's lafety, they reftifed to enter into any detail
of particulars, or to utter from the chair of truth,
what appeared to be flill dubious and uncertain.

A few davs after, the king returned to Edinburgh,

and though Galloway, the minister of his own chapel,
made an harangue to the people at the public cross,
in which he recited all the circumstances of the con-
fpiracy; though James himfclf, in their hearing, con-
firmed his account; though he commanded a narrative
of the whole tranfadion to be published; the ministers
of that citv, as well as many of their brethren, fill
contirued incredulous and unconvinced. Their high
esteem of Gowrie, their jealoufv of every part of the
king's conducA, added to tome false and many impro-
bable circumtlances in the narrative, not only led them
to suspect the whole, hut gave their filfpicions an air
of credibility. But at length, the king, partly by argu-
ments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of them,
except Mr. R-bert Bruc. to owv.n that thrv were con-
vinced of the truth of the conlpiracy. He could be
brought no farthiT th:3i to declare, that he reverenced
the king's account of the tranlfacion, but could not
sav that he hnimftit was persuadeid of the truth of it.
iTh.- -:rJpics or ubitllia: of a liiigic man would have

been little regarded; but as the fame spirit of incredu-
lity began to spread among the people, the example
of one in so high reputation for integrity and abilities
was extremely dangerous. The king was at the utmoit
pains to convince and to gain Bruce; but finding it im-
possible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his
benefice, and after repeated delays, and many attempts
towards a reconcilement, banilhed him the kingdom.

The proceedings of parliament were not retarded by

any scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of the two
brothers were produced there, according to law; an in-
dicment for high treason was preferred against them;
witnesses were examined: and by an unanimous fen-
tence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the pu-
nilhment due to traitors was inflicted on their dead bo-
(lies; and, as if the punifhmcnt hitherto in use did not
express sufficient detestation of their crimes, the parlia-
ment enacltd that the surname of Ruthven ihould be
abolished, and in order to prelerve the memory of the
king's miraculous escape, and to declare the sense which
the nation had of the divine goodness to all future ages,
appointed the fifth of August to be oblerved annually,
as a day of public thanklgiving*.

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers,

the king published a discourse of their vile and unnatu-
ral conspiracy agailnf his life. In the year 171;,, George
earl of Croinaric publilhed an " Hiltorical account of
the confpiracv by the earl ot Gowrie, and Robert Lo-
gan of lRftalrig, against king James VI." He eiemns net
to have leen the account which the king himlelf had
given ot that matter, and borrows the whole hiltorical
part from Spotfwood and other authors; but he has cx-
tracted from'the public records the depolitions of the
witnfl'es produced by the king's council, in order to
make good the charge againit the two brother., and
Logan their aflociate. Fromn thefr two treatilrs our
knowledge of all the material circumnlanccs of the con-
fpiracy is derived. The evidence whil they contain
one would exped to be authentic and dccilivc. An ac-

' 2,

Though Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden

and a great alarm, it was followed by no consequences

count of a fa&, still recent; published by royal authori-
ty, and the original depositions of persons examined in
presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to con-
vey a degree of evidence seldom contained in historical
relatipns, and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncer-
tainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfac-
tion is dark and problematical, the king's account and
the depofitioris of the witnesses not only vary but con-
tradict each other, in so many circumitances, that much
room' is still left for hesitation and hiflorical scepticism.
The teflimony of Henderson is the fullest and most im-
portant; but in several particulars the king's account
and his are contradi&ory. I. According to the king's
account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the dagger at
his breast, " the fellow in the study flood quaking and
trembling.' Disc. 17. But Henderson fays that he
himself wrested the dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's hands.
Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boasted to his
wife that he had that day twice saved the king from
being tfabbed. Diif. 54. Crom. 53. 11. The king
a;Terts that Henderson opened the window during Mr.
Ruthven's absence, Disc. 25. Henderson deposes, that
he was only attempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven
returned, and that during the struggle between the
king and him, he opened it. Disc. 53 54. Crom.
5 1, . III. If we may believe the king, the fellow in
the fudy flood, during the straggle, behind the king's
hack, inacive and trembling all the time. Disc. z7.
But Henderson affirms, that he snatched away the gar.
ter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the
king; that he pulled back Mr. Ruthven's hand, while
he was endeavonring to flop the king's mouth, and
that he opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52.
1V. By the king's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in
the study, and went away in order to meet with his
brother, and that the earl came up the flairs for the
fame purpose. Disc. 2;. Henderson deposes, that
w hen Mr. Ruth-en left the king, " he believes that he

of importance, and having been concerted by the two
brothers, either without any associates, or with such as
were unknown, and chose to remain so, the danger
was over as soon as discovered. But not long after, a
conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth,
which, though the first danger was infiantly dispelled,

did not pals from the door." Crom. 5r. It is appa-
rent both from the situation of the house, and from
other circumstances that there could not poflibly have
been any interview between the brothers at this time.
Dire. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland be-

fore the privy-council in August, and next at Edinburgh
before the parliament in November. Not to mention
some lesser variations between these depositions, we flall
point out two which are remarkable. In his firit depo-
fition, Mr. Henderson relates the mofi material cir-
cumftance of the whole in there words; " Mr. Ruthven
pulled out the deponent's dagger, and held the fame to
his majesty's breafL, faying, " Remcinber you of my fa-
tlr 's murder; you Jball nowe diefor it:" and pointing to his
bighnefs's heart with the dagger, the deponent, threw
the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hands, and lIvrore, that
as God should judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had
retained the dagger in his hand, the fiace a man may
go fix lteps, he would have firicken the king to the
hilts with it." Disc. 52. But at his second examina-
tion he varied firom this in two material circumfiances,
First, the words he at that time put in Mr. Ruthvein'
mouth while he held the dagger at the king's breast,
are, " Sir. you Iujf be -my prijoner; remerrber on myfathr
death.' Secondly when he threatened him with death,
it was only to deter him from making any noise,
" Holdyour tongue, or by Cbri/f youjfall de 2. In his
firfl deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven, when lie
returned to the chamber where he had left the king,
are, " There is no remedy, by God you tnuj aie." But in
his second deposition, " By God there is no remedy,
snd offered to bind his majeft)'s hands." Crqm. s5.

7, S3

produced tragical effeats, that rendered the close of
that queen's reign dismal and unhappy. As James was
deeply interefied in that event, it merits our particular
notice.

The court of England was at this time divided be-

tween two powerful factions, which contended for the
supreme diretion of affairs. The leader of the one
was Robert D'Evreux, earl of Effex; Sir Robert Cecil,
the son of lord trealurer Burleigh, was at the head of
the other. The former was the most accomplished and
the most popular of all the English nobles; brave, ge-
nerous, affable; though impetuous, yet willing to liften
to the counsels of those whom he loved; an avowed,

the material words you muJf die are omitted. The first
depopition seems plainly to intimate that it was Ruth-
ven's intention to murder the king. The second would
lead us to conclude that he had no other design than to
detain him as a prisoner.

There are iikcwife some remarkable contradictions

in the testimonies of the other witnesses. i. In the dil-
eourfe publifihed by authority, it is insinuated that the
:u:nult of the inhabitants was raised againil the king,
aind that it required some art to pacify them. Disc. 3z.
The duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition.
Crom. 44. An ad of privy-council lilmmoning the ma-
giftrates of Perth to aniwer for that riot is still extant.
And vet Andrew R*oy, one of the bailies of the town,
deposes that he himfclf raised the people, and that they
took arms in order to afiift the king. Crom. 66. 2.
Henderson deposes, that he gav;e an evalive aniwer to
Mr. John Moncrief, who enquired where he had been
i-hat imorning, becanfe the earl had commanded hiil
:ot to let any man know that he had been at Falkland.
Dilc. j4. lonlcrief deposes to the fame purpose. Croim.
64. And vet George Hay, afterwards lord Kinnoil,
and cl:a::cel!hr of( Scotland, and Peter llay, depo!c,
that the c-r!, in their praf:nce, alked Henderl:i,
:' WVhoil lie fcnd thh the king at Falkland?" Cronl.

o,. \'7t .ich i :z:flion fiems to prove that he did nou
.. -r k:.';;' !' * :'.1. ; oLre X a ;c.rct.

but not an implacable enemy; a friend no less conflant
than warm; incapable of dilguifing his own sentiments,
or of misrepresenting those of others; better fitted for
the camp than for the court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the firit place in the administration,
with a spirit which scorned the Tecond as below his
merit. He was soon diftinguiihed by the queen, who,
with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred on him,
even in his earliest youth, the highest honours, and
mofl important offices. Nor did this diminish the e-
fteem and affe6tion of his countrymen; but, by a rare
felicity, he was at once the favourite of his fovtreign,
and the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
hand, educated in a court, and trained under a father
deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, insinuating, in-
duftrious; and though pofiefied of talents which fitted
him for the highest offices, he did not rely upon his
merit alone for attaining them, but availed hiinllilf of
every advantage, which his own addrels, or the mil-
takes of others afforded him. Two such men were
formed tb be rivals and enemies. Esi'x defpilcd the
arts of Cecil as low and base. To Cecil the earl's,
magnanimity appeared to be prelumption and folly.
All the military men, except Raleigh, favoured EfIfx.
Moit of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whole manners
more nearly resembled their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the flruggle between

these factions became more violent. Eflex, in order
to strengthen hirmlelf, had early courted the friend(hiip
of the king of Scots, for whole right of fucccfT.on lie
was a zealous advocate, and held a close correfpuindcnce
both with him and with his principal miniliters, Ce-
cil, devoted to the queen alone, role daily to new ho-
nours, by the assiduity of his services, and the patience
with which he expected the reward of them; while
the earl's high spirit and impetuosity Ibmctiries ex-
ptpife him to checks from a miltrcls, who, though par-
tial in her affection toward him, could not ealily bear
contradiction, and conferred favours often unwillingly,
and always ilowly. -His own bolicitations, however,
Icc:ndcd nialicioufly by his enemies, who wilhed t'

remove him at a distance from court, advanced him to
the command of the army employed in Irelanl against
Tyronne, and to the office of lord lieutenant of that
kingdom with a commission almost unlimited. His
forcess in that expedition did not equal either his own
promises, or the expeiations of Elizabeth. The queen,
peeviih from her disappointment, and exasperated a-
ginft Effex by the artifices of his enemies, wrote him
a harsh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
Thcfe his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the firfl
transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over
a part of his army into England, and by driving his
enemies from the queen's presence, to reinltate himself
ia favour and in power. But, upon more mature
thoughts, he abandoned this rash dcfign, and, letting fail
with a few officers devoted to his person, landed in
England, and posted directly to court. Elizabeth re-
ceived him without any fympton either of affection or
of displeasure. By proper compliances and acknow-
kldgments, he might have regained his former ascendant
over the queen. But he thought himself too deeply in-
jured to submit to there. Elizabeth, on the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though
her severity drew from him the most humble letters,
ihe confined him to the lord keeper's house, and ap-
pointed commissioners to try him, both for his condu&
during his government of Ireland, and for leaving that
kingdom without her permilfion. By their sentence,
he was suspended from all his offices, except that of
mafler of the horse, and continued a prisoner during
ihc queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having mortified
his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not susser the sentence
to be recorded, and soon after allowed him to retire
to his own house. During these tranfadCions, which
occup:ed leveral months, Effex fluctuated between the
allegiance he owed to his sovereign, and the desire of
revenge; and Sometimes leaned to the one, and tome-
timei to :he other. In one of the intervals when the latter
prevai'ed, he sent a messenger into Scotland, to encourage
the king to alTert his own right to the succession by force
of arn.s, and to promise that, besides the afiftance ot

the earl and all his friends in England, lord Mountjoy,
now lord lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
five thousand from that kingdom. But James did not
choose to hazard the losing a kingdom, which wasjuft
ready to fall into his hands by a premature attempt to
seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise, and
Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts of
ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his
mind.

This moderation, which was merely the effect of

disgust and disappointment, was not of long continu-
ance; and the queen, having not only refused to renew
a lucrative grant which she had formerly bellowed, but
to admit him into her presence, that new injury drove
a temper naturally impatient, and now much fretted,
to absolute delpair. His friends, instead of oiothing his
rage or restraining his impetuosity, added to both by
their imprudent and interested zeal. After many anxious
confulta:ions, he determined to attempt to redress his
wrongs by violence. And conscious how unpopular
such an enterprise would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured
to give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the king of Scotland's interest with his own. He wrote
to James, that the facion which now predominated in
the English court had resolved to support the pretensions
of the infanta of Spain to the crown; that the places
of the greatest importance in the kingdom were put
into the hands of his avowed enemies; and that unlfs
he sent ambafladors, without delay, to assist on the im-
mediate declaration of his right of fuccefion, their mea-
fures were so well concerted, that all his hopes would
be desperate. James, who knew how disagreeable filch
a proposal would be to the queen of England, was not
willing rashly to expose himself to her displeasure. But
Effex, blinded by resentment, and impatient for re-
venge, abandoned himself to these passions, and Prted
like a man guided with frenzy and despair. With two
or three hundred followers incompletely armed, he at-
tempted to assault a throne the belt eftabliibed in Eu-
rope. Sallying at their head out of his own houe, he

called on the citizens of London, if they either valued
his life, or wilhed to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow
his standard. He advanced towards the palace with an
intention to drive Cecil and his facion out of the
queen's presence, and to obtain a declaration of the
ScottiLh king's right of succession'. But, though al-
most adored by the citizens, not a man would join him
in this wild enterprise. Dispirited by their indifference,
deserted by some of his own attendants, and almost fur-
rounded by the troops which marched under different
leaders into the city, he retreated to his own house;
and without any bold effort, suitable to his present con-
dition, or worthy of his former reputation for courage,
he surrendered to his enemies.

As boon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he ap-

pointed the earl of Mar, and the abbot of Kinlofs, to
repair as his ambassadors to the court of England.
The former of these was the person by whose means
Effex had carried on his correfpondcnce with the king.
lie was a passionate admirer of the earl's character, and
disposed to attempt every thing that could contribute
to his safety. Bruce, united in a close friendship with
Mar, was ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor
was the purpose of the embassy less friendly to Effex,
than the choice of his ambassadors; they were com-
manded to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the earl's
life, and if they found that the king, by avowing his
friends, could either promote their designs or contri-
bute to their safety, they were empowered to lay aside
all difguile, and to promise that he would put himself
at their head, and claim what was due to him by force
of arnmst. But before the ambassadors could reach
London, Effex had suffered the punishment which lie
merited by his treason. Perhaps, the fear of their in-
terpofing, in order to obtain his pardon, hastened his
death. Elizabeth, continued for some time, irresolute
concerning his fate, and could not bring herself to con-

*Bich, Me. ii. 77. tjohnt. 289. Birch.
Mer. ii.

510.

sign into the hands of the executioner, a man who had
once possessed her favour so entirely, without a painful
struggle between her resentment against his late mif-
condut, and her ancient affecftion towards him. The
distress to which he was now reduced, tended naturally
to soften the former, while it revived the latter with
new tenderness: and the intercession of one faithful
friend, might perhaps have saved his life, and have
procured him a remission, which, of hcrfelf, the queen
was athamed to grant. But this generous nobleman
had at that time no such friend. Elizabeth, solicited
incessantly hy her ministers, and offended with the
haughtiness of Effex, who, as she imagined, scorned
to sue for pardon, at last commanded the lrntcncc to
be put in execution. No sooner was the blow !-ruck
than she repented of her own ralhnefs, and hbewailled
his death with the deepest sorrow. james al.-ays con-
fidered him as one who had fallen a martyr to his icr-
vice, and, after his accession to the Englifn throne, re-
itored his son to his honours, as well as all hlid alilc;atts
in the conspiracy, and diilinguifhed tliem with his
favour *

The Scottish ambassadors, finding that they Itad ar-

rived too late to execute the chief business committed to
their charge, not only concealed that part of their in-
ftructions with the utnoft care; but congratulated the
queen, in their mafler's name, on her happy el-tape
from such an audacious conspiracy. Elizabhth, though
no stranger to the king's correfpondeice wi:;l Efli:x, yr
to that nobleman's intentions of asserting James s right
to the crown was not willing that tlirle should ie
known to thi - ople, and, for that realon, received the
congratulatio, of the Scottish ambassadors with all
possible marks of credit and good-will; and in order to
soothe James, and to preserve the appearances of' unii,
between the two courts, increafCle the fubtidy which
she paid him annually. The amhaffldors rclided ior
l'me time in England, and were empioyd(, A ith great

Camd. Spotlw. 464.

success, in renewing and extending the intrigues which
Bruce had formerly entered into with the Engliih no-
bles. As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English
turned their eyes more and more towards Scotland. and
were eager to prevent each other in courting the favour
of their future monarch. Assurances of attachment,
professions of regard, and promises of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom,
Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had found-
ed on the friendship of the Scottifi king, and what ad-
vantages he might have derived from it, thought it
prudent to stand no longer at a distance from a prince,
who might so soon become his master. But being fen-
fible at the fame time how dangerous such an inter-
course might prove, under a mistress naturally jealous,
and whose jealousy grew ftrouger with old age; though
he enter-d into a correspondence with him, he carried
it on with all the secrecy and caution, necessary in his
fituatien, and peculiar to his characer. And James
having gained the man whose opposition and influence
he had hitherto chiefly dreaded, waited in perfect fecu-
rity, till that event thould happen, which would open
his way to the throne of England. It was with some
difficulty, that he restrained within proper bounds his
adherents in that kingdom who, labouring to diftinguith
thcmfelves by that officious zeal with which a prince,
who has a near profpet of mounting the throne, is al-
ways served, urged him to allow a motion to be made
in parliament for declaring his right of succession to the
crown. James prudently discouraged that design; but
it was with no small fatisfa&tion that he observed the as-
cendent he was acquiring in a court whose didtates he
had been so long obliged to obey; and wfich had either
prescribed or thwarted every flep he had taken during
the whole course of his reign .

Norwithflanding the violent struggles of the political

fations which divided the court, and the frequent revo-
lItions which had happened there, since the king filrf
took the reins of government into his own hands, Scpzt-

'Spotfwr. 467, 471. Birch. Mem. ii. 514.

land had enjoyed unusual tranquillity; being undifturb-
ed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intefline
commotion of long continuance. During this period,
James endeavoured to civilize the Highlands and the
Isles, a part of his dominions almost totally neglected by
former monarchs, though the reformation of it was an
objeCt highly worthy of their'care. The long peace
with England had offered an opportunity of fubdiuing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restraining
their depredations, often no less ruinous to their coun-
trymen than to their enemies. The inhabitants of the
low country began, gradually to forget the use of arms,
and to become attentive to the arts of peace. But the
Highlanders, retaining their natural fierceness, averse
from labour, and inured to rapine, infested their more
industrious neighbours by their continual incursions.
James, being solicitous not only to repress their inroads,
but to render them useful fubjeats, had at different
times enaced many wife laws extremely conducive to
there ends. All landlords, or chiefs of clans, were en-
joined to permit no persons to reside on their eftatep,
who could not find fuffieient surety for their good beha-
viour; they were required to make a lift of all fufpici-
ous persons under their jurifdic6ion, to bind themfvlves
to deliver them up to justice, and to indemnify those
who should susser by their robberies; and in order to
ascertain the faithful performance of these articles, the
chiefs themselves were obliged to give hostages to the
king, or to put pledges in his hands. Three towns,
which might serve as a retreat for the industrious, and
a nursery for arts and commerce, were appointed to be
built in different parts of the Highlands; one in Can-
tire, another in Lochaber, and a third in the isle of
Lewis; and, in order to draw inhabitants thither, all
the privileges of royal boroughs were to he conferred
upon them. Find.rg it, however, to be no ealy matter
to in!pire the natives ofthofe countries with the love of
indultry, a relblution was taken to plant among them
colonies of people from the more industrious counties.
'1 he frft experiment wasmade in the ile of Lewis, and as

\L.. 1[. A a

it was advantagecufly situate for the fishing trade, a
fouree from which Scotland ought naturally to derive
great wealth, the colony transported thither was drawn
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well Ifilled
in that branch of commerce. But before they had re-
mained there long enough to manifest the good effecs
of this infiitution, the islanders enraged at feeing their
country occupied by those intruders, took arms and
lurprifing them in-the night-time, murdered some of
them, and compelled the reft'to abandon the fettlemrnt.
The king's attention being soon after turned to other
objects, we hear no more of this salutary proicc.
Though James did not pursue the design with that
fleady application and perseverance, without which it
is impossible to change the manners of a whole people,
he had the glory, however, not only of having first con-
ceived the thoughts, but of having first pointed out the
proper method of introducing the civil arts of life into
that part of the island.

After having long enjoyed a good state of health, the

effec1 of a found conffitution, and the reward of uncom-
mon regularity and temperance, Elizabeth began this
winter to feel her vigour decrease, andto be fenfille
of the infirmities of old age. Having removed on a
very flormy day from Westminster to Richmond, whe-
ther (he was impatient to retire, her complaints increaf-
ed. She had no formed fever; her pulse was good;
but fne eat little, and could not sleep. Her dileniper
seemed to proceed from a deep melancholy, which ap-
peared both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in solitude, she fat constantly in the dark; and
was often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the queen's indisposition known than

persons of all ranks, and of all different fees and par-
ties, redoubled their application to the king of Scots,
and vied with each other in professions of attach-
ment to his person,. and in promises of fubmiflion to hi;
government. Even some of her own servants, weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient
to get rid of the burden of gratitude for pals benefits,
and exptcit-ng to Ihare in the liberality of a new prii:re

began to desert her: and crowds of people hurried
towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the favour of
the fucceilor, or afraid of being too late in paying
homage to him.

Mean while, the queen's disease increased, and her

melancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable. Va-
rious conjecures were formed concerning the causes of
a disorder, from which she seemed to be exempted by
the natural chearfulnefs of her temper. Some imputed
it to her being forced contrary to her inclination, to
pardon the earl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for
many years created her much trouble. Others ina-
gined that it arose from observing the ingratitude of
her courtiers and the levity of her people who beheld
her health declining with most indecent indifference,
and looked forward to the acceflion of the Scottish
king, with an impatience which they could not con-
ceal. The most common opinion at that time, and
perhaps the most probable, was, that it flowed from
grief for the earl of Effex. She retained an extraor-
dinary regard for the memory of that unfortunate no-
bleman; and though she often complained of his ob-
ftinacv, seldom mentioned his name without tears *.
An accident happened soon after her retiring to Rich-
mond, which revived her affection with new tender-
ness, and embittered her sorrows. The counters of
Nottingham being on her death-bed, desired to fee the
queen, in order to reveal something to her, without
discovering which, (he could not die in peace. When
the queen came into her chamber, she told her, that
while Effex lay under sentence of death, he was delir-
ous of imploring pardon in the manner which the queen
herself had prescribed by returning a ring, which dur-
ing the height of his favour (he had given him, with a
promise that if, in any future diitrefs, he sent that
back to her as a token, it thould entitle him to her
prote6tion; that lady Scroop was the person he intend-
ed to employ in order to present it; that, by a mistake,

Birch, Mem. ii. 505.

a a

it was put into her hands inflead of lady Scroop's; and
that she having communicated the matter to her hus-
band one of Essex's most implacable enemies, he had
forbid her either to carry the ring to the queen, or to
return it to the earl. The counters, having thus dif-
closed her secret, begged the queen's forgiveness; but
Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice of the earl's
enemies, and how unjustly the had fufpeaed him of
inflexible obflinacy, replied, " God may forgive you,
but I never can," and left the room in great emotiont.
From that moment, her spirit funk entirely; she could
scarce taste food; The refused all the medicines prescribed
her by her physicians; declaring that the wilhed to die,

t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first pub-

lifhed by jfborne, Mem. of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed
by the teflimony of de Maurier, Mem. 260. and by
the traditional evidence of lady Elizabeth Spelman,
published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 1o6. Camden men-
tions the queen's grief for Essex's death as one of the
canses of her melancholy Some original papers re-
main, which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch. Mem. ii. 506. But Effex had been
beheaded two years before her. death, and there feenis
to have been no other reason, but that which we have
assigned, why her sorrow thould revive with so much
violence at so great a distance of time. As the death
of the countess ~f Nottingham happened about a
fortnight before the queen's death, the coincidence of
these events, together with the other evidence men-
tioned, adds so much probability to the story related
by Osborne, as will entitle it to a place in history.
The only objection to the account we have given of
Elizabeth's attachment to Eflex, arises from her great
age. At the age of 68, the amorous paflions are com-
monly abundantly cool, and the violence of all the
paflions, except one, is much abated. But the force of
this objection is entirely removed by an author who has
illustrated many paifages in the English history, and
adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and Noble Author!,
Article Effex.

and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail
on her to go to bed; (he fat on cushions during ten days
and nights, penlive and silent, holding her finger almost
continually in her mouth, with her eyes open and fixed
on the ground. The only thing to which she seemed
to give any. attention were the adts of devotion per--
formed in her apartment by the archbishop of Canter-
bury; and in thele (he joined with great appearance of
fervour. Wafted, at las, as well by anguilh of mind,
as by long abstinence, (he expired, without a ftrugg!e,
on Thursday the 24th day of March, 1603, in the 70th
year of her age, and in the 45th of her reign .

Foreigners often accute the Englilh of indifference

and dilrepe&t towards their princes. But without rea-
son; no people are more grateful than they to thole
monarchs who merit their gratitude. The names of
Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned by the
English of this age with the fame warmth as they were
by those who shared in the blessings and splendor of
their reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is fill adored
in England. The historians of that kingdom, after
celebrating her love of her people; her sagacity in
dilierning their true interest; her ftcadinefs in pursuing
it; her wifdoln in the choice of her ministers; the
glory file acquired bv arms; the tranquillity she secured
to her fuiljects; and the increase o( fame, of riches,
and of commerce, which were the fruits of all there;
juIfly rank her among the molt illustrious princes. Even
the defects in her character, they ubserve, were not of
a kind pernicious to her people. Her excessive fruga-
lity was not accompanied with the love of hoarding;
and though it prevented some great undertakings, and
rendered the fuccels of others incomplete, it introduced
economy into her adininifiralion, and exempted the
intion tr,,m many burdens, which a monarch, more
proful'e or more enterpriling, must have impoled. Iltr
llowncis in rewarding her servants lonmitimnes difzoi-

'Carnd, Birch, Mem. ii. 506. Biri, , N'egoc. zo6.

Strvpe, iv. 37j.

a 3

raged usesud merit; but it prevented the undeferving
from acquiring power and wealth, to which they had
no title. Her extreme jealousy of those princes who
pretended to dispute her right to the crown, led her to
take such precautions, as tended no less to the public
safety, than to her own; and to court the affedions of
her own people, as the firmefi support of her throne.
Such is the picure which the English draw of this great
queen.

Whoever rndertakes to write the hifiory of Scotland,

finds him.self rbliged, frequently, to view her in a very
different, and in a less amiable light. Her authority
in that kingr'om, during the greater part of her reign,
was little inferior to that which she possessed in her
own. But this authority, acquired at first by a service
of great importance to the nation, she exercised in a
manner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By her
indufiry in fomenting the rage of the two contending
facions; by supplying the one with partial aid; by
feeding the other with false hopes; by balancing their
power so artfully, that each of them was able to diftrels,
and neither of them to subdue the other; The rendered
Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion, and blood-
sned: and her craft and intrigues, effesing what the
valour of her ancestors could not accomplish, reduced
that kingdom to a hate of dependence on England.
The maxims of policy, often little consonant to those
of morality, may, perhaps justify this condut. But
no apology can be offered for her behaviour to queen
Mary; a feene of dissimulation without necessity; and
of severity beyond example. In almost all her ac-
tions, Elizabeth is the objedt of our highest admiration;
in this we mull allow that Dhe not only laid aside the
magnanimity which became a queen, but the feelings
natural to a woman.

Though Elizabeth would never permit the queflion

concerning the right of succession to the crown to be
determined in parliament; nor declare her own senti-
ments concerning a point which she wfhled to remain
an impenetrable myflerv; she had, however, formed
no design of excluding the Scottish king from an in-

heritance to which his title was undoubted. A fbort
time before her death, ihe broke the silence which the
had so long preserved on that fubjeat, and told Cecil
and the lord admiral, "That her throne was the
throne of kings; that lhe would have no mean person
to afeend it, and that her cousin the king of Scots
should be her successor." This she confirmed on her
death-bed. As soon as she breathed her lait, the lords
of the privy-council proclaimed James king of Eng-
land. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners in
favour of the infanta, all the cabals formed within the
kingdom to support the titles of lady Arabella and the
earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment; the nobles
and people, forgetting their ancient hostilities with
Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of ftran-
gers, testified their fatisfadion with louder acclama-
tions than were usual at the accession of their native
princes. Amidst this tumult ofjoy, a motion made by
a few patriots, who proposed to prescribe some condi-
tions to the. successor, and to exat from him the redress
of some grievances, before they called him to the
throne, was scarce heard; and Cecil, by ftiffiing it, ad-
ded to his flock of merit with his new matter. Sir
Charles Piercy, brother of the earl of Northumberland,
and Thomas Somerset, the earl of Worcester's son,
were despatched to Scotland with a letter to the king,
signed by all the peers and privy-counfellors then in
London; informing him of the queen's death, of his
accession to the throne, of their care to recognize his
title, and of the universal applause with which the puL-
lic proclamation of it had been attended. They made
the utmost halte to deliver this welcome mefiage; but
were prevented by the zeal of fir Robert Carey, lord
Hunfdon's youngest son, who setting out a few hours
after Elizabeth's death. arrived at Edinburgh on Satur-
day night, jult as the king had gone to bed. He was
immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and
kneeling by the king's bed, acquainted him with the
death of Elizabeth, saluted him king of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland; and as a token of the
truth of the intelligence which he brought, presentcd

him a ring, which his sifter lady Scroop had taken
from the queen's finger after her death. James heard
him with a decent composure. But as Carey was only
a private messenger, the information which he brought
was not made public, and the king kept his apartment
till the arrival of Percy and Somerlet. Then his
titles were solemnly proclaimed; and his own fuhjedts
expressed no less joy, than the Englifn, at this increase
of his dignity. As his presence was absolutely necef-
fary in England, where the people were extremely im-
patient to fee their new sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that kingdom without delay. He appointed
his queen to follow him within a few weeks. He com-
mitted the government of Scotland to his privy-coun-
cil. He intrusted the care of his children to different
noblemen. On the Sunday before his departure, he
repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after hearing
a sermon, in which the preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in raising him to the throne
of such a powerful kingdom without opposition or
bloodlhed, and exhorted him to express his gratitude,
by promoting, to the utmost, the happiness and prof-
perity of his fubjells; the king rose up, and addreirng
himself to the people, made many profefrions of un-
alterable affection towards them; promiscd frequently
to visit Scotland; assured them that his Scottish sub-
jers, notwithstanding his ablcnce, should feel that lie
was their native prince, no less than when lie resided a-
mong them; and might still trust that his ears should be
always open to their petitions, which le would answer
with the alacrity and love of a parent. His words we;e
often interrupted by the tears of the whole audience;
who, though they exulted at the king's prosperity,
were melted into sorrow by these tender declarations *.

On the 5th of April, 1603, he began his journe-,

with a splendid, but not a numerous train; and n;ext
day he entered Berwick. Wherever lie came, immente
multitudes were afenlbled to welcoime hin; and the

-* 5utit 476.

principal persons in the different counties through
which he patsed displayed all their wealth and magnifi-
cence in entertainments prepared for him at their houses.
Elizabeth had reigned so long in England, that most of
her subjects remembered no other court but hers, and
their notions of the manners and decorums suitable
to a prince were formed upon what they had observed
there. It was natural to apply this standard to the
behaviour and adions of their new monarch, and to
compare him, at first fight, with the queen, on whose
throne he was to be placed. James, whose manners
were extremely different from hers, suffered by the
comparifbn. He had not that flowing affability, by
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people;
and, though easy among a few whom he loved, his
indolence could not bear the fatigue of rendering him-
self agreeable to a mixed multitude. He was no less a
firanger to that dignity with which Elizabeth tempered
her familiarity. And, initead of that well-judged fru-
gality with which she conferred titles of honour, he
beflowed them with an undiflinguifhing profusion,
that rendered them no longer marks of diflinftion, or
rewards of merit. But there were the reflections of the
few alone; the multitude continued their acclamations;
and amidst these, James entered London on the 7th of
May, 1603, and took peaceable possession of the throne
of England.

Thus were united two kingdoms, divided from the

earliefi accounts of time, but destined, by their fitua-
tion, to form one great monarchy. By this junction
of its whole native force, Great Britain has risen to
an eminence and authority in Europe, which England
and Scotland never could have attained.

The Scots had so long confidered their monarchs as

next heirs to the English throne, that they had full
leisure to refleet on all the consequences of their being
advanced to that dignity. But, dazzled with the glory
of giving a sovereign to their powerful enemy, relying
on the partiality of their native prince, and in full ex-
pecation of sharing liberally in the wealth and honours
he ould now be able to beflow, they attended litde

to the most obvious consequences of that great event,
and rejoiced at his accession to the throne of England,
as if it had been no less beneficial to the kingdom,
than honourable to the king. They loon had reason,
however, to adopt very different sentiments; and from
that period we may date a total alteration in the politi-
cal conifitution of Scotland.

The feudal ariftorracy, which had been subverted in

most nations of Europe by the policy of their princes,
or had been undermined bv the progress of commerce,
Rtill subsisted with full force in Scotland. Many causes
had contributed gradually to augment the power of the
Scottish nobles; and even the Reformation, which, in
every other country where it prevailed, added to the
authority of the monarch, had increased their wealth
and influence. A king possessed of a small revenue,
with a prerogative extremely limited, and unsupported
by a standing army, could not exercise much authority
over such potent fubjedls. He was obliged to govern
by expedients; and the laws derived their force not
from his power to execute them, but from the volun-
tary fubmiffon of the nobles. But though this pro-
duced a species of government feeble and irregular be-
yond example; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a monarchy, was really
subjea to an aristocracy, the people were not altogether
unhappy; and even in this wild form of a constitution,
there were principles, which tended to their security
and advantage. The king, checked and overawed by
the nobles, durst venture upon no at of arbitrary
power. The nobles, jealous of the king, whose claims
and pretensions were many, though his power was
finall, were afraid of irritating their dependents by
unreasonable exactions, and tempered the rigour of
ariftocratical tyranny, with a. mildness and equality to
which it is naturally a stranger. And while the military
genius of the feudal government remained in vigour,
the vassals both of the crown and of the barons were
generally not only free from oppression, but were court-
ed by their superiors, whose power and importance were
founded on their attachment and love.

But, by his accession to the throne of England, James

acquired such an immense accession of wealth, of pow-
er, and of splendor, that the nobles, afonifhed and inti-
midated, thought it vain to firuggle for privileges which
they were now unable to defend. Nor was it from
fear alone that they submitted to the yoke; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they should par-
take of his good fortune, loaded them with riches and
honours; and the hope of his favour concurred with the
dread of his power, in taming their fierce and indepen-
dent spirits. The will of the prince became the supreme
law in Scotland; and the nobles strove, with emulation,
who should moit implicitly obey commands, which
they had formerly been accustomed to contemn. Sa-
tisfied with having subjected the nobles to the crown,
the king left them in full poffeflfion of their ancient ju-
rifditlion over their own vassals. The extensive rights,
vefled in a feudal chief, became in their hands dreadful
infiruments of oppreflion, and the military ideas, on
which these rights were founded, L;ing gradually loft
or disregarded, nothing remained to correcd or to miti-
gate the rigour with which they were exercised. The
nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the expence of fre-
quent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more
wealthy neighbours, multiplied exations upon the peo-
ple, who durit scarce utter complaints which llthey knew
would never reach the ears of their ibvereign, nor move
him to grant them any redress. And from the union
of the crowvns to the Revolution in r688, Scotland was
placed in a political situation, of all others the moit lin-
gular and the moil unhappy; fubjeAed at once to the
ablblute will of a monarch, and to the opprellive jurmif-
diflion of an ariflocracy, it fufflred all the mifiries pe-
culiar to both there forms of government. Its kilgs
were despotic; its nobles were isaves and tyrants; and
the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

During this period, the nobles, it is true, made one

effort to fiake off the yoke, and to regain their aniient
indept.ndtcy. Alstrt tlc death of Jaincs, tiec Scottih

nation was no longer viewed by our monarchs with
any partial affection. Charles I. educated among the
Engliih, discovered no peculiar attachment to the king-
dom of which he was a native. And.the nobles, per-
ceiving the sceptre to be now in hands less friendly,
and swayed by a prince with whom they had lit-
tle connection, and over whose councils they had lit-
tle influence, no longer submitted with the fame im-
plicit obedience. Provoked by some encroachments of
the king on their order, and apprehensive of others,
the remains of their ancient spirit began to appear.
They complained and remonfirated. The people being,
at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innovations
in religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust;
and their artifices, together with the ill conduct of the
court, railed such a Spirit, that the whole nation took
arms against their sovereign, with an union and ani-
mofity of which there had formerly been no example.
Charles brought against them the forces of England,
and notwithflandihg their own union, and the- zeal of
the people, the nobles must have funk in the ftrug-
gle. But the difaffetion which was growing among
his English filbjecs, prevented the king from acting
with vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms;
and after many battles and revolutions, which are well
known, the Scottish nobles, who firit began the war,
were involved in the fame ruin with the throne. At
the Restoration, Charles II. regained full possession of
the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the nobles,
whose eflates were wafted, or their spirit broken, by
the calamities to which they had been exposed, were
Ifes able and less willing than ever to refill the power
of the crown. During this reign, and that of James
V II. the dictates of the monarch were leceived in
Scotland with most abje&c iubhifiion. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered tihemn
meaner slaves, and more intolerable tyrants th:n ever.
The people, a!ways neglectccd, were novw odious, anil
loaded Faith everv injury,v ni account of their attae;,-
ment to religious aa;d political principles, e:.tremelv r:-
pueulsnt to thl;: adopted by their princes.

The Revolution introduced other maxims into the go-

vernment of Scotland. To increase the authority of
the prince, or to secure the privileges of the nobles, had
hitherto been almost the sole object of our laws. The
rights of the people were scarce ever mentioned, were
disregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hencefor-
ward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the
claim of rift, their liberties were fccured; and the num-
ber of their representatives being increased, they gradu-
ally acquired new weight and consideration in parlia-
nlent. As they came to enjoy more security and great-
er power, their minds began to open, and to form more
extensive plans of commerce, ofindultry, and of police.
But the ariflocratical spirit, which still predominated,
together with many other accidcntsj retarded the im-
provement and happiness of the nation.

Another great event completed what the Revolution

had begun. The political power of the nobles, already
broken by the union of the' two crowns, was almost an-
nihilated by the union of the two kingdoms. Inllead
of making a part, as formerly, of the lupreme assembly
of the nation, instead of bearing the most conliderable
sway there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the
Britiih parliament by their representatives only, and
form but an inronfiderable part of one of those bodies in
which the legislative authority is vefied. They them-
selves are excluded allolutcly from the house of com-
mons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted to
represent their countrymen in that august assembly.
Nor have their feudal privileges remained to compensate
for this extinction of thrir political authority. As com-
merce advanced in its progress, and government attain-
ed nearer to perfedritn, their were inienfibly circumfcrib-
ed, and at last, by laws no iefs salutary to the public,
than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost totally
abolished. As the nobles were deplived of power, the
people acquired lilerty. Exempted from burdens to
which they were formerly lubhjed; screened from op-
preltlon, to which th;ey had been long exposed, and a-
dopted into a constitution 'hose genius and laws were
Vol. I}. B b

more'liheral than their own, they have extended their
commerce, refined their manners, made improvements
in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts and fci-

ences.

This survey of the political state of Scotland, in which

events and their causes have been mentioned rather than
developed, enables us to point out three seras, from each
of which we may date some great alteration in one or
other of the three different members of which the fu-
preme legislative assembly in our conflitution is cormpof-
ed. At the acc.F:on, the kings of Scotland, once the molt
limited, became, in an inflant, the most ahfolute princes
in Europe, and exercised a despotic authority, which
their parliaments were unable to controul, or their no-
bles to resist. At the anni:n, the feudal aristocracy, which
had fulfifted so many ages, and with power so exor-
bitant, was overturned, and the Scottish nobles, volunta-
rilv surrendered rights and pre-eminences peculiar to
their order, and reduced themselves to a condition which
is no longer the terror and envy of other fubjeats.
Srincr tic Irnion, the commons anciently ncgle&ed by their
kings, and despised by the nobles, have emerged into
dignity; and, being admitted to a participation of all
the privileges which the English had purchased at the
expence of so much blood, must now be esteemed a bo-
dv no less considerable in the one kingdom, than they
have long been in the other.

The church felt the effets of the absolute power

which the king acquired by his accession; and its revo-
lutions, too, are worthy of notice. James, during the
latter years of his adminifiration in Scotland, had reviv-
ed the name and office of bishops But they possessed
no ecclesiastical jurifdiclion or pre-eminence; their re-
venues were inconsiderable, and they were 'carce diflin-
guiihed by any thing but by their feat in parliament,
and by being the object of the clergy's jeaonufy, and the
people's hatred. The king delighted with the splendor
and authority which the English bifops enjoyed, and
eager to effect an union in ecclesiastical policy, which
he had, in vain attempted in the civil government, re-
solved to Bring both churches to an exact conformity

with each other. Three Scotsmen were consecrated
bishops at London. From them, their brethren were
commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were impofsd; and though the clergy, lefd
obsequious than the nobles, boldly opposed these inno-
vations, James, long pra&iled and well skilled in the
arts of managing them, obtained at length their compli-
ance. But Charles I. a fuperflitious prince, unacquaint-
ed with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and preci-
pitant in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom,
pressing too eagerly the reception of the English liturgy,
and indiscreetly attempting a resumption of church
lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the people
being left at liberty to ildulge their own withes, the e-
pifcopal church was overturned, and the presbyterian
government and discipline were re-eflablifhed with new
vigour. Together with monarchy, episcopacy was re-
stored in Scotland. A form of government, so odious
to the people, required force to uphold it; and though
the whole rigour of authority, and all the barbarity of
persecution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was inlurmountable, and it fubrifled with
difficulty. At the Revolution, the inclinations of the
people were thought worthy the attention of the legifla-
ture, the presbyterian government was again eflablifhed,
and, being ratified by the union, is still maintained in
the kingdom.

Nor did the influence of the accession extend to the

civil and ecclesiastical conflitutions alone; the genius of
the nation, its taste and spirit, things of a nature flill
more delicate, were sensibly affeEted by that event.
When learning revived in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, all the modern languages were in a state e-
qually barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and e-
ven of perspicuity. No author thought of writing in
languages so ill adapted to express and embellish his fen-
timents, or of erecing a work for immortality with
such rude and perishing materials. And as the spirit,
which prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited by

Bba

admiration of the ancients, their compositions were e-
fteemed not only the fiandards of taste and of sentiment,
but of stile; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar, and almost confe-
crated to learning and the muses. Not only the man-
ner of the ancients was imitated, but their language co-
pied: and, extravagant as the attempt may appear to
write in a dead tongue, in which men were not accuf-
tored to think, and which they could not speak, nor e-
ven'pronounce, the success of it was aftoniihing. As
they formed their flyle upon the purest models; as they
were uninfe&ed with those barbarisms which the inac-
curacy of familiar conversation, the affectation of courts,
intercourse with strangers, and a thousand other causes,
introduce into living languages; many moderns have
attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin compofi-
tions, which the Romans themselves scarcely possesscd
beyond the limits of the Augustan age. While this
was almost the only species of composition, and all au-
thors, by using one common language, could be brought
to a nearer comparison, the Scottilh writers were not
inferior to those of any other nation. The happy geni-
us of Buchanan, equally formed to excel in prose and
in verse, more various, more original, and more elegant,
than that of almost any other modern who writes in
Latin, refleAs, with regard to this patticular, the great-
eft lustre on his country.

But the labour attending the study of a dead tongue

was irksome, the unequal return for their industry
which authors met with, who could be read and admir-
ed only within the narrow circle of the learned, was
mortifying; and men, instead of wafting half their lives
in learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and to polih their own. The modern tongues were
found to be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if
not equal to those of the ancient ones were at least more
attainable. The Italians having first set the example,
Latin was no longer used in the works of taste; it was
confined to books of science; and the politer nations
have banished it even from these. The Scots, we may
presume, would have had no cause to regret this change

in the public tafle, and would flill have been able to
maintain some equality with other nations, in their pur-
suit of literary honour. The English and Scottish lan-
guages, derived from the fame ibirces, were, at the
end of the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar,
differing from one another somewhat in orthography,
though not only the words, but the idioms were much
the fame. The letters of several Scottish statesmen of
that age are not inferior in elegance, or in purity, to
those of the English millifers with whom they corre-
iponded. James himself was matter of a style far from
contemptible; and by his example and encouragement,
the Scottish language might have kept pace with the
English in refinement. Scotland might have had a fe-
ries of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin lan-
guage, to boast of; and the improvements in talte, in
the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the o-
ther polished nations of Europe, would not have been
unknown there.

But, at the very time when other nations were begin-

ning to drop the use of Latin in works of taste, and to
snake trial of the Itrength and compass of their own
languages, Scotland ceased to he a kingdom. The
transports ofjoy, which the acceflion at firfi occasioned
were soon over: and the Scots, being at once deprived
sos all the objects that refine or animate a people; of
the pretence of their prince, of the concourse of nobles,
of the splendor and elegance of a court, an universal
deje&ion of spirit seems to have seized the nation. The
court being withdrawn, no domeitic standard of pro-
priety and correCtness of speech remained; the few com-
positions that Scotland produced were tried by the Eng-
lifh standard, and every word or phrase that varied in
the least from that, was condemned as barbarous; where-
as, if the two nations had continued distinct, each might
have retained idioms and forms of speech peculiar to it-
self; and there, rendered fashionable by the example of
a court, and supported by the authority of writers of re-
putation, would have been confidered in the fame light
with the varieties occasioned by the different dialets
in the Greek, tongue; would have been confidered as

beauties; and, in many cafes, might have been used pro-
mifcuouny by the authors of both nations. But, by the
accession, the Engliih naturally became the sole judges
and lawgivers in language, and reje&ed as solecisms, e-
very form of speech to which their ear was not accuf-
tomed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse be-
tween the two nations was inconsiderable*, and ancient
prejudices were flill so violent as to prevent imitation,
possess the means of refining their own tongue accord-
ing to the purity of the English standard On the con-
trary, new corruptions flowed into it from every difier-
ent source. The clergy of Scotland. in that age, were
more eminent for piety than for learning; and though
there did not arise many authors among them, yet be-
ing in possession of the privilege of discoursing publicly
to the people, and their sermons being too long, and
perhaps too frequent, Iuch hafly productions could not
be elegant, and many slovenly and incorret modes of
expreflion may be traced hack to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally Icofe and inaccurate,
and that profeflion having furnished more authors, and
the matters of which they treat mingling daily in ccm-
mon discourse and business, many of thole vicious forms
of lpeech, which are denominated Scotticisms, have been

A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between

the Engliih and Scots before the union of the crowns, is
to be found in two curious papers, one published by
Haynes,-the other by Strype. In the year i567, Eliza-
beth commanded the biflhop of London to take a survey
of all the frangers within the cities of London and
Weflminfter. By this report, which is very minute, it
appears that the whole number of Scots at that time
was 58. Haynes, 455. A survey of the fame kind was
nmade by Sir Thomas Row, lord mayor; A. D. I568.
The number of Scots had then increased to 88. Strype,
iv. Supplement, No. I. On the accession of James, a
considerable number of Scots, especially of the higher
rank, resorted to England; but it was not till the union
that the intercourse between the two kingdoms became
great.

by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or public taste receive any improvement
in parliament, where a more liberal and more correct
eloquence might have been expected. All business was
tranfated there by the lords of articles, and they were
so servilely devoted to the court, that few debates arose,
and, none were conducted with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular assembly.

Thus, during the whole feventcenth century, the

English were gradually refining their language and their
talte; in Scotland the former was much debated, and
the latter almost entirely loft. In the beginning of that
period, both nations were emerging out of barbarity;
but the distance between them, which was then incon-
fidrable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even
after fcicnce had once dawned upon them, the Scots
seemed to he finking back into ignorance and obfcuri-
ty; and active, and intelligent as they naturally are,
they continued, wlile other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of languor
and ftupefadRion. This, however, mull be imputed to
the unhappiness of their political situation, not to any
defe&t of genius; for no sooner was the one removed
in any degree, than the other began to display itself.
The a&t aboliflsing the power of the lords of articles,
and other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, having
introduced freedom of debate into the Scottifi parlia-
ment, eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or
perfect it, became immediate objects of attention; and
the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sufficient to
shew that the Scots were still capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were
able to express themselves with energy, and with ele-
gance.

At length the union having incorporated the two na-

tions, and rendered them one people, the distinCtions
which had iuhfited for many ages gradually wear a-
way; peculiarities disappear; the fame manners prevail
in both parts of the island; the fame authors are read
and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented.
by the cl',ant and polite; ;nud the anitm Itandalrd of

tafe, and ofpuritv in language, is efablifhed. And the
Scots, after being plated, during a whole century, in a
situation no le's fatal to the liberty than to the taste
and genius of the nation, were at once put in poffeflion
of privileges more valuable than those which their an-
ceflors had formerly enjoyed; and every olftruEtion
that had retarded their pursuit, or prevented their ace
quifition or littra;y fame, was totally removed.

END OF VOLUME SECOND.

i -i
,% ):~.,,.
