T 11 E

HIST ORY

OF

SCOTLAND

DURING TIHE REIGNS OF

Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL

His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEwcfthe ScoT'TISHHISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.TD

Minicer of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:

Printed for T. CADELLJ in the Strand,

MDCC LXXXI.

Pubhlfd by the a~mne Authcr,

r. HE HISTORY of the RErCN Of the

EM ERov CHARLES V. with a View

of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the
Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the Begin-
ning of the Sixteenth Century. In three Vo-
lumes, Quarto.

*,* Another Edition in 4 Vols. 8vo.

2. TnK HISTORY oF AMERICA, Vols. I.

and II. Quarto.

+** Another Edition in 3 Vols. Svo.

# PREFACE.

PR EFACE.

7 Deliver this book to the world with all the
j dllfhence ad.1 anxiety natural to an Author
on '::blithing his tirit performance. The time
1 I we emr'loyed, and the pains I have taken,
i . o:-jel to render it worthy of the public ap-
p <oiation, it is, perhaps, prudent to conceal,
t*: it be known whether that approbation ihall
evr be beftotwed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many inflances,

from former historians, as I have placed faas
in a different light, and have drawn charaaers
with new colours, I ought to account for this
condu& to my readers; and to produce the evi-
dence, on which, at the difitance of two cen-
turies, I presume to contradit the teflinony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary hiflorians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againit each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embit-
tered by religious zeal. Each of these pro-
duced historians of considerable merit, who
adopted all their fentirnents, and defended all
their ations. Truth was not the sole obje&
of these authors. Blinded by prejudices, and

A 2 heated

heated by the part which they themfcivcs had
aded in the scenes they describe, they wrote
an apology for a faaion, rather than the his-
tory of their country. Succeedino Historians
have followed these guides almost implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
fentations. But as the fame pafions which
inflamed parties in that age have descended to
their poRferity; as almost cvcry event in Mary's
reign has become the objet of doubt or of
dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon
discovered, that without some evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of
Historians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been
produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransack-
ed by the zeal and cuiofty of writers of dif-
ferent parties. The attention of Cecil to col-
led whatever related to that period, in which
he aded so conspicuous a part, hath provided
such an immense flore of original papers for
illufirating this part of the English and Scot-
tifh1 hiflory, as are almost fufficient to satisfy
the utmort avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whole library is now the pro-
perty of the public) made great and valuable
additions to Cecil's collceion; and from this
rnagazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cab-
bVia, Anderlbn, Keith, Haynes, Forbes, have
drawn mooft of the papers which they have
printed. - No history of Scotland, that merits
any degcree of attention, has appeared Iince

thefs

these colledions were published. By confilt-
ing them, I have Leon enabled, in many in-
flances, to corrce the inaccuracles of former
Historians, to avoid their mifiakcs, and to de-
ted their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped

the notice of those industrious Colleaors, and
after all they have produced to light, much
11ill remained in darkness, unobserved or un-
published. It was my duty to search for these,
and I found this unplcafant task attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of

Advocates at Edinburgh, contains not only a
large colleaion of original papers relating to
the affairs of Scotland, but copies of others
no less curious, which have been preserved by
Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the Public
Oflices in England. Of all these the Curators
of that library were pleased to allow me the
perusal.

THOUGH the British Mufirum be not yet

open to the Public, Dr. Birch, whose obli-
ging difpioiition is well known, procured me
acceis to that noble colle(ion, which is wor-
thy the magnificence of a great and Polihed
nation.

TH AT vail and curious colledion of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
made by Dr. Forbes, and of which he publish-

ed

ed only two volumes, having been purchased
{ince his death, by the Lord viscount Royflon,
his Lordship was so good as to allow me the
use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing
that part of them which is conncaed with my

SIR A lexinder Dick communicated to me a

very valuable colleQion of original papers, in
two large Volumes. They relate chiefly to the
reign of James. Many of them are marked
with Archbilhcp Spotfiwood's hand; and it ap-
pears from several passages in his hiflory, that
he had perfled them with great attention.

M r. Calderwood, an eminent Preibyterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an
History of Scotland from the beginning of the
Reign of James V. to the death of James VI.
in fix large Volumes; wherein he has inserted
many papers of consequence, which are no
where else to be found. A copy of this his-
tory, which flill remains in manuscript in the
poffeflion of the church of Scotland, was put
into my hands by my worthy friend the Re-
verend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk
of the church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communi-

cated to me the papers which he has colleaed
relating to Gowrie's conspiracy; but, by ex-
plaining to me his sentiments with regard to
that problematical passage in the Scottish hifto-
;y, has enabled me to place that tranfa~ion in

a light

a light which difpcls much of the darkness
and confusion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

Mr. Goodall, though he knew my senti-

ments with regard to the condua and charac-
ter of Queen Mary to be extremely difcrent
from his own, communicated to me a Volume
of manuscripts in his poffefilon, which con-
taims -a great number of valuable papers copied
from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper Oflice, by the late Reverend Mr.
Crawford, Regius Profeffor of Church History
in the univeriity of Edinburgh. I likewiie
received from him the original Register of let-
lers kept by the Regent Lennox during his
adminifiration.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as

I thought they could be of any use towards
illufirating that period of which I write the
history. With what success I have employed
them to confirm what was already known, to
afEertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was controverted, the Public must judge.

I MIGviT easily have drawn, from the dif-

ferent repositories to which I had access, as ma-
ny papers as would have rendered my Appen-
dix equal in size to the most bulky colleaion
of my predecessors. But I have satisfied my-
seif with publishing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it necessary
to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.

t None

None of these, as far as I can recolled, ever
appeared in any former colledion.

I IIAVE added to the Appendix a Critical

DiJrtation concerning the murder of King Hen-
ry, and the genuineness of the ~rcen's letters to.
BotLwe/ll. The faas and observations which
relate to Mary's letters, I owe to my friend
Mr. John Davison, one of the Clerks to the
Signet, who hamh examirned this point with
his usual acuteneifs and indufiry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

HISTORY

OF

SCOTLAND.

BOOK I.

Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH Hifory pre-

YiOkS to the death of JAMES V.

HE firif ages of the Scottish history are B o o sc
dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as I.
men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and *r

the events, which happened during their infancy ofnations
or early youth, cannot be recoileL~ed, and deserve andobfcure.
not to be remembered. The gross ignorance,
which anciently covered all the North of Europe,
the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and
the frequent and deftruaive revolutions which
these occasioned, render it impossible to give any
authentic account of the origin of the different
kingdoms now eflablifhed there. Every thing be-
yond that short period, to which well attefited an-
nals reach, is obscure; an immense space is left

VOL. I, B for

B o O K invention to occupy; each nation, with a vanity

I. inseparable from human nature, hath filled that
L void with events calculated to display its own an-

tiquity and luffre. And hiffory, which ought to
record truth and teach wisdom, often sets out with
retailing fi6Lions and absurdities,

oran of THE Scots carry their pretenflons to antiquity
t Scots. as high as any of their neighbours. Relying up-

on uncertain legends, and the traditions of their
bards, still more uncertain, they reckon up a
series of kings several ages before the birth of
Christ; and give a particular detail of the oc-.
currences, which happened in their reigns. But
with regard to the Scots, as well as the other
northern nations, we receive the earliest accounts
on which we can depend, not from their own, but

A. D. 81. from the Roman authors. *When the Romans un-

der Agricola, first carried their arms into the north-
ern parts of Britain, they found it poffeffed by the
Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people; and
having repulsed, rather than conquered them,
they erefted a Tirong wall between the firths of
Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif-
ficulty of defending such a difiant frontier, con-

A. 0. ,,,* trafted the limits of the Roman province in Bri-

tain, by building a second wall, which ran be-
tween Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambition of
succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover what
Adrian had abandoned ; and the country between
the two walls was alternately under the dominion
of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the

beginning

beginning of the fifth century, the inroads of the B o 0 K
Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans, I.
in order to defend the centre of their empire, to
recal those legions, which giuarded the frontier
provinces; and at that time they quitted all
their conquests in Britain.

THEIR long residence in the island had polished, A. D. 4'x,

in fame degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the
Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to
preserve the memory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left un-

der the dominion of the Scots and Pias. The
former, who are not mentioned by any Roman au-
thor, before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celts or Gauls Their
affinity to whom appears from their language,
their manners, and religious rites ; circumstances s
more decisive, with regard to the origin of na-
tions, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales
of ill-informed, and credulous Annalifts. The
Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at firfi in Ireland ; and, extending them-
selves by degrees, landed at last on the coast oppo-
site to that island, and fixed their habitations there.
Fierce and bloody wars were, dviring several ages,
carried on between them and the Phls. At
length, Kenneth II. the fixty-niuth King of the A.D.s s,
Scots (according to their own fabulous authors)
obtained a complete vitory over the Pias, and
vnited under one monarchy, the whole country,

B 2 from

B o o K from the wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean.

I. And his kingdom became known by its present

name, which it derived from a people who at firit
fettled there as itrangers, and remained long ob-
fcure and inconsiderable.

Hiloryof FROM this period the history of Scotland would
pcutlinl merit some attention, were it accompanied with
Obscure. any certainty. But as our remote antiquities are

involved in the fame darkness with those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown
almost an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfa~lions. This was occasioned by the mali-
cious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this Inmnarch
called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that that kingdom was held as a fief of
the crown of England, and fubjeated to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to efta-
blifh his claim, he seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poffeffion by force, or fraud, of many historical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity
or freedom of the kingdom, he carried some of
them into England, and commanded the reft to be
burned *. An universal oblivion of pait tranf-
a6tiorns might have been the effea of this fatal
event, but some imperfea Chronicles had escaped
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important faas relating to Scotland; and the
traditions concerning recent occurrences were frelh
and worthy of credit. These broken fragments

Innes, Efihy 55z. Johin

John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth B o O K
century, colle~ted with a pious induifry, and from I-
them picked out materials, which he formed into
a regular hiffory. His work was received by his
countrymen with applautfe; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied
the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom.
It was copied in many monasteries, and the thread
of the narrative was continued by different monks,
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, John Major and Hlector
Boethius published their histories of Scotland, the
former a fuccina and dry writer, the latter a co-
pious and florid one, and both equally credulous.
Not many years after, Buchanan undertook the
fame work; and if his accuracy and impartiality
had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance of
his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his style,
his history might be placed on a level with the
most admired compositions of the ancients. But,
instead of rejecting the improbable tales of Chro-
nicle writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn
them; and hath clothed with all the beauties and
graces of fiation, those legends, which formerly
had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE hiflory of Scotland may properly be divided Four re-

mark able

into four periods. The first reaches from the ori- ,. i; the
gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II.
The second from Kenneth's conquest of the Piats,
to the death of Alexander III. The third extends
to the death of James V. The last, from thence to
the acceflion of James VI. to the crown of England.

B3 THE

B o o K THE firit period is the region of pure fable and

I. conjeaure, and ought to be totally neglected, or

Y be abandoned to the induifry and credulity of an-

tiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second
period, with a light, feeble at firit, but gradually
increasing; and the events which then happened,
may be slightly touched, but merit no particular
or laborious inquiry. In the third period, the his-
tory of Scotland, chiefly by means of records pre-
served in England, becomes more authentic: not
only are events related, but their causes and es-
seas explained; the characters of the adors are
displayed; the manners of the age described; the
revolutions in the conititution pointed out: and
here every Scotsman ffhould begin not to read only,
but to fludy the hiitory of his country. During
the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so
mingled with those of other nations, its situation
in the political slate of Europe was so important,
its influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was so visible, that its hiflory becomes
an objea of attention to foreigners; and without
some knowledge of the various and extraordinary
revolutions which happened there, they cannot
form a just notion either of the most illustrious
events, or of the charaters of the moat diftin-
guifhed personages in the sixteenth century.

A review THE following history is confined to the last of
, a thia these periods: To give a view of the political slate

of the kingdom, during that which immediately
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book.
The imperfea knowledge which itrangers have of

the

the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots- B o o a.
men themselves have imbibed with regard to the I.
various revolutions in the government of their '
country, render such an introduaion equally ne-
ceffary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and a half, from the year z286, to the
year I542*

IT opens with the famous controversy concern- Rie ofrthe

ing the independence of Scotland. Before the C"flt~OVlg
union of the two kingdoms, this was a question of the inde.

pendence of

much importance. If the one crown had been soiland.
considered not as imperial and independent, but
as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could
not have been concluded on equal terms, and every
advantage which the dependent kingdom procur-
ed, must have been esteemed the concession of a
Sovereign to his vassal. Accordingly, about the
beginning of the present century, and while a
treaty of union between the two kingdoms was on
foot, this controversy was agitated with all the
heat which national animofities naturally inspire.
What was then a fubjea of serious concern, the
union of the two kingdoms hath rendered a mat-
rer of mere curiosity. But though the objeAs,
which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, exist no longer, a question which ap-
peared so momentous to our anceflors, cannot be
altogether indifferent or uninfitruive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottish Kings, who, as

B4 far

B o O K far back as the feudal customs can be traced, held

I. these poffeffions of the Kings of England, and did
Cy homage to them on that account. This homage,

due only for the territories which they held in
England, was in no wife derogatory from their
royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal
ideas, than that the fame person mhould be both a
Lord and a Vassal, independent in one capacity,
and dependent in another *. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and inde-
pendent, though the Princes who wore it were,
for many ages, the vassals of the Kings of France;
and, in consequence of their poffefions in that
kingdom, bound to perform all the services, which
; feudal Sovereign has a title to exac1. The fame
was the condition of the Monarchs of Scotland
free and independent as Kings, but, as poffefling
English territories, vassals to the King of Eng-
land. The English Monarchs, satisfied with their
legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither ca-
pable, nor had any thoughts of ufirping more.

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history.

Arpin fold the vicomte of the city Bourges to PhilipI. who
did homage to the count of Sancerre for a part of these lands,
which held of that Nobleman, A.D. I100. 1 believe that np
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjeas,
is to be met with in the hiflories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bel abolished this pradice in France A. D. 1302. HIe-
nazat Abregi Chronol. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. 1535, confdituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abbey, veiling in him all the powers
which pertained to that ofiice,- and requiring him to be an-
fwerable to the Abbot for his exercise of the fame. Archi-v.
pibl. Edin.

England

England, when conquered by the Saxons, being B o o t
divided by them into many small kingdoms, was I.
in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot- L '
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And
though these petty principalities were gradually
formed into one kingdom, the reigning princes,
exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fubjeAed to the yoke of those formidable pi-
rates, seldom turned their arms towards Scotland,
and were utterly incapable of establishing new
rights in that country. The first Kings of the
Norman race, busied with introducing their own
laws and manners into the kingdom which they
had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
on the throne which some of them poffeffed by
a very dubious title, were as little solicitous to
acquire new authority, or to form new preten-
fions in Scotland. An unexpeaed calamity that
befel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged
the English to think of bringing his kingdom un-
der dependance. William King of Scotland be-
ing taken prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the
price of his liberty, not only extorted from him
an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender
the places of greatest fitrength in his dominions,
but compelled him to do homage for his whole
kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, so-
lemnly renounced this claim of homage, and ab-
solved William from the hard conditions which
Henry had imposed. Upon the death of Alex-
ander III. near a century after, Edward I. avail-
ing himself of the situation of affairs in Scotland,

acquired

B o o K acquired an influence in that kingdom which no

I. English Monarch before him ever poffeffed, and

''* imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather

than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the
claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

preten(ions MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughter of Alex-

noo ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive

zamn'ed. him. The right of succession belonged to the de-

fcendants of David Earl of Huntingdon, third fan
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for
the crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel,
Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the grand-
fan of Margaret the eldest daughter. According
to the rules of succession which are now establish-
ed, the right of Baliol was preferable, and not-
withitanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood
toEarlDavid, Balici's claim, as the representative
of his mother and grandmother, would be deemed
inconteftible. But in that age, the order of fuc-
cefimon was not ascertained with the fame precision.
The question appeared to be no less intricate, than
it was important. And though the prejudices of
the people, and perhaps the laws of the kingdom,
favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported
by a powerful faLtion. Arms alone, it was fear-
ed, muat terminate a dispute too weighty for the
laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire,
and both parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree.
This had well nigh proved fatal to the independ-

x ence

ence of Scotland; and the nation, by its eager- B o o K
ness to guard against a civil war, was not only ex- I.
posed to that calamity, but almost fubjeaed to a
foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, enter-
prifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition
of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited
him firif to seize, and then to fubje& the kingdom,
The authority of an umpire, which had been un-
warily bestowed upon him, and from which the
Scots dreaded no dangerous consequences, en-
abled him to execute his schemes with the greater
facility. Under pretence of examining the quef-
tion with the utmoff solemnity, he summoned all
the Scottilh Barons to Norham, and having gained
some, and intimidated others, he prevailed on all
who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
Jiol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a
fief of the English Crown, and to swear fealty to
him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord, This Piep
led to another still more important. As it was
vain to pronounce a sentence which he had not
power to execute, Edward demanded poffefion of
the kingdom, thathe might be able to deliver it to
him whose right hould be found preferable. And
such was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and the
impatient ambition of the competitors, that both
assented to this firange demand, and Gilbert de
lUmfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man,
who refused to surrender the caffles in his cutody

to

B o o ix to the enemy of his country. Edward finding

I. Baliol the most obsequious and the least formi-

'cy~-' dable of the two competitors, soon after gave judg-,

ment in his favour. Baliol once more profeifed
himself the vassal of England, and submitted to
every condition, which the Sovereign whom he
had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
the nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully established.
But he began too soon to assume the master; his
new vassals, fierce and independent, bore with
impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the
passive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Ed-
ward, who had no longer use for such a pageant
King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly
attempted to fiize it as fallen to himself by the
rebellion of his vassal. At that critical period,
arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom the
fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed
many fabulous aas of prowess, though his real
valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such,
as needs not the heightenings of fi6tion. He, al-
most single, ventured to take arms in defence of
the kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit
of his countrymen. At lass, Robert Bruce, the
grandson of him who flood in competition with
Baliol, appeared to assert his own rights, and to
vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles,

amhamed

aihamed of their former baseness, and enraged at B o 0 rK
the many indignities offered to the nation, crowd- I.
ed to his standard. In order to crulh him at
once, the English Mlonarch entered Scotland, at
the head of a mighty army. Many battles were
fought, and the Scots, though often vanquished,
were not subdued. The ardent zeal with which
the nobles contended for the independence of
the kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and
above all a national enthusiasm inspired by such a
cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Edward, and
counterbalanced all the advantages which he de-
rived from the number, and wealth of his sub-
je6ts. And though the war continued with little
intermission upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept poffefion of the throne of Scot-
land, and ruled with an authority not inferior to
that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employ-
ed to terminate this controverry, neither Edward
nor the Scots seemed to difiruft thejuflice of their
cause; and both appealed to hiflory and records,
and from these produced, in their own favour,
such evidence, as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addressed by
each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced
as the common father, and often appealed to. as
the common judge'of all Christian Princes, are lill
extant. The fabulous tales of the early British
hiffory; the partial testimony of ignorant Chroni-
clers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the

proofs,

B o o K proofs, on which Edward founded his title to the

I. sovereignty of Scotland; and the homage done by

' ' the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in England

is preposterously supposed to imply the fubjeaion
of their whole kingdom *. Ill founded, however,
as their right was, the English did not fail to re-
vive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between the
two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indignation. To this, we must impute
the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national anti-
pathies were excited, not only by the usual cir-
cumftances of frequent hoffilities, and reciprocal
injuries; but the English considered the Scots as
vassals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots,
in their turn, regarded the English as ufurpers
who aimed at enslaving their country.

1zos. AT the time, whenRobertBruce began his reign

State of the
kingdom in Scotland, the fame form of government was
ben his established in all the kingdoms of Europe. And
was"- the surprising similarity in their conititution and

laws demonfirates that the nations which over-
turned the Roman empire, and ereaed these king-
doms, though divided into different tribes, and
distinguished by different names, were originally
the fame people. When we take a view of the
feudal fyfitem of laws and policy, that fiupendous
and singular fabric ereaed by them; the firlt ob-
je~t that firikes us is the King. And when we are
told that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands
within his dominions, that all his fubjets derive

* Anderfon's Hiflorical Essay concerning the Independ-

ency, thc. their

their poffeffions from him, and in return confe- B o o K
crate their lives to his service; when we hear that I1
all marks of diftincdion, and titles of dignity, flow '
from him as the only fountein of honour; when
we behold the most potent peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign
and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him
a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclu-
lion, however, would be more raib, or worse found-
ed. The genius of the feudal government was purely
ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty,
and with many appearances of despotic power, a
feudal King was the most limited of all Princes.

BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations Orighn of

the frudal

to conquer the world, many of the northern na- covern-
tions seem not to have been fubjeat to the govern- itso ariiod
ment of Kings *; and even where monarchical go- Ci"afc2

u .

vernment was established, the prince poffeffed but
little authority. A General rather than a King, his
military command was extensive, his civil jurifdic-
tion almost nothing '. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be com-
pelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed
his standard $. These conquered not for their
leader, but for themselves; and being free in their
,own country, renounced not their liberty when
they acquired new settlements. They did not ex-
terminate the ancient inhabitants of the countries
which they subdued, but seizing the greater part of
their lands, they took their persons under protec-

Cats. lib. vi. c. z3. t- Tacit, de Mor. Germ. c. 7. xz.

1 Cal, ibidl

tion.

B o o K tion. And the difficulty of maintaining a hewv

I. conquest, as well as the danger of being attacked
Ly'J by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be al-

ways in a posture of defence, the form of govern-
ment which they established was altogether mili.
tary, and nearly resembled that to which they had
been accustomed in their native country. Their
general Btill continuing to be the head of the co-
lony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him; the remainder, under the name of beneficia
orfiefs, was divided amongit his printipal officers.
As the common safety required that these officers
ihould, upon all occasions, be ready to appear in
arms, for the common defence, and mhould conti-
nue obedient to their general, they bound them-
selves to take the field, when called, and to serve
him with a number of men, in proportion to the
extent of their territory. These great officers
again parcelled out their lands among their follow-
ers, and annexed the fame condition to the grant.
A feudal kingdom was properly the encampment
of a great army; military ideas predominated, mi-
litary subordination was established, and the pof-
fetion of land was the pay which soldiers received
for their personal service. In consequence of these
notions, the poffeflion of land was granted du-
ring pleasure only, and Kings were eleaive. In
other words, an officer disagreeable to his general
was deprived of his pay, and the person who was
most capable of conduaing an army, was chosen
to command it. Such were the first rudiments, or
infancy of feudal government.

BuT

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth B o o ic

century, the feudal system had undergone many I.
thanges, of which the following were the most con-
fiderable. Kings formerly cleaive, were then he-
reditary; and fiefs granted at firit during pleasure,
descended from father to son, and were become
perpetual. There changes, not less advantageous
to the nobles than to the prince, made no altera-
tion in the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal conifi-
tution. The King, who at a distance seemed to ceneral
be invefled with majesty and power, appears, on ""

u.

a nearer view, to poffers none of those advantages mitedthe

power of

which beflow on monarchs their grandeur and au- the feudal

. tnonarchs·

thority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a
flanding army; and he enjoyed no proper jurif-
diction.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were un- Their reve.

known, even in the palaces of kings; when the imane.
officers of the crown received little salary besides
the fees and perquisites of their office ; when em-
baffles to foreign courts were rare; when armies
were composed of soldiers who served without pay;
it was not necessary that a king ffhould possess a
great revenue, nor did the condition of Europe,
in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent.
Commerce made little progress in the kingdoms
where the feudal government was established. In-
ftitutions, which had no other objeat but to inspire
a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to
make arms the only honourable profeflion, natu-
rally discouraged the commercial arts. The reve-
nues, arising from the taxes imposed on the dif
ferent branches of commerce, were by confe.

VOL. I. C quenice

B o o K quence inconsiderable; and the prince's treafury'

I. received little supply from a source, which, among

a trading people, flows with such abundance, and is
almost inexhauffible. A fixed tax was not levied
even on land; such a burthen would have appear-
ed intolrable to men who received their estates as
the reward of their valour, and who considered
their service in the field as a full retribution for
what they poffefhed. The King's demeniles, or the
portion of land which he still retained in his own
hands unalienated, furnished flbfiftence to his
court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of go-
vernment *. The only slated taxes which the feu-
dal law obliged vassals to pay to the king, or to
those of whom they held their lands, were three;
one when his eldest son was made a knight; ano-
ther when his eldeat daughter was married; and a
third in order to ransom him if he ihould happen
to be taken prifioner. Besides these, the king re-
ceived the feudal casualties of the ward, marriage,
&c. of his own vassals. And, on fame extraor-
dinary occasions, his fubjedts granted him an aid,
which they diftinguilhed by the name of a benevo-
lence, in order to declare that he received it not in
consequence of any right, but as a gift, flowing
from their good will j. All these added together,
produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which,
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing
that could excite the jealousy or fear of the no-
bles, kept him in continual indigence, anxiety,
and dependence.

* Craig. de Feudr lib. 1. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Gloss.

voc. Dominicum. t Du Cange voc. Auxilium.

NoRa

toR cculd the king supply the defea of his re- B o K K

Menues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary I.
troops and ifanding armies were unknown, as long Dhey han Z
as the feudal government faubfited in vigour. Eu- 8 u'.
rope was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the
king, and the fub-vaffals of the barons, were all
obliged to carry arms. And while the poverty of
princes prevented them from fortifying their fron-
tier towns, while a campaign continued but a few
weeks, and while a fierce and impetuous courage
was impatient to bring every quarrel to the deci-
sion of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little discipline, was fufficient for all the purposes
both of the security and of the glory of the nation4
Such an army, however, far'from being an engine
at the king's dif pofal, was often no less formidable
to him, than to his enemies. T'he more warlike
any people were, the more independent they be-
came; and the fame pei-fons being both soldiers
and fubjeas, civil privileges and immunities were
the consequence of their viaories, and the reward
of their martial exp1oits. Conquerors, whorh mer-
cenary armies, under our present forms of govern-
ment, often render the tyrants of their own people,
as well as the fcourges of mankind, were common-
ly, under the feudal conflitution, the most indul-
gent of all princes to their fubjeas, because they
fRood most in need of their afflitance. A prince,
whom even war aid viaories did not render the
maiter of his own army, poffeffed no Ihadow of mi-
litary power during times of peace. His disbanded
soldiers mingled with his other fubjeas; not a fin-
gle man received pay from him; many ages elapfecl

C= a even

B o O K even before a guard was appointed to defend his

I. person; and destitute of that great infirument of

'L~* dominion a standing army, the authority of the

king continued always feeble, and was often con-
temptible6

Their jurif, NOR were these the only circurnifances which
Idid'mio was contributed towards depressing the regal power.

By the feudal system, the king's judicial authority
was extremely circumscribed. At firif, princes
seem to have been the fupremejudges of their peo-
ple, and, in person, heard and determined all con-
troverfies among them. The multiplicity of causes
soon made it necessary to appoint judges, who, in
the king's name, decided matters that belonged to
the royal jurifdiRion. But the Barbarians, who
over-ran Europe, having destroyed most of the
great cities, and the countries which they seized
being cantoned out among powerful barons, who
Were blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom,
in return, they were bound to protea from every
injury; the adminifiration of juifice was greatly
interrupted, and the execution of any legal sentence
becamealmoft impradticable. Theft, rapine, mur-
der, and disorder of all kinds prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible,
and scarce compatible with the fubfiifence of civil
society. Every ofender iheltered himfelfunder the
proteaion of some powerful chieftain, who screen-
ed him from the pursuits ofjufiice. To apprehend,
and to punish a criminal, often required the union
and effort of half a kingdom *. In order to remedy

these

A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following his-

tory, so late as the year i;6i. Mary, having appointed a court

these evils, many persons of diftination were en- B o o K
trusted with the adminjifration of juffice within I.
their own territories. But what we may presume M
was, at firit, only a temporary grant, or a personal
privilege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon
converted into a right, and rendered hereditary.
The lands of some were ere&ed into Baronies, those
of others into Regalities. The jurifdiAion of the
former wasextenfive; that of the latter, as the name
implies, royal, and almost unbounded, All causes,
whether civil or criminal, were tried by judges,
whom the lord of the regality appointed; and if
the king's courts called any person within his ter-
ritory before them, the lord of regality might put

ofjuflice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less
than eleven counties were ftmmoned to guard the person, who
was to a& as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions,
p. 234. The words of a proclamation, which afford such a
convincing proof of the feebleness of the feudal government,
deserve our notice.---" And because it is rieceffary for the ex-
ecution of her Highnefs' commandments and service, that her
justice be well accompanied, and her authority fufficiently for-
tified, by the concurrence of a good power of her faithful sub-
jeas---Therefore commando and charges all and sundry Earls,
Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlc-
men, dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every
pne of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and houfhold-
men, well bodin in feir of war in the most fubitantious manner,
[i. e. completely armed and provided,] and with twenty days
viauals to meet and to pafsi forward with him to the borough
of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the said space of
twenty days, and to receive fiuch direAion and commands, as
ihall be given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name,
for quietness of the country ; and to put the fhme in execution
under the pain of 10sing their life, lands, and goods." Keith's
flifl, of Scotland, 198.

6*3 a (1 0 p

1 o o re a flop to their proceedings, and by the privilege of

I. repledging, remove the cause to his own court, and

even punilh his vassal, if he submitted to a foreign
jurifdiaion ". Thus almost every queltion, in
which any person who rclided on the lands of the
nobles was intereffed, being determined by judges
appointed by the nobles themselves, their vassals
were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, sub-
jeat to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into
many small principaliries, almost independent, and
held together by a feeble and commonly an im-
perceptible bond of union. And the king was not
only fitripped of the authority annexed to the per-
son of a supreme judge, but his revenue fuffered
no small diminution, by the loss of those pecu-
niary emoluments, which were, in that age, due
to the perfbn who administered juffice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles role towards independence. Not
fatisfiec1 with having obtained a hereditary right to
their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder,
and by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as
human ingenuity and invention can reach that
end, to render their poffeffions unalienable and
everlasting. As they had full power to add to the
inheritance tranfinitted to them from their ancef-
tors, but none to diminish it; rime alone, by
mneans of marriages, legacies, and other accidents,
brought continual acceflions of wealth, and of dig-
nity; a great family, like a river, became confider-
~ble from the length of its course, and as it rolled

* Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

on, new honours and new property flowed fuccef- B Q a K,
lively into it. Whatever influence is derived from I.
titles of honour, the feudal barons likewise pof-
sessed in an ample manner. Theke marks of dif-
tin~tion are, in their own nature, either official or
personal, and being annexed to a particular charge,
or beffowed by the admiration of mankind upon ii-
lufirious charaaters, ought to be appropriated to
these. But the son, however unworthy, could not
bear to be fitripped of that appellation, by which
his father had been diftinguimhed. Flis prefump-
tion claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles
of honour became hereditary, and added new luf-
tre to nobles already in poffefimon of too much
power. Something more audacious and more ex-
travagant still remained. The supreme dire~tion
of all affairs, both civil and military, being com-
mitted to the great officers of the crown, the fame
and safety of princes, as well as of their people, de-
pended upon the fidelity and abilities of these of-
ficers. But such was the preposterous ambition of
the nobles, and so fuccefsful even in their wildefit
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all the
kingdoms where the feudal inflitutions prevailed,
most of these offices were annexed to great fami-
lies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right, A
person whose undutiful behaviour rendered him
odious to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed
him to the contempt of the people, often held a
place of power and trust, of the greiteft import-
ance to both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord
Justice General, Great Chamberlain, High Stew-
ird, High Conitable, Earl Marlhal, and High

C 4 Admiral

B o o K Admiral, were all hereditary; and in many coun-

I. ties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame

manner.

NoBLEs, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want in-
firuments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
merous band of faithfiul and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely fplen-
dour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was
often more crouded than the court of his fove-
reign. The ifrong caffles, in which they resided,
afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and
seditious. A great part of their revenue was spent
upon multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers.
And if at any time they left their retreat to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were
accompanied, even in times of peace, with a vast
train of armed followers. The usual retinue of
William the sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of
0ooo horse. Those of the other nobles were
magnificent and formidable in proportion. Im-
patient of subordination, and fo'rgetting their pro-
per rank, such potent and haughty barons were
the rivals, rather than the fubjec's of their prince.
They often despised his orders, insulted his per-
son, and wrefied from him his crown. And the
hifiory of Europe, during several ages, contains
fittle else, but the accounts of the wars and

8 revo-

revolutions occasioned by their exorbitant ambi- B o o Kc
tion. i.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceed- Theirpow-

ed its proper bounds in the other nations of Eu- Scota nd
rope, we may affirm that the balance which ought tha in any
to be preserved between a king and his nobles was dam.
entirely loft in Scotland. The Scottilh nobles en-
joyed, in common with those of other nations,
all the means for extending their authority which
arise from the ariftocratical genius of the feudal
government. Besides these, they poffeffed advan-
tages peculiar to themselves: The accidental
sources of their power were considerable; and
singular circumitances concurred with the spirit
of the conifitution to aggrandize them. To enu- Thepartr.
merate the most remarkable of these, will serve [,
both to explain the political ifate of the kingdom,
and to illustrate many important occurrences, in
the period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of The nature

of the?

the power and independence of the Scottish nobi- counny.
Sity. Level and open countries are formed for ser-
vitude. The authority of the supreme magistrate
reaches with ease to the most distant corners ; and
when nature has ereaed no barrier, and affords no
retreat, the guilty or obnoxious are soon dete6ted,
and punished. Mountains, and sens, and rivers
set bounds to despotic power, and amidst these, is
the natural feat of freedom and independence. In
such places, did the Scottish nobles usually flx
their residence. By retiring to his own caffle, a
mutinous baron could defy the power of his so-
yereign, it being imrprazlicable to lead an army,

throu rh

B o o K through a barren country, to places almost in-

I. accessible to a single man. The fame causes,

~ which checked the progress of the Roman arms,

and rendered all the efforts of Edward I. abortive,
often proteated the Scottish nobles from the ven-
geance of their prince; and they owed their per-
fonal independence, to those very mountains and
marlhes, which saved their country from being
conquered.

The Fmaln II. THE want Of great cities in Scotland con-

.ber O tributed not a little to increase the power of the

nobility, and to weaken that of the prince.
Wherever numbers of men assemble together, or-
der must be established, and a regular form of go-
vernment inflituted, the authority of the magif.
trate mult be recognized, and his decisions meet
with prompt and full obedience. Laws and sub-
ordination take rife in cities; and where there are
few cities as in Poland, or none as in Tartary,
there are few or no traces of any fort of police.
But under the feudal governments, commerce,
the chief means of assembling mankind, was neg-
ledted; the nobles, in order to fitrengthen their
influence over their vassals, resided among them,
and seldom appeared at court, where they found
a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with
equals. In Scotland, the rich counties in the
South lying open to the English, no town situated
there could riIe to be great or populous amidfl
continual inroads and alarms: The residence of
our monarchs was not fixed to any particular
place; many parts of the country were barren and
VincUltivated 4 and in consequence of there pecu,

iia

liar circumstances, added to the general causes B o o K
flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions, I.
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and C*'
very inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron
occupied a difcina portion of the kingdom, and
formed a separate and almoit independent society.
Instead of giving aid towards reducing to obe-
dience their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he
took under his prote~tion, they were all in arms
for his defence, and obftru6ded the operations of
justice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals, whom he could not reach;
the nobles, conscious of this advantage, were not
afraid to offend; and the difficulty of punishing
almost assured them of impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had The inaii

tution oC

no small efTfe in rendering the nobles confidera- Clans.
ble. The nations, which over-ran Europe, were
originally divided into many small tribes; and
when they came to parcel out the lands which
they had conquered, it was natural for every
chieftain to bellow a portion, in the first place,
upon those of his own tribe or family. These all
held their lands of him; and as the safety of each
individual depended on the general union, these
finall societies clung together, and were diftin-
guifhed by some common appellation, either pa-
tronymical, or local, long before the introduaioi
of firnames, or ef/igns armorial. But when there
became common, the descendants and relations of
every chieftain afuimed the fame name and arms
with him; other vafrals were proud to imitate
their example, and by degrees they were commu-

nicated

B o O K nicated to all those who held of the fame fluperior,

1. Thus clanlhips were formed; and in a generation

or two, that consanguinity which was, at firif, in
a great measure, imaginary, was believed to be
real. An artificial union was converted into a
natural one; men willingly followed a leader,
whom they regarded both as the fluperior of their
lands, and the chief of their blood, and lerved
him not only with the fidelity of vassals, but with
the affeation of friends. In the other feudal king-
doms, we may observe fuich unions, as we have
described, imperfeatly formed; but in Scotland,
whether they were the produaion of chance, or
the efflca of policy, or introduced by the Irish co-
lony above mentioned, and firengthened by care-
fully preserving their genealogies both genuine
and fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Such a
confederacy might be overcome, it could not be
broken; and no change of manners, or of govern.
ment, has been able, in some parts of the king-
uomn, to dissolve associations which are founded
upon prejudices so natural to the human mind,
How formidable were nobles at the head of fol-
lowers, who counting that cause juff and honour-
able which their chief approved, were ever ready
to take the field at his command, and to sacrifice
their lives in defence of his person, or of his fame?
Againit such men, a king contended with great
disadvantage; and that cold service, which money
purchases, or authority extorts, was not an equal
match for their ardour and zeal.

,ru run IV. THE fimallnefs of their number may be
numberoE mentioned among the causes of thle Orandeur of
the nobles. the

the Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back B o o a
to the first division of property in the kingdom; IL
but so far as we can trace the matter, the original
poffellions of the nobles seem to have been ex-
tensive. The ancient Thanes were the equals and
the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls and
barons, who succeeded them, were maffers of ter-
ritories no less ample. France and England,
tountries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to
a numerous and powerful nobility. .Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not
contain many such overgrown proprietors. But
the power of an aristocracy always diminishes, in
proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude; irresistible if cen-
tered in a few; When nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly resemble those of the people;
they are rouked only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend ; and submit to many arbi-
trary .and oppreirnve ails, before they take arnms
against their sovereign. A finall body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible, and more impatient;
quick in discerning, and prompt in repelling dan-
ger; all its motions are as sudden, as those of the
other are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme
jealousy, with which the Scottish nobles observed
their monarchs, and the fierceness with which
they opposed their incroachments. Even the vir-
tue of a prince did not render them less vigilant,
or less eager to defend their rights; and Robert
Bruce, notwithstanding the splendour of his vic-
tories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their resist-

ance,

B o 6 i ance, no less than his unpopular descendant Jameq

I. III. Besides this, the neat alliance of the great
L~'' families, by frequent intermarriages, was the na-

tural consequence of their finall number. And as
consanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond
of union, all the kindred of a nobleman interested
thei1 'clves in his quarrel, as a common cause; and
every contest the king had, though with a single
baron, soon drew upon him the arms of a whole
confederacy.

Ther V. THOSE natural connexions, both with their
Icaguel arid
comtbina equals and with their inferiors, the Scottilh nobles
"in tfrengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar to

themselves, was. at lealt more frequent among
them, than in any other nation. Even in times of
profound peace, they formed associations, which
when made with their equals, were called leaguel
of mutual defence., and when with theit inferiors,
bonds of manrent. By the former, the contracting
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each
other, in all causes, and against all persons. By
the latter, protection was fibpulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and personal service promised
on the other *. Self-prefervation, it is probable,
forced men at firit into these confederacies; and
while disorder and rapine were universal, while go-
vernment was unsettled, and the authority of laws
little known or regarded, near neighbours found it
necessary to unite in this manner for their security,
and the weak were obliged to court the patronage
of the firong. By degrees, these associations be-
came so many alliances offenfive and defensive

O At 3o. Parl. X4Z4. Act 43. P. 1555.

3 againfi

againit the throne; and as their obligation was held B o o ia
to be more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave I.
much umbrage to our kings, and contributed not a
little to the power and independence of the nobili-
ty. In the reign of James II. William the eighth
earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind
withthe earlsof Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond,
the lords Hamilton, Balveny, &c. and so formi-
dable was this combination to the king, that he
had recourse to a measure no less violent than un-
just, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and The fre-

quent wars

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the with Eng.

land.

power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar-
rier between the twokingdoms; a river,almoft eve-
ry where fordable, divides them towards the east:
on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The finall revenues of our kings prevented thern
from fortifying, or placinggarrifons in the towns on
the frontier; nor would thejealoufy of their fubjeats
have permitted such a method of defence. The ba-
rons, whose estates lay near the borders, considered
themselves as bound both in honour and in interest
to repel the enemy. The wardenihips of the different
marches, offices of great trust and dignity, were al-
ways beflowed on them. This gained them the
leading of the warlike counties in the south; and
their valTals, living in a ifate of perpetual hoffility,
or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became more
inured to war than even the reft of their country-
men, and more willing to accompany their chief-
tain in his most hardy and dangerous enterprises.
It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglafes great. The

nobles

B o o tc nobles in the northern and midland counties were

I. often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but

our monarchs always found it impraaicable to
subdue the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of
the borderers. In all our domestic quarrels, those
who could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the
southern counties, were sure of viaory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who poffeffed
authority there, Wvere apt to forget th" duty which
they owed their sovereign; and to aspire beyond
the rank of fubjeas.

The fre. VII. THa calamities which befel our kingrs con-
4uent ml- 1
norities tributed more than any other cause to diminish
which hap.
pened in the royal authority. Never was any race of mo-
Scoeand. narchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix

successive princes, from Robert III. to James VI.
not one died a natural death; and the minorities,
during that time, were longer, and more fre-
quent, than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. we rec-
kon ten princes; and seven of these were called to
the throne, while they were minors, and almost
infants. Even the mofi regular and best efta-
blifhed governments feel sensibly the pernicious
effeas of a minority, and either become languid
and inaaive, or are thrown into violent and unna-
tural convulsions. But, under the imperfeat and
ill-adjuffed fyflem of government in Scotland,
these effec"Ls were liull more fatal; and the fierce
and mutinous Qpirit of the nobles, unreitrained by
the authority of a king, scorned all fubjeiion to the
delegated jurifliifrion of a regent, or to the feeble
commands of a minor. The royal authority

was

Wvas circumscribed within narrower limits than B O O K
'ver; the prerogatives of the crown, naturally in- I*
conliderable, were reduced almost to nothing; and
the ariftocratical power gradually rose upon the
ruins of the monarchical. Left the personal power
of a regent mhould enable him to a&t with too much
vigour, the authority annexed to that office, was
sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being di-
vided; or if a single regent was chosen, the greater
nobles, and the heads of the more illustrious fa-
milies, were seldom raised to that dignity. It was
often conferred upon men, who poffeffed little in-
fluence, and excited nojealoufy. They, confci-
ous of their own wealknefs, were obliged to over-
look some irregularities, and to permit others;
and in order to support their authority, which was
destitute of real strength, they endeavoured to gain
the molt powerful and a~cive barons, by granting
them poffeffions and immunities, which raised
them to fill greater power. *When the King him-
self came to aiaume the reins of government, he
found his revenues waaed or alienated, the crown
lands seized or given away, and the nobles so ac-
cuftomed to independence, that, after the firuggles
of a whole reign, he was seldom able to reduce
them to the fame state, in which they had been at
the beginning of his minority, or to wrest from
them what they had usurped during that time. If Revew o
we take a view of what happened to each of our favourable
kings, who was so unfortunate as to be placed in nobles dur-
this situation, the truth and importance of this rn o t.
observation will fully appear.

VOL. I.

B o o K THE minority of David II. the fan of Robert

I. Bruce, was diffurbed by the pretensions ofEJxward
L~j~ Baliol, who, relying on the aid of Enghl'.nd, and on

DaviJ If. the lIpport of lome di~affeCicd areCns among the

Scors, invaded the kingdom. The fcccs w hich
at firfit attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France ; and Baliol rook polcefion of
the throne. A fnall body of the nobles, however,
continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol outof Scotland; and after an absence of nine
years, David returned from France, and took the
government of the kingdom into his own hands.
But nobles, who were thus wafing their blood and
treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to
the undisturbed pofeffion of their ancient privi-
leges; and even some title to arrogate new ones.
It seems to have been a maxim in that age, that
every leader might claim as his own, the territory
which his sword had won from the ce emy. Great
acquiltions were gained by the ncility in that
way and to these the gratitude and iPbcraiity of
David added, by difributing am nng such as ad-
hered to him, the vase poiihfons n hich fell to the
crown by the fcrfciture of his eocmies. The fa-
mily of Douplas, wh:ch began to rife above the
other nobles, in the reign of]',s fchcr, aurmnented
both its power and its property, duuiiinig his mi-
nority.

t40o. JAMES I. was seized by the Englilh during the

J'U.u I. continuance of a truce, and ungencrouly detained

a prisoner almost nineteen years. During that pe-
riod, the kingdom was governed, sirs by his uncle
Robert duke of Albany, and tlen, by Murdo his

son.,

son. Both these noblemen aspired to the crown; B o o K
and their unnatural ambition, if we may believe 1.
moll of our hiflorians, not only cut short the days
of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but pro-
longed thecaptivity of James. They flattered them.
selves that they might flep with less opposition in-
to a throne, when almolt vacant: and, dreading
the King's return, as the extinaion of their autho.
rity, and the end of their hopes, they carried on
the negociations for obtaining his liberty with ex-
treme remissness. At the fame time, they negleSc?
ed nothing that could either iboth or bribe the no-
bles to approve their scheme. They slackened
the reins of government ; they allowed the prero-
gative to be encroached upon ; they ibffered the
most irregular aCts of power, and even wanton in-
stances of opprefifon, to pass with impunity; they
dealt out the patrimony of the crown among those
whose enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they
had gained ; and reduced the royal authority to a
state of imbecility, from which succeeding mo-
narchs laboured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the admini- iw.

firation of alfairs and the custody of the King's Janu,
person were committed to Sir William Crichton,
and Sir Alexander Livington. Jealoufx and dif-
cord were the eFfe~s of their conjunc? authority,
and each of them, in order to firengthen himfeilf,
bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young earl
of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, eiretcd
a fort of independent principality within the king-
dom3 and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge

Dz gany

II o o K any authority but his own, he created Knights,

I- appointed a privy council, named officers civil

Y and military, assumed every ensign of Royalty,

but the title of King, and appeared in public with
a magnificence more than royal.

146o. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the king-

:ames 110. dom during the minority of James III. Lord

Boyd, however, by seizing the person of the young
King, and by the ascendant which he acquired over
him, soon engrofred the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious project of raising his family
to the fame pitch of power and grandeur with those
of the prime nobility; and he effeaed it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern-
ment, and the Barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power,
wihich Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long continuance, and the fall of his
family, according to the fate of favourites, was
sudden and deflrulive; but upon its ruins, the
family of [-Hamilton rose, which soon attained the
highest rank in the kingdom.

:s-n- V. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or prote~ted either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more re-
gular fa~tions, and disregarded more than ever
the restraints of order and authority. The French
had the advantage of fceing one, devoted to their
interest, raised to be regent. This was the duke
of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of
James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the molt

2 eminent I

eminent of all the Scottish peers, who survived B o o K
the fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his mea- I.
fures, during the first years of his adminjifration;
and the intrigues of the Queen Dowager, fifler
of Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no
less feeble. Though supported by French auxili-
aries, the nobles despised his authority, and, re-
gardlefs either of his threats or his intreaties, per-
emptorily refused, two several times, to enter
England, to the borders of which kingdom he
had led them. Provoked by there repeated in-
stances of contempt, the regent abandoned his
troublesome station, and, retiring to France, pre-
ferred the tranquillity of a private life, to an ofice
def'itute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Anrus became mafler of the
King's person, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of
his usurped authority. But the numerous vassals
and friends of his family adhered to him, because
he divided with them the power and emoluments
of his office; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas he exercised, without the title
of regent, a fuller and more absolute authority
than any who had enjoyed that dignity; and the
ancient, but dangerous pre-eminence of the
Douglafes, seemed to be ref'ored.

To there, and to many other causes, omitted

or unobserved by uw, did the Scottish nobility
owe that exorbitant and uncommon power, of
which inflances occur, so frequently, in our his-
tory. Nothing however demonfirates so fully the
extent of their power, as the length of its duration.

D 3 1Many

1 o o K Many years after the declension of the feudal ryf-

I. tems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and
'Y when the arms or policy of Princes had, every

where, shaken, or laid it in ruins, the founda-
tions of that ancient fabric remained, in a great
measure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

re ower THE powers, which the feudal initirutions vefi-
l ~ ed in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
b-camre- Princes of Europe, who longed to poffers fbme-
I'~cos. thing more than a nominal and precarious autho-

rity. Their impatience to obtain this, precipi-
tated Henry III. of England, Edward II. and
fame other weal: Princes, into rash and premature
attempts againif the privileges of the Barons, in
which they were diiappointed or perifhied. Princes,
of greater abilities, were content to mitigate evils
which they could not cure; they fought occupa-
tion for the turbulent fpi;it of their nobles, in fre-
quent wars ; and allox ed their fiery courage to
evaporate in foreign expeditions, which, if they
brought no other advantage, secured at least do-
meftic tranquillity. But time and accidents ripen.

The a - ed the feudal governments for defiruaion. To-
h .

t wards the end of the fifteenth century, and begin-

~·;!j'j ning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe
;I-r,,ic andattacked, as if by concert, the power of their

nobles. Men of genius then undertook with
success, what their unikilful predecefiors had at-
tempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the moa
profounJ and the moat adventurous genius of that
nge, began, and, in a single reign, almoff com-
pleted the scheme of their deflruction. The fore
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England,

produced

produced the fame effeal. The means, indeed, B o o K
employed by these monarchs were very different. I.
The blow, which Lewis ifruck, was sudden and L
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those
flow poisons, which waste the conflitution, but
become not mortal till some difiant period. Nor
did they produce consequences ltfsoppofite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrefled
from the nobles. Henry undermined his Barons,
by encouraging them to fell their lands, which
enriched the commons, and gave them a weight
in the legislature unknown to their predecessors.
But while these great revolutions were carrying But theno.
on in two kingdoms, with which Scotland was ona
intimately conne~ted, no alteration happened there; g:tler
the King neither extended his own prerogative, nor s tLn d
enabled the commons to encroach upon the aril-
tocracy; the nobles not only retained their an-
cient privileges and poffeffions, but daily made
new acquisitions.

THis was not owing to the inattention of our Our Kings

Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were ""l"co"o'd
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the th~ ryal
nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that
order. They did not, however, poffcfs means sus-
ficient for accomplishing that end. The resources
of our monarchs were few, and the progress which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number of oen-rri
their followers, and the extent of their jurifdiaion, wstunh~a
were the two chief circumstances which rendered end.
the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance
the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings
had recourse to the fame expedients.

D )4 5. Assona

B 0 o K I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of

L unpolifhied manners, fur rounded with vassals bolk

T and licentious, whom they were bourd by intereRt
cifcord a- and honour to protec1, the causes of discord were
rrong the
nobles. many and unavoidable. And as thc contending

parties could seldom agree in ack[Aowukddgmng the
authority of any common fuperio- or j udge, and
their impatient spirit would seldom wait thie flow
decisions of juflice, their quarrels were usually
terminated by the sword. The offcnded Baron
assembled his valfhls, aisd wasted the lands, or foed
the blood of his enemy. To for ive an injury,
was mean ; to forbear revenge, infamous or cow-
ardly *. Hence quarrels were tranlinitted from
father to son, and, under tite name of deadly feuds,
subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated
rancour. It was the interest of the crown to so-

* The irpirit of rcvenp-e was encouraged, not only by the
nanners, but, what I, more remarkable, by the laws of thofc
ages. If any person thought the prosecution of an injiuryoffer.
ed tohis family, too troubi'fome, or too dangerous, the Sa-
lique laws permitted him publicly to lefit from demanding
vengeance; but the fame laws, in order to punish his cow-
ardice, and want of affefion to his family, deprived him of
the rtght of fucceflion. Heonault's Abh-egc Chronol. p. 81.
Among the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular inilitution dif-
tinguifhed by the name of/c &ratiorm; a voluntary acfociation,
the objea whereof was the personal security of those who
joined in it, and which the feebleness of go eminment at that
time renjered necessary. Among other regulations, which
are cont-ined in one of these flill cxtant, the following de-
serves notice: " If any affociace fixll either eat or drink with
a person who has killed any member of the odalitium, unless
in the presence of the King, the BiCop, or the Count, and
unless he can prove that he did not ki.ow the person, let him
pay a great fine." Hicks Dissert. Epiftolar. apud Thefaur.
Ling. Septentr. vol. i. p. zi.

ment

ment rather than to ex:inguifh these quarrels; and B o o K
by scattering or cherifhling the feeds of discord L-
among the nobles, that union which would have
rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which
mult at once have annihilated the prerogative,
was effeaually prevented. To the fame cause,
our Kings were indebted for the success, with
which they sometimes attacked the most powerful
chieftains. They employed private revenge to
aid the impotence of public laws, and arming
againit the person who had incurred their difplea-
sure, those rival families which wihed his fall,
they rewarded their service, by sharing among
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this ex-
pedient, though it served to humble individu-
als, did not weaken the body of the nobility.
Those, who are now the instruments of their
Prince's vengeance, became, in a short time, the
objeais of his fear. Having acquired power and
wealth by serving the Crown, they, in their turn,
set up for independence: And though there might
be a fluatuation of power, and of property; though
old families fell, and new ones role upon their
ruins; the rights of the ariflocracy remained en-
tire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the adminifiration of justice is one of Extnd the

the most powerful ties between a King and his jifriftaion
fubje6s, all our monarchs were at the utmost pains King's
to circumscribe the jurifdiaion of the Barons, courts.
and to extend that of the crown. The external
forms of subordination, natural to the feudal sys-.
tem, favoured this attempt. An appeal lay from
she judges and courts of the Barons, to those of

the

B o o K the King. The right, however, of judging in

I. the first inifance, belonged to the nobles, and
Y' they easily found means to defeat the effe& of ap-

peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations.
The royal jurifdiEion was aimoft confined within
the narrow limits of the King's demefnes, beyond
which his judges claimed indeed much authority,
but poffeffed next to none. Our Kings were fen-
fible of these limitations, and bore them with im-
patience. But it was impoifble to overturn in a
moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to ifrip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had
held so long, and which were wrought almost in-
to the frame of the feudal conflitution. To ac-
complifh this, however, was an object of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other
instances, towards a more regular and perfea po-
lice. He made choice, among the ellates of par-
liament, of a certain number of persons, whom
he distinguish ed by the name of Lords of Scffn,
and appointed them to hold courts for determin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and
forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased
to name. Their jurifdiC'ion extended to all mat-
ters, which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of
parliament, their decisions were final. James II.
obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which
should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring
the right of jurifdiAion to be unalienable for the
future. James III. imposed severe penalties upon
those judges appointed by the Barons, whose de-

cifions

ciflons (hould be found on a review to be unjuff B o o sr
and, by many other regulations, endeavoured to I.
extend the authority of his own court *. James IV. -
on pretence of remedying the inconveniencies
arising from the lhort terms of the court of Seflion,
appointed other judges called Lords of Daily Council.
The Se/ion was an ambulatory court, and met fel-
dom: the Daily Council was fixed, and fat con-
frantly at Edinburgh; and though not composed
of members of parliament, the fame p'owers,
which the Lords of Session enjoyed, were vested in
it. At last James V. ereaed a new court that still
fubfifls, and which he named the Col'cge of 7uftice,
the judges or Senators of which were called Lords
of Couzii nilnd Sefon. This court not only exer-
cifed the fame jur;fdiaion which formerly be-
longed to the. Session and Daily Council, but new
rights were added. Privileges of great import-
ance were granted to its members, its forms were
preferibed, its terms fixed, and regularity, power,
and ijAlendour conferred upon it. The persons
conitituted judges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpeas, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their deci-
lions more consistent. Such judicatories became
the objeats of confidence, and of veneration.
MIen willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their encroachments on the
jurifdiailons of the nobles were popular, and for

# APz6P. 1469. A94P. 1493* A 99P. x4S7.

that

E o O K that reason fiuccefsful. By devices of a similar

I. nature, the jurifdialon of the nobles in criminal
LC causes was refitrained, and the authority of the

court of Juluticiary extended. The crown, in this
particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobies, re-
covered more ample authority; and the King,
whofejurifdiaion once resembled that of a Baron,
rather than that of a sovereign *, came more and

mo0e

* The moil perfefh idea of the feudal fyllem of government

may be attained by attending to the slate of Germany, and to
the hiflory of France. In the forme'r, the feudal inflitutions
fill fubfsft with great vigour; and though altogether abolilhed
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully pre-
served, that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been
enabled, with more certainty and precision, than those of any
other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and
revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be con-
fidered as a fief, and all its great Princes as vassals, holding
of the Emperor. They poffis all the feudal prix ileges: their
fiefs areperpetual; theirjurif'ictions within their own ternito-
ries, separate and extensive; and the great offices of thecmpire
are all hereditary, and anne'eed to particular families. At the
fame time the Emperor retains many of the prerogatives of the
feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretensions are
innumerable, and his power small; his jurifdialon within his
own demefnes or hereditary countries, is complete; beyond
the bounds of these it is almoil nothing; and so permanent are
feudal principles, that although the feudal fyflem be over-
turned in almost every particular fdate in Germany, and al-
though its Princes have all become abfolutc, the original
feudal conflitution of the empire flill remains, and ideas pecu-
liar to that form of government direa all its operations, and
determine the rights of all its Princes. O r observations
with aegard to the limited jurifdiaion of kings un der the feu-
dal governments, are greatly illuifrated by whaL happened in
France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of
Charlemaigne encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent
jurifdiaion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown;

all

more to be considered as the head of the com- B o o K
munity, and the supreme dispenser of juffice to I*
his people. These acquisitions of our Kings, Y
however, though comparatively great, were in
reality inconsiderable; and, notwithstanding all
their efforts, many of the separate jurifdiations
poffeffed by the nobles remained in great vigour;
and their final abolition was reserved to a difiant
and more happy period.

BUT besides these methods of defending their Each of our

prerogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which < roC
may be considered as common to all our Princes, Plan of
we shall find, by taking a review of their reigns, the nobiSe·
that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert
Bruce to James V. had formed some particular
system for deprefling the authority of the nobles,
which was the objeat both of their jealoury and
terror. This conduit of our monarchs, if we
reft satisfied with the accounts of their hiflorians,
must be considered as flowing entirely from their
resentment against particular noblemen; and all
their attempts to humble them, muff be viewed
as the sallies of private passion, not as the confe-
quences of any general plan of policy. But, though

all was seized by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the
throne, A. D. 987. he kept poffeflion of his private patri-,
mony the Conte of Paris, and all the jurifdiAion, which the
Kings his successors exercised for some time, was within its
territories. There were only four towns in France, where he
could eflabliflh Grands Baillis, or royal judges; all the other
lands, towns, and baillages belonged to the nobles. The me-
thods to which the French monarchs had recourse for extending
their jurifdidion, were exaalyfimilar to those employed by our
Princes. Henault's Abreg6, p. 617, &c. De l'Efprit des
Loix, liv. 30. chl. o, &c,

some

B o O K some of their actions may be imputed to those

I. paflions, though the different genius of the men,

b the temper of the times, and the slate of the na-

tion, necessarily occasioned great variety in their
schemes; yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceffive refinement, we may affirm that their end

rThsprov- was uniformly the fame. And the project of re-
ed by a re-
viewofthe ducing the power of the ariflocracy, sometimes
even s mn
theirreigns. avowed, and pursued wth vigour ; sometimes

concealed, or seemingly suspended; was never
altogether abandoned.

Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles
Bruce.

re than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the

kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His
gratitude and generosity beflowed on them the
lands of the vanquished. Property has seldom
undergone greater or more sudden revolutions,
than those to which it was fubjec, at that time,
in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the
eflates of most of the ancient Scottish Barons,
granted them to his English fibjefts. These
were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new masters. Amidit such rapid changes,
confusion was unavoidable; and many pofeffed
their lands by titles extremely defEtive. During
one of those truces between the two nations, oc-
cafioned rather by their being weary of war, than
desirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for
checking the growing power and wealth of the
nobles. HIe iummoned them to appear, and to
fLew by what rights they held their lands. They
assembled accordingly, and the queltion being
put, they started up, at once, and drew their

ivords,

swords, "e By these, said they, we acquired our B o 0 K
lands, and with these we will defend them." I.
The King, intimidated by their boldness, pru-
dently dropt the projea. But so deeply did they
resent this attack upon their order, that, notwith-
flanding Robert's popular and splendid virtues,
it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy againit his
life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, as- Davd II,

terwards a prisoner in England, and involved in
continual war with Edward III. had not leisure to
attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or
to think of retrenching the privileges of the no-
bility.

OUR hifforians have been more careful to relate Robertll.

the military, than the civil tranfaaions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmifnes and inroads of little
consequence, they describe minutely; but with re-
gard to every thing that happened, during several
years of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble administration of Robert III. mutt Robertill.

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly conflitution,
was not a fit person to enter the lifts with aaive
and martial Barons, or to attempt wresting from
them any of their rights.

THE Civil tranfaaions in Scotland are better James ,

known fnce the beginning of the reign of James I.
and a complete fcries of our laws supplies the de-
feats of our hifforians. The English made some
amends for their injustice in detaining that Prince
a prisoner, by their generous care of his education.

3 During

B o o K During his long residence in England, he had adl

I. opportunity of observing the feudal fyfilem in ai

more advanced slate, and refined from many of
the imperfeaions which iftill adhered to it, in his
own kingdom. iHe saw there nobles great, but
not independent; a King powerful, though far
from absolute; he saw a regular adminiffration of
government; wife laws enaBted; and a nation
flourishing and happy, because all ranks of men
were accuicomed to obey them. Full of these
ideas, he returned into his native country, which
presented to him a very different scene. The
royal authority, never great, was now contempt-
ible, by having been so long delegated to regents.
The ancient patrimony, and revenues of the
crown, were almost totally alienated. During
his long absence, the name of a King was little
known, and less regarded. The licence of many
years had rendered the nobles independent. Uni-
versal anarchy prevailed. The weak were ex-
posed to the rapine and oppreflion of the firong.
In every corner some barbarous chieftain ruled at
pleasure, and neither feared the King, nor pitied
the people *.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open

force to correal such inveterate evils. Neither the

A cotemporary Monkish writer deferibes these calamities

very feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis, non erat lex
in Scotia, fed quilibet potentiorum juniorem oppreffit; et
totum regnum suit unum latrocinium; homicidia, deprreda-
tiones, incendia, et caetera maleficia remanferunt impunita;
etjuflitia relegata extra terminos regni exulavit. Chartularr
Morav. apud Innes Efaly, vol. i. p. 272.

men, rior the times would have born it. He ap- B O O K
plied the gentler, and less offenfive remedy of laws I.
and itatutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his return, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
establish order, tranquillity, and juffice, in the
kingdom. But, at the fame time that he endea-
voured to secure these blessings to his fubjeAs, he
discovered his intention to recover those poffefilons
of which the crown had been juffly bereaved; and
for that purpose obtained an aA, by which he was
impowered to summon those who had obtained
crown lands during the three lass reigns, to pro-
duce the rights by which they held them *. As this
statute threatened the property of the nobles, ano-
ther which passed in a fubfequentparliament, aimed
a dreadful blow at their power. By it the leagues
and combinations, which we have already defcrib-
ed, and which rendered the nobles so formidable
to the crown, were declared unlawful J. Encou-
raged by this success in the beginning of his en-
terprife, James's next ifep was still bolder and
more decisive. During the fitting of parliament,
he seized, at once, his cousin Murdo Duke of Al-
bany, and his sons; the Earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other peers
and barons of prime rank. To all of them, how-
ever, he was immediately reconciled, except to Al-
bany, and his sons, and Lennox. These were
tried by their Peers, and condemned; for what
crime is now unknown. Their execution ffruck
the whole order with terror, and their forfeiture

* Aa 9 P. 1424. + AS 30 P. 1424.

YoVL. I, E added

B o 0 K added vait poffefllons to the crown. He seized,

I. likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern,

upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell to
him by inheritance. The patience and inaaivity
of the nobles, while the King was proceeding so
rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown, are amaz-
ing. The only obftrution he met with was from
a flight infurreAion headed by the Duke of Al-
bany's youngest sons and that was easily sup-
pressed. The splendour and presence of a King,
to which the great men had been long unaccuf-
tomed, inipired reverence: James was a Princeof
great abilities, and conduated his operations with
much prudence. Ile was in friendnhip with Eng-
land, ard closely allied with the French King: He
was adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual fe-
curity and happiness under his adminiffration: And
all his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of
the nobles, had been gained by attacks upon in-
dividuals; were obtained by decisions of law;
and being founded on circumifances peculiar to
the persons who fuffered, might excite murmurs
and apprehensions, but affordcd no colourable
pretext for a general rebellion. It was not so with
the next attempt which the King made. Encou-
raged by the facility with which he had h:therto
advanced, he ventured upon a measure that irri-
tated the whole body of the nobility, and which
the events shew either to have been entered into
with too much precipitancy, or to have been car-
ried on with too much violence. The father of
George Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms
againit Robert III. the King's father; but that
crime had been pardoned, and his la::ds restored

8 by

by Robert duke of Albany. James, on pretext B o o K
that the regent had exceeded his power, and that I*
it was the prerogative of the King alone to pardon
treafoni or to alienate lands annexed to the crown,
obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be
void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Ma-
ny of the great men held lands by no other right
than what they derived from grants of the two
Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though they
had reason to expel it in consequence of the ita-
tute which the King had obtained, occasioned a
general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at present,
the only fufferer, the precedent might be extended,
and their titles to poffefIlons, which they conflder-
ed as the rewards of their valour, might be fiub-
jeaed to the reviewof courts of law, whose forms of
proceeding, and jurifdiaion, were in a martial age
little known, and extremely odious. Terror and
discontent spread fast, upon this discovery of the
King's intentions; the common danger called on
the whole order to unite, and to make one bold
stand, before they were firipped flucceflively of
their acquisitions, and reduced to a ifate of po-
verty and insignificance. The prevalence of these
sentiments among the nobles encouraged a few
desperate men, the friends or followers of those
who had been the chief fifferers under the King's
administration, to form a conspiracy against his
life. The first uncertain intelligence of this was
brought him, while he lay in his camp before
Roxburgh caifle. Lie durit nor confide in nobles,
to whom he had given so many causes of d~iguf,
but instantly difulilled them and their vassals, and,

E z retiring

B O O K retiring to a monastery near Perth, was soon after

I. murdered there, in the mout cruel manner. All

our hiflorians mention, with affonifhment, this
circumfitance of the King's dilbanding his army, at
a time when it was so neceihTry for his preferva-
tion. A King, fay they, surrounded with his Ba-
rons, is secure from secret treason, and may defy
open rebellion. But those very Barons were the
persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is evi-
dent from this review of his adminiliration, that
he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expect defence from their hands. It was the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived.
Happy! had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-
lized; his love of peace, of juflice, and of ele-
gance, would have rendered his schemes success-
ful; and instead of perishing because he had at-
tempted too much, a grateful people would have
applauded and reconded his efforts to reform and
to improve them.

James H. CRTCHTON, the most able man of those who

had the direction of alfairs during the minority of
James II. had been the minister of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling
the nobility. He did not relinquish the design,
and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the
fame sentiments. But what James had attempted
to effedt flovwly, and by legal means, his son and
Crichton pursued with the impetuoiity natural to
Scotfien, and with the fiercenes:s peculiar to that
age. William the sixth Earl of Dmugias was the
first vitim to their barbaiuus policy. That young

nobleman

nobleman (as we have already observed) con- B o to
temning the authority of an infant prince, almost I.
openly renounced his allegiance, and aspired to
independence. Crichton, too high-fpirited to
bear such an insult, but too weak to curb or to
bring to justice so powerful an offender, decoyed
him by many promises to an interview in the cafile
ofEdinburgh, and, notwithifanding these, mur-
dered both him and his brother. Crichton, how-
ever, gained little by this a& of treachery, which
rendered him universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas was no less powerful, and
no less formidable to the crown. By forming the
league which we already mentioned with the Earl
of Crawford and other Barons, he had united
againit his Sovereign almost one half of his king-
dom. But his credulity led him into the fame
snare which had been fatal to the former Earl.
Relying on the King's promises, who had now at-
tained to the years of manhood, and having ob-
tained a fafe-condua under the great feal, he ven-
tured to meet him in Stirling caflle. James
urged him to dissolve that dangerous confederacy
into which he had entered; the Earl obitinately
refused; ," If you wilV not," said the enraged
monarch, drawing his dagger, " This thall ;" and
stabbed him to the heart. An aaion so unworthy
of a King filled the nation with affonifhment, and
with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms vith
the utmost flury, and dragging the fafe-condu&,
which the King had granted and violated, at a
horfe's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
the town, and threatened to besiege the cafife.
An accommodation ensued; on what terms is not

E 3 known,

OO K known. But the King's jealousy, and the new
I. Earl's power and rcfentment, prevented it from
LT being of long continuance. Both took the field,

at the head of their armies, and met near Aber-
corn. That of the Earl, composed chiefly of
borderers, was far superior to the King's, both in
number and in valour; and a single battle mult,
in all probability, have decided whether the house
of Stewvart or of Douglas was henceforth to pof-
fess the throne of Scotland. But, while his troops
impatiently expecIed the signal to engage, the
Earl ordered them to retire to their camp; and Sir
James Hamdtion of Cadyow, the person in whom
he placed the greatest confidence, convinced of
his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or
of his want of courage to seize a crown, deferred
him that very night. This example was followed
by many; and the Earl, despised or forsaken by
all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and
obliged to depend for his subSistence on the friend-
(hip of the King of England. The ruin of this
great family, which had so long rivalled and over-
awed the crown, and the terror with which such
an example of unfuccefsfil ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for some time, from
opposition; and the royal authority remained un-
controlled and aimcft absolute. James did not
fuffer this favourable interval to pass uinimproveds
he procured the consent of parliameut to laws
more advant igcous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the ariflocracy, than
were ever obtained by any fcrmcr or subsequent
monarch of Scotland.

BY one of these, not only all the vafl poffeffions B o o K

of the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, I.
but all prior and future alienations of crown lands
were declared to be void, and the King was im-
powered to seize them at pleafuire, without any
process or form of law, and oblige the poffefforS
to refund whatever they had received from them*.
A dreadful instrument of oppreflion in the hands
of a Prince !

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; reifrained, in
several initances, the jurifdiaion of that office;
and extended the authority of the King's courts f.

BY a third, it was enaaied that no Regality, or

exclusive right of administering justice within a
man's own lands, should be granted in time to
come, without the consent of Parliament i'; a con-
dition, which implied almost an express prohibi-
tion. Those nobles who already poffeffed that
great privilege, would naturally be solicitous to
prevent it from becoming common, by being be-
fcowed on many. Those who had not themfeives
attained it, would envy others the acquisition of
such a flattering diftindcion; and both would con-
cur in rejeaing the claims of new pretenders.
. By a fourth a&, all new grants of hereditary
offices were prohibited, and those obtained since
the death of the lafi King were revoked §.

Each of these statutes undermined fame of the

great pillars on which the power of the aristocracy
rested. During the remainder of his reign, this

* Aa 41 P. 1i55. t Ibid. Aft 42.
4 Ibid. As 43. § AM 44.

E 4. Prince

Bo K Prince pursued the plan which he had begun)

L. with the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden

L death, occasioned by the iplinter of a cannon

which burif near him at the siege of Roxburgh,
prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius
nor courage to perfea it: And Scotland might,
in all probability, have been the firit kingdom in
Europe which would have seen the subversion of
the feudal fyitem.

James rll. JAMES III. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and ad-
dress, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and poffeffed of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were
likewise his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif-
tance, and bertowed every mark of confidence and
aff'eaion upon a few mean persons, of profeffions
lb dilhonourable, as ought to have rendered them
unworthy of his presence. Shut up with these in
his caffle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public,
and amused himfclf with architecture, music, and
other arts, which were then little esteemed. The
nobles beheld the power and favour of these mi-
nions with indignation. Even the sanguinary mes-
fiures of his father provoked them less than his ne-
gleA. Individuals alone fiufred by the former;
by the latter, every man thought himfclf injured,

becaufy

because all were contemned. Their discontent was B o o K
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights I.
to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and L
every other conceflion which was detrimental to
his prerogative, andwhich had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual
preparatives for civil war, were the effeas of their
resentment. AlexanderDuke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame
coldness as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into all their cabals. The King dereaed
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and, seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The Earl of Mar
having remonitrated with too much boldness against
the King's condu6a, was murdered, if we may be-
lieve our hiflorians, by his command. Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape oue
of the castle, and fled into France. Concern for
the King's honour, or indignation at his measures,
were perhaps the motives which first induced him
tojoin the malecontents. But James's attachment
to favourites rendering him every day more odi-
ous to the nobles, the profpea of the advantages
which might be derived from their general difaf-
fecion, added to the resentment which he felt on
account of his brother's death, and his own in-
juries, soon inspired Albany with more ambitious
and criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty with
Edward IV. of England, in which he assumed the

name

B o o K name of Alexander King of Scots; and in return

I. for the alliftance which was promised him towards
r dethroning his brother, he bound himself, so soon

as he was put in poffafion of the kingdom, to
swear fealty and do homage to the English mo-
narch, to renounce the ancient alliance with
France, to contrat a new one with England, and
to furrendcr some of the firongeft castles and most
valuable counties in Scotland*. That aid, which
the Duke so basely purchased at the price of his
own honour, and the independence of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of
Gloucester with a powerful army condufted him
towards Scotland. The danger of a foreign in-
vafion obliged James to implore the assistance of
those nobles whom he had so long treated with
contempt. Some of them were in close confe-
deracy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were impatient for
any event which would reitore their order to its
ancient pre-eminence. They took the field, how-
ever, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-
lowers, but with a stronger disposition to redress
their own grievances, than to annoy the enemy;
and with a fixed resolution of puniflhing those mi·
nions, whose insolence they could no longer to.
lerate. This rcfolution they executed in the
camp near Lawdcr, w;th a military dispatch and
rigour. Having previously concerted their plan,
the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by
almost all the barons of chief note in the army,
forcibly entered the apartment of their sovereign,

*
s :c;r. 1\Lrt. Atoh1. v-. U. p. 4Tf3.

seized

seized all his favourites except one Ramsay, whom B o o rs
they could not tear from the King, in whose arms I.
he took shelter, and, without any form of trial, "
hanged them initantly over a bridge. Among the
most remarkable of those who had engrossed the
King's affeaion, were Cochrah a mason, Hommil
a taylor, Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and
Torfifan a fencing-maiter. So despicable a reti-
nue discovers the capricioufnels of James's cha-
raaer, and accounts for the indignation of the
nobles, when they beheld the favour, due to theme
beflowed on such unworthy objeals.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his command, and, difiniffing it, fhuc
himself up in the castle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he feerned even to
have regained his brother's favour, by some im-
portant services. But their friendship was not of
long duration. James abandoned himself, once
more, to the guidance of favourites; and the fate
of those who had fuffered at Lawder, did not de-
ter others from courting that dangerous pre-emi-
nence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had
been made to take away his life by poison, fled
from court, and, retiring to his castle at Dunbar,
drew thither a greater number of Barons than at-
tended on the King himself. At the fame time,
he renewed his former confederacy with Edward;
the Earl ofAngus openly negociated that infamous
treaty; other Barons were ready to concur with
it; and if the sudden death of Edward had not
prevented Albany's receiving any aid from Eng-

land,

B o 0 K land, the crown of Scotland would probably have

I. been the reward of this unworthy combination

with the enemies of his country. But, inifead of
any hopes of reigning in Scotland, he found, up-
on the death of Edward, that he could not reside
there in safety; and flying firif to England, and
then to France, he seems from that time to have
taken no part in the affairs of his native country.
Emboldened by his retreat, the King and his
Miniffers multiplied the insults which they of-
fered to the nobility. A itanding guard, a thing
unknown under the feudal governments, and in-
consistent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their
nobles, was raised for the King's defence, and the
command of it given to Ramsay, lately created
Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who had so
narrowly escaped when his companions were put
to death at Lawder. And, as if this precaution
had not been fufficient, a proclamation was issued,
forbidding any person to appear in arms within
the precinds of the court *; which, at a time
when no man of rank left his own house without a
numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in es-
fe&, debarring the nobles from all access to the
King. James, at the fame time, became fonder
of retirement than ever, and, funk in indolence
or fiuperitition, or attentive only to amusements,
devolved his whole authority upon his favourites.
So many injuries provoked the most considerable
nobles to take arms, and having persuaded or
obliged the Duke of Rothesay, the King's eldedt

*Ferrerius, 393.

son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at their B 0 9 K
head, they openly declared their intention of de- L
priving James of a crown, of which he had dif- c
covered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannock-
burn; but the valour of the Borderers, of whom
the army of the malecontents was chiefly com-
posed, soon put his troops to flight, and he him-
self was slain in the puriuit. Suspicion, indo-
lence, immoderate attachment to favourites, and
all the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his
whole conduct; but the charaaer of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjuffly affixed to
him by our hiflorians. His negleR of the nobles
irritated, but did not weaken them; and their
discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two
brothers, and their unnatural confederacies with
England, were fufficient to have disturbed a more
vigorous administration, and to have rendered a
prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation which many persons of rank

expressed against the condu& of the conspirators,
together with the terror of the sentence of excom-
munication which the Pope pronounced against
them, obliged them to use their viAory with
great moderation and humanity. And being
conscious how detectable the crime of imbruing
their hands in the blood of their sovereign ap-
peared, they endeavoured to regain the good
opinion of their countrymen, and to atone for the
treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty
towards the son. They placed him inifantly on

x the

B o o K the throne, and the whole kingdom soon united

I. in acknowledging his authority.

James Iv. JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave;

he felt, in an high degree, all the passions which
animate a young and noble mind. He loved
magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager
to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient
and hereditary enmity between the King and
nobles seems almost entirely to have ceased. He
envied not their splendor, because it contributed
to the ornament of his court ; nor did he dread
their power, which he considered as the security
of his kingdom, not as an objec? of terror to him-
self. This confidence on his part met with the
proper return of duty and affefcion on theirs;
and, in his war with England, he experienced
how much a King, beloved by his nobles,
is able to perform. Though the ardour of his
courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than
the prospect of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition ; such was the zeal of
his fubjels for the King's glory, that he was fol-
lowed by as gallant an army, as ever any of his
ancestors had led upon English ground. But
though James himself formed no scheme danger-
ous or decrimental to the aristocracy, his reign
was difltingui led by an event extremely fatal to
it; and one accidental blow humbled it more
than all the premeditated attacks of preceding
Kings. In the raflh and unfortunate battle of
Flowden, a brave nobility chole rather to die than
to desert their Sovercign. Twelve Earls, thir-
teen Lords, five eldeti sons of noblemen, and an

incredible

incredible number of barons, fell with the King *. B o o Ic
The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly, I*
felt this difaffer; and if a Prince of full age had -'
then ascended the throne, their conf'ernation and
feebleness would have afforded him advantages
which no former monarch ever poiffifed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was JamesV.

an infant of a year old; and though the office of
regent was conferred on the Duke of Albany, a
man of genius and enterprise, a native of France,
and accuffomed to a government where the power
of the King was already great; though he made
many bold attempts to extend the royal autho-
rity; though he put to death Lord Home, and
banished the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of
greatest influence in the kingdom, the aristocracy
loft no ground under his administration. A
stranger to the manners, the laws, and the lan-
guage of the people whom he was called to rule,
he aCIed, on fbme occaflons, rather like a viceroy
of the French King, than the governor of Scot-
land; but the nobles asserted their own privileges,
and contended for the interest of their country
with a boldness, which convinced him of their in-
dependence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unfuccefsful itruggles,
he voluntarily retired to France; and the King
being then in his thirteenth year, the nobles
agreed that he should afibme the government,
and that eight persons ihould be appointed to at-
tend him by turns, and to advise and afflit him in

* Aber. ii. 54.

B o O K the adminjifration of public affairs. The Earl

I. of Angus, who was one of that number, did not

'"y' long remain satisfied with such divided power.

He gained some of his colleagues, removed others,
and intimidated the reft. When the term of his
attendance expired, he itill retained authority, to
which all were obliged to submit, because none
of them was in a condition to dispute it. The
affe~ion of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But
an aaive and high-fpirited Prince submitted, with
great impatience, to the reitraint in which he was
kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
confined as a prisoner within his own palace; to
be treated with no refpea, and to be deprived of
all power. He could not, on some occasions, con-
ceal his indignation and resentment. Angus
foresaw that he had much to dread from these; and
as he could not gain the King's heart, he resolved
to make filre of his person. James was conti-
nually surrounded by the Earl's spies and confi-
dents; many eyes watched all his motions, and
observed every fiep he took. But the King's eager-
ness to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance.
He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the cafile
of Stirling, the residence of the Qujeen his mo-
ther, and the only place of firength in the king-
dom which was not in the hand of the Douglafes.
The nobles, of whom some were influenced by
their hatred to Angus, and others by their refpet
for the King, crowded to Stirling, and his court
was soon filled wivh perfoS, of the greatest dif-

tinaion.

tinction. The Earl, though af'conifhed at this un- B o o K
expeaed revolution, resolved, at firit, to make one I*
bold push for recovering his authority, by march- '~r'
ing to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he
wanted either courage or fitrength to execute this
resolution. In a parliament held soon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after escaping from
many dangers, and enduring much misery, he was
at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no prince of that age in gracefulness
of person, or in vigour of mind. His understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm; the former ca-
pable of great improvement, and the latter fifcep-
tible of the best impreflions. But according to the
usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne in
their infancy, his education had been negleted.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to infiru( him. It was the intereit of those
who governed the kingdom, to prevent him from
knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in
order to divert him from business, gave him an early
taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and
engrof'ed him more than became a King. Accord-
ingly we discover in James all the features of a
great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pafifons, implacable resentment, an immo-
derate desire of power, and the utmost rage at dif-
appointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punishment of private opprefiors, con-
fidence in his favourites, and the mofit engaging
openness and affability of behaviour.

VOL. I. F WHaT

B o o s. WIHrAT he himself had fulfered from the exorbi.

I. tant power of the nobles, led him early to imitate

'-' his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.

The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more fyffematic, and pursued with greater
conflancy and steadiness, than that of any of his
ancestors. And the influence of the events in his
reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
it necessary to explain his conduEt at greater length,
and to enter into a more minute detail of his ac-
tions. Hle had penetration enough to discover those
defeais in the schemes adopted by former Kings,
which occasioned their miscarriage. The example
of James I. had taught him, that wife laws ope-
rate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The effeas of the violent measures
of James II. convinced him, that the opprefilon of
one great family is apt either to excite the suspicion
and resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich
with its spoils some new family, which would soon
adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally
formidablk to the crown. He saw, from the fatal
end of James III. that negle2 was still more in-
tolerable to the nobles than opprefflon, and that
the Miniffry of new men and favourites was both
dithonourable and dangerous to a Prince. At the
fame time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not fufficient to counterbalance the power of
the ariflocracy, and that without some new accession
of trength, he could expecr no better success in
the firuggle than his ancestors. In this extremity,
he applied himfeilf to the clergy, hoping that they

z would

Would both relish his plan, and concur, with all B o o K
their influence, in enabling him to put it in ex- 1.
ecution. Under the feudal government,the church, C
being reckoned a third estate, had its reprefenta-
tives in parliament; the number of these was con-
fiderable, and they poffeffed great influence in that
assembly. The superstition of former Kings, and
the zeal of an ignorant age, had bellowed on ec-
clefiaftics a great proportion of the national
wealth; and the authority which they acquired by
'the reverence of the people, was superior even to
that which they derived from their riches. This
powerful body, however, depended entirely on the
crown. The Popes, notwithstanding their atten-
tion to extend their ufurpations, had neglealed
Scotland as a difitant and poor kingdom, and per-
mitted its Kings to exercise powers which they
disputed with more considerable princes. The
Scottish monarchs had the sole right of nomination
to vacant bifhoprics and abbeys*; and James na-
turally concluded, that men who expeaed prefer-
ment from his favour, would be willing to merit
it, by promoting his designs. Happily for him,
the nobles had not yet recovered the blow which
fell on their order at Flowden; and if we may
judge either from their condut, or from the cha-
raaer given of them by Sir Ralph Sadler the Eng-
liih envoy in Scotland, they were men of little
genius, of no experience in business, and incapa-
ble of afing either with unanimity, or with vi-
gour. Many of the clergy, on the other hand,
were diftingulfhed by their great abilities, and no

* Epiit. Reg. Scot. I. 197, &C. At I 5. P. 1540.

F2 less

B o o i lets by their ambition. Various causes of difgtu

I. had arisen between them and the nobles, who de-
-' fpifed their charaaer, and envied their power, or

their wealth. By ading in concert with the King,
they not only gratified him, but avenged them-
jlves, and hoped to aggrandise their own order,
by deprelfing those who were their sole rivals. Se-
cure of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured
to proceed with greater boidnefs. In the first heat
of refentmenr, he had driven the Earl of Angus
out of the kingdom; and sensible that a person, so
far superior to the other nobles in abilities, might
create many obitacles, which would retard or ren-
der inefieOual all his schemes, he solemnly swore,
that he would never permit him to return into
Scotland ; and, notwithifanding the repeated soli-
citations of the King of England, he adhered to his
vow with unrelenting obflinacy. He thenproceed-
ed to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stir-
ling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken these
precautions by way of defence, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve.
Those offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
felion, to confider as appropriated to their order,
were now beltowed on eccleflatics, who alone pof-
feifed the King's ear, and, together with a few gen-
tlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had commu-
nicated his schemes, were intrufed with the ma-
nagement of all public affairs. These ministers
were chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Bea-
toun, who soon became the most eminent among
them, was a man of superior genius. They served

the

the King with fidelity, they carried on his measures B o o K
with vigour, with reputation, and with success. L
James no longer concealed his contempt of the no-
bles, and fuffered no opportunity of mortifying
them to escape. Slight offences were aggravated
into real crimes, and punished with feveriry. Every
accusation againRt persons of rank was heard with
pleasure, every appearance of guilt was examined
with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to those
who were accused: the banishing Hepburn Earl
of Bothwell for reasons extremely frivolous, the
beheading the Master of Forbes without fufficient
evidence of his guilt, and the condemning Lady
Glamis, a lter of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt
for the crime ofwitchcraft, of which even that cre-
dulous age believed her innocent, are monuments
both of the King's hatred of the nobility, of the
severity of his government, and of the firetches
he made towards absolute power. By these a~cs
of authority, he tried the spirit of the nobles, and
how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his contempt for them, and add-
ed to the ardour and boldness with which he pur-
fuied his plan. Meanwhile they observed the ten-
dency of his schemes with concern, and with re-
fentment ; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance
of his minifcers, and the want of a proper leader,
made it dangerous to concert any measures for
their defence, and impossible to aa with becom-
ing vigour. James and his counfeilors, by a false
itep which they took, presented to them, at
length, an advantage which they did not fail po
improve,

F 3 IMoTIvs,

B o o K MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted

I. Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and

to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
system of reformation satisfied none of his fubjeas,
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so
far, others murmured because he proceeded no far,
ther; and by his imperious temper, and alternate
perfecutions of the zealots for Popery, and the con-
verts to the Protestant opinions, he was equally for-
mnidable to both. Henry was afraid that this gene-
ral difratisfaRion of his people might encouragte his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the friendship of the king of Scots, and endeavour-
ed to engage him in an alliance against England.
Hie resolved, therefore, to disappoint the c'ecls of
their negociations, by entering into a closer union
with his nephew, and for that purpose sent ambaf-
fadors into Scotland, to propose a personal inter-
view with him at York. It w as plainly James's in-
terest to accept this invitation; the af~lfianct of so
powerful an ally, the high honours which were pro-
mifed him, and the liberal subsidies he might have
obtained, would have added no little dignity to his
domeflic government, and muit have greatly faci-
litated the execution of his favourite plan. On the
other hand, a war with England, which he had rea-
son to apprehend, if he rejeAcd Henry's offers of
friendship, was inconsistent with all his views. This
would bring him to depend on his barons; an army
could not be raised without their assistance: To
call nobles incensed against their prince into the
field, was to unite his enemies, to make them fen-

fible

fble of their own fitrength, and to afford them an B o o K
opportunity of revenging their wrongs. James, I*
who was not ignorant that all these consequences ''J
mightfollow a breach with England, liffened atfirif
to Henry's proposal, and consented to the inter-
view at York. But the clergy dreaded an union,
which muff have been eflablifhed on the ruins of
the church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse
into his nephew his own fcntiments concerning
religion, and had frequently solicited him, by am-
baffadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the
Pope, which was no less dishonourable to princes,
than grievous to their fIabjeas. The clergy had
hitherto, with great addres, diverted the Kin-
froni regarding these folicitations. But, in an ami-
cable conference, Henry expeOaed, and they fear-
ed, that Jamees would yield to his entreaties, or be
convinced by his arguments. They knew thac the
revenues of the church were an alluring objed1 to a
Prince who v anted money, and wx ho loved it; that
the pride and ambition of eccleliaftics raield thie
indignation of the u'obles; that their iniecent li-ce
gave offence to the people; that the Pro etflnt
opinions were spreading fLft throughour the na-
tion; and that a'1 univerfld d fcdon from., the cfla-
blified church would be the confcquence of givinp
the ihnalleft derrree of encouragement to the1f
priciples. I'or these reasons, they emnploved all
their credit with the King, and had recourse to eve
ry artifice and insinuation, in order to divcrt lmn
from a jou:aye, which muff have been {b f1t al to
their ictereiR. They endeavoured to inspire ilii
with feo:r, bi nrar-nifying thve d incor to which hie

[ j.i ?

B o o K would expose his person, by venturing so far into

I. England, without any security but the word of a

Prince, who having violated every thing venerable
and sacred in religion, we s no longer to be trusted;
and by way of compensation for the sums which he
might have received from Henry, they offered an
annual donative of 50,000 crowns; they promised
to contribute liberally towards carrying on a war
with England, and lattered him with the profpea
of immeafe riches, arising from the forfeiture of
persons who were to be tried and condemned as
heretics. Influenced by these considerations, James
broke his agreement with Henry, who, in expe&a-
tion of meetinn him, had already come to York;
and that haughty and impatient Monarch resented
the affront, by declaring war againit Scotland.
His army was soon ready to invade the kingdom.
James was obliged to have recourse to the nobles,
for the defence of his dominions. At his com-
mand, they affermbled their followers: but with the
fame dispositions which had animated their ancef-
tors in the reign of James III and with a full re-
solution of ilitating their example, and by puniih-
ing those to whom they imputed the grievances
of which they had reason to complain; and if the
King's M:niters had not been mcn of abilities, so-
perior to those of James III. and of considerable
interest even with their enemics, who could not
agree among themfehi es what viaims to sacrifice,
the camp of F1ala would have been as remarkable
as that of Lawder, for the daring encroachments
of the nobility on the prerogative of the Prince.
But though his minifcers were fsved by this ag-

cident,

cident, the nobles had soon another opportunity of B o o K
discovering to the King their diffatisfaaion with IL
his government, and their contempt of his autho- **~
rity. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of the
season, having obliged theEnglifh army, which had
invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined that
he couldattack them, with great advantage, in their
retreat; but the principal barons, with an obfti-
nacy and disdain which greatly aggravated their
disobedience, refused to advance a flep beyond the
limits of their own country. Provoked by this in-
fult to himfeilf, and ftifpicious of a new conspiracy
against his ministers, the King initantly difoanded
an army which paid so little regard to his orders,
and returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could not

brook ftch a mortifying affront. His hopes of
success had been rash, and his despair upon a dif-
ippointment was exceflrve. HIe felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecessary war with England, which,
instead ofyielding him the laurels and triumphs
that he expeEaed, had begun with such circum-
stances, as encouraged the insolence of his sub-
jets, and exposed him to the scorn of his enemies.
He fawv how vain and inefeatual all his projeats to
humble the nobles had been, and that, though in
times of peace a Prince may endeavour to depress
them, they will rife, during war, to their former
importance and dignity. Impatience, resentment,
indignation, filled his bosom by turns. The vio-
lence of these paflions altered his temper, and,
perhaps, impaired his reason. He became pensive,
Siullen, and retired. He fqemed, through the day,

to

B o o K to be swallowed up in profound meditation, and,

I. through the night, he was disturbed with those vi.

'"LV' fionary terrors which make impression upon aweak

underilanding only, or a disordered fancy. Inor.
der to revive the King's spirits, an inroad on the
western borders was concerted by his miniflers,
who prevailed upon the Barons in the neighbour-
ing provinces to raise as many troops as were
thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's coun-
try. But nothing could remove the King's aversion
to his nobility, or diminish his jealousy of their
power. He would not even intrust them with the
command of the forces which they had assembled;
that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite,
who no sooner appeared to take poffellion of the
dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the ar-
my. Five hundred English, who happened to be
drawn up in fight, attacked the Scots in this dif-
order. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
general, produced an effe2 to which there is no
parallel in history. They overcame the fear of
death, and the love of libcrty; and ten thousand
men surrendered to a number so far inferior, with-
out ifriking a single blow. No man was desirous
of a viEaory, which would have been acceptable to
the King, and to his favourite; few endeavoured
to save themselves by flight; the English had the
choice of what prisoners they pleased to take; and
almost every person of diftinaion, who was en-
gaged in the expedition, remained in their hands.
This astonishing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difaffeLTaion of the nobility,

and

and a new discovery of his own weakncfs, and want B o o K
of authority. Incapable of bea.ring these repeated I.
insults, he found himfeif unable to revenge them. 'ey'
The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the first ac-
count of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
violent passions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and wasted and consumed a
youthful and vigorous confritution. Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison;
but the diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; and the known effe6ts of
disappointment, anger, and re fcntment, upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, fuficiently account
for his unhappy fate. " His death (says Drum-
mond) proveth his mind to have been raised to an
high ifrain, and above mediocrity; he could die,
but could not diget a difafter." Had James fur-
vived this misfortune, one of two things must have
happened: Either the violence of his temper
would have engaged him openly to attack the no-
bles, who would have found in Henry a willing
and powerful protecaor, and have derived the fame
assistance from him, which the malecontents, in
the succeeding reign, did from his daughter Eli-
zabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war would
have been the certain consequence. Or, perhaps,
necefilty might have obliged him to accept of
Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his nobility.
In that event the church would have f,:llen a facri-
fice to their union, a Reformation, upon Henry's
plan, would have been established by law, a great
part of the temporalities of the church would have

been

B O O K been seized, and the friendship of the King and

I. Barons would have been cementcd by dividing

its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re-

ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. Ifthey
were not attended with success, we must not, for
that reason, conclude that they were not tonduded
with prudence. Every circumftence seems to have
combined againlt the crown. Accidental events
concurred with political causes, in rendering the
best concerted meaahres abortive. The affaffina.
tion of one King, the sudden death of another, and
the fatal despair of a third, contributed no less
than its own natural fitrengtth, to preserve the
ariffocracy from ruin.

AMIDST these fitruggles, the influence which

our Kings pofeffed in their parliaments, is a cir-
cumitance seemingly inexplicable, and which me.
rits particular attention. As these assemblies
were composed chiefly of the nobles, they, we
are apt to imagine, must have dicIated all their

The extra- decisions; but, inflead of this, every King found
ordinnary n them obsequious to his will, and obtained such
the Scottiih laws, as he effeemed necciffry for extending his
rarniamen.t authority. All things vvere condufted there with

dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of our
historians, do we find an instance of any oppofi-
tion formed against the court in Parliament, or
mention of any difficulty in carrying through the
measures which were agreeable to the King. In
order to account for this fangular faca, it is ne-
ceffary to inquire into the origin and conifitution
of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform B o o e

in all its operations, produced the fame effets in '-
small, as in great societies; and the territory of a The reasons
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom. o it.
He poffeffed theright ofjurifdiAion, but those who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
assist both in paming and executing his sentences.
When assembled on these occasions, they establish-
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations as tended
to the welfare of their finall society; and often
granted, voluntarily, fu ch supplies to their Superior,
as his necessities required. Change now a single
name: In place of Baron, fubilitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its firit rudiments, and ob-
serve the firit exertions of those powers, which its
members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and
as dispensers of the public revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the King's Court *,
and of the King's Great Council, by which, Parlia-
ments were anciently distinguished; and suitable to
this, likewise, were the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal king-
doms, those who held of the King in chief were
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to amia in his courts. Nor was this efleemed a
privilege, but a service. It was exacted likewise of
Bishops, Abbots, and the greater ecclefiaftics, who
holding vaat poffefions of the Crown, were deemed
fubjet to the fame burden. Parliaments did not
continue long in this ifate. Cities gradually acquir-
ed wealth, a considerable share of the public taxes

D ID Cange, voc. Curia,

were

B o o K were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into efii-

I. mation, and, being enfranchired by the Sovereign,

a place in Parliament was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer fuchl a privilege, or to
impose such a burden on a whole community, every
borough was permitted to chufe one or two of its
citizens to appear in the name of the corporation;
and the idea of representation was firit introduced in
this manner. An innovation, still more important,
naturally followed. The vassals of the crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful;
but as it is impoflible to render property fixed and
permanent, many of their poffeffions came, gradu-
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence
arose the diftination between the Greater and the
Leffier Rarons. The former were those who retain-
ed their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and less potent vaffls of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal ser-
vices, and, of consequence, to give attendance in
Parliament. To the Leifer Barons, who formed no
inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable griev-
ance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure, bo-
roughs renounced their right of elcOting, charters
were obtained, containing an exemption from at-
tendance; and the anxiety with which our anceffors
endeavoured to get free from the obligation of fit-
ting in Parliament, is surpassed by that only with
which their posterity solicit to be admitted there.
In order to accommodate both parties, and, at
once, to fccure to-the King a fufuicient number of
members in his great council, and to save his vai>

fals

fals from an unnecefrary burden, an easy expedient B O O K
was found out. The obligation to personal at- I.
tendance was continued upon the Greater Barons,
from which the Lesser Barons were exempted, on
condition of their eleating, in each county, a cer-
tain number of Representatives, to appear in their
name. Thus a Parliament became complete in
all its members, and was composed of Lords Spi-
ritual and Temporal, of Knights of the (hires, and
of Burgesses. As many causes contributed to bring
government earlier to perfection in England, than
in Scotland; as the rigour of the feudal institutions
abated iboner; and its defets were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the
other; England led the way in all these changes,
and Burgesses, and Knights of the (hire, appeared
in the Parliaments of that nation, before they were
heard of in ours. BuroefTes were firit admitted
into the Scottish Parliaments by Robert Bruce*; A.D.iJzE.
and in the preamble to the laws of Robert III. they
are ranked among the conflituent menibers of
that assembly. · The Lefftr Barons were indebted
to James I. for a ftatutce exempting them from spy;
personal attendance, and pcrmitting them to eleL
representatives: the exemption was eagerly laid
hold on; but the privilege was so little valued,
that, except one or two infiances, it lay neglec?-
ed during i60 years; and James VI. firit obliged
them to fend representatives regularly to Par-
liament t.

*Abercromby, i. 635.
1- EBfayson Brit. Anti9. Eli, JL Dalrymp. Hist. ofFeud.

Prop, ch, 8,

A ScoT-

B o o R A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, consisted ancients

I. ly of Great Barons, of Ecclefiics, and a few re-
c prefentatives of boroughs. Nur were thefc divid-

ed, as in England, into two oufes, but composed
one affembly,in which the Lurd Chancellor prefid-
ed*. And, in rude ages, when the science of go-
vernment was extremely iinperftc among a mar-
tial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
firangers to the talents which make a figure in de-
bate, and despising them, Parliaments were not held
in the fame estimation as at present; nor did haugh-
ty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared
with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments
were often haffily assembled, and it was, probably,
in the King's power, by the manner in which he
iiled his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his meaiures. At a time
when deeds of violence were common, and the re-
firraints of law and decency were little regarded, no
man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have

met in fepzrate houses; and James I. who was fond of imitat-
ing the English in all theircufloms, haj probably an intention
ofintroducing some considerable dittinoion between the Great-
Er and Lesser Barons in Sco:land; at leall he determined that
their consultations {hould not be carried on under the direaion
of the fame President; for by his law, A. D. 1327, it is pro-
vided, " that out of the Commiflioners of all the lhires lhall be
chofn a wife and expert man, called the common Speaker of
the Parliament, who shall propose all and sundry needs and
causes pertaining to the Commons in the Parliament or generil
council." No inch Speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen;
and by a fbfequcent law the Chancellor was declared perpe-
tual President of Parliament.

Parlia-

Parliament, were extremely few; even so late rs B o o K
the beginning of the reign of James VI. * they I.
amounted only to fifty-three. The Ecclefiaflics L
equalled them in number, and being devoted im-
plicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have been
already explained, rendered all hopes of viaory
in any struggle desperate. Nor were the nobles
themselves lo anxious, as might be imagined, to
prevent aas of Parliament favourable to the royal
Prerogative; conscious of their own fitrength,
and of the King's inability to carry these aas into
execution withoutdtheir concurrence, they trufced
either to elude, or to contemn them; and the fla-
tute revoking the King's property, and annexing
alienated jurifdliaions to the Crown, repeated in
every reign, and violated and despised as often, is
a flanding proof of the impotence of laws, when
opposed to power. So many concurring causes
are fuficient, perhaps, to account for the ascend-
ant, which our Kings acquired in Parliament.
But, without having recou rfe to any of these, a
single circumstance, peculiar to the constitution
of the Scottish parliament, the mentioning of
which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly
explain this faL, seemingly so repugnant to all
our reasonings concerning the weakness of the
King, and the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to trace

the constitution of our Parliaments, we find a
committee, distinguished by the name of Lords of
Articles. It was their business to prepare, and to
digeRt all matters which e.'cre to be laid bLfore the

* And. Coal. v. i. pref. 40.

VOL. I. Parlia-

B o o K Parliament; every motion for a new law was first

I. made there, and approved or rejeaed by them at

'~y* pleasure; what they approved was formed into a

bill, and presented to Parliament; what they re-
jeaed could not be introduced into the house.
This committee owed the extraordinary powers
vested in it, to the military genius of the ancient
nobles; too impatient to submit to the drudgery
of civil business, too impetuous to observe the
forms, or to enter into the details necessary ii
conduaing it, they were glad to lay that burden
upon a finall number, while they themselves had
no other labour than simply to give, or to refuse
their fanaion to the bills, which were presented
to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only
direaed the whole proceedings of Parliament, but
poffeffed a negative before debate. That 'com-
mittee was chosen and conifituted in such a man-
ner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the
King's hands. It is extremely probable, that the
King once had the sole right of nominating the
Lords of Articles *. They came afterwards to

be

* It appears from authentic records, that a parliament was

appointed to be held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of
Articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before the
assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly eleaed so
long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude,
that the Prince alone poffeffed the right of eleaing them. There
are two different accounts of the manner of their eleaion at that
time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the archbilhop of
Glasgow; " We, accompanied with our nobility for the time,
" pafl to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for holding of our Par-
" liament on the 7th day of this inflant, and eleaed the Lords
" Articulars." If we explain these words, according to irid
grammar, we muff conclude that the Queen herself eleded

them.

be eleted by the parliament, and confilted of an B o o K
equal number out of each estate, and most com- I*
monly of eight Temporal and eight Spiritual L''
Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and
of the eight great officers of the Crown. Of this
body, the eight ecclefiaftics, together with the
offcers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce pofible that the
choice could fall on such Temporal Lords and
Burgesses as would unite in opposition to his mea-
fures. Capable either of influencing their elec-
tion, or of gaining them when elected, the King
commonly found the Lords of Articles no less ob-
fequious to his will, than his own privy council,
and by means of his authority with them, he could
put a negative upon his Parliament before debate,
as well as after it; and what may seem altogether
incredible, the most limited Prince in Europe
aCtually poffeffed, in one initance, a preroga-
tive which the most absolute could never attain *.

To

them. It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to sav,
that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counsellors,
and others, eleaed the Lords of Articles. Keith's Hilu. of
Scotland, p. 33r. The other account is Lord Rutlhven's, who
expressly afirms that the Queen herfelfelefted them. Keith's
Append. Iz6. Whethcr we embrace the one or the other of
these opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy counsellors
pnd nobles attending the court had a right to eleA the Lords of
Articles, it was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the
Prince had had the sole nomination of them.

* Having deduced the history of the committee of Lords of

Articles as low as the fubjed of this preliminary book required,
it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers, toknow
the subsequent variations in this singular inflitution, and the
political use which our Kings made of there. When Parlia-

G z ments

B O O K To this account of the internal constitution of

I- Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of

Sate of Eu- the political (Iate of Europe at that period, where
roea hes the following history commences. A thorough
the i6th knowledge of that general system, of which every
century. kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not Icfs re-

quifite towards underitanding the history of a na-

tion,

ments became mcre numerous, and more considerable by the
admiflion of the representatives of the lesser Barons, the pre-
serving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, like-
wife, an objea of greater importance to ourKings. JamesVI.
on pretence that the Lords of Ariticles could not find leisure
to confider the great multitude of affairs laid before them,
obtained an aa, appointing four persons to be named out of
each efate, who should meet twenty days before the com-
mencement of Parliament *, to receive all fupplications, &c.
and rejeaing what they thought frivolous, mhould engross in
a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords
of Articles. No pros ifion is made in the aA for the choice
of this feked body, and the King would, of course, have
claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was begin-
ning to innrvduce rhofe innovctions which gave so much of-
fence to the nation, he dreaded the opposition of his Parlia-
ment, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was made use
of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The Tem-
poral Peers were appointed to choose eight Biihops, and the
Biihops eight Peers; there fixtcen met together, and elefbd
eight Knights of the Shire, and eight Burgesses, and to there
the crown oficers were added as ufiual. If we can only sup-
pose eight persons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of
Scotland were become by that time, attached to the court,
these, it is obvious, would be the men whom the Bishops would
choose, and of consequence the whole Lords of Articles were
the tools and creatures of the King. This praaice, so incon-
fatent with liberty, was abolished during the civil war: And
the Itatute of James VI. was repealed. After the Refloration,
Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only
a temporary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, con-

* At zzz. P. 594*e verted

tion, than an acquaintance with its peculiar go- E o o K
vernment and laws. The latter may enable us I.
to comprehend domestic occurrences and revo-
lutions; but without the former, forcign tranfac-
tions must be altogether myfierious and unintel-
ligible. By attending to this, many dark passages
in our hiflory may be placed in a clear light; and
where the bulk of hiflorians have seen only the
effe~, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declenflon in the neighbouring
kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in
the political f'ate of Europe. Kingdoms, which
were incoficrerable when broken, and parcelled
out among nobles, acquired firmness and firength,
by being united into a regular monarchy. Kings
became conscious of their own power and imports
ance. They meditated schemes of conquest, and
engaged in wars at a diflance. Numerous armies
were raifid, and great taxes impoled for their sub,
fiftence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in conifant pay; that service grew to be ho-
nourable; and cavalry, in which the strength of
European armies had hitherto confifed, though
proper enough for the short and voluntary ex-

verted into a standing law. " For my pair," says the author
from wxhom I have borrowed many of there particu!ars, " I
" ho id h.xe tiioought it left criminnAl in our Refroration Par-
" lment, to vc ( pcn ly bh'tiox ed upon the King a nega-
" tiee b:tore debate, thin, in fxhh an underhand artificial
" manner, to bemrav their conolituents, anid the nation." Es-
fles on Btit. Antiq. g3. It is probable, however, from a
letter of R loiph's to Cecil, 1o Au:. ;s6o, priuted in the
Appendix, thit this Parliament had some appearance of an-
&cnt precc lnc to jutfiy their unworthy condufi.

G 3 currlonS

B o o rz curflions of Barons who served at their own expence,

I. were found to be unfit either for making, or de-

'cr ' sending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new fitrength. The division
of that country into so many finall Rates, the lux-
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italiains, wvho had been accustom-
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their quar-
rels by innocent and bloodless viaories, were aflo-
nilhed at the fight of real war; and as they could
not resist the torrent, they fuffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
fiupplied the want of firength; and necessity and
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to the
great secret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the power of one Prince, by
throwing that of another into the opposite scale.
By this happy device, the liberty of Italy was
long preserved. The feales were poised by very
skilful hands; the smallest variations were attend-
ed to, and no Prince was allowed to retain any fu-
periority, that could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduEt, pursued with so much

success inItaly, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu-
rope rendered it so necefrary, that it soon became
a matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.
Every itep any Prince took was observed by all his

neighbours,

neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind ofhonourable B o o x
spies, authorised by the mutual jealousy of Kings, I.
resided almost conitantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater difiance, and pre-
vented with more ease. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which role above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or feif-defence were no longer
the only causes of hoflility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; and war, both in its
commencement, and in its operations, was more
an exercise of the judgment, than of the paflions
of men. Almost every war in Europe became
general, and the most inconsiderable states ac-
quired importance, because they could add weight
to either scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year 'I 5 and Charles V. who obtained
the Imperial Crown in the year 1519, divided
between them the fitrength and affections of all
Europe. Their perpetual enmity was not owing
either to personal jealousy, or to the caprice of
private pafflion, but was founded so much in na-
ture and true policy, that it fiubifted between
their posterity for several ages; and, notwith-
standing their present accidental and unnatural
union, must again revive. Charles ficceeded to all
the dominions of the house of Aufrria. No fa-
mily had ever gained so much by wife and for-
tunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind
the Aufcrian Princes rose, in a short time, from
obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Archdukes
of Auffria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were in

G 4 poffeflion

B o a i pof"leTon of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-

reditary right. Besides these territories in Ger-
many, Charles was heir to the crown of Spain,
and to all the dominions which belonged to the-
house of furgundy. The Burgundian provinces
engroffcd, at that time, the riches and commerce
of one half of Euiope; and lie drew from them,
on many occalons, those immense sums, which
no people vithout trade and liberty are able to
contribute. Spain furnifmed hIn a gallant and
hardy irfan:rv, to whose discipline he was indebt-
ed for all his conquefis. And at the fame time,
by the discovery of th~e nexv woyXd, a vein of
wealth was opened to him, which all the exta-
vagance of amnbition could not exhaust. These
advantages rendered Charles the flrlt Prince in
Europe ; but he wished to be more, and openly
aspired to univeri i monarchy. HIs genius was
of that hind which ripens slowly, and lies long
concealed; but it glew up without observation,
to an un:spie(ted height and vigour. He pof-
fefed, in an eminent degree, the charaderiftic
virtues of all the diflirent races of Princes to whom
he was allied. In forming his schemes, he dif-
cvecred all the fdbtlety and penetration of Ferdi-

nd hi:s cra: dfither ; he purfiuedl them with that

ubitinate and inflexible perseverance which has
ever been pecuilar to the Aufcrian blood; and in
erecutiug theimn, he could employ the magnani-
n:ivy and bol inefs of his Burgundian ancestors.
His abilities were equal to his power, and neither
of th. m would have been inferior to his designs,
had not Providence, in pity to mankind, and in

6 order

order to preserve them from the worst of all evils, B o o K
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I. to de-
fend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were
less extensive, but more united than the Em-
peror's. His fubjeacs were numerous, aaive, and
warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of their King.
To Charles, power was the only obje6e of desire,
and he pursued it with an unwearied and joyless
induffry. Francis could mingle pleafiure and ele-
gance with his ambition; and though he negle&-
ed some advantages, which a more phlegmatic
or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
a~tive and intrepid courage supplied all its de-
seas, and checked or defeated many of the Em-
peror's deflgns.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one flde, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert
it, had recourse to the expedient, which they
had often employed with success. They endea-
voured to divide the power of the two contend-
ing Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union
of several finall slates to counterpoise him, whose
power became too great. But, what they con-
certed wrh much wisdom, they were able to ex-
ecute with little vigour; and intrigue and refine-
ment were feeble fences against the incroachments
of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held

the balance with ]efs delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in pqwer; and the advantageous situation

of

B o o a of his dominions, his domeflic tranquillity, his

I. immense wealth, and absolute authority, rendered

'L~ him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.

Each of the rivals courted him with emulation;
he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance
even, and to refirain both, by not joining entirely
with either of them. But he was seldom able to
reduce his ideas to pradice; he was governed by
caprice more than by principle ; and the passions
of the man were an overmatch for the maxims of
the King. Vanity and resentment were the great
springs of all his undertakings, and his neighbours
easily found the way, by touching these, to force
him upon many ralh and inconsistent enterprises.
His reign was a perpetual series of blunders in
politics; and while he efleemed himself the wisest
Prince in Europe, he was a conitant dupe to
those, who found it necessary, and could submit
to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which

had hitherto wasted her fitrength in the quarrels
between France and England, emerged from her
obscurity, took her flation in the system, and be-
gan to have some influence upon the fate of dif-
tant nations. Her assistance was, frequently, of
consequence to the contending parties, and the
balance was often so nicely adjufled, that it was
in her power to make it lean to either fide. The
part aringned her, at this junAure, was to divert
Henry from carrying his arms into the continent.
That Prince, having routed the French at Gui-
negat, and invested Teroue3nne, France attempted
to divide his forces, by engaging James IV. in

*2 that

that unhappy expedition which ended with his B o o K
life. For the fame reason Francis encouraged and L.
alfifted the Duke of Albany, to ruin the families '
of Angus and Home, which were in the interest
of England, and would willingly have persuaded
the Scots to revenge the death of their King, and
to enter into a new war with that kingdom.
Henry and Francis having united not long after
againfit the Emperor, it was the interest of both
Kings, that the Scots should continue inaaive;
and a loug tranquillity was the effet of their
union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and
to embarrass Henry by another inroad of the
Scots. For this end, he made great advances to
James V. flattering the vanity of the young Mo-
narth, by ele~ting him a Knight of the Golden
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the im-
perial family; while, in return for these empty
honours, he demanded of him to renounce his
alliance with France, and to declare war againit
England. But James, who had much to lose,
and who could gain litdle by embracing the Em-
peror's proposals, rejeted them with decency,
and keeping firm to his ancient allies, left Henry
at full liberty to a& upon the continent with his
whole fitrength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme con-
tempt, that he was at no pains to gain its friend-
Ihip; but, on the contrary, he irritated the whole
nation, by reviving the antiquated pretensions of
the crown of England to the sovereignty over

Scotland.

B o OK Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex-

I. ample of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of

~J its importance. It was impossible to defend an

open and extensive frontier, againif the incursions
of an aaive and martial people. During any war
on the continent, this obliged him to divide the
fitrength of his kingdom. It was necessary to
maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England ; and after all precautions, the
Scottish borderers, who were fluperior to all man-
kind in the praaice of irregular war, often made
fuccefsful inroads, and spread terror and defo-
lation over many counties. He fell, at lass, upon
the true secret of policy, with refpe& to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little pene-
tration to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people, made the conquest of Scotland impof-
fible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faSion, rendered it an easy matter to divide,
and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the
former design, and resolved to employ the utmost
addres in exccuting the latter. It had not yet be-
come h'jnourable for one Prince to receive pay
from anot'er, under the more decent name of a
fubficiy. But, in all ages, the fame arguments
have been good in courts, and of weight with
ministers, factious leaders, an I favourites. WVhat
were the arguments by which Henry brought over
so many to his intcreft during tile minority of
James V. we know by the original warrant still
extant ", fur remittin- considerable sums into

" Eurn. UX;. Ref. v. i. p. 7.

Scotland.

Scotland. By a proper ditiribution of these, ma- B o o ic
ny persons of note were gained to his party, and I.
a fa~tion which held secret correspondence with '
England, and received all its dire&ions from
thence, appears henceforward in our domeffic
conteRfs. In the sequel of the history, we shall
find Henry labourinn to extend his influence in
Scotland. His successors adopted the fime plan,
and improved upon it. The affairs of the two
kingdoms became interwoven, and their interefis
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her at-
tention almost equally between them, and the au-
thority, which she inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which Ihe acquired in the other.

# BOOK II.

HISTORY

OF

SCO T LA N D.

BOOK II.

M ARY Queen of Scots was born a few days B o o K

before the death of her father James V. II.

The situation in which he left thekingdom alarmed
all ranks of men with the profpe& of a turbulent xsoi.
and difaffrous reign. A war against England had Mary, and

. . slate of the

been undertaken without necessity, and carried kingdom.
on without success. XVIany persons of the first
rank had fallen into the hands of the Englilh, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and
were still prisoners at London. Among the relt
of the nobles there was little union either in their
views, or in their affeaions; and the religious
disputes occasioned by the opinions of the re-
formers, growing every day more violent, added
to the rage of those faaions which are natural to
a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

THu

B o o K THE government of a Queen was unknown in

II. Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
1 the minds of a martial people. The government

of an infant Oueen was still more destitute of real
authority; and the profpeal of a long and feeble
minority invited to faEtion by the hope of impu-
nity. James had not even provided the common
remedy againit the disorders of a minority, by
committing t6 proper persons the care of his
daughter's education, and the adminifiration of as-
fairs in her name. Though he Ihw the clouds ga-
thering, and foretold that they would quickly burst
into a florm, he was so little able to dilperfe them,
or to defend his daughter and kingdom againti the
imminent calamities, that, in mere derpair, he
abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and
left open to every pretender, the offce of Regent,
which he could not fix to his own fatisfac'ion.

Pretensions CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
of Cardipal
Beatoun o been considered as prime miniffer, was the first who
the regency. claimed that high dignity; and in support of his

pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he
himself had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other right, instantly assumed the
title of Regent. He hoped, by the afliftance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the firpport of the
whole popish famion, to hold by force, what he
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Those among the nobles who wished for a Reform-

* Sadler's Lett. i6i.

ation

Ithation in religion dreaded his severity, and others B o o K
tonfidered the elevation of a Churchman to the *.
highest office in the kingdom as a depression of
themselves. At their initigation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, roused
himself from his inativity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that fi'tion, to which proximity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Ear of A.
were assembled for that purpose, unanimously con- anchofea
ferred on him the office of Regent; and the pub-
lic voice Applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in dif- characer

position and charaaer, than the Earl of Arran of eatou.
and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal wvas by nA-
ture of immoderate ambition; by long expe-
rience he had acquired address and refinement;
and infilence grew upon him from continual fuc-
cess. His high ifation in the church placed him
in the way of great employments: his abilities
wvere equal to the greatest of there; nor did he
reckon any of them to be above his merit. As
his own eminence was founded upon the power
of the church of Rome, he was a zealous de-
fender of that fuperifition, and for the fame rea-
son ah avowed enemy to the do~trine of the Re-
formers. Political motives alone determined him
to support the one, or to oppose the other. His
early application to public business kept him un-
acquainted with the learning and controversies of
the age; he gave judgment, hoviever, upon all
points in dispute, with a precipitancy, violence,
and rigour, which cotemporary historians mention
with indignation.

VOL, I. H TIs

B o o K THE charadler of the Earl of Arran was, in al'

IL. most every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He

oT an. was neither infeaed with ambition, nor inclined

to cruelty : The love of ease extinguished the for-
mer, the foftnefs of his temper preserved him
from the latter. Timidity and irresolution were
his predominant failings, the one occasioned by
his natural conititution, and the other arising
from a consciousness that his abilities were not
equal to his ifation. With these, dispositions he
might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but
his public condu6a was without courage, or dig-
nity, or conflitence. The perpetual slave of his
own fears, and, by consequence, the perpetual
tool of those, who found their advantage in prac-
tifing upon them. But as no other person could
be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with any
probability of success, the nation declared in his
favour with so general a consent, that the arti-
fices of his rival could not withstand its united
firength.

Schemes of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffelion
we reans of his new dignity, when a negociation was open-
toswotland' ed with England, which gave birth to events of

the most fatal consequence to himself, and to the
kingdom. After the death of James, Henry
VIII. was no longer afraid of any interruption
from Scotland to his designs against France; and
immediately conceived hopes of rendering this
security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward
his only son with the young Queen of Scots.
He communicated his intention to the prisoners
taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour

it, by the promise of liberty, as the reward of B o o ic
their success. In the mean time he permitted II.
them to return into Scotland, that, by their pre-
fence in the Parliament which the Regent had
called, they might be the better able to persuade
their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A
cause, intrufted to fiuch able and zealous advocates,
could not well miss of coming to an happy iue.
All those who feared the Cardinal, or who desired
a change in religion, were fond of an alliance,
which afforded proteAion to the dodrine which
they had embraced, as well as to their own per-
sons, against the rage of that powerful and
haughty Prelate.

BEr Henry's rough and impatient temper was Ii condun-

. ed by him-

incapable of improving this favourable conjunc- re .
ture. Address and delicacy in managing the fears,
and follies, and interests ofmen, were arts with
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs
.he had formed upon Scotland were obvious from
the marriage which he had proposed, and he had
not dexterity enough to disguise, or to conceal
them. Inifead of yielding to the fear or jealoury
of the Scots, what time and accidents would soon
have enabled him to recover, he, at once, alarm-
ed and irritated the whole nation, by demanding
that the Queen's person ihould be immediately
committed to his custody, and that the govern-
ment of the kingdom should be put in his hands
during her minority.

HENRY COuld not have prescribed more igno- Odiomto

the Scots,

minious conditions to a conquered people, and it though in
is no wonder they were reje6aed, with indignation, rby them.

H2 by

B o o K by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with

II. England, at the price of their own liberty. The
C parliament of Scotland, however, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; desirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the

Mzrcn nz, Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner,

'5 from any opposition to which he might have given

rife; consented to a treaty of marriage and of
union, but upon somewhat a more equal footing.
And after some dark and unfuccefsful intrigues,
by which his amba&'ador endeavoured to carry off
the young Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into Eng-
land, Henry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he con-
fented that the Queen mhould continue to reside
in Scotland, and himenlf remain excluded from any
share in the government of the kingdom. On the
other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sove-
reign into England as ibon as (he attained the full
a{,e of ten years, and instantly to deliver fix per-
sons, of the first rank, to be kept as hofiages by
Ilenry till the Queen's arrival at his court.

ra onrel t THE treaty was Ptill so manifefily of advantage
a seen' to England, that the Regent loft much of the

public confidence by consenting to it. The Car-
dinal, who had now recovered liberty, wvatched
for such an opportunity of regaining credit, and
he did not fail to cultivate and improve this to the

O pdTed y utmof'. He complained loudly that the Regent

cafdi- had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate

enemies, and sacrificed its honour to his own am-
bition. He foretold the extinftion of the true ca-
tholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-

municated

municated heretic; but above all, he lamented to B o o ic
fee an ancient kingdom consenting to its own fla- 11.
very, descending into the ignominious ifation of
a dependent province; and, in one hour, the
weakness or treachery of a single man surrendering
every thing for which the Scottish na.tion had
ifruggled and fought during so many ages. These
remonfitrances of the Cardinal were not without
effefR. They were addrelfed to prejudices and
passions which are deeply rooted in the human
heart. The fame hatred to the ancient enem;ies
of their country, the fame jealoufr of national
honour, and pride of independence, which, at the
beginning of the present century, went near to
prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage,
did, at that time, induce the whole nation to de-
clare againit the alliance which had been con-
cluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty
years of peace between the two nations, the habit
of being iubjeated to the fame King, and governed
by the fame maxims, had considerably abated old
animofities, and prepared both people for incor-
porating. In the other, injuries were flill fresh,
the wounds on both sides were open, and, in the
warmth of resentment, it was natural to seek re-
venge, and to be averse from reconcilement. Ac
the Union in 1707, the wilo0m of parliament dcr
fpifed the groundless murmurs occafoned by an-
tiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complainrs
of the nation were better founded, and urged with
a zeal and unanimity, which it is neitherjuft nor
safe to disregard. The rage of the people rose to

-lj 3 f uc h

B 0 0 K such an height, that the Engliifh Anbaffiador could

HI. hardly be proteaed from their insults. The cler-

gy contributed a great fum towards preserving
the church from the dominion of a Prince, whose
fyfeiem of Reformation was so fatal to their power.
The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal,
so lately, in such a cruel manner, were, now,
ready to applaud and to recond him, as the de-
fender of the honour and liberty of his country.

Ie excater ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power-

w, ful Barons declared openly against the alliance
"g with England. BBy their affihlance, the Cardinal

seized on the persons of the young Queen and her
mother, and added to his party the Iplcndour and
authority of the royal name ". He received, at
the fame time, a more real accession to his
itrength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl
of Lennox, who1e return from France he had
earnestly solicited. This young nobleman was
the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton.
He had many claims upon the Regent, and pre-
tended a right to exclude him, not only from fuc-
ceeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of the
poffeffion of his private fortune. The Cardinal
flattered his vanity with the profpedt of marrying
the Queen Dowager, and affedted to treat him
with so much refpeat, that the Regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS fuifpicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland
some time before the Earl of Lennox, and aRed
in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural

* Weith's Wist. of Scotl. 3o.

brother of the Regent, with whom he had great B o o K
credit; a warm partisan of France, and a zealous U.
defender of the eflablifhed Religion. He took
hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and en-
deavoured to bring about a change in his fen-
timents, by working upon his fears. The de-
fertion of the nobility, the difaffetion of the cler-
gy, and the rage of the people ; the resentment
of France, the power of the Cardinal, and the
pretelnflons of Lennox, were all represented with
aggravation, and with their mail threatening
afpea.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-

tion of the tneaty with England, and the delivery
of the hostages, approached, and the Regent was
still undetermined in his own mind. He aied to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
which is peculiar to weak men, when they are so
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the condua
of difihcult affairs. On the 25th of August, he Oblgesthe

Regent to

ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the renounce

the frnnd-

Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene- sip with
may to his coun try. On the 3d of September, he Englaud;
secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
Cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendihip
of England, and declared for the interests of
France *

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not

spared the most magnificent promises. He had of-
fered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to conifitute him Kinig of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.

* Sadler, 339. 356.

H4 But

B o o K But upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be

II less considerable than he had imagined, the Eng.

'~V- lifh monarch began to treat him with little refpe&.

The young Queen was now in the custody of his
enemies, who grew every day more numerous
and more popular. They formed a separate court
at Stirling, and threatened to elea another Regent.
The French King was ready to afford them his
prote6tion, anJ the nation, out of hatred to the
English, would have united in their defence. In
this situation, the Regent could not retain his au-
thor;uy, without a sudden change of his measures;
apd though he endeavoured, by ratifying the trea-
ty, to preserve the appearances of good faith with
England, he was obljged to throw himself into
the arms of the party which adhered to France.

and to per- SooN after this sudden revolution in his political
{eformers. principles, the 1Regent changed his sentim-ents

concerning religion. The spirit of controverf'5 was
then new and warm; books of that kind were
eagerly read by men of every rank; the love of
novelty, or the convi6ion of truth, had led the
Regent to express great esteem for the writings of
the Reformers and having been powerfully sup-
ported by those who had embraced theiropinions,
he, in order to gratify them, entertained, in his
own family, two of the most noted preachers of
ot'- Protestant dotrine, and, in his first Parlia-
rie nt, consented to an aa, by which the laity
m: ~permitted to read the Scriptures in a language
a ch they underltood. Truth needed only a fair

ing to be an over-match for error. Abfurdi-

to , which had long impoied op the ignorance

and

and credulity of mankind, were deteaed and ex- B o o ic
posed to public ridicule; and under the coun- II,
tenance of the Regent, the Reformation made ''e
great advances, The Cardinal observed its pro-
grefs with concern, and was at the utmost pains
to obftrua it. He represented to the Regent his
great imprudence in giving encouragement to opi-
nions so favourable to I Lennox's pretensions; that
his own legitimacy depended upon the validity of
a sentence of divorce, founded on the Pope's au-
thority; and that by fuffering it to be called in
queflion, he weakened his own title to the fuc-
ceflion, and furnished his rival with the only ar-
gument by which it could be rendered doubtfil *,
These insinuations made a deep imprelfion on the
Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpe6 of
such imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
the Cardinal could have wished; and his zeal for
the Protestant religion was not long proof against
his fear. He publicly abjured the doLtrine of the
Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling,
and declared not only for the political, but the re-
ligious opinions of his new confidents.

The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fucceflion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth, a dauglhter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and
the present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise
the grandson of the Princess Mary. But his father having mar-
ried Janet Beatoun the Regent's mother, after he had obtaine4
a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pre.
tended that the sentence of divorce was unjuff, and that the
Regent being born while Elizabeth Home was flill alive, ought
to be considered as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. z9z.

THu

B o o K THE Protefiant do~trine did not fuffer much by

II. his apofiacy. It had already taken so deep root in
Ly the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity

could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
to every thing that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necefThry for the preservation of the established reli-
gioll. The Reformers were persecuted with all the
crue!ty' which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the pu-
niihment of its enemies; but they fuffered with a
spirit so nearly refimbiing the patience and for-
titude of the primitive martyrs, that more were
converted than terrified by such fpe&acles.

Belaon rTHE Cardinal, however, was now in poffefion

) of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-

direnion ercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the
of affaire.

envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public efleem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trufled by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were the
only thing which remained to emnbarrafs him. He
had very fluccefsfully made use of that nobleman
to work upon the Regent'sjealoufy and fear, but
as he no longer flood in need of such an infiru-
ment, he was willing to get rid of him with de-
cency. Lennox soon began to fufpet his intention;
promises, flattery, and refpea, were the only re-
turns he had hitherto received for filbftantial ser-
vices; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no
longer be concealed, and Lennox, initead of at-
taining power and dignity himself, saw that he

3 had

had been employed only to procure these for ano- B o o ic
ther. Resentment and disappointed ambition pulh- II.
ed him on to seek revenge on that cunning pre-
late, who, by sacrificing his interest, had so un-
generously purchased the Earl of Arran's friend-
ihip. HIe withdrew, for that reason, from court,
and declared for the party at enmity with the Car-
dinal, which, with open arms, received a convert
who added so much lufire to their cause.

THE two fations which divided the kingdom

were fill the fame, without any alterations in their
views or principles; but, by one of those firange
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the par-
tifans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lennox in the fame station with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in reli-
gion. The one laboured to pull down his own
work, which the other upheld with the fame hand,
that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start

of the Cardinal's a~tivity. He surprised both him
and the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
with a numerous army; and might easily have
crushed them, before they could prepare for their
defence. But he was weak enough to liflen to
proposals for an accommodation; and the Car-
dinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the
treaty to fluch a length, that the greater part of
the Earl's troops, who served, as is usual wherever
the feudal institutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, defrrted him; and in concluding a peace,

instead

B o O K inifead of giving the law, he was obliged to re-

II. ceive it. A second attempt to retrieve his affairs

Y ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his

troops was cut to pieces, and the reft dispersed;
and with the poor remains of a ruined party, he
must either have submitted to the conqueror, or
have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach
of an English army had not brought him a short
relief.

nenry in. HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
vae Sco:- indignity, with which he had been treated, both

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who
at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and firiaer con,
federacy with France. The rigour of the season
retarded for some time the execution of his ven-
geance. But in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was deltined for France, re-
ceived orders to fail for Scotland, and a proper
number of cavalry was appointed to join it by
land. The Regent and Cardinal little expeted
such a visit. They had trusted that the French
war would find employment for all Henry's forces;
and, from an unaccountable iecurity, were wholly
unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The
Earl of Hertford, a leader fatal to the Scots in
that age, commanded this army, and landed it,
without opposition, a few miles above Leith. He

May 3 was quickly matter of that place; and marching

direAly to Edinburgh, entered it with the fame
ease. After plundering the adjacent country, the
richest, and most open in Scotland, he set on fire
1oth these towns, and upon the approach of fomr

troops

troops gathered together by the Regent, put his B o o R
booty on board the fleet, and with his land forces 11.
retired safely to the English borders, delivering 'Y
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an
invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended wirh no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was still in his view, he loft a
great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of
Huntly humoroui7y called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into ab-
horrence; and exasperated by so many indignities,
the Scots were never at any period more attached
to France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Re-
gent and French Kino, continued a correspond-
ence with England, which ruined his own intereif,
wrthour promortng Henry's. Many of his own
val'als preferring their duty to their country before
their ati&eLion to him, reuifci to concur in any de-
lign to favour the public enemy. And after a few
feeble and unfuccefsful attempts to diilurb the Re-
gent's adminifiration, he was obliged to fly for
safety to the court of England, where Henry re-
warded services which he had the inclination, but
not the power to perform, by giving him in mar-
riage his niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This
unhappy exile, however, was defined to be the
father of a race of kings. He saw his son Lord
Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the per-
petual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed
in his ruin, And, from that time, his posterity

have

B o O K have held the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of

II. which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the

'~*J other received as a fugitive.
A peace MEAN while hostilities were continued by both
concluded, nations, but with little vigour on either lide.

The historians of that age relate minutely the
circumstances of several skirmishes and inroads,
which, as they did not produce any considerable
effe&, at this distance of time deserve no remem-
brance *. At last an end was put to this languid
and inative war, by a peace, in which England,
France, and Scotland were comprehended. Hen-

ry

* Though this war was diftinguilhed by no important or de-

cifive a&ion, it was, however, extremely ruinous to indivi-
duals. There fill remain two original papers, which give us
some idea of the miseries, to which the mofc fertile counties
in the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and deftruaive
incursions of the borderers. The firfI seems to be the report
made to Henry by the English wardens of the marches, for
the year s544, and contains their exploits from the ad of July
to the x7th of November. The account it gives of the dif-
ferent inroads, or Forrays, as they are called, is very minute;
and in conclusion, the fum total of mischief they did is thus
computed:

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekyns, parifhe-churches,

baftel-houfes calt down or burnt - 19Z

Scots slain - - - 403

Prisoners taken - - - 816
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken - 10,386
Sheep - - - - j2,49z
Nags and geldings - - 1,296
Goats - - 200
Blols of corn - - 8go
Infight-gear, i. e. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State Papers, 43*

The

ry laboured to exclude the Scots from the benefit B o o K
of this treaty, and to reserve them for that ven- JL
geance, which his attention to the affairs of the '
continent had hitherto delayed. But although a
peace with England was of the last consequence
to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing
to attack with all his forces, he was too generous
to abandon allies, who had served him with fide-
lity, and he chose rather to purchase Henry's
friendihip with disadvantage to himself, than to
leave them exposed to danger. By yielding some
things to the interest, and more to the vanity of
that haughty Prince; by fubmiflion, flattery, and
address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots
included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a ihort time before The mir.

the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more 22<e...
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun
had not used his power with moderation, equal

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of

Hertford, between the 8th and z3d of September, 1545 ; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt;
rafed, and dei'royed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
only,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes - 7
Cafiles, towers, and piles - 16
Market towns - -

Villages - - - 243

Milns - - - 13
HIiolpitals - - - 3

All these were call down or burnt. Haynes ja. As the Scots
were no less skilful in the pradice of irregular war, we may
conclude that the damage which they did in England was not
inconsiderable; and that their raids were no less walleful than
the forraji of the Engliih.

33 o o K to the prudence by which he attained it. Not.

II. withifanding his great abilities, he had too many
- of the pafions and prejudices of an angry leader

of a fation, to govern a divided people with
temper. His resentment against one party of the
nobility, his insolence towards the reit, his fe-
verity to the Reformers, and, above all, the bard
barous and illegal execution of the famous George
Wifhart, a man of honourable birth and of pri-
mitive fanaity, wore out the patience of a fierce
age; and nothing .but a bold hand was wanting
to gratify the public wish by his deftruaion.
Private revenge, inflamed and fanaified by a
false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this want.
Norman Lefly, the eldeRt son of the Earl of
Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal with
injustice and contempt. It was not the temper
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. And as the profefion of
his adversary screened him from the effeAs of
what is called an honourable resentment, he re-
solved to take that satisfaCtion which he could
not demand. This resolution deserves as much
censure, as the Qngular courage and condua
with which he put it in execution excite wonder.
The Cardinal, at that time, resided in the cafile
of Saint Andrews, which he had fortified at
great expence, and in the opinion of the age had
rendered it impregnable. His retinue was nu-
merous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh-
bouring country full of his dependents. In rthis
situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his
cattle, and to affallinate himfeilf; and their fuccefi

I was

Wvas equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early B o 0 Ks
in the morning they seized on the gate of the II.
caitle, which was set open to the workmen who 3,
were employed in finishing the fortifications; and X546.
having placed sentries at the door of the Cardi-
nal's apartment, they awakened his numerous do-
meftics one by one, and turning them out of the
castle, they, without rioife or tumult, or violence
to any other person, delivered their country,
though by a most unjuitifiable a~tion, from an
ambitious man, whole pride was insupportable to
the nobles, as his cruelty and cunning were the
great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and The Regent

to the French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal :t fPt",l
for both continued among a great party in the themur.
nation, but when deprived of the genius and au-
thority of fb skilful a leader, was of fnall confe-
quence. Nothing can equal the consternation
which a blow so unexpedted occasioned among
his adherents; while the Regent secretly enjoyed
an event, which removed out of his way a rival,
who had not only eclipsed his greatness, but almost
extinguished his power. Decency, however, the
honour of the church, the importunity of the
Queen Dowager and her fation, his engagements
with France, and, above all' these, the desire of
recovering his eldest son, whom the Cardinal had
detained for some time at St. Andrew's in pledge
of his fidelity, and who, together with the caffle,
had fallen into the hands of the conspirators, in-
duced him to take arms, in order to revenge the
death of a man he hated.

VOL. I. I HIi

B o a K He threatened vengeance, but was unable to

II. execute it. One part of military science, the art
'c of attacking fortified places, was then unknown

in Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and
impetuosity of the Scots, rendered their armies as
unfit for sieges, as they were adtive in the field.
An hundred and fifty men, which was the greatelt
number the conspirators ever assembled, refiffed
all the efforts of the Regent for five months ',
in a place which a single battalion, with a few
battering cannon, would now reduce in a few
hours. This tedious siege was concluded by a
truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the
conspirators an absolution from the Pope, and a
pardon in parliament; and upon obtaining there,
they engaged to surrender the caltle, and to set his
son at liberty4

IT is probable, that neither of them were fin-

cere in this treaty. On both sides, they fought
only to amuse, and to gain time. The Regent
had applied to France for aiffiance, and expeated
soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On the
other hand, if Lefly and his associates were not
at firit incited by Henry to murder the Cardinal,
they were, in the sequel, powerfully fiupported
by him. Notwithflanding the silence of cotem-
porary hiflorians, there are violent presumptions
of the former; of the latter there is undoubted
certainty t. During the siege, the conspirators
had received from England supplies both of mo-
ney and provisions ; and as Henry was preparing
to renew his proposals concerning the marriage

SEpifi. Reg. Scot. 2. 37,9. eth

t Kecith, 60.

and the union he had projeated, and to second his B o o Kc
negociations with a numerous army, they hoped, II.
by concurring with him, to be in a ficuation, in c
which they would no longer need a pardon, but
might claim a reward.

THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It JavUary I,

happened in the beginning of next year, after aw'.
a reign of greater splendour than true glory;
bustling, though not adtive; oppreflive in domestic
governmeht3 and in foreign politics wild and ir-.
regular; But the vices of this Prince were more
beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of others.
His rapaciousness, his profufion;->and even his
tyraninyi by deprefling the ancient nobility, and
by adding new property and power to the Com-
mons, laid the foundations of the British liberty.
His other patfions contributed no less towards the
downfal of Popery, and the establishment of re-
ligious freedom in the nation. His resentment
led him to abolish the power, and his covet-
oufnefs to seize the wealth of the church; and by
withdrawing these supports, made it easy, in the
following reign, to overturn the whole fabric of
fuperltition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who

had been alternately his rival and his friend; but
his (ucceffor Henry II. was not negleftful of the
French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Troopsa

live furom

able body of men, under the command of Leon han .
Strozzi, to the Regent's assistance. By their long
experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dexterous in the conduaE of
sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the

I 2 boldnef

B o o It bold ness and despair of the conspirators could not:

II. defend them againif their foperior art, they, after

a {hort refiffance, surrendered to Strozzi, who

cflae of St. enraged, in the name of the King his malter, for
to rcuen- the security of their lives; and as his prisoners.
d". transported them into Frances The castle itself,

the monument of Beatoun's power and vanity,,
was demolished, in obedience to the canon law,
which, with admirable policy, denounces its ana-
themas even againfi the houses in which the sacred
blood of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and or-
dains them to be laid in ruins .

THE archbishopric of St" Andrew's was bestow-

ed by the Regent upon his natural brother John
Hamilton, Abbot of Paisley.

New reach THE delay of a few weeks would have fbved the
with Eng-
itnd. conspirators. Those ministers of Henry VIIL

who had the chief dire&ion of affairs during the
minority of his son Edward VI. con duJed them-
selves, with regard to Scotland, by t&e maxims
of their late master, and resolved to frighten the
Scots into .a treaty, whic . they had not abilities
or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceerl to relate the events

which their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we
shall flop to take notice of a circumifance unob-
served by cotemporary historians, but extremely
remarkable for the discovery it makes of the fen-
timents and spirit, which then prevailed among
the Scots. The conspirators againit Cardinal
Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son in the castle
Zf St. Anidrew's; and as they needed the protec-

*Burn. Hill. Ref. i. 330*

tion of the English, it was to be feared that they B o o K
might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering II.
to them this important prize. The presumptive "
heir to the crown in the hands of the avowed
enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful profpe&.
And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell
upon a very extraordinary expedient. By an at
made of purpose, they excluded " the Regent's
a eldest son from all right of fucceiffon, public
cc or private, so. long as he ihould be detained a
(C prisoner, and substituted in his place, his other
a brothers, according to their. seniority, and in
cc failure of them, those who were next heirs to
" the Regent a." Succession by hereditary right
is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation
seldom ventures to make a breach in it, but in
cafes of extreme neceflity. Such a necellity did
the Parliament discover in the present situation.
Hatred to England, founded on the memory of
past hostilities, aid heightened by the smart of
recent injuries, was the national passion. This
didated that uncommon itatute, by which the
order of lineal succession was so remarkably broken.
The modern theories, which represent this right
as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to
be violated upon any consideration whatsoever,
seem to have been then altogether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of ScooIand

Hertford, now Duke of Somerset, and Protec6or e11 tny.
of England, entered Scotland at the head of
*x#,ooo men, and, at the fame time, a feet of Co
(hips appeared on the coast, to second his land

* Epif. Reg. Scot. z. 359.

S3 forces.

B o o K forces. The Scots had for some time observed

II. this florm gathering, and were prepared for it,

Their army was almeft double to that of the ene-
my, and polled to the greatest advantage on a
rising ground, above Muffelburgh, not far from
the banks of the river Efke. Both these circum7
fiances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw
his danger, and would willingly have extricated
himself out of it, by a new overture of peace on
conditions extremely reasonable. But this mo-
deration being imputed to fear, his proposals
were rejeaed with that scorn which the confidence
of success inspires ; and if the conduct of the Re-
gent, who commanded the Scottish army, had
been in any degree equal to his confidence, the
deftruwaion of the English must have been inevi.
table. They were in a situation, precisely similar
to that of their countrymen under Qliver Crom-
well, in the following century. The Scots had
chosen their grqund so well, that it was impossible
to force them to give battle; a few days had ex-
haufled the forage and provision of a narrow coun-
try; the fleet could only furnilh a scanty and prel
carious fubliftence; a retreat therefore was necef.
fary but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
consequences of retreating.

ON both these occafians, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the English, and
precipitated their own country into the utmoif
pianger. The pndifciplined courage of the private
men became impatient at the fight of an enemy.

anni g The General was afrai4 of nothing, but that the
0"@ Engliflh would escape from him by flight; and

leaving

leaving his strong camp, he attacked the Duke of B o a K
Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than I1L
his rashness deserved. The Prote~or had drawn spteb
up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now Io, 1s547
the advantage of ground on his fide. The Scot-
tilh army conifted almost entirely of infantry,
whose chief weapon was a long spear, and for that
reason their files were very deep and their ranks
close. They advanced towards the enemy in three
great bodies, and, as they passed the river, were
considerably exposed to the fire of the Engliflh
fleet, which lay in the bay of Muffelburgh, and
had drawn near the shore. The English cavalry,
flushed with an advantage which they had gained
in a lkirmifh some days before, began the attack
with more impetuosity than good condc.a, A
body so firm and compaGV as the Scots, ea1ily re-
sifted the impreflion of cavalry, broke them, and
drove them off the field. The Englih infantry,
however, advanced, and the Scots were at once
exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
from 400 foreign fufileers who served the enemy,
and to their cannon which were planted behind the
infantry on the highest part of the eminence. The
depth and clofeners of their order making it impof-
fible for the Scots to stand long in this situation;
the Earlof Angus, who commanded thevanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire
towards the main body, But rhiS friends unhap-
pily mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into
confusion. At that very initant, the broken caT
valry having rallied, returned to the charge i the
foot pursued the advantage they had gained ; the

I 4 profpet

B1 o a K profped of viaory redoubled the ardour of both:

II. And in a moment the rout of the Scottish army

~ L'' became universal and irretrievable. The en,

counter in the field was not long nor bloody;
but in the pursuit, the Engliflh discovered all the
rage and fierceness which national antipathy,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by re-
ciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit
was continued for five hours, and to a great dif-
tance, All the three roads, by which the Scots
fled, were firewed with spears, and swords, and
targets, and covered with the bodies of the slain.
Above 0o,oco men fell on this day, one of the
most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were
taken prisoners, and among these some persons of
diftinaion. And the Protetor had it now in his
power to become mailer of a kingdom, out of
which, not many hours before, he was almost
obliged to retire with infamy *.

BuT

The following passage in a curious and rare journal of

the Prote~tor's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Pat-
ten, who was joined in commission with Cecil, as Judge
Marihal of ;he army, and printed in 1548, deserves our no-
tice; as it gives a jufi idea of the military discipline of the
Scots at that time. " But what after I learned, specially
touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well
ps going to offend, as of fianding to defend, I have thought
necessary here to utter. Hackbutters have they few or none,
and appoint their fight moll commonly always a-foot. They
come to the field well furnished all with jack and lkull, dag-
ger and buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding
good temper, and universally so made to slice, that as I never
saw none so good, so I think it hard to devise the better.
Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice

or

BUT this viaory, however great, was of no real B o o ie

utility, for want of skill, or of leisure, to improve IU
it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more Their vic-
averse from an union with England; and the Pro- ,Y("f bttlc
te6or negleaed the only measure which would thE nsuL
have made it necefrary for them to have given
their consent to it. He amused himself in wasting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty catiles; whereas, by fortifying a few places
which were acceflible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a fiort
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his
terms, or have submitted to his power. By such
an improvement of it, his viaory at Dunbar gave
Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle

or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. IaTheir
array towards joining with the enemy, they cling and thrul
so near in the fore rank, lhoulder and shoulder together, -with
their pikes in both their hands firaight afore them, and their
followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying their
pikes over their foregoers lhoulders, that, if they do assail
undiscovered, no force can well withstand them. Standing at
defence they thrufi lhoulders likewise so nigh together, the
fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, stoop low before, their
fellows behind holding their pikes with both hands, and
therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of their
pike against their right foot, and the other against the enemy
breaft-high; their followers crossing their pike points with
them forward ; and thus each with other so nigh as space and
place will fuffer, through the whole ward, so thick, that as
easily lhall a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry
hedge-hog, as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other
curious particulars are found in this journal, from which Sir
John Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or spear was appointed by

A& q44 P. 7471. to be fix ells; i. e. eighteen feet fix inches.

B o 0 K of Pinkey had no other effecd but to precipitate

II. the Scots into new engagements with France.
~"J The situation of the Englilh court may, indeed,

be pleaded in excuse for the Duke of Sornerfet's
conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which oc-
cafioned his tragical end, was already formed;
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly
undermined his power and credit at home. Self-
preservation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his
safety before his fame, and to return without reap-
ing the fruits of his viaory. At this time, how-
ever, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by
which he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and
his presence suspended its effe't for some time.
The supreme power still remaining in his hands,
he employed it to recover the opportunity which

A~ri1ss4S he had loft. A body of troops, by his command,

seized and fortified HIaddingtoun, a place, which,
on account of its distance from the sea, and from
any English garrison, could not be defended with-
out great expence and danger.

Porcesthe MEAN while the French gained more by the
lorerunion defeat of their allies, than the English did by their
withfrancc, viatory. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,

Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
fiderable thare in the direc~ion of affairs. She was
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
the French interest i and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots
were broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of
nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon the
fitiation Of the kingdom, all eyes were turnel tQ-

wards

wards France, no profpe2 of safety appearing B oo K
but in affiltance from thence. But Henry II. IL
being then at peace with England, the Queen re-
pr~efentted that they could not exped him to take
part in their quarrel, but upon views of persona!
advantage; and that without extraordinary con-
.effions in his favour, no assistance, in proportion to
their present exigencies, could be obtained. The
prejudices of the nation powerfully seconded these
representations of the Queen. What often hap-
pens to individuals, took place among the nobles
in this convention; they were swayed entiyely by
their passions; and in order to gratify them, they
deserted their former principles, and disregarded
their true interest. In the violence of resentment,
they forgot that zeal for the independence of Scot-
land, which had prompted them to reje& the pro-
pofals of Henry VIII. and by offering, volun-
tarily, their young Queen in marriage to the anatofelr
Dauphin, eldest son of Henry II. and, which was it2,j;.
still more, by proposing to fend her immediately one
into France to be educated at his court, they
granted, from a thirit of vengeance, what for-
merly they would not yield upon any confider-
ation of their own safety. To gain at once such
a kingdom as Scotland, was a matter of no small
consequence to France. Henry, without hefita-
tion, accepted the offers of the Scottilh ambaf-
fadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of
his new acquisition. Six thousand veteran soldiers,
under the command of Monfeur Defs&, aflifted
by some of the best officers, who were formed in
ehe long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith.

They

B o o K They served two campaigns in Scotland, with a

II. spirit equal to their former fame. But their ex-
Lr ploits were not considerable. The Scots soon be-

came jealous of their designs, and neglec~ed to
support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the English, in acting wholly upon the
defensive, prevented them from attempting any
enterprise, of consequence; and obliged them to
exhaust their fitrength in tedious sieges, under-
taken under many disadvantages. Their efforts,
however, were not without some benefit to the
Scots, by compelling the Englifl to evacuate
Iladdingtoun, and to surrender several finall forts,
which they poffeffed in different parts of the king-
dom.

BuT the consequence of these operations of his

troops were still of greater importance to the
French King. The diversion which they occa-
fioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out of the
hands of the English; and the influence of his
army in Scotland obtained the concurrence of
Parliament with the overtures made to him, by
the assembly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the
Queen's marriage with the Dauphin, and her edi-
cation at the court of France. In vain did a few
patriots remonfirate againift flch extravagant con'
celfions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a

Tietrty province of France; and Henry, from an ally,
so. ha# pr'r raised to be mailer of the kingdom; by which the
ludcd. friendihip of France became more fatal than the

enmity of England; and every thing was fondly
given up to the one, that had been bravely deT
fended against the other. A point of so much

consequence

consequence was hastily decided, in a Parliament, 1 o o 0K
assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: .The 11.
intrigues of the Queen Dowager, the zeal of the '
clergy, and resentment against England, had prec Is4s
pared a great party in the nation for such a step;
the French General and Ambaflador, by their li-
berality and promises, gained over many more.
The Regent himself was weak enough to stoop to
the offer of a pension from France, together with
the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that king-
dom. A conliderable majority declared for the
treaty, and the interest of a faction was preferred
before the honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and Mary rent

to be edu-

fatal resolution, the source of many calamities to catedin
themselves and to their sovereign, the French rrance.
allowed them no time for refleaion or repentance.
The fleet, which had brought over their forces,
was still in Scotland, and, without delay, convoy-
ed the Queen into France. Mary was then fix
years old, and by her education in that court,
one of the politest, but molt corrupted in Europe,
she acquired every accomplishment that could add
to her charms as a woman, and contraaed many
of those prejudices which occasioned her misfor-
tunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to fuffer
the war in Scotland to languish. The recovering
of the Boulonnois was the objea Henry had most
at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufu-
ficient to divide the attention and fitrength of the
English, whose domectic factions deprived both

their

B o o i their arms and councils of their accustomed ,iia

II. gour. The government of England had under-

gone a great revolution. The Duke of Somer-
fet's power had been acquired with too muich vi.
olence, and was exercised with too little modes
rations to be of long continuance. Many good
qualities, added to great love of his country,
could not atone for his ambition in ufurping the
sole direaion of affairs. Many of the most emi-
nent courtiers combined againit him; and the Earl
of Warwick% their leader, no less ambitious, but
more artful than Somerset, conduded his measures
with so much dexterity, as to raise himfelfupon
the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious
name of Protedory he succeeded to all the power
and infuence, of which Somerfer was deprived;
and he quickly found peace to be necelfary for the
eitablifhment of his new authority, and the exes
sution of the vast designs he had conceived.

Pcrae o HE NrY was no fitanger to Warwick's situation,
c'lded. and improved his knowledge of it to good purpore,

in conducaing the negociarions for a general peace.
He prescribed what terms he pleased to the English
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however ad-

March ;, vantageous to that Monarch and his allies. Eng-
a5so. land consented to reflore Boulogne and its depend-

encies to France, and gave up all pretensions to
a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or
to the conquest of her country. A few final1
forts, of which the Englilh troops had hitherto
kept poffeflion, were rafed; and peace between
the two kingdoms was etiablifhed on its ancient
foundation.

8 BOTI

BOTN the Britiifh nations loft power, as well as B o o ic

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on II.
both sides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interest; and was carried on, under
the influence of national animofities, which were
blind to all advantages. The French, who en-
tered into it with greater coolness, conduded it
with more ikill; and by dexterously availing them-
selves of every circumitance which occurred, re-
covered poffefilon of an important territory which
they had loft, and added to their monarchy a new
kingdom. The ambition of the English Minister
betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate
rage of the Scots againit their ancient enemies be-
stowed on them the latter; their own address and
good policy merited both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, The Scou

become

the French forces left Scotland, as much to their jealou of
own fatisfation, as to that of the nation. The tbeFrenhb.
Scots soon found, that the calling to their alfift-
ance a people more powerful than themselves, was
a dangerous expedient. They beheld, with the
utmost impatience, those who had come over to
prote& the kingdom, taking upon them to com-
mand in it; and on many occalions they repented
the rash invitation they had given. The peculiar
genius of the French nation heightened this dif-
gust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke,
before they had well begun to feel it. TheFrench
were, in that age, what they are in the present, one
of the molt polilhed nations in Europe. But it is
to be observed, in all their expeditions into foreign
countries, whether cowards the £outh or north,

that

B o o Ke that their manners have been remarkably incom-

I!. patible with the manners of every other people.
' ~ Barbarians are tenacious of their own customs,

because they want knowledge and taste to dif-
cover the reasonableness and propriety of customs
which differ from them. Nations, which hold
the firit rank in politeners, are frequently no lefi
tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so in
the ancient world; and the French are the fame
in the modern. Full of themselves ; flattered by
the imitation of their neighbours; and accustom-
ed to confider their own modes as the ifandards of
elegance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside
the distinguishing manners of their own nation, or
to make any allowance for what may differ from
them among others. For this reason, the beha-
viour of their armies has, on every occasion, been
insupportable to ifrangers, and has always exposed
them to hatred, and often to deftruEtion. In that
age, they over-ran Italy four several times by their
valour, and loft it, as often, by their insolence,
The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear
the mosT diflant insinuation of contempt, were
not of a temper to admit all the pretensions of
such assuming guefis. The symptoms of aliena-
tion were soon vilible; they seconded the mili-
tary operations of the French troops with the ut-
most coldness, and their disgust grew insensibly to
a degree of indignation that could hardly be
refirained; and on occasion of a very flight ac-
cident, broke out with fatal violence. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took

I arms,

arms, with equal rage, in defence of their country- B o o K
-men. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and II.
I'everal citizens of diftinaion, were killed in the
.fray; and the French were obliged to avoid the
fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out of' the city.
Notwitrhfanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercoturfe of good offces
between the two nations, an aversion for the French
took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the
effe's whereof were deeply felt, and operated
powerfully through the subsequent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing Proares of

the Resound

has been said of the slate of religion. While the ation.
war with England continued, the clergy had no
leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expea any thing
more than connivance and impunity. The new
doarines were still in their infancy j but during
this short interval of tranquillity, they acquired
strength, and advanced by large and firm fleps,
towards a full establishment in the kingdom. The
first preachers againit Popery in Scotland, of
whom several had appeared during the reign of
James V. were more eminent for zeal and piety,
than for learning. Their acquaintance with the
principles of the Reformation was partial, and at
second hand ; some of them had been educated
in England; all of them had borrowed their no-
tions from the books published there; and, in
the firit dawn of the new light, they did not ven-
ture far before their leaders. But, in a ihont time,
the doEarines and writings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known; the inquisitive

VOL. I. K genius

B o o iK genius of the age pressed forward in quest ds

1I. truth; the discovery of one error opened the way

to others; the downfal of one irimpoffure drew
many after it; the whole fabric, which ignorance
and fuperflition had ereted in times of darkness,
began to totter; and nothing was wanting to
complete its ruin, but a daring and aRive leader
to direat the attack. Such was the famous John
Knox, who, with better qualifications of learn-
ing, and more extensive views than any of his
predecessors in Scotland, poffeffed a natural in-
trepidity of mind, which set him above fear. le
began his public miniffry at St. Andrew's in the
year 1547, with that success, which always ac-
companies a bold and popular eloquence. In-
flead of amufi ng himflf with lopping the branches,
he struck direaly at the root of popery, and at-
tacked both the doatrine and discipline of the
elaablifhed church, with a vehemence peculiar to
himself, but admirably suitable to the temper and
wishes of the age.

As adversary so formidable as Knox, would

not have easily escaped the rage of the clergy,
who observed the tendency and progress of his
opinions, with the utmoli concern. But, at firit,
he retired for safety into the cattle of St. An-
drew's, and while the conspirators kept poffefiion
of it, preached publicly under their prote~tion.
The great revolution in Englmnd, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no
less than the zeal of Knox, towards demolifhiing
the Popish church in Scotland. Henry had
loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of

Popery.

Popery. The miniffers of his son Edward VI. B o o K
cast them off altogether, and established the Pro- II.
teftant religion upon almost the fame footing
whereon it now itands in that kingdom. The in-
fluence of this example reached Scotland, and the
happy effeats of ecclesiastical liberty, in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The Reformers had, hitherto,
been obliged to conduct themselves with the ut-
most caution, and seldom ventured td preachl but
in private houses, and at a distance from court;
they gained credit, as happens on the firit pibli-
cation of every new religion, chiefly among per-
sons in the lower and middle rank of life. But fe-
veral noblemen, od the greatest diftinaion, having,
about this time, openly efpoured their principles,
they were no longer under the neceflity of a~ling
with the fame reserve; and with more focurity
and encouragement, they had likewise greater
success. The means of acquiring and spreading
knowledge became more common, and the fpirlt
of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every
day bolder and more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was

flill under some reifraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, fuflicient to overturn a system
founded on the deepeRt policy, and supported by
the most formidable power. Under the present
circumifances, any attempt towards aation must
have been fatal to the Protestant doatrines; and
it is no small proof of the authority, as well as pe-
netration of the heads of the party, that they were
able to refirain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous

K , people,

B o O K people, till that critical and maturejundure, whei

II. every itep they took was decisive and fuccefsful.

MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement

from two different quarters, whence they never
could have expeaed it. The ambition of the
house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land, hastened the fubverflon of the Papal throne
in Scotland; and by a singular disposition ofPro-
vidence, the persons who opposed the Reforma-
tion in every other part of Europe with the fiercest
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in
that kingdom.

'he Qeen MARY Of Gulfe poffeffed the fame bold and

', aspiring spirit which diftinguilhed her family.

te cffice of But in her it was softened by the female charaaer,

and accompanied with great temper and address.
Her brothers, in order to attain the high objefts
at which they aimed, ventured upon such daring
measures, as suited their great courage. Her de-
signs upon the supreme power were concealed with
the utmolt care, and advanced by address and re-
finements more natural to her sex. By a dexte-
rous application of those talents, she had acquired
a considerable influence on the councils of a na-
tion hitherto unacquainted with the government
of women; and, without the finalleft right to any
share in the adminiiftration of affairs, had engrossed
the chiefdirection of them into her own hands.
But ihe did not long reft satisfied with the enjoy-
ment of this precarious power, which the fickle-
ness of the Regent, or the ambition of those who
governed him, might so easily diffurb; and ihe
began to set on foot new intrigues, with a design

of

of undermining him, and of opening to herself a B o o K
way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her II·
brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and
supported it with all their credit at the court of
France. The French king willingly concurred
in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scot-
land entirely under management, and, in any fu-
ture broil with England, to turn its whole force
upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Queen Dowager had only one of two ways to
chufe; either violently to wrest the power out of
the hands of the Riegent, or to obtain it by his
consent. Under a minority, and among a war-
like and fatious people, the former was a very
uncertain and dangerous experiment. The latter
appeared to be no less impradticable. To per-
fuade a man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme
power; to descend to a level with those, above
whom he was raised; and to be content with the
second place where he hath held the firit, may
well pass for a wild and chimerical projeat. This,
however, the Queen attempted; and the pru-
dence of the attempt was fufliciently juffified by
its success.

Tuz Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, to-

gether with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his adminiffration, raised the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people
against him, to a great height; and the Queen
secretly fomented these with much industry. All
who wilhed for a change met with a gracious re-
ception in her court, and their spirit of difaf-

K 3 feihion

B o O K IrC sion was nourished by such hopes and promises,

IT. as, in every age, impose on the credulity of the

Courts t faCtious. The favourers of the Reformation be-
ktoriro.as. ing the most numerous and spreading body of

the Regent's enemies, she applied to them, with a
particular attention; and the gentleness of her dif-
position, and feeining indifterence to the religious
points in dif1 ute, made all her promises of pro-
teRion and indulgence pass upon them for sincere,
Finding so great a part of the nation willing to fall
in with her measures, the Qeen set out for
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter,

oa. ls30. and took along with her those noblemen, who

poffcifed the greateff power and credit among
their countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of
an elegant court, flattered by the civilities of the
French King, and the caresses of the house of
Guise, and influenced by the seasonable diftribu-
tion of a few favours, and the liberal promise of
many more, they were brought to ayprove of all
the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE she advanced by there flow but sure

ileps, the Regent either did not foresee the dan-
ger which threatened him, or neglected to provide
against it. The first discovery of the train which
was laid, came from two of his own confidents,
Carnegie of Kiinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross,
whom the Queen had gained over to her interest,
and then employed as the most proper inifruments
for obtaining his consent. The overture was made
to him in the name of the French King, enforced
by proper threatenings, in order to work upon
his nattrl timidity, and fiweetened by every pro-

mise

mise that could reconcile him to a proposal so dif- B O O K
agreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation of II.
his French title, together with a considerable pen-
lion, the parliamentary acknowledgment of his
right of succession to the Crown, and a public ra-
tification of his condica during his regency, were
offered him. On the other hand, the displeasure
of the French King, the power and popularity of
the Queen Dowager, the difaffeaion of the nobles,
with the danger of an after-reckoning, were repre-
fiented in the fitrongeft colours,

IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so ex-

traordinary and unexpected, without fcme pre-
vious flruggle; and had the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and
passive spirit of the Regent, he would, in all pro-
bability, have rejeaed it with disdain. Happily
for the Queen, the sagacity and ambition of that
Prelate could, at this time, be no obitruaion to
her views. He was lying at the point of death,
and in his absence, the influence of the Queen's
agents on a flexible temper counterbalanced feve-
ral of the Ptrongeft pations in the human mind,
and obtained his consent to a voluntary surrender
of the supreme power.

AFTER gaining a point of such difliculty with oDc.i55;.

so much ease, the Queen returned into Scotland,
in full expecaation of taking immediate poffefiprp
of her new dignity. But, by this time, the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that dif-
temper, which the ignorance of the Scottiflh phy-
ficians had pronounced to be incurable. This he
owed to the afliftance of the famous Cardan, one

K 4 of

B O O K Of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of

II. whom Italy produced so many about this period.

'cy' A bold genius led him to some useful discoveries,

which merit the esteem of a more discerning age;
a wild imagination engaged him in those chimeri-
cal sciences, which drew the admiration of his co-
temporaries. As a pretender to afirology and
magic, he was revered and consulted by all Eu-
rope; as a proficient in natural philorophy, he was
but little known. The Archbifihop, it is probable,
considered him as a powerful magician, when he
applied to him for relief; but it was his know-
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure
his disease .

TOGETHER with his health, the archbishop re-

povered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dishonour-
able promise, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great
her surprise and indignation were, at this fresh in-
flance of his inconitancy, she was obliged to dif-
femble, that she might have leisure to renew her
intrigues with all parties; with the Protestants,
whom (he favoured and courted more than ever;
with the nobles, to whom flhe rendered herself
agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent
himself, in order to gain whom, (he employed
every argument. But whatever impressions her

Cardan himself was more desirous of being considered as

an Afirologer than a Philosopher; in his book De Genituris, we
find a cnlculation of the Archbifhop's nativity, from which he
pretends both to have predited his disease, and to have effe&-
ed his cure. He received, from the Archbilhop, a reward of
i0oo crowns. A great fum in that age. De vita/ua, p. 32.

emissaries

Rmiffaries might have made on the Regent, it was B o a o
no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the IL
archbilhop. Under his management, the nego-
ciations were spun out to a great length, and his
brother maintaine4 his itation with that addref4
and firmness, which its importance so well merited,
The universal defe'Etion of the nobility, the grow-
ing power of the Protefiants, who all adhered to
the Queen Dowager, the reiterated folicitations of
the French King, and, above all, the interpolition
of the young Queen, who was now entering the
twelfth year of her age, and claimed a right of no-
minating whom mhe pleased to be Regent, obliged
him, at lass, to resign that high office, which he PrevaUs5or
had held many years. He obtained, however, the ieret' n9
fame advantageous terms for himfeif, which had office.
been formerly flipulated.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the She obtains

ioth of April 1554, that the Earl of Arran exe- g Res.
cuted this extraordinary resignation; and at the
fame time Mary of Guise was raised to that digni-
ty, which had been so long the objeat of her wilies.
Thus, with their own approbation, a woman and
a firanger was advanced to the supreme authori-
ty, over a fierce and turbulent people, who fel-
dom submitted, without relu~tance, to the legal
and ancient government of their native Mo-
narchs.

WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland con- Reormy

tributed so much towards the progress of the Re- nues to
formation, by the proteftion which she afforded mae grets
it, from motives of ambition; the English Queen,
by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with

persons

B o O K persons aaive in promoting the fame cause. Mary

II. ascended the throne of England, on the death of
'' -' her brother Edward, and soon after married Phi-

July 6,

s553* lip II. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the

Romilh superstition, and the fierceness of that age,
mhe added the private resentment of her own and
of her mother's fufferings, with which he loaded
ghe reformed religion; and the peevilhnefs and fe-
verity of her natural temper carried the acrimony
of all these passions to the utmost extreme. The
cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds of
those tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach
to human nature. The bigotry oi her clergy coulh
scarce keep pace with the impetuofiry of her zeal
Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on some
occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceecd-
ings. Many among the most eminent Reformers
fuffered for the doarines which they had taught;
others fled from the Thorm. To the greacer parc
of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a fe-
cure asylum; and not a few, out of choice or
necessity, fled into Scotland. What they had seen
and felt in England, did not abate the warmth and
zeal of their indignation againit Popery. Their
attacks were bolder and more fuccefsful than ever;
and their doEtrines made a rapid progress among
all ranks of men.

THrSE doarines, calculated to redtify the opi-

nions, and to reform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other effe~ts; but they soon
began to operate with greater violence, and proved
the occasion, not only of ifbverting the established
religion, but offlhaking the throne, and endanger-

ing

irsg the kingdom. The causes which facilitated B o o i
the introduaion of these new opinions into Scot- 1U.
lynd, and which disseminated them so fast through ,i of
the nation, merit, on that account, a particular the political
and careful inquiry. The Reformation is one of which con-

trbtdto.

the greatest events in the hifory of mankind, and, wardsthat.
in whatever point of light we view it, is infiruaive
and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the i5th and i6th

centuries roused the world from that lethargy in
which it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mind felt its own lirength, broke the fetters
of authority by which it had been so long re-
firained, and venturing to move in a larger
sphere, pufned its inquiries into every fubjec1
with great boldness and surprising fuccers.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity

of exercising their reason, than religion was one
of the first objeas which drew their attention.
Long- before Luther publilhed his famous Theses,
which Ihook the Papal throne, science and philo-
sophy had laid open, to many of the Italians, the
impoflure and absurdity of the eftablithed super-
fihtion. That fiibtle and refined people, satisfied
with exjoying those discoveries in fecrer, were
little dillpofed to affiume the dangerous charaaer
of Reformers, and concluded the knowledge of
truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while
vulgar minds must be overawed and governed
by popular errors. But, animated with a more
noble and difinterefced zeal, the German Theo-
logian boldly ereded the flandard of Truth, and
upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity,

which

Q o K which merits the admiration and gratitude of all
II. succeeding ages.

THE occasion of Luther's being firit disgusted

with the tenets of the Romilh church, and how,
from a frnall rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable breach, is known to every one who
has been the least conversant in history. From
the heart of Germany, his ppinions spread, with
astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and, where-
ever they came, endangered or overturned the
ancient, but ill-founded fyfitem, The vigilance
and address of the court of Rome, and the power
and bigatry of the Aufcrian family, suppressed
these notions on their firit appearance, in the
southern kingdoms of Europe. But the fierce spirit
of the north, irritated by multiplied impositions,
could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor
subdued by the fame force; and encouraged by
some Princes from piety, and by others out of
avarice, it easily bore down the feeble oppofitioq
of an illiterate and immoral clergy,

THE fiuperifition of Popery seems to have growq

to the molt extravagant height in those coun-
tries which are situated towards the different ex-
tremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabit-
ants of southern climates, rendered them fufcep-
tible of the deepest impreflions of superstitious
terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity
were no less favourable to the progress of the fame
spirit, among the northern nations. They knew
little, and were disposed to believe every thing.
The most glaring abfuvdities did not mhock their

gr oss

gross understandings, and the most improbable Bo o ia
iAions were received with implicit assent and II.
admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which

prevailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted
and illiberal kind. Those doarines which are
most apt to ihock the human underitanding, and
those legends which farthest exceed belief, were
proposed to the people without any- attempt to
palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever call
in queffion the reasonableness of the one, or the
truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept

pace with the prog-ress of superstition . for it is
the riature of that spirit to observe no bounds in
its refpe~t and liberality towards those whose
charaEter it esteems sacred. The Scottith Kings
early demonfitrated how much they were under
its influence, by their vast additions to the im-
mnunities and riches of the clergy. The profuse
piety of David I. who acquired on that account
the name of Saint, transferred almost the whole
crown-lands, which were at that time of great
extent, into the hands of ecclefiaftics. The ex-
ample of that virtuous Prince was imitated by
his successors. The spirit spread among all or-
ders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood
with new poffeflions. The riches of the church
all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of those countries, wherein they had
farthest exceeded the juff proportion. The Scot-
tifh clergy paid one-half of every tax imposed on
land; and as there is no reason to think that, in

5 that

II. share of the burden, we may conclude, that by

the time of the Reformation, little less than one-
half of the property in the nation had fallen into
the hands of a society, which is always acquiring,
and can never lose.

THE nature too, of a considerable part of their

property, extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an
easy rent, and were poffeffed by the younger sons,
and descendants of the best famihes *. T7e
connexion between superior and safalf, between
landlord and tenant, created dependences, and
gave rife to an union of great advantage to the
church; and in estimating the influence of the
Popish ecclefiaftics over the nation, these, as well
as the. real amount of their revenues, must be at-
tended to, and taken into the account.

TmIs extraordinary mhare in the national pro-

perty was accompanied with proportionable
weight in the supreme council of the kingdom.
At a time, when the number of the temporal
Peers was extremely small, and when the Lesser
Barons and representatives of Burroughs seldom
attended Parliaments, the Ecclefiaflics formed a
considerable body there. And it appears from
the ancient rolls of Parliament, and from the
manner of chufing the Lords of Articles, that the
proceedings of that high court mult have been, in
a great measure, under their direc'tion t.

* Keith, ff21o

Not. (,).

·t Spots. Hist. of the Church of Scotland, 449-

tHE reverence due to their sacred charater, B o o K

which was often carried incredibly far, contri- II*
buted not a little towards the growth of their l
power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence
of the Popish clergy are remarkable, both as
causes and effe6s of that dominion which they had
acquired over the reft of mankind. They were
regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a fu-
perior species; they were neither fubjet to the
fame laws, nor tried by the fame judges. Every
guard, that religion could supply, was placed
around their power, their poffeffions, and their
persons; and endeavours were used, not without
(uccefs, to reprei'ent them all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in
place of these were fubitituted studies, barbarous
and uninfiruEtive; but as the Ecclefiaftics alone
were conversant in them, this procured them
efleem; and a very little knowledge drew the
admiration of rude ages, which knew nothing.
War was the sole profeflion of the nobles, and
hunting their chief amusement; they divided
their time between thef e; unacquainted with the
arts, and unimproved by science, they difdained
any employment foreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and address,
than bodily vigour. Wherever the former were
necessary, the clergy were intrufled; because
they alone were properly qualified for the trust.

Almost

B o o K Almoff all the high offices in civil government

II. devolved, on this account, into their hands.
Y ?The Lord Chancellor was the firit ffbjea in the

kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death
of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held
that high ofifce; and of these, forty-three had
been Ecclefiaflics ". The Lords of Session were
supreme Judges in all matters of civil right;
and by its original conibitution, the President
and one-half of the Senators in this court were
churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy; and undiffrated by those cares, and
unincumbered with those burdens, which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their order
became their only obje&, and they were at full
leisure to pursue it.

TuiE nature of their fundion gave thEnam no

to all persons, and at all seasons. They could
employ all the motives of fear and of hope, of
terror and of consolation, which operate most
powerfully on the human mind. They haunted
the weak and the credulous; they besieged the
beds of the sick and of the dying. They fuffered
few to go out of the world without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church, and taught them
to compound with the Almighty for their fins,
by beftowing riches upon those who called them-
selves his servants.

* Crawf. Oflic. of State.

WanE

WHEN their own induifry, or the superstition of B o 0 K

mankind failed of producing this effeE, the Eccle- H.
fiaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. Whoever died intestate, was presumed to
have detitned his moveaJbles to pious uses. The
church took poffeffion of them. The children, the
wife, the creditors of the person deceased, were
often excluded from any flare, in what was
eileemed a sacred property ". As men are apt to
trust to the continuance of life with foolish confi-
dence, and childifhily ihun every thing that forces
them to think of their mortality, many die with-
out fettling their affairs by will; and the bold
usurpation of the clergy in this cafe, of which
there are frequent vefliges in our laws, though
none in our historians, may be reckoned among
the most plentiful sources of the wealth of the
church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-

tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
and by laws which the clergy themselves had
framed. The penalty, too, by which the deci-
fions of there courts were enforced, added to their
authority. A sentence of excommunication was no
less formidable, than a sentence of outlawry. It was
pronounced on many occasions, and againit various
crimes: And besides excluding those, upon whom
it fell, from Chrilian privileges, it deprived them
of all their rights as men, or as citizens ; and the
aid of the secular power concurred with the super-
flition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of
the church no less defiruative than terrible.

* Essays on Brit. Antiq. '74.

VoL. 1. L To

B o o K To these general causes, may be attributed the

II. immense growth both of the wealth and power of
Y the Popish church; and without entering into any

more minute detail, this may serve to discover
the foundations, on which a firuaure so ftupen-
dous was ereded.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own fuperitition and profuflenefs, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and emi-
nence, they began, by degrees, to feel and to
murmur at their encroachments. No wonder
haughty and martial Barons {hould view the power
and poffefions of the church with envy; and re-
gard the lazy and inactive charaAer of church-
men with the utmost contempt. While, at the
fame time, the indecent and licentious lives of
the clergy gave great and just offence to the peo-
ple, and conliderably abated the veneration,
which they were accuflomed to yield to that or-
der of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ig-

norance, and, above all, the severe injunation of
celibacy, had concurred to introduce this corrup-
tion of morals among the clergy; who, presuming
too much upon the fubmifinon of the people, were
at no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their
own vices, According to the accounts of the Re-
formers, confirmed by several Popish writers, the
most open and scandalous dissolution of manners
prevailed among the Scottish clergy t. Cardinal

-1- Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 2oz. zo5. Lefl. de Rcb.

Gest. Scot. z3z.

Beatoun,

Bcatoun, with the fame public pomp wlich is B oo Ia
due to a legitimate child, celebrated the mar- II-
riage of his natural daughter with the Earl of '
Crawfurd's son *; and, if we may believe Knox,
he publicly continued to the end of his days a cri-
minal correspondence with her mother, who was
a woman of rank. The other prelates Rem not
to have been more regular and exemplary than
their Primate t.

MEN Of such characAers ought, in rerfon, to

have been alarmed at the first clamours raised
against their own morals, and the doarines of the
church, by the Protestant preachers; but the
Popish Ecclefiaftics, either out of pride or igno-
rance, negleted the proper methods for silencing
them. Initead of reforming their lives, or dif-
guising their vices, they afFeaed to despise the
censures of the people. And while the Reform-
ers, by their mortifications and aufterities, en-
deavoured to resemble the firif propagators of
Christianity, the Popish clergy were compared to

* The marriage articles fufbcribed with his own hand, in

wlich he calls her my daughter, are flill extant. Keith, p. 4 2.

t A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy

is found in the public reccrds. A greater number of letters
of legitimation was granted during the firfi thirty years after
the Reformation, than during the whole period that hIs
clapfed lince that time. These were obtained by the sons of
the Popish clergy. The ecclefiatlics, who were allowed to
retain their benefices, alienated them to their children; who,
when they acquired wealth, were desirous that the slain of
il!egitimary might no longer remain upon their families. In
Krith's Catalegue of the Scotti/h BiJhsps, we find fcveral in-
fliances of such alienations of church lands, by the Popiih
incumbents, to their natural children.

B oos 0 ill those persons who are most infamous ifi

II. hifory, for the ehormity and scandal of theit

crimes.

ON the c1' er hand, instead of mitigating the

rigour, or cot l(riig over the absurdity, of the
established dcrinbrs; infiead of attempting to
found them upon icripture, or to reconcile them
to reafbon; they left them without any other sup-
port or recommendation, than the authority of the
church, and the decrees of councils. The fables
concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage,
amid the merits of the faints, were the topics, on
which they insisted in their discourses to the
people; and the duty of preaching being left
wholly to Monks of the lowest and most illiterate
orders, their compositions were still more wretched
and contemptible, than the fubjets on which they
insisted. While the Reformers were attended by
crowded and admiring audiences, the Popilh
preachers were either universally deserted, or
listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imprudent and unfuccefsful. As many doarines
of their church had derived their credit, at firit,
from the authority of false miracles, they now en-
deavoured to call in there to their aid *. But those
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpi-
cious admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darkness and of ignorance, met with a

* Spotfiood, 69.

very

very different reception, in a more enlightened B o o K
period. The vigilance of the Reformers dete6ed II.
these impoftures, and exposed not only them, but L
the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices,
to ridicule.

As the Popish Ecclefiaftics became more and

more the objeas of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the Reformers were liflened to as so
many calls to liberty; and besides the pious in-
dignation which they excited againif those corrupt
dotrines, which had perverted the nature of true
Chritianity; besides the zeal, which they inspired
for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of re-
ligion; they gave rife also, among the Scottish
nobles, to other views and paflions. They hoped
to shake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion,
which they had long felt to be oppreflive, and
which they now discovered to be unchrititan.
They expeaed to recover pofi'fflon of the church
revenues, which they were now taught to confider
as alienations made by their anceflors, with a
profusion no less undifcerning than unbounded.
They flattered themselves, that a check would be
given to the pride and luxury of the clergy,
who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themnfelves within the sphere peculiar to their fa-
cred charader. An averiion for the eltabllihed
church, which flowed from so many concurring
causes, which was raised by considerations of
religion, and heightened by motives of policy,
spread fast through the nation, and excited a
spirit, that burst out, at last, with irrefiftib1c
violence.

B o O K PLL.LSOUS considerations, alone, were fufflcienr

1I. to have b..0012 ths fairit. The 'O its in contro-

V' verly with the cuwl :i \

i . - of so much

importance to the happine Lt

L Iai kincj, and so

essential to Chriftian~ty, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to establish them. But the Reformation having
been represented a the effea of some wild and
enthuflaflic frenzy in the human mind, this at-
tempt to account for the eagerness and zeal with
which our anceilors embraced and propagated the
Protefiant do~trines, by taking a view of the po-
lirical motives alone which infuenced them, and
by fhcwing how naturally these prompted them
to aa with so much ardour, will not, perhaps, be
efeemed an unnecessary digrefion. Ve now re-
turn to the course of the hiillory.

. ?THE Que en 's elevation to the office of Regent

seems to have transported her, at firit, beyond the
known prudence and moderation of her chara6ter.

The Qeen She began her adminifiration, by conferring upon
Regent be-
gins her ad- foreigners several ofices of trult and of dignity;

a fRep, which, both from the inability of firangers

i" "ir to disc harge these offices with vigour, and from

the envy which their preferment excites among
the natives, is never attended with good confe-
quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and
intrufled with the management of the public re-
venues; Bonot was appointed Governor of Oik-
ney; and Rubay honoured with the custody of the
Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chancellor *. It
was with the highest indignation, that the Scots

* Lefy, de Reb. Gefi. Scot. 189.

beheld

beheld offices of the greateit eminence and autho- 13 o o K
rity, dealt out among firangers. By these pro- II.
motions they conceived the Queen to have offered '
an insult both to their understandings and to
their courage; to the former, by supposing them
unfit for those ifations, which their ancestors had
filled with so much dignity; to the latter, by
imagining that they were tame enough not to
complain of an affront, which, in no former age,
would have been tolerated with impunity.

WIHILE their minds were in this disposition, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highe'f degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been ac-
cuftomed to embarrass the English, and to divide
their fitrength by the sudden and formidable in-
curfions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these
inroads were seldom attended with any real ad-
vantage to Scotland, and exposed it to the dan-
gerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the
Scots began to grow less traatable than formerly,
and scrupled, any longer, to serve an ambitious
ally at the price of their own quiet and security.
The change, too, which was daily introducing in
the art ofwar, rendered the afiftance of the Scot-
tifh forces of less importance to the French Mo-
narch. For these reasons, Henry having resolved
upon a war with Philin II. and foreseeing that the
Queen of England would take part in her hus-
band's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to fccure,
in Scotland, the assistance of some troops, which
would be more at his command than an un-

L l disciplined

B o o K disciplined army, led by chieftains who were al.

HI. most independent. In prosecution of this design,

~J but under pretence of relieving the nobles from

the expence and danger of defending the borders,

a5Sss the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament, to

regilier the value of lands throughout the king-
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to ap-
ply that revenue towards maintaining a body of
regular troops in conflant pay. A fixed tax up-
on land, which the growing expence of govern-
rnent hath introduced into almost every part of
Europe, was unknown at that time, and seemed
altogether inconsistent with the frec and inde-
pendent spirit of the feudal government. Nothing
could be more shocking to a generous and brave
nobility, than the intrufitng, to mercenary hands,
the defence of those territories which had been ac-
quired, or preserved, by the blood of their an-
ceftors. They received this proposal with the
utmost indignation. About 300 of the lesser Ba-
rons repaired in a body to the Queen Regent, and
reprefentcd their sense of the intended innovation,
with that manly and determined boldness which
is natural to a free people, in a martial age.
Alarmed at a remonifrance delivered in so firm a
tone, and supported by such formidable numbers,
the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme, which
ihe found to be universally odious. As the Queen
herself was known perfetly to underfltand the cir-
cumflances and temper of the nation, this measure
was imputed wholly to the suggestions of her so-
reign counsellors; and the Scots were ready to pro-
ceed to the most violent extremities against them.

THP,

THE French, inifead of extingulihing, added B o 0

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced II.
hoffilities againit Spain, and Philip had prevailed t
on the Queen of England to reinforce his army engagethe

kcingdom in

with a considerable body of her troops. In order a war with
to deprive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as England.
he projeaed, to the Scots; and attempted to ex-
cite them to invade England. But, as Scotland
had nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's
charaaer, who, far from any ambitious scheme of
dialurbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied
in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjets;
the nobles, who were assembled by the Queen
Regent at Newbottle, liflened to the folicitations
of the French Monarch with extreme coidnefs,
and prudently dechlned engaging the kingdom in
an enterprise so dangerous and unnecessary. WVhat
mhe could not obtain by persuasion, the Queen
Regent brought about by a stratagem. Notwith-
fianding the peace which utbfiffed between the two
kingdoms, ihe commanded her French soldiers to
rebuild a small fort near Berwick, which was ap-
pointed, by the ]aft treaty, to be rafed. The
garrison of Berwick fdllied out; interrupted the
work,; and ravaged the adjacent country. This
insult roused the fiery spirit of the Scots, and
their promptness to revenge the leafs appearance
of national injury, dirnpated, in a moment, the
wife and pacific resolutions which they had so lately
formed. War was determined, and orders in-
flantly given for raising a numerous army. But
before their forces could assemble, the ardour of
their indignation had time to cool, and the Eng-

lifh

B o O K lifh having discovered no intention to push the

II. war with vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific

L ~system, and resolved to ifand altogether upon the

1556. defensive. They marched to the banks of the

Tweed, they prevented the incursions of the ene-
my; and having done what they thought fuffcient
for the fafery and honour of their country, the
Queen could not induce them either by her en-
treaties, or her artifices, to advance another Prep.

WHILE the Scots perdfied in their inaEtivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who poffeffed entirely the confidence of the Queen
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to
engage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to
the orders of the Scottish General, he marched
over the Tweed with his own soldiers, and in-
vefced Werk, a garrison of the English. The
Scots, inifead of seconding his attempt, were en-
raged at his presumption. The Queen's partiality
towards France had long been fufpe ced; but it
was now visible that she wantonly sacrificed the
peace and safety of Scotland, to the interest of
that ambitious and assuming ally. Under the
feudal governments, it was in camps that fib-
jeats were accustomed to address the boldest re-
monifrances to their Sovereigns. While arms were
in their hands, they felt their own firength; and
at that time all their representations of grievances
carried the authority of commands. On this occa-
lion, the indignation of the nobles broke out with
such violence, that the Queen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in action to be yain, ab,
ruptly dismissed her army, and retired with the ut-

1 rnsf'

molf lhame and difgufl; having discovered the im- B o o K
potence of her own authority, without effetairng any II.
thing which could be of advantage to France.

IT is observable, that this firif inifance of con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no de-
gree, be imputed to the influence of the new opi-
nions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to
the Regency had been principally supported by
those who favoured the Reformation, and as she
fill needed them for a counterpoise to the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's, and the partisans of the
house of Hlamilton ; they were now treated by her
with great refpeat, and even admitted to no in-
considerable share in her favour and confidence.
Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving con-
fpirators againit Cardinal Beatoun, were, about
this time, recalled by her from banishment; and,
through her connivance, the Protestant preachers
enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of
great advantage to their cause. Soothed by these
instances of the Queen's moderation and huma-
nity, the Proteflants left to others the office ofre-
monifrating; and the leaders of the opposite sac-
tion set them the first example of disputing the
will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre- TheQeeen's

carious her authority was, while it depended on mriaghe
the poise of these contrary faaions, she endea- Dauphin.
voured to eflablifh it on a broader and more fe-
cure foundation, by hastening the conclusion
of her daughter's marriage with the Dauphin.
Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in the
Nloom of youth; and considerable as the territo-

ries

B o0o 0 ries were, which fne would have added to the

II. French Monarchy; reasons were not wanting to

~ ~ difruade Henry from completing his firit plan of

marrying her to his son. The Constable Mont-
morency had employed all his interest to defeat
an alliance, which refleaed so much lultre on the
Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the im-
pofifbility of maintaining order and tranquillity
among a turbulent people, during the absence of
their Sovereign; and for that reason, had advised
Henry to beflow the young Queen upon one oi
the Princes of the blood, who, by residing in
Scotland, might preserve that kingdom an useful
ally to France, which, by a nearer union to the
Crown, would become a mutinous and ungovern-
able province *. But, at this time, the Conflable
was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards, and
the Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their
glory; and their influence, seconded by the
charms of the young Queen, triumphed over
the prudent, but envious, remonfirances of their
rival.

Dec. 14, THE French King accordingly applied to the
ass? Parliament of Scotland, which appointed eight of

its members ( to represent the whole body of the
nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice conferred
this honourable charaater, were forne of the most

*Melv. Mem. IS.
t Viz. The Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Ross,

the Bishop of Orkney, the Earls of Rothes and Caffiis, Lord
Fleming, Lord Seton, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John
Erikine ofDux.

avowed

avowed and zealous advocates for the Reforma- B o o zc
tion; by which, may be estimated the degree of II.
refpea and popularity, which that party had now ·
attained in the kingdom. The infitru6ions of the
Parliament to those Commissioners still remain *,
and do honour to the wisdom and integrity of that
assembly. At the fame time that they manifefied,
with refpea to the articles of marriage, a laudable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sove-
reign, they employed every precaution which pru-
dence could did9ate, for preserving the liberty
and independence of the nation, and for securing
the succession of the Crown in the house of Ha-
milton.

WrrTT regard to each of there, the Scots ob- AraincesoC

the French

tained whatever fatisfacion their fear or jealousy in the mac-
could demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, rige treaty.
and the King of France ratified every article with
the most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by
deeds in form, under their hands and seals. But
on the part of France, all this was one continued
scene of Itudied and elaborate deceit. Previous
to these public tranfaffions with the Scottish de-
puties, Mary had been perfibaded to fiubfcribe pri-
vately three deeds, equally unjufh and invalid;
by which, failing the heirs of her own body, ftle
conferred the kingdom of Scotland, with what-
ever inheritance or fuccefifon might accrue to it,
in free gift upon the crown of France, declaring
all promises to the contrary, which the necelfity
of her affairs, and the folicitations of her £ubjecs
had extorted, or might extort from her, to be

void

~X hci:h, XyTc!ld. r;.

B o o K void and of no obligation ". As it gives us 6

II. proper idea of the charader of the French court

'*V' under Henry II. we may observe that the King

himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the Duke
of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the
persons engaged in conducting this perfidious and
dishonourable projecl. The Queen of Scots was
the only innocent aclor in that scene of iniquity.
Her youth, her inexperience, her education in. a
foreign country, and her deference to her uncle's
will, mufl vindicate her, in the judgment of every
impartial person, from any imputation of blame
on that account.

THIS grant, by which Mary bellowed the in-

heritance of her kingdom upon flrangers, was
concealed with the utmost care from her fubjells.
They seem, however, not to have been unac-
quainted with the intention of the French to
overturn the settlement of the fuccelfion in favour
of the Duke of Chatelherault. The zeal, with
which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed
all the measures of the Q.ueen Regent, evidently
proceeded from the fears and suspicions of that
prudent prelate, on this head 9.

Apil 14, The marriage, however, was celebrated with
ass5* great pomp ; and the French, who had hitherto

affeded to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-
land, began now to tunfold their intentions without
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the de-

* Corps Diplomat. tom. v. 21. Keith, 73.
+ About this time, the French seem to have had some de·

sign of reviving the Earl of Lennox's pretensions to the fuc-
cession, in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke of Chatel-
herault. Hayncs, z15. 219. Forbes's Colleta. vol. i. i8g.

puties

puties had agreed that the Dauphin should affiume
the name of King of Scotland. This they confi-
dered only as an honorary trtle; but the French
laboured to annex to it fomne solid privileges and
power. They insisted that the Dauphin's title
mhould be publicly recognised; that the Crown
Matrimonial mhould be conferred upon him; and
that all the rights pertaining to the husband of a
Queen should be vefled in his person. By the
laws of Scotland, a person who married an heiress
kept poffefflion of her ef'ate during his own life, if
he happened to survive her and the children born
of the marriage *. This was called the courtesy of
Scotland. The French aimed at applying this
rule, which takes place in private inheritances,
to the fuccefion of the kingdom; and that seems
to be implied in their demand of the Crow:n Ma-
trimlzonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scottish hifto-
rians, and which they have neglec'ed to explain.
As the French had reason to expea difmculties in
carrying through this measure, they began with
founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage-articles between
their Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an ex-
ample to the age, of that prudent jealousy and re-
serve, with which a foreigner should be admitted
so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the
Scottimh deputies had, in th'-ir oath of allegiance
to the Dauphin, expressed themselves with re-
markable caution J. Their answer was in the
fame spirit, refpeaful, but firm ; and discovered
a fixed resolution of conft'nting to nothing, that

* Reg. Maj. Jib. ii. .

5 Keith, Append. 0o.

tended

B o o K tended to introdulce any alteration in the order ot

II. succession to the crown.

FouR of the deputies * happening to die beford

they returned into Scotland, this accident was un-
verfally imputed to the effeas of poiron, which wag
fuppcoeJ to have been given them by the emiffa-
ries of the house of Guise. The historians of all na-
tions discover an amazing credulity with refpe& to
fiories of this kind, which are so well'calculated
to please the malignity of some men, and to gra-
tify the love of the marvellous which is natural to
all, that in every age they have been swallowed
*without examination, and believed contrary to
reason. No wonder the Scots should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such strong.
colours of probability, both from their own re-
fentment, and from the known charader of the
Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
juflice of the ends which they pursued, or of the
means which they employed. For the honour of hu-
man nature, it mull, however, be observed, that is
we can discover no motive, which could induce
any rrtan to perpetrate such a crime, so there ap-
pears no evidence to prove that it was committed.
But the Scots of that age, influenced by national
animofities and prejudices, were incapable ofet-
amining the circumitances of the cafe with calrn-
ners, or of judging concerning them with cani
dour. All parties agreed in believing the Fretcrh
to have been guilty of this detestable altion 1 and
it is obvious how much this tended to increase

* The Bilhop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the earl of

Caffils, and Lord Fleming.

the aierfion for them, which was growing among B 0 a K
all ranks of meri. II.

NOTWITHSTArDIN6 the cold reception which The Regeet

their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial PreeV;ion
Inet with from the Scottilh deputies; the French ment to
ventured to move it in parliament. The partisans Nov. ?.
of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
signs upon the fucceflion, opposed it with great
zeal. But a party, which the feeble and uniteady
condua of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withitand the in-
fluence of France, and the address of the Queen
Regent, seconded, on this occasion, by all the
numerous adherents of the Reformation. Be-
sides, that artful Prindefs dressed out the French
demands in a less offenfive garb, and threw in so
mnany limitations, as seemed to render them of
small consequence4 These either deceived the
Scots, or removed their scruples: and in com-
pliance to the Queen, they pafed an a&, confer-.
ring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and,
with the fondest credulity, truited to the frail fe-
Curity of words and statutes, against the danger.
ous encroachments of power 4.

THE concurrence of the Protefitants, with the Continue,

Queen Regent, in plomoting a measure so ac- : e

The AR of Parliament is worded with the utmost care,

with a view to guard againfe any breach of the order of fuccef-
lion. But the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a so-
lcmn protestation to secure his own right. Keith, 76. It is
plain, that he fufpeaed the French of having some intention
to set aside his right of fucceflion; and, indeed, if they had
no delign of that kind, the eagerness with which they urged
:heir demand, was childish.

VOL, I, M ceptabiG

B o O K ceptable to France, while the Popiflh clergy, under

II. the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's,

'~p' opposed it with so much violence *, is one of

those singular circumitances, in the condua of
parties, for which this period is so remarkable.
It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dex-
terous management of the Qieen, but chiefly to
the moderation of those who favoured the Re-
formation. The Protestants were, by this time,
almost equal to the Catholics, both in power, and
in number; and, conscious of their own fItrength,
they submitted with impatience to that tyrannical
authority, with which the ancient laws armed the
ecclefiatics against them. They longed to be
exempted from this opprefilve jurifdiation, and
publicly to enjoy the liberty of profefling thofc
opinions, and of exercising that worship, which
so great a part of the nation deemed to be found-
ed in truth, and to be acceptable to the Deity.
This indulgence, to which the whole weight of
priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence muff ex-
tort it from the reluaiant hand of their Sovereigns
or by prudent compliances they might exped it
from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to
which no nation has recourse suddenly; and sub-
jeas seldom venture upon resistance, which is their
lati remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity.
On this occasion the Reformers wifely held the
opposite course, and by their zeal in forwarding
Lhe Qeen's deigns, they hoped to merit her

* Melv. 47.

proteCtioni

proteaion. This disposition the Queen encouraged B oo ie
to the utmost, and amused them so artfully with II.
many promises, and some concessions, that, by
their affiltance, she surmounted in Parliament the
force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jea-
lousy, which would, otherwise, have swayed with
the greater number.

ANOTHER circumifance contributed somewhat

to acquire the Regent such considerable influence
in this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bishop-
rics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to
a feat in Parliament, were in the gift of the
Crown . From the time of her accession to the
Regency, the Queen had kept in her own hands
almoat all those which became vacant, except Iuch
as were, to the great disgust of the nation, be-
flowed upon foreigners. Among these, her bro-
ther the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the
abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the most
wvealthy foundations in the kingdom t. By this
condua, mhe thinned the ecclefiaflical bench j,
which was entirely under the influence of the
Archbishop of Sr. Andrew's, and which, by its
numbers and authority, usually had great weight
in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give, at that time, of little consequence.

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior

of St. Andrew's, one the most powerfull, and
the other the most popular leader of the Pro-

* See Book I. t Lefly, 20o.
t It appears from the rolls of this Pariiament, which Le rfl

calls a very full one, that only seven Bishops and sixteen Ab-
hots were present.

M 2 te~ants,

B o o rK teftants, were appointed to carry the Crown anl

II. other ensigns of royalty to the Dauphin. But
''3 from this they were diverted by the part they

were called to aa, in a more interesting scene,
which now begins to open.

Elizhb';h EEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceifary to
faccp·-ds to
secroen observe, that on the 17th of November, Mary of

Sng1and. England finished her short, and inglorious reign.

Her sifter Elizabeth took poffeffion of the throne
without opposition; and the Protefiant religion
was, once more, eflablifhed by law in England.
The accellion of a Queen, who, under very dif-
ficult circumstances, had given firong indications
of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel,
rendered her reign so illustrious, attracted the eyes
of all Europe. Among the Scots, both parties
observed her firfl motions with the utmofit concern,
as they easily foresaw that she would not remain
long an indifferent fpedator of their tranfacions.

UNDER many difcouragements, and much op-

prefimon, the Reformation advanced towards a full
eitablifhment in Scotland. All the low country,
the most populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinfured
with the Proteltant opinions; and if the fame im-
prellions were not made in the more distant coun-
ties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpoli-
tions among the people, but to the scarcity of
preachers, whose most indefatigable zeal could
not satisfy the avidity of those who desired their
inftrubtons. Among a people bred to arms, and
lo prone to mutiny as the Scots; and in an age,
when rcligious paflions had taken such firong pof-

feflion

remon of the human mind, and moved and agi- B o O K
tated it with so much violence, the peaceable and H.
regular demeanor of so numerous a party is truly
affonifhing. From the death of Mr. Patrick Ha-
milton, the firfU who fuffered in Scotland for the
Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed, and
during so long a period, no violation of public
order or tranquillity had proceeded from that
sea *; and though roused and irritated by the
most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they
did, in no instance, transgress those bounds of
duty which the law prescribes to fubjeAs. Be-
sides the prudence of their own leaders, and the
protedion which the Queen Regent, from poli-
tical motives, afforded them, the moderation of
the Archbifihop of St. Andrew's encouraged this
pacific disposition. That Prelate, whole private
life cotemporary writers tax with great irregulari-
ties t, governed the church, for some years, with
a temper and prudence of which there are few ex-
amples in that age. But some time before the
meeting of last Parliament, the Archbishop de-
parted from those humane maxims, by which he
had hitherto regulated his condu6 ; and whether,
in spite to the Qieen, who had entered into so
close an union with the Protestants, or in corn-
pliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let
loose all the rage of persecution against the Re-
formed; sentenced to the flames an aged priest,

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by pri-

vate revenge, and being contrived and executed by fixteeq
persons only, cannot, with justice, be imputed to the whole
Proteilant party. j- Knox, Buchanan, Keith, zos.

M3 who

B o O K wh1o had been convited of embracing the Pro-

II. teftant opinions; and summoned several others,
Cy ifufpeAed of the fame crime, to appear before a,

synod of the clergy, which was soon to convene
at Edinburgh.

NOTHrNG could equal the horror of the Pro-

tefiants at this unexpeaed and barbarous execu-
tion, but the zeal, with w hich they espoused the
defence of a cause, that now seemed devoted to
deftru6aion. They had immediate recourse to the
Queen Regent; and as her success in the Parlia-
ment, which was then abput to meet, depended
on their concurrence, she not only sheltered them
from the impending storm, but permitted them the
exercise of their religion, with more freedom than
they had hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with this
precarious tenure, by which they held their reli-
gious liberty, the Protestants laboured to render
their poffeffion of it more secure and independent.
With this view, they determined to petition the
Parliament for some legal proteaion, againit the
exorbitant and oppreflive jurildiation of the eccle-
fiaftical courts, which, by their arbitrary method
of proceeding, founded in the canon law, were led
to sentences the most (hocking to humanity, by
maxims the most repugnant to jufrice. But the
Queen, who dreaded the effu2 of a debate on this
delicate fubjea, which could not fail of exciting
high and dangerous panions, prevailed on the lead-
ers of the party, by new and more solemn promises
of her protecion, to desist from any application to
parliament, where their numbers and influence
would, in all probability, have procured them, if

not

not the entire redress, at leaat some mitigation of E o a K
their grievances. II.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convo-

cation of the Popilh clergy, but with the fame ill
success, which hath always attended every proposal
for reformation, addressed to that order of men.
To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative
error, are sacrifices, which the virtue of indivi-
duals has, on some occasions, offered to truth;
but from any society of men, no such effort can
be expecaed. The corruptions of a society, re-
commended by common utilirv, and juflified by
universal praaice, are viewed, by its members,
without shame, or horror; and reformation never
proceeds from themselves, but is always forced
upon them by some foreign hand. Suitable to this
unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was the behaviour
of the Convocation in the present conjundcure.
All the demands of the Protestants were rejeated
with contempt; and the Popish clergy, far from
endeavouring, by any prudent concefions, to
sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, as-
ferted the doatrines of their church, concerning
some of the moat exceptionable articles, with an
ill-timed rigour, which gave new offence ".

DURIN G the fitting of the Convocation, the Pro-

teftants firift began to fufpeat some change in the
Regent's disposition towards them. Though join,
ed with them for many years by interest, and
united, as they conceived, by the ifrongeft ties
of a'e~tion and of gratitude, ihe discovered, on
this occasion, evident fymptomns, not only of

*Keith, 8i.

M 4 Fcldneis,

B o 0 K coldners, but of a growing disgust and aversion.

II. In order to account for this, our historians do little

159. more than prodice the trite observations concern-

ing the nfluence of prosperity to alter the chat
raaer, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen,
fay they, having reached the utmost point to
which her ambition aspired, no longer preserved
her accustomed moderation, but, with an info-
lence usual to the fortunate, lookled down upon
those, by whose afitance Ihe had been enabled to
rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity of
the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the
Queen's difpoition, that we must search for the
motives of her present condu&t. These were det
rived from another~ and a more remote source,
whiclq, in order to clear the subsequent tranfac-
tions, we flali endeavour to open with some care.

Ambitious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had
prin$-foho been no lefq fuccefsful, than daring; but all their
Lorrain. fchemos were difkinguifhed by being vast and un-

bounded. Though firangers at the cpurt of
France, their eminent qualities had raised them,
in a Ihort time, to an height ps power, superior
to that of all other subjects, and had placed them
on a level even with the princes of the blood them-
selves. The church, the army, the revenue, were
under their direaion. Nothing but the royal dig-
nity remained unattained, and they were elevated
to a near alliance with it, by the marriage of th4
Queen of Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gra-
tify their own vanity, and to render their niece
more worthy the heir of France, they set on foot

her

her claim to the crown of England, which was B o o a
founded on pretences not unplaufible. II.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry 1559.
VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that im-
patient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced, or
beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he mar-
ried. In order to gratify him, both his daughters
had been declared illegitimate by ARI of Parlia-
ment; and yet, with that fantastic inconfiflence
which diftinguilhes his charader, he, in his last
'vill, whereby he was impowered to fettle the or-
der of fuccellion, called both of them to the
throne upon the death of their brother Edward;
and, at the fame time, passing by the posterity of
his eldest sifter Margaret Queen of Scotland, he
appointed the line of fuccefifon to continue in the
descendants of his younger sifter, the Duchess of
Suffolk.

IN consequence of this deffination, the validity

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in
England without the least complaint of neigh-
bouring Princes. But the fame causes, which fa-
cilitated her accefion to the throne, were obstacles
to the elevation of her sifter Elizabeth, and ren-
dered her pofleflion of it precarious and insecure.
Rome trembled for the Catholic faith, under a
Proteffant Queen of such eminent abilities. The
fame fuperifitious fears alarmed the court of
Spain, And France beheld, with indignation, a
throne, to which the Queen of Scots could form
fa many pretensions, occupied by a rival, whose

birth,

B o o K birth, in the opinion of all good Catholics, ex-

II. cluded her from any legal right of succession. The

impotent hatred of the Roman Pontiff, or the flow

r 59* councils of Philip II. would have produced no fud-

den or formidable effeat. The ardent and impe-
tuous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at
that time, governed the court of France, was more

They per- decisive, and more to be dreaded. Inifigated by
uaL*dMy them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per-
te tie f fuaded his daughter-in-law, and her husband, to
iiaanJ, assume the title of King and Queen of England.

They affeted to publilh this to all Europe. They
used that style and appellation in public papers,
some of which still remain *. The arms of Eng-
land were engraved on their coin and plate, and
borne by them on all occasions. No preparations,
however, were made to support this impolitic and
premature claim. Elizabeth was already seated on
her throne; she poffeffed all the intrepidity of fpi-
rit, and all the arts of policy, which were necessary
for maintaining that ifation. England was grow-
ing into reputation for naval power. The marine
of France had been utterly negleted; and Scot-
land remained the only avenue, by which the ter-

Refolveto ritories of Elizabeth could be approached. It was
ile Eng- on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain

determined to make their attack t; and, by using
the name and pretensions of the Scottish Queen,
they hoped to rouse the English Catholics, formi-
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and
exasperated to the utmost againfr Elizabeth, on

* Anders. Diplom. Scot. No. 63 and 164.
t Forbes, Colca. i. 233. 277.

account

account of the change which flhe had made in the B o o i
national religion. II.

IT was vain to expe& the afflifance of the Scot- r559*

tifh Protestants to dethrone a Queen, whom all in crdur to
Europe esteemed the guardian and defender of the I S onec f
reformed faith. To break the power and reputa- *t ~.fio-
tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this Scotland.
reaibn, a necessary ifep towards the invasion of
England. With this the Princes of Lorrain re-
fohed to open their fcherne. And as persecution
was the only method for fuppreifing religious opi-
nions, known in that age, or diaated by the de-
fpotic and funguinary spirit of the Romish super-
flition, this, in its utmost violence, they deter-
mined to employ. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior
ofSt. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party,
tere marked out by them for immediate deftruc-
tion *; and they hoped, by puniflhing them, to
intimidate their followers. Inflru6ions for this
purpose were sent from France to the Queen Re-
gent. That humane and sagacious Princess con-
demned a measure, which was equally violent
and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, ihe
had become acquainted with the eager and impa-
tient temper of the nation; she well knew the
power, the number, and popularity of the Pro-
teflant leaders; and had been a witness to the in-
trepid and unconquerable resolution which reli-
gious fervour could inspire. What, then, could
be gained by rousing this dangerous spirit, which,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been
abke to retrain ? If it once broke loose, the au-

* Forbes, i. x5z.

thority

B o O K thority of a Regent would be little capable to

II. subdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if, in

'~r order to quell it, foreign forces were called in,

this would give the alarm to the whole nation,
irritated already at the excelfive power which the
French poffeffed in the kingdom, and suspicious
of all their defgns. Armidft the (hock which this
might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate
the Protestant doarine, it would be well if the
whole fabric of the established church were not
flhaken, and perhaps overturned from the founda-
tion. These prudent remonifrances made no im-
prefion on her brothers; precipitant, but infexi-
ble in all their resolutions, they insisted on the
full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
pafifonately devoted to the interest of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opi-
nions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared
to execute their commands with implicit sub-
milfion*; and, contrary to her own judgment,
and to all the rules of found policy, she became
the infirument of exciting civil commotions in
Scotland, which ended with the ruin of the French
power, and of the Popish religiorn in that king-
dom.

The Regent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for

the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the

wish rard Popilh clergy, under the direaion of the Arch-
to the PrO-
tenants. bithop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in op-

position to all her measures. Her firfit flep toward
the execution of her new scheme, was to regain
their favour. Nor was this reconcilement a mat-

*Melv. 48. Mem. de Cafmenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446.

ter

ter of difficulty. The Popiih ecclefiaftics, repa-
rated from the reft of mankind by the law of ce-
libacy, the boldest and most fuccefsful invention
of human policy; and combined among them-
selves in the clofelt and most sacred union ; have
been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all
private and particular paflions to the dignity and
interest of their order. Delighted, on this occa-
sion, with the profpeat of triumphing over a sac-
tion, whose encroachments they had long dread-
ed, and animated with the hopes of re-eflablifh-
ing their declining grandeur on a firmer bafls;
they, at once, cancelled the memory of past in-
juries, and engaged to second the QVueen in all
her attempts to check the progress of the Refor-
mation. The Queen, being secure of their as-
fiftance, openly approved of the decrees of the
Convocation, by which the principles of the Re-
formers were condemned; and at the fame time
she ifiued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to
observe the approaching festival of Easter accord-
ing to the Romish ritual.

As it was no longer pollible to millake the

Queen's intentions, the Protestants, who saw the
danger approach, in order to avert it, employed
the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hupgh Campbell
of Loudon, to expostulate with her concerning
this change towards severity, which their former
services had so little merited, and which her re-
iterated promises gave them no reason to expeLit.
She, without disguise or apology, avowed to them
her resolution of extirpating the Reformed religion
out of the kingdom. And, upron tieir urging

her

B o O K her former engagements, with an uicourtly, but

II. honest boldness, she so far forgot her usual mo-
L deration, as to utter a sentiment, which, however

15s59 apt those of royal condition may be to entertaid it1

prudence ihould teach them to conceal as much
as possible. cc The promises of Princes, says ihe,
ought not to be too carefully remembered, nor
the performance of them exac'ted, unless it suits
their own conveniency."

summons THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen
their
preachers to into this rash expyreflon, was nothing in comparifori
apea be- of that with which she was animated, upon hearing

that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once, she threw off the mask, and commanded all
the Proteffant preachers in the kingdom to be fum-
moned to a court ofjutifice, which was to be held
at Stirling on the tenth of May., The Protefants,
who, from their union, began, about this time, to
be distinguished by the name of the CONGREGA-
TION, were alarmed, but not intimidated by this
danger; and inifantiy resolved not to abandon
the men, to whom they were indebted for the most
valuable of all blessings,· the knowledge of truth.
At that time, there prevailed in Scotland, with
refpedt to criminal trials, a custom, introduced, at
firit, by the inifitutions of vaialaage and clanihip,
and tolerated, afterwards, under a febie govern-
ment; any person accused of a crime was accom-
panied to the place of trial by a retinue of his
friends and adherents, assembled for that purpose
from every quarter of the kingdom. Authorised
by this ancient praftice, the Reformed convened,

8 ' in

in great numbers, to attend their paffors to Stir- B o o K
ling. The Queen dreaded their approach with a II.
train so numerous, though unarmed; and in order

e I559.

to prevent them from advancing, ihe empowered
John Erfikine of Dun, a person of eminent autho-
rity with the party, to promise, in her name, that
ihe would put a flop to the intended trial, on con-
dition the preachers and their retinue advanced no
nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced him-
felfof· the Queen's sincerity, served her with the
utmost zeal. And the Proteffants, averse from
proceeding to any aat of violence, listened with
pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The preach-
ers, with a few leaders of the party, remained at
Perth; the multitude, which had'gathered from
different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and re-.
tired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithflanding this solemn promise, the Breals.

Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call PnfT
to trial the persons who had been summoned, and had rdied.
upon their non-appearance, the rigour of juftfce
took place, and they were pronounced outlaws.
By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real
dignity, and To inconsistent with that integrity
which mhould prevail in all transactions between
Sovereigns and their fubjeits, the Queen forfeited
the esteem and confidence of the whole nation.
The Protestants, mhocked no less at the indecency
with which mhe violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themfelvcs, prepared
boldly for their own defence. Erflane, enraged
at having been made the infirumnent for deceiving
his party, instantly abandoned Stirling, and re-

pairing

B oo K pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his affo-

IL. ciates, by his representations of the Queen's in.
C flexible resolution to suppress their religion.

1559.
rhis occa- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully fe.

aioan- conded his representations: He having been car-

e neth ried a prisoner into France, together with the

other persons taken in the cafile of St. Andrew's,
Loon made his escape out of that country; and
residing sometimes in England, sometimes in
Scotland, had, at last, been driven out of both
kin gdonis by the rage of the Popilh clergy, and
was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was
called by the leaders of the Protestants in Scot-
land; and, in compliance with their folicita-
tions, he set out for his native country, where
he arrived a few days before the trial appointed
at Stirling. He hurried inftafitly to Perth, to
Ihare with his brethren in the common danger,
or to assist them in promoting the edrtmron
cause. *Vhile their minds were in that ferment,
which the Queen's perfidioufnefs and their own
danger occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and
by a vehement harangue against idolatry, in-
flamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The
indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after
Knox's sermon, was preparing to celebrate mass,
and began to decorate the altar for that pur-
pose, precipitated them into immediate ation.
With tumultuary, but irrefiffible violence, they
fell upon the churches in that city, overturned
the altars, defaced the pidlures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the mo-
nafleries, they, in a few hours, laid those lump-

r tuOUsf

tttous fabrics arlmoft level with the ground. This B o o io
riotous infurreaion was not the effte of any con- 1H.
cert, or previous deliberation: Censured by the ' -

I559*

reformed preachers, and publicly condemned by
the persons of most power and credit with the
party, it mull be ,regarded merely as an accidental
eruption of popular rage .

BEU to the Qjeen herself, there proceedings The Pegent

appeared in a very different light. Besides their againe
manifest contempt for her authority, the Protest- them.
ants had violated every thing in religion which
she esteemed venerable or holy; and on both
these accounts, the determined to inflica the fe-.
verelt vengeance on the whole party. She had
already drawn the troops in French pay to Stir-
ling; with these, and what Scottish forces flue
could levy of a sudden, ihe marched direaly to
Perth, in hopes of surprising the Protestant lead-:
ers before they could assemble their follove::s,
whom, out of confidence in her difungenuous pro-
mises, they had been ralhly induced to difnifs.
Intelligence of there preparations and menaces
was soon conveyed to Perth. The Pro~teflants
would, gladly, have soothed the Q ecn, by adi
dresses both to her-self, and to the persons of graer-
eft credit in her court; but finding her inexorabli,
they, with great vigour, took meaiures for their
own defence. Their adherents, animated with
zeal for religion, and eager to expoie thnemli;'es
in so good a cause, flocked in fiuch numbers to
Perth, that they not only secured the town from
danger, but, within a few days, were in a con-

Knox, Hist. 127, 1z2.

Vor. I. N dition

B o o K dition to take the field, and to face the Queen,

II. who advanced with an army 7000 firong.
1559. NEITHER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised
above the sense of fear, or of danger. The Pro-
tefeants beheld with regret the Earl of Argyll, the
Prior of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent
persons of their party, still adhering to the Queen;
and destitute of their aid and counsel, declined
hazarding an amon, the ill fucccfs of which
might have proved the ruin of their cause. The
profpeda of an accommodation was for there rea-
sons highly acceptable to both sides: Argyll and
the Prior, who were the Queen's commiflioners
for condualing the negociation, seem to have been
sincerely desirous of reconciling the contending
fa~tions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriving un-
expeatedly with a powerful reinforcement to the
Congregation, augmented the Queen's eagerness

A treaty for peace. A treaty was accordingly concluded,
6cncluded, - --- ~-----

in which it was fripulated, that both armies Phould
be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to
the Queen; that indemnity should be granted to
the inhabitants of that city, and to all others
concerned in the late infurretion ; that no French
garrison Ihould be left in Perth, and no French
soldier Ihould approach within three miles of that '
place; and that a Parliament thould immediately
be held, in order to compose whatever differences
might flill remain *.

- *Keith, 89.

THE

THE Leaders of the Congregation, diffruitful B o O K

of the Queen's sincerity, and sensible that con- II.
ceflions, flowing not from inclination, but extorted 1559.
by the necessity of her affairs, could not long re- a, n.
main in force, entered into a new association, by
which they bound themselves, on the first infringe-
ment of the present treaty, or in the least appear-
ance of danger to their religion, to re-assemble
their followers, and to take arms in defence of
what they esteemed the cause of God, and of their
country ".

THE Queen, by her condua, demonfrated Brch nby

the Regent4

there precautions to be the result of no groundless
or unnecessary fear. No sooner were the Protest-
ant forces dismissed, than she broke every article
in the treaty. She introduced French troops into
Perth, fined some of the inhabitants, banished
others, removed the Magifirates out of offce, and,
on her retiring to Stirling, (he left behind her a
garrison of 600 men, with orders to allow the ex-
ercife of no other religion than the Roman Ca-
tholic. The situation of Perth, a place at that
time of fame firength, and a town the mofi pro-
per of any in the kingdom for the ifation of a
garrison, seems to have allured the Queen to this
unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach of public faith;
which (he endeavoured to colour, by alleging
that the body of men left at Perth was entirely
composed of native Scots, though kept in pay by
the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold;

it was now apparent, that not only the reli ion, but

* Knox, I3 .

N 2 - the

B o O K the liberties of the kingdom were threatened; and

II. that the French troops were to be employed as in-
'-"' firuments for subduing the Scots, and wreathinga
559. the yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius

of the Scots then was, the poverty of their coun-
try made it impossible to keep their armies long
gffembled; and even a very finall body of regular
troops might have proved formidable to the na-
tion, though consisting wholly of soldiers, But,
what number of French forces were then in Scot-
land, at what times, and under what pretexts they
returned, after having left the kingdom in I550,
we cannot, with any certainty, determine. Co-
temporary hifforians often fele&, with littlejudg-
ment, the circumstances which they transmit to
posterity; and with refpea to matters of the great-
eft curiosity and importance, leave succeeding ages
altogether in the dark. We may conjeaure how-
ever, from some passages in Buchanan, that the
French and Scots in French pay amounted at least
to 3000 men, under the command of Mons.
D'Oyfel, a creature of the house of Guise; and
they were soon augmented to a much more for-
~nidable number.

THE QTeen encouraged by having so confider-

able a body of well-difciplined troops at her com-
nand, and inifigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash ac-
tion, once more threw the nation into the most

T'he Pro- gTeEr fAgl n
tftantsw. dangerous convullions. The Earl Qs Argyll and
gain take Prior of St. Andrew's instantly deserted a court,

where faith and honour feemeid to theni to be no

8 longer

longer regarded. The Barons from the neigh. B o o is
bouring counties repaired to them, the preachers 1I*
roused the people to arms, and wherever they
came, the fame violent operations, which accident
had occafloned at Perth, were now encouraged
out of policy. The enraged multitude was let
loose, and churches and monasteries, the mo-
numents of ecclesiastic pride and luxury, were fa-
crificed to their zeal.

JN order to check their career, the Queen,

without losing a moment, put her troops in mo-
tion; but the zeal of the Congregation got the
start, once more, of her vigilance and aaivity.
In that warlike age, when all men were accuflom-
ed to arms, and on the least profpe& of danger
were ready to run to them, the leaders of the
Protestants found no difficulty to raise an army.
Though they set out from St. Andrew's with a
flerider train of an hundred horse, crowds flocked
to their ifandards from every corner of the country
through which they marched; and before they
reached Falkland, a village only ten miles distant,
they were able to meet the Queen with superior
force*.

THE Queen, surprised at the approach of so

formidable a body, which was drawn up by its
leaders En such a manner as added greatly in ap-
pearance to its numbers, had again recourif to ne-
gociation. She found, however, that the preferva-
tion of the Proteflant religion, their zeal for which
had at firfi roused the leaders of the Congregation
to take arms, was not the only qbjeEt they haa now

* Knox, 141.

414 3 i n

B o O K in view. They were animated with the warmest

II. love of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in

imminent danger from the attempts of the French

Ij59. forces; and these two passions mingling, added re-
They am at ciprocally to each other's flrength. Together with

Si; more enlarged notions in religion,the Reformation

a: rfii)Ous filled the human mind with more liberal and ge-

nerous sentiments concerning civil government.
The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to
the power of Princes. The implicit fubmillion to
all her decrees, which is exaded by the Romish
Church, prepares and breaks the mind for political
servitude; and the doarines of the Reformers, by
overturning the eftablilhed system of fuperilition,
weakened the firmest foundations of civil tyranny,
That bold spirit of inquiry, which led men to rejea
theclogical errors, accompanied them in other fci-
ences, and discovered every where the fame manly
zeal for truth. A new study introduced at the fame
time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty.
Men became acquainted with the Greek and Roman
authors, who described exquisite models of free go-
yernment, far superior to the inaccurate and oppref-
five fyfiem established by the feudal law; and pro-
dluced such illuifrious examples of public virtue, as
wonderfully suited both the circumfiances and fpi-
rit of that age. Many, among the most eminent
Reformers, vw ere themselves considerable maiters in
ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted
the maxims and ipirit of the ancients, with regard
to government . The most ardent love of liberty

accom-

* The exceffve admiriaticn of ancient policy was tile occaion

of Knox's famous book concerning the GOvE,-nmeot of WiPomer,

whilereIn,

accompanied the Protestant religion throughout all B o o K
its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it II.
roused an independent spirit, which rendered men
attentive to their privileges as fubjeas, and jealous 1559.
of the encroachments of their Iovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Rcformation, infused
generous sentiments concerning government into
the minds of their hearers, and the Scottish barons,
naturally free and bold, were prompted to afferE
their rights with more freedom and boldness than
ever. Instead of obeying the Queen Rcgent, who
had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they
demanded not only the redress of their religious
grievances, but, as a preliminary toward fettling
the nation, and securing its liberties, required the
immediate expulsion of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power to make
To important a concemon without the concurrcence
of the French Monarch; and as some time was re-
quirte in order to obta!n that, flre hoped, durion
this interval, to receive flch reinforcements frocn
France, as would insure the accompiiihment of
that design, which she had twice attempted with
unequal ifrength. Mean while, she agrcdt to a cef- June Ii3
fation of arms for eight days, and before the ex-
piration of these, engaged to transport the French

wherein, confrmale to the maxims of tOe ancient iegi.rfcrs,
which! modlern crpe rr nce h:'s proved to he ill founded, he P-o-
nounces the clevation of women to the fiupreme authorrty, to
be utterly dctroclive of good rover tmeot. His priacipl es, 2u-
tboritits, an I e -: r plcs were all drawn from zancient \ ters.
The fame ob9: v on .n: y be mode t:i repi to Buchlann's
Tie!>C, De 'e uni

be P ·

apud S . It is {lsi'nded not on the

majims of feudal, but of ancient governonent.

N .4 te sops

B o o i troops to the south fide of the Forth; and to fend

II. commiffloners to St. Andrew's, who should labour

to bring all differences to an accommodation. AS
ihe hoped, by means of the French troops, to over-
awe the Protestants in the southern counties, the
former article in the treaty was punftually ex-
ecuted; the latter having been inserted merely to
amuse the Congregation, was no longer remem-
bered.

A second By these reiterated and wanton infrances of per,
treatry vio.
lated, fidy, the Oueen loft all credit with her adverfariesi

and no safety appearing in a:'; other course, they
again took arms with more iindamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The
removing of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country situated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjecLed to the insolence and exaaions of the gar-
rifon which the Qujeen had left there, implored
the atiflance of the Congregation for their relief.
Thither they marched, and having, without effeA,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms
of the former treaty, they prepared to besiege it in
form. The Queen employed the Earl of Huntly
and Lord Erikine to divert them from this enter-
prise. But her wonted artifices were now of no
avail; repeated so often, they could deceive no lon-
ger; and without listening to her offers, the Pro-
teftant~s continued the siege, and soon obliged the
garrison to capitulate,

AFTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavour-

ed to seize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,
fyprn its command of the only bridge over the

'orth)

Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the B o 0 K
Congregation, having intelligence of her design, 1I.
prevented the execution of it, by an hasty march I559-
thither with part of their forces. The inhabit- Rap,1
ants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to f"u" enohc
them the gates of their town. Thence they ad- Protenanc.
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edin-
lburgh, wFhich the Queen, on their approach, aban-
doned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

TuE Protestant army, wherever it came, kin-

died, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excefTes of violence were committed upon
churches and monalteries. The former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then efleemed fa-
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at
this difiance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many flately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceffors magnificence, and among the nobleff orna-
ments of the kingdom. But amidit the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable;
and perhaps no one could have been permitted
more proper to allure and interest the multitude,
or more fatal to the grandeur of the established
church. However absurd and ill-founded the fpe-
culative errors of Popery may be, some inquiry
and attention are requisite towards discovering
them. The abuses and corruptions, which had
crept into the public worship of that church, lay
more open to observation, and by firiking the
senses, excited more universal difguff. Under
the long reign of I-Heathenifin, f1perftition ieems

B o o K to have exhaufled its talent of invention, so that

II. when a superstitious spirit seized Christians, they

were obliged to imitate the Heathens in the pomp

1559* and magnificence of their ceremonies, and to bor-

row f-urm them the ornaments and decorations of
thiir temples. To the pure and simple worihip
of the primitive Christians, there succeeded a fpe-
cics of splendid idolatry, nearly resembling those
pagan originals, whence it had been copied. The
coar u icty of such observances, to the spirit of
Chiftia'i y, was almolt the first thing, in the
Romish fyilem, which awakened the indignation
of the Reformers, who, applying to these the de-
nunciations in the Old Testament against idolatry,
imagined that they could not endeavour at sup-
pressing them with too much zeal. No taflk could
be more acceptable to the multitude, than to over-
turn those feats of superstition ; they ran with
emulation to perform it, and happy was the man
whose hand was mo~t adventurous and fuccefsful
in executing a work esteemed so pious. Nor did
their leaders labour to restrain this impetuous fpi-
rit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its
sallies were, they tended dire6ly to that end which
they had in view; for, by demolishing the mo-
nafteries throughout the kingdom, and setting
at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped
to render it impossible ever to rebuild the one, or
to re-assemble the other.

BUT amicift these irregular proceedings, a cir-

cumfiance, which does honour to the condua and
humanity of the leaders of the Congregation,
ckforvcs notice. They so far relirained the rage

of

of their followers, and were able so to temper B o o K
their heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Ca- II.
tholics were exposed to any personal insult, and ~ c''
not a single man fuffered death .

AT the fame time we discover, by the facility

with which these great revolutions were effTcled,
how violently the current of national favour ran
towards the Reformation. No more than 300
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of
Argyll and Prior of St, Andrew's I; with this
inconsiderable force they advanced. But where-
ever they came, the people joined them in a
body; their army was seldom less numerous than
5000 men; the gates of every town were thrown
open to receive them; and, without firiking a
single blow, they took poffefion of the capital of
the kingdom.

THIs rapid and affoniahing success seems to June29.

have encouraged the Reformers to extend their
views, and to rife in their demands. Not fa-
tisfied with their first claim of toleration for their
religion, they now, openly, aimed at establish-
ing the Protestant dodtrine on the ruins of Po-
pery. For this reason, they determined to fix
their residence at Edinburgh; and, by their ap-
pointment, Knox, and some other preachers,
taking poffeffion of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned by the afrightened clergy, declaimed
against the errors of Popery with such fervent
zeal, as could not fail of gaining many pro-
felytes.

It3 Kecith, 94-

* Lefly, 2x.

B o o r IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

II. dently given way to a torrent which ihe could
X559 not resist, observed with pleasure that it now

began to subside. The leaders of the Congre-
gation had been above two months in arms, and
by the expences of a campaign, protrated so
long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhauf'ed all the money, which a coun-
try, where riches did not abound, had been able
to supply. The multitude, dazzled with their
fuccers, and concluding the work to be already
done, retired to their own habitations. A few
only of the more zealous or wealthy Barons re-
mained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with little
difficulty, whatever was tranfaaied at Edinburgh
was soon known at Dunbar. And the Queen,
regulating her own conduat by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amused them with the
profpea of an immediate accommodation; while,
at the fame time, flhe, by fludied delays, spun
out the negociations for that purpose, to such a
length, that, in the end, the party dwindled to
an inconsiderable number; and, as if peace had
been already re-etablifhed, became careless of
military discipline. The Queen, who watched
for such an opportunity, advanced, unexpeaed-
ly, by a sudden march in the night with all her
forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled
that city with the utmof't coniternation. The
Proteffants, weakened by the imprudent dif-
perfion of their followers, durst not encounter
the French troops in the open field; and were

eve:.

een uniable to defend an ill fortified town againit B o o K.
their assaults. Unwilling, however, to abandon 11.
the citizens to the QOeen's mercy, they endea- V 1559.
voured, by facing the enemy's army, to gain
time for colleting their own associates. But the
Queen, in spite of all their resistance, would
have easily forced her way into the town, if the
seasonable conclusion of a truce had not procured
her admission without the effilon of blood.

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the A thlri

treaty.

Congregation to liflen to any overtures of peace;
and as the Queen was looking daily for the ar-
rival of a fitrong reinforcement from France, and
expeaed great advantages from a cefiation of
arms, Ihe also agreed to it upon no unequal
conditions. Together with a suspension of hof-
tilities, from the 24th of July to the xoth of
January, it was stipulated, in this treaty, that,
on the one hand, the Protestants should open the
gates of Edinburgh next morning to the Queen
Regent; remain in dutiful fubje6ion to her go-
vernment; abitain from all future violation of
religious houses; and give no interruption to the
aftablifhed clergy, either in the discharge of
their funaions, or in the enjoyment of their
benefices. On the other hand, the Queen agreed
to give no molestation to the preachers or pro-
feffors of the Protefiant religion; to allow no
other form of worship in Edinburgh but the Re-
formed; and to permit the free and public exer-
cife of it all over the kingdom. The Queen, by
these liberal concemons in behalf of their reli-
gion, hoped to sooth the Protellants, and cx-

pead.,

B o o K peJaed, from indulging their favourite pallion1

II. to render them more compliant with refpea to
-v other articles, particularly the expulsion of the
I559- French troops out of Scotland. The anxiety

which the Queen expressed for retaining this
body of men, rendered them, more and more,
the objeAs of national jealousy and aversion.
The immediate expulsion of them was therefore
demanded anew, and with greater warmth; but
the Queen, taking advantage of the distress of
the adverse party, eluded the request, and would
consent to nothing more, than that a French
garrison ihould not be introduced into Edin·
burgh.

THE desperate slate of their affairs, imposed

on the Congregation the neceflity of agreeing to
this article, which, however, was very far from
giving them fatisfation. Whatever apprehen-
lions the Scots had conceived, from retaining
the French forces in the kingdom, were abun-
dantly jufified during the late commotions. A
small body of those troops, maintained in con-
fiant pay, and rendered formidable by regular
discipline, had checked the progress of a martial
people, though animated with zeal both for re-
ligion and liberty. The smallest addition to
their number, and a considerable one was daily
expeaed, might prove fatal to public liberty,
and Scotland might be exposed to the danger of
being reduced 'from an independent kingdom,
to the mean condition of a province, annexed to
the empire of its powerful ally.

I IN

IN order to provide against this immineit cala- B o o o

roity, the Dulke of Chatelherault, and Earl of Il.
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce, "'

~3 1559.

desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the mofl potent, at
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the party
which adhered to the established church. They had
followed the Queen, during the late commotions,
and having acccfs to observe more narrowly the
dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhor-
rence of the yoke which was preparing for their
country, surmounted aMl other considerations, and
determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they profelfed, than to give their aid to-
wards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
mhould, with her usual inflncerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refuife to gratify the
wilhes of the whole nation, by difniffino her
French troops, they would, then, instantly join
with their countrymen in compelling her to a
measure, which the public fafery, and the pre-
servation of their liberties, rendered nececfary ".

AsouT this time died Henry II. of France; Jl gs -

just when he had adopted a system with regard to
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility, have reflored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom 7-. Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain be In vilbly to decline in

q Knox, 154.

a o O K favour, and the Conitable Montmorency, by the
II. assistance of the Duchess of Valentinois, recover-

G ~ ed that ascendant over the spirit of his master,
1559* which his great experience, and his faithful, though

often unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit.
That prudent minister imputed the infurrelions
in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Car-
dinal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant
counsels could not fail of transporting, beyond all
bounds of moderation, men, whose minds were
poffeffed with that jealousy, which is inseparable
from the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with
that ardour which accompanies religious zeal:
And, in order to convince Henry that he did not
load his rivals with any groundless accusation, he
prevailed to have Melvil*, a Scottish gentleman
of his retinue, dispatched into his native country,
with initruations to observe the motions both of
the Regent, and of her adversaries; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that
kingdom, by Melvil's report.

DID hif'ory indulge herfelfin there speculations,

it would be amusing to inquire what a different
direaion might have been given,by this resolution,
to the national spirit; and to what a diffierent issue,
Melvil's report, which would have set the conduA
of the malecontents in the mofL favourable light,
might have conduaed the public disorders. Per-
haps by gentle treatment, and artful policy, the
progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon

* The Author of the Memoirs.

France.

France. perhaps, by gaining poffeTfion of this B o o K
avenue, the French might have made their way II.
into England, and, under colour of supporting
Mary's title to the Crown, they might have re-
established the Roman Catholic religion, and de-
fitroyed the liberties of that kingdom. But, into
this boundless field of fancy and conje~ture, the
historian must make no excursions; to relate real
occurrences, and to explain their real causes and
effeits, is his peculiar and only province.

THE tragical and untimely death of the French Accefonf oF

Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacific totheCrown
measures, with regard to Scotland. The Duke of Fragce.
of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the
accession of Francis II. a prince void of genius,
and without experience, assumed the chief direc-
tion of French affairs. Allied so nearly to the
throne, by the marriage of their niece the Queen
of Scots with the young King, they now wanted
but little of regal dignity, and nothing .of re-
gal power. This power did not long remain in-
ative in their hands. The fame vast schemes of
ambition, which they had planned out under the
former reign, were again refiumed; and they
were enabled, by poffeffing such ample authority,
to pursue them with more vigour, and greater
probability of success. They beheld, with infi-
nite regret, the progress of the Protestant religion
in Scotland; and sensible what an unfurmount-
able obifacle it would prove to their designs, they
bent all their strength to check its growth, before
it rose to any greater height. For this purpoie,
they carried on their preparations with all pof-

VOL. I. O fible

B o o K fible expedition, and encour'aged the Queen their

II. fifler, to expea, in a short time, the arrival of

an army, so powerful, as the zeal of their adver-
9faries, however desperate, would not venture to
oppole.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation either

ignorant of those violent counsels, which pre-
vailed in the court of France since the death of
Henry, or careless of providing against the dan-
ger, which threatened them from that quarter.
The success of their cause, as well as their per-
fonal safety, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of their own resolutions, they endea-
voured to guard against division, and to cement
together more closely, by entering into a firiaer
bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two
persons concurred in this new association, who
brought a great accelfion both of reputation and of
power to the party. These were the Duke of Cha-
telherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having resided some years
in France, where he commanded the Scottish
guards, had imbibed the Protestant opinions con-
cerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of
youth, and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered
sentiments with refpe&t to the points in contro-
verfy, which did not suit the temper of a bigotted
court, intent, at that juncdure, on the extinftion
of the Protedant religion; in order to accomplish
which, the greatest excefTs of violence were com-
mitted. The church was fuffered to wreak its
utrmofit fury upon all who were fufpeded of he-
rely. Courts were ereded in different parts of

I France,

rrance, to take cognizance of' this crime, and by B o o K
their sentences, several persons of diftin&ion were II.
condemned to the flames. 1559.

1559*

BUT, in order to inspire more univerf'al terror,

the Princes of Lorrain resolved to fele~t, for a.fa-
crifice, some person,. whose fall might convince
all ranks of mefl, that neither splendour of birth,
nor eminence in Rtation, could exempt from pu-
nifhment, those who should be guilty of this un-
pardonable tranfgreflion. The Earl of Arran was
the person destined to be the unhappy vic'tim *.
As he was allied to one throne, and the pre-
fumptive heir to another; as he poffeffed the first
rank in his own country, and enjoyed an honour-
able ifation in France; his condemnation could
not fail of making the desired impreflion on the
whole kingdom. But the Cardinal of Lorrain
having let fall some exprefilons, which raised Ar-
ran's furpicions of the design, he escaped the in-
tended blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal,
resentment, all prompted him to seek revenge
upon these persecutors of himself and of the reli-
ligion which he profeffed; and as he passed
through England, on his return to his native
country, Elizabeth, by hopes and promises, in-
flamed those passions, and sent him back into
Scotland, animated with the fame implacable
averflion to France, which poffeffed a great part
of his countrymen. He quickly communicated Earl ofAr-
these sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatel- 'rainst
herault, who was already extremely disgusted with

* Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 46z. LJit. Francof.

O the

B o O K tne measures carrying on in Scotland; and as it

II. was the fate of that nobleman to be governed in

every inflance by those about him, he now sus-
fered himself to be drawn from the Queen Re-
gent; and having joined the Congregation, was
considered, from that time, as the head of the
party.

BUT with refpea to him, this diftinaion was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St.
Andrew's, was the person who moved and aauated
the whole body of the Protestants, among whom,
he poffeffed that unbounded confidence, which his
ftrenuous'adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities so jufily merited. He was the natural
son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erficine;
and as that amorous Monarch had left several
others a burden upon the Crown, they were all
deflined for the church, where they could be
placed in flations of dignity and affluence. In
consequence of this resolution, the Priory of St.
Andrew's had been conferred upon James: But,
during so busy a period, he soon became difgufled
with the indolence and retirement of a moniaftii
life; and his enterprising genius called him forth,
to aRt a principal part on a more public and con-
fpicuous theatre. The scene, in which he ap-
peared, required talents of different kinds: Mili-
tary virtue, and political difcernmenr, were equally
ieceffary in order to render him illuifrious. These
he poffeffed in an eminent degree. To the most
unquestionable personal bravery, he added great
skill in the art of war, and in every enterprise his
arms were crowned with success. His sagacity

and

and penetration in civil affairs enabled him, B o 0 K
amidst the reeling and turbulence of fa&ions, to II.
hold a prosperous course. While his boldness in c
defence of the Reformation, together with the I559*
decency, and even severity of his manners, fe--
cured him the reputation of being sincerely at-
tached to religion, without which, it was impof-
fible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over man-
kind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen

dreaded the enmity of a man, so capable to
obftrua her designs. And as she could not, with
all her address, make the least imprefion on his
fidelity to his associates, ihe endeavoured to lessen
his influence, and to scatter among them the feeds
of jealoury and diffruft, by insinuating that the
ambition of the Prior aspired beyond the condi-
tion of a fulbje&, ard aimed at nothing less than
the Crown itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little

credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
fumption of unexpeaed success, and his elevation
to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
leged to have inspired, at any subsequent period,
it is certain that, at this junclure, he could form
no such vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who
was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no ation by which she
could forfeit the effeem and affeaion of her sub-,
jeas; who could employ, in defence of her rights,
the forces of a kingdom, much more powerful
than her own; and to fubilitute, it her place, a
person whom the illegitimacy of his birth, by the

0 3 practicg

B o O K pra tice of all civilized nations, rendered incapable

II. of any inheritance, either public or private; was

a proje6a so chimerical, as the most extravagant

1559* ambition would scarce entertain, and could never

conceive to be praaicable. The promise too,
which the Prior made to MIelvil, of residing con-
ftantly in France, on condition the public griev-
ances were redressed *; the confidence reposed in
him by the Duke of Chatelherault and his son,
the presumptive heirs to the Crown; and the
concurrence of almost the whole Scottilh nobles,
in promoting the measures, by which he gave of-
fence to the French court, go far towards his vin-
dication from those illegal and criminal designs,
with the imputation of which, the Queen endea-
voured, at that time, to load him.

T'roops ar- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers corn-
rive from
France, and penfated, in some degree, for the loss which the

f Queen sustained by the defeaion of the Dyke of

Chatelherault. These were, immediately, com-
manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on ac-
count of its commodious harbour, and its situation
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a
plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the
head-quarters of her foreign forces. This unpo-
pular measure, by the manner of executing it,
was rendered still more unpopular. In order to
bring the tpwn entirely under their command,
the French turned out a great part of the ancient
inhabitants, and taking poffellion of the houses,
which they had obliged them to abandon, pre-
ieted to the view of the Scots, two objeAs

Melvil, 5{.

equally irritating and offenfive; on the one hand, B o o K
a number of their countrymen expelled their ha- II.
bitations by violence, and wandering without any 1559
certain abode; on the other, a colony of so- 1559*
reigners, fettling with their wives and children,
in the heart of Scotland, growing into strength by
daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a
yoke, to which, without some timely exertion of
national spirit, the whole kingdom mufit, of ne.
ceffity, submit.

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the TheProtes.

Congregation beheld this bold and decisive ifep, ftrnteagainft
taken by the Oueen Regent: Nor did they hefi- thiS
tate a moment, whether they should employ their
whole ifrength, in one generous effort, to rescue
their religion and liberty from impending deitruc-
tion. But, in order to juffify their own condual,
and to throw the blame entirely on their adverfa-
ries, they resolved to preserve the appearances of
decency and refped towards their superiors, and
to have no recourse to arms, without the most ur-
gent and apparent necellity. They joined, with Sept. zg.
this view, in an address to the Regent, represent-
ing, in the ifrongelt terms, their diffatisfation
with the measures she was pursuing, and beseech-
ing her to quiet the fears and jealouifes of the na-
tion, by defifting from fortifying Leith. The
Queen, conscious of her present advantageous
situation, and elated with the hopes of fresh fuc-
cours, was in no disposition for listening to de-
mands, utterly inconfifteit with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity, which is so
little acceptable to Princes.

O 4. T a a

B o o K THE fuggeflions of her French counsellors con-

II. tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still far-
LY3 ther from any scheme ofaccommodation. As the
1559.
The r ant Qijeen was ready on all occasions, to discover an

extraordinary deference for the opinions of her

mnoitran- countrymen, her brothers, who knew her secret

disapprobation of the violent measures they were
driving on, took care to place near her such per-
fans, as betrayed her, by their insinuation~s, into
many a(Uons, which her own unbiaffed judgment
would have highly condemned. And as their
success in the present junaure, when all things
were hastening towards a crisis, depended entirely
on the Queen's firmness, the Princes of Lorrain
did not trust wholly to the influence of their ordi-
nary agents; but, in order to add the greater
weight to their councils, they called in aid the
Minifrers of Religion; and, by the authority of
their sacred chara6der, they hoped effeaually to
recommend to their filler, that system of severity
which they had espoused *. With this view, but
under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
the skill of such able maflers in controversy, they
appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-
land. At the head of these, and with the charac-
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pellev Pilhop
of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Car-
dinal of Sens, a furious bigot t, servilely devoted
to the houle of Guise, and a proper inifrument for
iccommending or executing the most outrageous
InTafurCs.

* Lefly, 2 9 CaRlcnau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446. 473.
t I)avila, Erantome. ,AMIDST

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, B o o i

there DoaQrs had little opportunity to display IIL
their address in the use of their theological wea- I559*
pons. But they gave no small offence to the na-
tion by one of their aaions. They persuaded the
Queen to seize the church of St. Giles in Edin-
burgh, which had remained, ever since the late
truce, in the hands of the Protestants; and hav-
ing, by a new and solemn consecration, purified
the fabric from the pollution, with which they
supposed the profane ministrations of the Protest-
ants to have defiled it, they, in direa contradic-
tion to one article in the late treaty, re-eftablilhed
there the rites of the Romish church. This,
added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Qxueen received their remon-
fitrances, convinced the Lords of the Congrega-
tion, that it was not only vain to expea any re-
dress of their grievances at her hands, but abfo-
lutely necessary to take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, They takQ

arrrs in

as well as every consideration of good policy, their ow*
prompted them to take this bold ifep without de- defnce.
lay. It was but a fhnall part of the French auxi-
liaries which had as yet arrived. The fortifica-
tions of Leith, though advancing fast, were still
far from being complete. Under there circum-
stances of difadvanrage, they conceived it possible
to surprise the Queen's party, anld, by one fud-
den and decisive blow, to prevent all future
bloodshed and contention. Full of there expeaa-
tions, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh
4ith a numerous army. But it was no easy mat- Oaober6,

6 ter

B b O K ter to deceive an adversary, so vigilant and atten-

II. tive as the Queen Regent. With her usual saga-
'- ' city, she both foresaw the danger, and took the

only proper course to avoid it. Intead of keep-
ing the field against enemies, superior in number,
and formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour
of their courage, flhe retired into Leith, and de-
tcrrmined patiently to wait the arrival of new re-
inforcements. Slight and unfinithed as the for-
tifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military ifores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, ereated all over the kingdom, in defence
of private property againit the incursions of ban-
ditti.

NoR did the Qjeen, mean while, neglec2 to

have recourse -to those arts, which Ihe had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries,
By private folicitations and promises, Ihe ihook
the fidelity, or abated the ardour of some. By
open reproach and accusation, she blasted the re-
putation, and diminished the authority ofothers,
hler emissaries were every where at work, and,
notwithifanding the zeal for religion and liberty,
which· then animated the pation, they seem to
have laboured not without success. We find
Knox, about this period, abounding in com-
plaints of the lukewarm and languid spirit, which
had begun to spread among his party *. But if
their zeal f1ackened a little, and fuffered a ma-

K Knox, 180.

mentary

mentary intermission, it soon blazed up with fresh B o o K
vigour, and rose to a greater height than ever. II.

THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by 1559·

the reply which she made to a new remonifrance Renew teir
from the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their ces;
arrival at Edinburgh, they once more represented
to her the dangers arising from the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be de-
fitruaive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom;
and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone,
and avowed more openly than ever, their refolu-
tion of proceeding to the utmost extremities, in
order to put a ifop to such dangerous encroach-
ments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and
urged with so much boldness, the Queen replied but without

success.

in terms no less vigorous and explicit. She pre-
tended that she was not accountable to the confe-
derate Lords for any part of her condua ; and
upon no representation of theirs, would fhle either
abandon measures, which flie deemed necessary;
or difinifs forces, which ihe found useful; or de-
molifh a fortification, which might prove of ad-
vantage. At the fame time, she required them,
on pain of treason, to disband the forces which
they had assembled.

TnIs haughty and imperious flyle founded

harshly to Scottish nobles, impatient, from their
national charaIer, of the slightest appearance of
injury; acccuftomed even from their own Mo-
narchs, to the most refpeaful treatment; and
poffeffing, under an ariftocratical form of govern-
ment, such a share ofpower, as equalled, at all

times,

B o o ie times,· and often controlled that of the ifove-

II. reign. They were sensible, at once, of the in-
C~ dignity offered to themselves, and alarmed with
1559. this plain declaration of the Queen's intentions;

and as there now remained but one fRep to take,
they wanted neither public spirit nor resolution to
take it.

Delibcrate BUT, that they might not seem to depart from
(onerng the established forms of the constitution, for which,
'~htey even amidst their most violent operations, men
takI. always retain the greatest reverence, they atf

fembled the whole Peers, Barons, and Repre-

on .= * fentatives of burroughs, who adhered to their

party. These formed a convention, which ex-
ceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the
usual ynectings of parliament. The leaders of
the Congregation laid before them the declaration
which the Oueen had given in answer to their re-
monflrance; represented the unavoidable ruin,
which the measures, she therein avowed and juffi-
fied, would bring upon the kingdom ; and re-
quiring their direEion with regard to the obe-
dience due to an administration so unjust and
opprefave, they submitted to their deciion, a
queffion, one of the most delicate and interesting
that can pofbly fall under the consideration of
fubjeas.

TuIs assembly proceeded to decide, with no

less dispatch, than unanimity. Strangers to those
forms, which protract business; unacquainted
with the arts, which make a figure in debate;
and much more fitted for action, than discourse:
A warlike people always hasten to a conclusion,

and

and bring their deliberations to the ihorteft iifue. B o o K
It was the work but of one day, to examine and II.
to resolve this nice problem, concerning the be-
haviour of fubjeas towards a ruler who abuses his 1559*
power. But, however abrupt their proceedings
nay appear, they were not destitute of solemnity.
As the determination of the point in doubt, was
conceived to be no less the office of divines, than
oflaymen, the former were called to assist with
their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for
the whole order, and pronounced, without hefita-
tion, both from the precepts and examples in
scripture, that it was lawful for fubjeas not only
to relift tyrannical princes, but to deprive them
of that authority, which, in their hands, becomes
an infirument for destroying thole, whom the Al-
mighty ordained them to prote2. The decifior
of persons, revered so highly for their sacred cha-
radter, but more for their zeal, and their piety,
had great weight with the whole assembly. Not
satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner
of signifying consent, every person present was
called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and
rising up in order, all gave their fuifrages, with- They do.

prive the

out one difienting voice, for depriving the Queen Queen of
of the office of Regent, which she had exercised Re gen
so much to the detriment of the kingdom .

TmIs extraordinary sentence was owing no less Therightw

oftheirolw

to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. ana.
In the aQc of deprivation, religious grievances are
slightly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Qleen upon the civil conititution are

SKinox, iS8.

pro-

B o o K produced, by the Lords of the Congregation, in

II. order to prove their condu& to have been not
C~ only just, but necessary. The introducing foreign
1559. troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the

world; the seizing and fortifying towns in differ-
ent parts of the country; the promoting strangers
to offices of great power and dignity; the debaf-
ing the current coin' ; the subverting the ancient
laws; the imposing of new and burdensome taxes;
and the attempting to subdue the kingdom, and
to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated aAs
of violence, are enumerated at great length, and
placed in the firongeft light. On all these ac-
counts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors by birth-right to their mo-
narchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
conflitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Queen, and with many exprefions of
duty and submission towards them, they deprived
the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained,
that, for the future, no obedience should be
given to her commands t. Vio-

* The flandard of money in Scotland was continually va-

rying. In the i6th of JamesV. A. D. 1529, a pound weight
of gold, when coined, produced so8 pounds of current money.
But under the Queen Regent's adminifiration, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was
considerably increased, produced 1441. current money. In
1529, a pound weight offilver, when coined, produced 91. a s.;
but in Is;6, it produced 531. current money. Ruddiman.
Prafat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotix, p. 80, 81. from which
it appears, that this complaint, which the malecontents often
repeated, was not altogether destitute of foundation.

t M. Caftelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils

of the Princes of Lorrain, with regard to the affairs of Scot-

land,

VIOLENT as this aaion may appear, there wanted B o o ic

not principles in the conifitution, nor precedents II.
in the history of Scotland, to justify and to au-
thorife it. Under the ariftocratical form of
government eftabliihed among the Scots, the
power of the Sovereign was extremely limited.
The more considerable nobles were themselves
petty princes, poffeffing extensive jurifdiaions,
almost independent of the crown, and followed
by numerous vassals, who, in every contest,
espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition
to the King. Hence the many initances of the
impotence of regal authority, which are to be
found in the Scottish history. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right
of controlling the King. Jealous of their privi-
leges, and eager to take the field in defence of
them, every error in adminjifration was observed,
every encroachment upon the rights of the arifto-
cracy excited ind gnation, and no prince ever ven-
tured to transgress the boundaries, which the law
had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting
resistance, which shook, or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the confcitution, and
countenanced by the example of their ancestors,
the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this junaure, to inquire into
the mal-adminjifration of the Queen Regent, and
to preserve their country from being enslaved or

land, acknowledges, with his usual candour, that the Scots
declared war againit the Queen Regent, rather from a desire
of vindicating their civil liberties than from any motive of
religion. Memn 446.

con-

E o o it conquered, by depriving her of the power to exe-

II. cute such a pernicious scheme .

£559. * The aa of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of

the Congregation to the Queen Regent, are frill extant.
Knox, 184. They discover not only that masculine and
undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of To bold a refolu-
tion; but are remarkable for a precision, and vigour of ex-
preflion, which we are surprised to meet with in an age so
unpolifhed. The fame observation may be made with refpe&
to the other public papers of that period. The ignorance oi
bad tafle of an age may render the compositions of authors by
profefion obscure, or affeaed, or absurd; but the language
of business is nearly the fame at all times; and wherever men
think clearly, and are thoroughly interefled, they express
themselves with perspicuity and force.

TITE

# BOOK III.

HISTORY

OF

S C OTLA N ND.

BOOKO III.

T fIE Lords of the Congregation soon found, B o a zc

that their zeal had engaged them in an III.

undertaking, which it was beyond their utmost ,
ability to accomplish. The French garrison, The5C5o-
despising their numerous, but irregular forces, gff""in
refused to surrender Leith, and to depart out of difficulties.
the kingdom; nor were they fufficiently &kilful in
the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
poffeffed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite
for that purpose; and their followers, though of
undaunted courage, yet being accuflomed to de-
cide every quarrel by a battle, were firangers to
the fatigues of a long campaign, and Loon be-
came impatient of the severe and constant duty
which a liege requires. The Queen's emilfaries,
who found it easy to mingle with their country-

VOL. 1. P men,

B o o K men, were at the utmost pains to heighten their

III. disgust, which discovered itself at firit in murmurs
'''~ and complaints, but on occalion of the want of
I559* money for paying the army, broke out into open

mutiny. The most eminent leaders were fearce
secure from the unbridled insolence of the fol-
diers; while some of inferior rank, interposing
too ralhly in order to quell them, were torn in
pieces by their rage. Discord, consternation,
and perplexity, reigned in the camp of the Re-
formers. The Duke, their General, funk, with
his usual timidity, under the terror of approach-
ing danger, and discovered manifest symptoms of
repentance for his rashness, in espousing such a
desperate cause.

Apply to IN this situation of their affairs, the Congrega-
Ei~zabeth
forii tion had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose pro-
ance. tealion they could derive their only reasonable

hope of success. Some of their more sagacious
leaders, having foreseen that the party might pro-
bably be involved in great difficulties, had endea,
voured to secure a resource in any such exigency,
by entering into a secret correspondence with the
court of England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dan-
gerous designs which the Princes of Lorrain had
formed againit her Crown, was early sensible of
how much importance it would be, not only
to check the progress of the French in Scotland,
but to extend her own influence in that kingdomt;
and perceiving how effeatually the present infur-
re&ions would contribute to retard or defeat the

* Burn. Hilt. Ref. 3. Append. 278. Beith, Append. z2.
j- See Append. No. f. fchetnes

schemes formed againit England, she liffened B O o K
with pleaiure to these applications of the male- IL
contents, and gave them private afflurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph *, an
agent extremely proper for conduting any dark
intrigue, was dispatched into Scotland, and refid-
ing secretly among the Lords of the Congrega-
tion, observed and quickened their motions:
Money seemed to be the only thing they wanted
at that time; and it was owing to a seasonable re-
mittance from Englandt-, that the Scottilh nobles
had been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
vance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth was dif-
truitful of the Scots, and itudious to preserve ap-
pearances with France, her subsidies were be-
flowed at first with extreme frugality. The filb-
fiftence of an army, and the expences of a siege,
soon exhaufled this penurious supply, to which
the Lords of the Congregation could make little -
addition from their own funds; and the ruin and
dilperfion of the party muff have inflantly fol-
lowed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiffon She sends

Ehern a

was sent,. with the utmost expedition, to the go- small hm
vernors of the town .and castle of Berwick. As o money,
Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatefl
importance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Rialph
Sadler and Sir James Cro;fts, persons of confider-
able figure, were employed to command there,
and were entrufled with a discretionary power of
supplying the Sottish malecontents, according to

* Keith, Append. 29. - Knox, 214. Kecith, Append. 44.

P2 the

B o O K the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock-

III. burn received 4000 crowns, but little to the ad-

vantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by

w cP. ie the Queen's initigation, lay in wait for him on his
intercepted, return, dispersed his followers, wounded him, and

carried off the money.

THIs unexpeaed disappointment proved fatal

to the party. In mere despair, some of the more
zealous attempted to assault Leith; but the French
beat them back with disgrace, seized their can-
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edin-
burgh, were on the point of entering along with
them. All the terror and confusion, which the
profpe6 of pillage or of massacre can excite in a
place taken by Prorm, filled the city on this occa-
sion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by the
opposite gate; the forces of the Congregation were
irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's par-
tifans in the town openly insulted both. At last,
a few of the nobles ventured to face the enemy,
who, after plundering some houses in the suburbs,
retired with their booty, and delivered the city
from this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND ikirmifh, which happened a few days

after, was no less unfortunate. The French sent
out a detachment to intercept a convoy of provi-
flins which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence
of this, marched in all hafle with a considerable
body of their troops, and falling upon the enemy
between Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry
than good condu&, were almost surrounded by a
second party of French, who advanced in order

Co

to support their own men. In this situation, a B o o ic
retreat was the only thing which could save the III.
Scots; but a retreat over marshy ground, and in
the face of an enemy superior in number, could 1559.
not long be conduaed with order. A small body They retire

from Leith

of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot in confc.
fell into the utmost confusion, and it was entirely ""'
owing to the caution of the French, that any of
the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of

the Congregation funk altogether. They did not
think themselves secure, even within the walls of
Edinburgh, but inifantly determined to retire to
some place at a greater difitance from the enemy.
In vain did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few
others, oppose this cowardly and ignominious
flight. The dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the sense of honour, and zeal for the
cause. At midnight they set out from Edin- Novumb.6.
burgh, in great confusion, and marched without
halting till they arrived at Stirling.

DURING this last infurreaion, the great body

of the Scottish nobility joined the Congregation.
The Lords Seton and Bortfiwick were the only
persons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
assisted her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly
favoured her cause, but resided at his own house.
The Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty
policy which distinguishes his charater, amused
the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had
engaged to assist, with many fair promises, but

*Keith, Append. 31.

P 3 never

B o O K never joined them with a single man *. The

III. Earl of Morton, a member of the Congrega-

L tion, fluatuated in a ifate of irresolution, and

did not aR heartily for the common cause. Lord
Erikine, Governor of Edinburgh Caffle, though
a Proteitant, maintained a neutrality, which he
efleemed becoming the dignity of his office; and
having been intrufted by Parliament with the
command of the principal fortress in the king-
dom, he resolved that neither faCiion mhould get
it intc$ their hands.

Metiand A FEw days before the retreat of the Congre-
revoits from
the queen g tion, the Qeen fuffered an irreparable loss
towager. by the defection of her principal Secretary, Wil-

liam Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the
Reformed religion, together with his warm re-
monfcrances againit the violent measures which
the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so mudh
to her resentment, and to that of her French
Counfeilors, that he, fufpeaing his life to be in
danger, withdrew secretly from Leith, and fled to
the Lords of the Congregation t; and they, with
open arms, received a convert, whose abilities
added both fitrength and reputation to their cause.
Maitand had early applied to public business ad-
mirable natural talents, improved by an acquaint-
ance with the liberal arts; and, at a time of life,
when his countrymen of the fame quality were
following the pleasures of the chace, or serving as
adventurers in the armies of France, he was ad-
mitted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put

*Keith, Append. 33. Knox, zzz1 J Knox, 192.

upon

upon a level with persons of the most confum- B o o K
mate experience in the management of affairs. IIL.
le poffeffed, in an eminent degree, that intrepid '-55
spirit, which delights in pursuing bold designs,
and was no less malter of that political art and
dexterity which is neceiTary for carrying them
on with success. But these qualities were deeply
tincaured with the neighbouring vices. His ad-
dress sometimes degenerated into cunning; his
acuteness bordered upon excess of subtlety and re-
finement; his invention, over fertile, fuggefited
to him, on some occasions, chimerical systems
of policy, little suitable to the genius of the age;
and his enterprizing spirit engaged him in pro-
jeas vast and splendid, but beyond his utmost
power to execute. All the cotemporary writers,
to whatever fadtion they belong, mention him
with an admiration, which nothing could have
excited but the greatest fluperiority of penetration
and abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation

increased, to foch a degree, the terror and con-
fusion which had seized them at Edinburgh, that,
before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled
to an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox,
however, still remained undaunted and ered, and
having mounted the pulpit, he addreffeJ, to his
defponding hearers, an exhortation which won-
derfully animated and revived them. The heads
of this discourse are inserted in his hiflory *, and
afford a fitriking example of the boldness and

* Knox, 193.

P 4. freedom

B o o K freedom of reproof affrumed by the firit Reformers,

III. as well as a specimen of his own Ikill in chufing
' the topics most fitted to influence and rouse his
1559- audience.
The Lords A MEETING Of the leaders being called, to con-
ge a e fider what course they should hold, now that their
l aganown resources were all exhaufled, and their de-

firuAion appeared to be unavoidable, without so-
reign aid, they turned their eyes once more to
England, and resolved to implore the assistance
6f Elizabeth towards finishing an enterprise, in
which they had so fatally experienced their own
weakness, and the firength of their adversaries.
Maitland, as the most able negotiator of the
party, was employed in this embassy. In his ab-
fence, and during the ina~tive season of the year,
it was agreed to dismiss their followers, worn out
by the fatigues of a campaign, which had so far
exceeded the usual time of service. But, in or-
der to preserve the counties most devoted to their
interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of
the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke of
Chatelherault, with the refit, fixed his residence
at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's
address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take
his country under her proteation. She observed
the prevalence of the French counsels, and the
progress of their arms in Scotland, with great
concern; and as ihe well foresaw the dangerous
tendency of their schemes in that kingdom, she
had already come to a resolution with regard to
the part ihe herself would at, if their power
there should grow still more formidable.

IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Boo ic

Council a full and diftinat view of any important III.
matter which might come before them, it seems - '
to have been the pratice of Elizabeth's ministers Motives
to prepare memorials, in which they clearly slated e-
the point under deliberation, laid down the het·o ·au

them.

grounds of the condua which they held to be
most reasonable, and proposed a method for carry-
ing their plan into execution. Two papers of this
kind, written by Sir William Cecil with his own
hand, still remain *; they are intitled, '. A short
" difcumion of the weighty matter of Scotland,"
and do honour to the indufcry and penetration of
that great Minifrer. The motives, which deter-
mined the Queen to espouse so warmly the de-
fence of the Congregation, are represented with
perspicuity and force; and the consequences of
fuffering the French to eflablifh themselves in
Scotland, are prediaed with great accuracy and
discernment. .

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to

the laws both of God and of nature, that every
society hath a right to defend itself, not only from
present dangers, but from such as may probably
ensue; to which he adds, that nature and reason
teach every Prince to defend himself by the fame
means, which his adversaries employ to difirefs
him. Upon these grounds, he establishes the
right of England to interpose in the affairs of
Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that
kingdom, at which the French openly aimed.

* Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

The

B oo re The French, he observes, are the ancient and

III. Implacable enemies of England. Hostilities had

*"" iulifted between the two nations for many centu-

I559· ries. No treaty of peace, into which they entered,

had ever been cordial or sincere. No good effe&
was therefore to be expeaed from the peace lately
agreed upon, which being extorted by present
necessity, would be negligently observed, and
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very short
time, France would recover its former opulence;
and though now drained of men and money by a
tedious and unfuccefsful war, it would quickly be
in a condition for acling, and the restless and
martial genius of the people would render a6ion
necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that
time had the entire dire6ion of French affairs,
were animated with the most virulent hatred
againit the English nation. They openly called
in question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth,
and by advancing the title and pretensions of their
niece the Queen of Scotland, iludied to deprive
Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the English from the
treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured
to conclude a separate peace with Spain. They
had persuaded Henry II. to permit his daughter-
in-law to assume the title and arms of Queen of
England; and even iince the conclusion of the
peace, they had solicited at Rome, and obtained
a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegiti-
mate. And though the wisdom and moderation
of the Conifable Montmorency had, for some time,
checked their career, yet there restraints being

3. now

now removed by the death of Henry II. and the B o o

a

disgrace of his miniffer, the utmost excesses of III.
violence were to be dreaded from their furious
ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scotland 1559*
is the quarter, whence they can attack England
with moss advantage. A war on the borders of
that country exposes France to no danger, but
one unfuccefsful aaion there may hazard the
Crown, and overturn the government of England.
In political conduat, it is childish to wait till the
designs of an enemy be ripe for execution. The
Scottish nobles, after their utmost efforts, have
been obliged to quit the field; and far from ex-
pelling the invaders of their liberties, they be-
hold the French power daily increasing, and mult
at last cease from fitruggling any longer in a con-
test so unequal. The invading of England will
immediately follow the reduCtion of the Scottish
malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the
mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a way
for her enemies into the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conqueff. Nothing therefore re-
mained but to meet the enemy while yet at a di-
stance from England, and by supporting the Con-
gregation with a powerful army, to render Scot-
land the theatre of the war, to crush the designs
of the Princes of Lorrain in their infancy, and, by
such an early and unexpected effort, to expel the
French out of Britain, before their power had
time to take root, and grow up to any formidable
height. But as the matter was of as much import-
ance, as any which could fall under the confidera-

tion

B o o Kc tion of an English Monarch, wisdom and mature

III. counsel were neceirary in the first place, and aftere

wards vigour and expedition in condua; the
danger was urgent, and, "by losing a tingle mo-
ment, might become unavoidable *.

THEse arguments produced their full es fe& up-

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme
degree, of every pretender to her Crown, and no
let's anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happi-
ness of her fubjeas. From these motives she had
aaed, in granting the Congregation an early sup.
ply of money; and from the fame principles she
determined, in their present exigency, to afford
theim more effeaual aid. One of Maitland's at-
tendants was initantly dispatched into Scotland
with the ftirongeft assurances of her proteaion,
and the Lords of the Congregation were defited to
fend commififoners into England to conclude a
treaty, and' to fettle the operations of the cam-
paign, with the Duke of Norfolk t-.

The Queen MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom
,wwiia, no motion of the Congregation could long be
sends her concealed, dreaded the fuccets of this hnegotiation
~Am.a. with the court of England, and foresaw how little
gainA thrn. the would be able to refill the united effort of the

two kingdoms. For this reason the determined,
if poffilble, to get the tiart of Elizabeth; and by
venturing, notwithifanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their

* The arguments which the Scots employed,-itsorder to

obtain Elizabeth's afiltance, are urged with great force, in a
paper of Maitland's. See Appendix, No. 1I.

t Keith, 1ps.

pre feat

present dispersed and helpless situation, ihe hoped B o o K
to put an end to the war, before the arrival of Ill.
their English allies. '559.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,

who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the
Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife,
deffroying and plundering, with excefflve out-
rage, the houses and lands of those whom they
esteemed their enemies. Fife was the molt po-
pulous and powerful county in the kingdom, and
molt devoted to the Congregation, who had hi-
therto drawn from thence their molt considerable
supplies, both of men and provisions; and there-
fore, besides punishing the difaffeaion of the in-
habitants, by pillaging the country, the-French
proposed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and
to leave in it a garrison fufficient to bridle the
mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
feflion of a port situated on the main ocean.

BUT on this occasion, the Prior of Sr. An-

drew's, Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and
a few of the molt aaive leaders of the Congrega-
tion, performed, by their bravery and good con-
duB, a service of the utmost importance to their
party. Having assembled fix hundred horse,
they infefied the French with continual incur-
lions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their
convoys of provisions, cut off their straggling
parties, and so haraired them with perpetual

4 alarms,

B o o K alarms, that they prevented them for more than

III. three weeks from advancing*.
i560. AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, was

conifrained to retire, and the French set out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coast to-
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a

January 23s few miles, when, from an eminence, they descried

a powerful fleet fleering its course up the Frith of
Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded
that these ships belonged to him, and gave way
to the most immoderate transports of joy, on the
prospect of this long expeded succour. Their
great guns were already fired to welcome their
friends, and to spread the tidings and terror of
their arrival among their enemies, when a small
boat from the opposite coast landed, and blasted
their premature and short-lived triumph, by in-
forming them, that it was the fleet of England
which was in fight, intended for the aid of the
Congregation, and was soon to be followed by a
formidable land army t.

TheEnglifh THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was
o thiver cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude
affance. in executing her resolutions, joined to the delibe-

ration with which she formed them, her admini-
ftration became remarkable, no less for its vigour,
than for its wisdom. No sooner did she deter-
mine to afford her proteaion to the Lords of the

* Knox, zoz. -t ILbid. zo3.

Congre-

Congregation, than they ex;perienced the aaivity, B o o K
as well as the extent of her power. The season III.
of the year would not permit her land army to
take the field; but left the French ihould, in the
mean time, receive new reinforcements, she in-
ftantly ordered a strong squadron to cruise in the
Frith of Forth. She seems, by her inftru~tions
to Winter her Admiral, to have been desirous of
preserving the appearances of friendmhip towards
the French *. But these were only appearances;
if any French fleet should attempt to land, he was
commanded to prevent it, by every a& of hostility
and violence. It was the fight of this squadron,
which occasioned at first so much joy among the
French, but which soon inspired them with such
terror, as saved Fife from the effeas of their ven-
geance. Apprehensive of being cut off from their
companions on the opposite shore, they retreated
towards Stirling with the utmost precipitation,
an', ) a dreadfu) fedaon, and through roads al-
most impassable, arrived at Leith, harassed and
exhausted with fatigue t.

THE English fleet calt anchor in the road of

Leith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clufion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and
considerably facilitated the operations of their own
forces by land.

SooN after the arrival of the English squadron, They con-

the Commiflioners of the Congregation repaired teeaye with

England.

K Keith, Appendix 45. f Knox, 203. eb sy.

B o o it to Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of

III. Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union with

7 Elizabeth, which was of so great advantage to the

cause. To give a check to the dangerous and
rapid progress of the French arms in Scotland,
was the profeffed design of the contrasting parties.
In order to this, the Scots engaged never to sus-
ser any closer union of their country with France;
and to defend themselves to the uttermost againit
all attempts of conquest; and for their afliitance,
Elizabeth promised to employ, in Scotland, a
powerful army, which the Scots undertook to join
with all their forces; no place in Scotland was to
remain in the hands of the Englilh; whatever
mhould be taken from the enemy was either to be
rafed, or kept by the Scots, at their choice; if
any invasion ihould be made upon England, the
Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with part of
their forces; and to ascertain their faithful ob-
fervance of the treaty, they bound themselves to
deliver hoflages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many proteitations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not in-
coniftent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country *.

TheEnglifh THE English army, consisting of fix thousand
army Ias foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
siege to
Leith. of Lord Gray of Wilton,'entered Scotland early in
A pril 2. the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-

fembled from all parts of thekingdom to meet their

*Knox, 2z7*

hew allies; and having joined them with great B o o K
multitudes of their followers3 they advanced to- III.
gether towards Leith. The French were little 1

1560.

able to keep the field against an enemy so much
superior in number. A fitrong body of troops,
deltined for their relief, had been scattered by a
violent florm, and had either perished on the
coast of France, or with difficulty had recovered
the ports of that kingdom *. But they hoped to
be able to defend Leith, till the Princes of Lor-
rain should make good the magnificent promises
of affiffance, with which they daily encouraged
them; or till scarcity of provisions mhould con-
ifrain the Englilh to retire into their own coun-
try. In order to hasten this latter event, they did
not negleft the irfual, though barbarous pre-
caution for diftrefling an invading enemy, by
burning and laying waste all the adjacent coun-
try t. The zeal, however, of the nation fruf-
trated their intentions; cager to contribute to-
wards removing theiir oppressors, the people pro-
duced their hidden ifores to support their friends;
the neighbouring cdunties supplied every thing
necessary, and far from wanting subsistence, the
English found, in their camp, all forts of pro-
vilions at a cheaper rate than had for some time
been known in that part of the kingdom t.

ON the approach of the English army, the

Queen Regent retired into the caffle of Edin-
burgh. Her health was now in a declining slate,
and her mind broken and depressed by the mif-

* Mem. de Caftel. 450. t Knox, 225. T Knox, ibid.

VOL. I. fortunes

B o o K fortunes of her adminifiration. To avoid the

III. danger and fatigue of a siege, Ihe committed
L?~ herself to the proteaion of Lord Erflkine. This
r560. nobleman still preserved his neutrality, and by

his integrity, and love of his country, merited
equally the elteem of both parties. He received
the Queen herself with the utmost honour and
refpea, but took care to admit no such retinue,
as might endanger his command of the cafmle *

Apri16. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the

English invefied Leith. The garrison, ihut up
within the town, was almolt half as numerous
as the army which fat down before it, and by
an obitinate defence protrated the liege to a
great length. The circumstances of this liege,
related by cotemporary historians, men without
knowledge or experience in the art of war, are
often obscure and imperfea, and at this difitance
of time are not considerable enough to be en-
tertaining.

AT firit the French endeavoured to keep pof-

feflion of the Hawk Hill, a riling ground not

April rs. far difitant from the town, but were beat from it

with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious at-
tack of the Scottish cavalry. Within a few
days, the French had their full revenge; having
sallied out with a itrong body, they entered the
English trenches, broke their troops, nailed
part of their cannon, and killed at leafi double
the number they had loft in the former lkirmifh.
Nor were ihe Englilh more fortunate in an at-

* Forbes's Colledt. vol. i. 503. Keith, 12Z.

tempt

iempt which they made to take the pla'ce by B o k
assault; they were rriet with equal courage, and III.
repulsed with cohfiderable loss. From the detail "

I560.

of these circhmftances by the Mariters

of that a7e, may 7

it is eify to observe the differeit charaters of
the French and English trodps. The formier,
trained to war, under the ac'iive i-eigns of Fran-
cis I. and Henry II. defended themifelves not
only with the bravery, but with the ikill of ve-
zerans. The 1ater, wiho had been more accuf-
tomed to peace, still preserved the intrepid and
desperate valour peculiar to the Pation, but dif-
covered few marks of military genius, or of ex-
perience in the pra~tice of iwar. Every niisfor-
tune or dBfappoiritinent dui~ing the siege niuft be
impited to manifest errors in conduCt. The ffuc-
cess of the bei'eged in their sally was owing en-
tirely to the security and negligence of the Eng-
liih: miany of their officers were absent; their
roldiers had left their stations; and the trenches
were almost without a guard. The ladders,
which had been provided for the assault, wanted
a great deail of the necelfary strength; and the
troops employed in that service were ill flupport-
ed. The trenches were opened, at first, in an
improper place; and as it was found expedient
to change the ground, both time and labour
Wvere loft. The weakness of their own Generals,
no less than the flrength of the French garrison,
rendered the progress of the Englifhe wonder-
fully flow. The length, however, of the Liege,
and the loss of part of their magazines by an ac-
cidental fire, reduced the French to extreme

Q2 distress,

B O O K diffrefs, which the profpea of relief made thema

111* bear with admirable fortitude.
x56o. WHILE the hopes and courage of the French

protraced the Liege so far beyond expeaation,
the leaders of the Congregation were not idle.
By new associations and confederacies, they la-
boured more perfe6ly to unite their party. By
publicly ratifying the treaty concluded at Ber-
wick, they endeavoured to render the alliance
with England firm and indissoluble. Among the
subscribers of these papers, we find the Earl of
Hunt!y, and some others, who had not hitherto
concurred with the Congregation in any of their
measures *. Several of these Lords, particularly
the Earl of Huntly, still adhered to the Popish
church; but on this occasion, neither their re-
ligious sentiments, nor their former cautious
maxims, were regarded; the torrent of national
resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on J.

* Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 221.

t The dread of the French power did, on many occasions,

surmount the zeal which the Catholic nobles had for their re-
ligion. Besides the presumptive evidence for this, arising
from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hiuf. of the Re-
formation, vol. iii. 281. and publilhed by him, App. p. 278;
the infirutions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it be-
yond all doubt, that many zealous Papifts thought the alliance
with England to be neceflhry for preserving the liberty and
independence of the kingdom. Keith, 158. Huntly him-
self began a cOrrespondence with Elizabeth's Miniffers, be-
fore the march of the English army into Scotland, Haynes's
State Papers, z61, z63. See Append. No. III.

THE Queen Regent, the inifrument, rather B o o K

than the cause of involving Scotland in those ca- HII.
lamities, under which it groaned at that time,
died during the heat of the liege. No Princess Deadh and
ever poffeffed qualities more capable of rendering the (Qor
her administration illuifrious, or her people hap- Cowager. June 10.
py. Of much discernment, and no less address;
of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle
and humane, without weakness; zealous for her
religion, without bigotry; a lover of juflice,
without rigour. One circum itance, however,
and that, too, the excels of a virtue, rather than
any 'vice, poisoned all there great qualities, and
rendered her government unfortunate, and her
name odious. Devoted to the interest of France,
her native country, and attached to the Princes
of Lorrain her brothers, with most pafllonate
fondness; Ihe departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim which her own wisdom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in
a great measure; that reputation and popularity
which had finoothed her way to the highest
flation in the kingdom ; and many examples of
falsehood, and some of severity, in the latter
part of her administration, totally alienated from
her the affeaions of a people, ·ho had once
placed in her an unbounded confidence. But,
even by her entemies, there unjufiifiable adions
were imputed to the facility, nor to the malig-
nity of her nature; and while they taxed her
brothers, and French counsellors, with rashness
and cruelty, they still allowed her the praise of

Q3 prudence

B o 0 K prudence and of lenity ". A few days before her

III. death, she desired an interview with the Prior of

o St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyil, and other

chiefs of the Congregation. To them the la-
rnentcd the fatal ifire of those violent councils,
which she had been obliged to follow; and, with
the candpur natural to a generous mind, con-
sessed the errors of her own administration, and
begged forgiveness of those to whom they had
been hurtful; but, at the fame time, mhe warned
them, amidit their firuggles for liberty, and the
ihock of arms, not to lose fight of the loyalty
and fubjetion which was due 'to their fovereignt,
The remainder of her time ihe employed in re-
ligious meditations and exercises. She even in-
vited the attendance of Willox, one of the most
eminent among the Reformed preachers, listened
to his infitruations with reverence and attentiont,
and prepared for the approach of death with a de-
cent fortitude.

setives of NOTHING could now save the French troopsg
fherh 4hut up in Leith, but the immediate conclufio?
Spca e of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful army

from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain
amused their party in Scotland with continual ex-
pe(ations of'the latter, and had thereby kept
alive their hopes and their courage. But at laa,
the situation of France, rather than the terror of
the English arms, or tihe remonifrances of the
Scottish malecontents, constrained them, though
with reluaance, to turn their thoughts towards

' Buchan, 324. t Lefly, de Rebus Gefi. Scot. zzz.
f Knox, 228.

pacific councils. The Protestants in France were, B 0 0 K
at that time, a party formidable by their number, IH.
and more by the valour and enterprising genius z560,
of their leaders. Francis II. had treated them
with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every
fiep he took, a fettled resolution to extirpate their
religion, and to ruin those who profeffed it. At
the profpeab of this danger to themselves, and to
their cause, the Protestants were alarmed, but
not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed
with resentment, they not only prepared for their
own defence, but resolved, by some bold aaion,
to anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and
as the Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the au-
thors of all the King's violent measures, they
marked them out to be the first viaims of their
indignation. Hence, and not from any disloyalty
to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of
Amboise; and though the vigilance and good for- March s;
tune of the Princes of Lorrain discovered and
disappointed that design, it was easy to observe
new ilorms gathering in every province of the
kingdom, and ready to burlt out with all the fury
and outrage of civil war. In this situation, the
ambition of the House of Lorrain was called off
from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to de-
fend the honour and dignity of the French crown,
and iniead of sending new reinforcements into
Scotland, it became necefrary to withdraw the
veteran troops already employed in that king.
dom '.

*Lefly, zz,4

B 0 O K IN Order to condua an affair of so much im-

III. portance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain

made choice of Monluc Bishop ofValence, and of

Tlr nego- the Sieur de Randan. As both there, especially
tiarlens for
r1ar- the former, were reckoned inferior to no persons
pole, of that age in address and political refinementi

Elizabeth opposed to them Ambassadors of equal
abilities; Cecil her Prime Minister, a man per-
haps of the greatest capacity who had ever held
that offce; and Wotton Dean of Canterbury,
grown old in the art of negotiating under three
fucceflive Monarchs. The intereits of the French
and English courts were soon adjuffed by men of
so great dexterity in business; and as France easily
consented to withdraw those forces, which had
been the chief occasion of the war; the other
points in dispute, between that kingdom and
England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif-
ficult difcufion.

THa grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress,
employed longer time, and required to be treated
with a more delicate hand. After so many open
attempts, carried on by command of the King and
Queen, in order to overturn the ancient confli-
tution, and to suppress the religion which they
had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not think
themselves secure, without fixing some new bar-
rier against the future encroachments of regal
power. But the legal fieps towards accomplish-
ing this were not so obvious. The French am-
baffadors considered the entering into any treaty
with Iubje~ts, and with rebels, as a condescension

unworthy

unworthy the dignity of a Sovereign; and their B o o s
scruples on this head might have put an end to III.
the treaty, if the impatience of both parties for
peace had not fuggefied an expedien:, which
seemed to provide for the security of the fubjeR,
without deiogating from the hgnour of the Prince.
The Scottish nobles agreed, on this occasion, to Articles o
pass from the point of right and privilege, and to the treacy.
accept the redress of their grievances as a matter
of favour. Whatever additional security their
anxiety for personal iiety, or their zeal for public
liberty, prompted them to demand, was granted
in the name of Francis and Mary, as awts of their
royal favour and indulgence. And left concefTions
ps this kind should seem precarious, and liable to
be retraaed by the fame power which had made
them, the French Ambalador agreed to inferc
them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and thereby to
bind the Kipg and Queen inviolably. to observe
them *.

IN relating this tranfartion, cotemporary hifto-

rians have confounded the conceflions of Francis
and Mary to their Scottish fubjeas, with the treaty
between France and England; the latter, besides
the ratification of former treaties between the two
kingdoms, and flipulations with regard to the
time and, manner of removing both armies out of
Scotland, contained an article, to which,, as the
source of many important events, we fhaioften.
have occasion to refer. The right of Elizaketh to,
her crown is thereby acknowledged in the firongeft
terms; and Francis and Mary solemnly engage

* Keith, '34, &c.

neither

B o o K neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms

III. of King and Queen of England in any time to
ij6o. come.
July6. HoNoURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

herself, the conditions she obtained for her allies
the Scots were no less advantageous to them.
Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of
Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scot-
land ihould instantly be sent back into their own
country, and no foreign troops be hereafter intro-
duced into the kingdom without the knowledge
and consent of Parliament; that the fortifications
of Leith and Dunbar Ihould immediately be rafed,
and no new fort be ere~ted without the permission
of Parliament; that a Parliament (hould be held
on the firfi day of Augufi, and that assembly be
deemed as valid, in all refpeas, as if it had been
called by the express commandment of the King
and Queen; that, conformable to the ancient laws
and customs of the country, the King and Queen
should not declare war, or conclude peace, with-
out the concurrence of Parliament; that, during
the Queen's absence, the adminifiration of govern-
ment should be vefited in a council of twelve per-
sons, to be chosen out of twenty-four named by
Parliament, seven of which council to be ele~ted
by the Queen, and five by the Parliament; that
hereafter, the King and Queen should not advance
foreigners to places of trust or dignity in the king-
dom, nor confer the offices of Treasurer or Comp-
troller of the Revenues upon any ecclesiastic; that
an a6t of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and me-
inory of all offences, committed fipce the 6th of

March,

)Aarch, 1558, should be passed in the ensuing Par- B o o K
liament, and be ratified by the King and Queen. III.
that the King and Qrueen should not, under co- z;6o
lour of punishing any violation of their authority
during that period, seek to deprive any of their
fubjeas of the offices, benefices, or estates which
they now held; that the redress due to churchmen,
for the injuries which they had sustained during the
late infurrelions, mhould be left entirely to the
cognizance of Parliament. With regard to reli-
gious controversies, the Ambassadors declared that
they would not presume to decide, but permitted
the Parliament, at their firit meeting, to examine
the points in difference, and to represent their
sense of them to the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period did the Lords of Theeffeai

the Congregation, by their courage and perse-
verance, condu6a an enterprise, which, at firift,
promised a very 4ifferent iIue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the
party grew by degrees to great power; and being
favoured by many fortunate incidents, baffled all
the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces
of a more considerable kingdom. The sovereign
authority was, by this treaty, transferred wholly
into the hands of the Congregation; that limited
prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto pof-
sessed, was almost entirely annihilated; and the
ariftocratical power, which always predominated
in the Scottilh government, became supreme and
incontrolable. By this treaty, too, the influence
of France, which had long been of much weight

* Keitk, 137, PC.

3 ·o O K in the affairs of Scotland, was greatly diminished;
14. and not only were the present encroachments of
t ~ 6 that ambitious ally reltrained, but, by confederating

with England, protection was provided againit any
*future attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame
time, the controversies in religion being left to the
consideration of Parliament, the Proteffants might
reckon upon. obtaining whatever decision was moss
favourable to the opinions which they profeffed.

A FEw days after the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot-
land.

A Parlia- THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were
nent held, turned towards the approaching Parliament. A

meeting, summoned in a manner so extraordinary,
at such a critical junaure, atnd to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected
with the utmoR anxiety.

A ScorTIxs Parliament, suitable to the arif-

tocratical genius of the government, was properly
an affembljr of the nobles. It was composed of
Biflops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners
of boroughs, who met altogether in one house.
The LesTer Barons, though pofleffed of a right to
be present, either in person, or by their repre-
fkntatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of
attending, according to the fafhlion of the times,
with a nuinerous train of vassals and dependants;
the inattention of the age to any legal or regular
system of government; but above all, the ex-
orbitant authority of the greater nobles, who
had drawn the whole power into their own hands,
made this privilege of so little value, as to be

ahwit

almost neglec2:ed. It appears from the ancient B o o a
rolls, that during times of tranquillity, few com- III.
miffioners of boroughs, and almost none of the
Lefler Barons appeared in Parliament. The or- i560.
dinary adminifiration of government was aban-
doned, without scruple or jealousy, to the King
and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary
conjunEtures, when the ifruggle for liberty was
violent, and the spirit of opposition to the Crown
role to an height, the Burgesses and Lesser Ba-
rons were roused from their inativity, and flood
forth to vindicate the rights of their country.
The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-
amples in proof of this observation *. The pub-
TPc inTignation againat the raih deflgns of that
weak and ilD-ad eifed Prince, brought into Par-
liament, besides the greater nobles and prelates,
a considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual con-

fluence of all orders of men to the Parliament,
which met on the firit of August. The uni-
versal paflion for liberty, civil and religious,
which had seized the nation, fuffered few per-
sons to remain unconcerned fpeaators of an as-
fembly, whose aAs were likely to prove decisive
with refpeil to both. From all corners of the
kingdom men flocked in, eager and determined
to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause, which they had defended with their swords
in the field. Besides a full convention of Peers,
Temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the re-
prefentatives of almost all the boroughs, and

* Keith, '4.

above

B o o K above an hundred Barons, who, though of the

III. lesser order, were gentlemen of the firit rank and
C fortune in the nation *
I560. THE Parliament was ready to enter on bufnersf

with the utmost zeal, when a diffculty was started
concerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No
Commiflioner appear-ed in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their consent
and approbation was yet received. These were
deemed, by many, essential to the irery being of
a Parliament. But, in opposition to this fen-
timent, the express words of the treaty of Edin-
burgh were urged, by which this assembly was
declared to be as valid, in all respects, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express com-
mand of the King and Queen. As the adherents
of the Congregation greatly outnumbered their
adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of most approved zeal,
were chosen to be Lords of the Articles, who
formed a committee of ancient use, and of great
importance in the Scottiih Parliament. The de-
liberations of the Lords of the Articles were
carried on with the most unanimous and aUive
zeal. The aa of oblivion, the nomination of twen-
ty-four persons, out of whom the council, intruit-
ed with supreme authority, was to be eleaed; and
every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
or which seemed necessary to render it effeaual,

Itsproceed- passed without dispute or delay. The article of re-

r ,ligion employed longer time, and was attended

Liaion. with greater difficulty. It was brought into Par-

*Keith, i46.

liament

liament by a petition from those who had adopted B, o 0 K
the principles of the Reformation. Many doc- III.
trines of the Popilh church were a contradiaion -v-'
to reason, and a disgrace to religion; its discipline 1560.
had become corrupt and oppressive; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill-applied.
Against all these, the Protestants remonfirated
with the utmost severity of flyle, which indigna-
tion at their absurdity, or experience of their per-
nicious tendency, could inspire; and encouraged,
by the number and zeal of their friends, to im-
prove such a favourable jundure, they aimed the
blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and besought
the Parliament to interpose their authority for
rectifying these multiplied abuses *.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-

cient superstition, were present in this Parliament.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teflants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They efleemed it impossible to resist or
divert that torrent of religious zeal, which was
frill in its full flrength; they dreaded that their
oppofirion would irritate their adversaries, and
excite them to new aats of violence; they hoped
that the King and Queen would soon be at leisure
to put a flop to the career of their insolent sub-
jeas, and that, after the rage and havock of the
present florm, the former tranquillity and order
would be restored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the doc-
trine, and even She power of the church, in order

* Knox, 237.

B o o i to enfre the safety of their dwn persons, and to

III. preserve the poffetlion of those revenues, which

were fiull in their hands. From whatever motives

1560. they aded, their silence, which was imputed to

the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded matter
of great triumph to the Protestants, and encou-
raged them to proceed with more boldness and
alacrity .

THZ Parliament did not think it enough to con-

demn those doarines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the fanc-
tion of their approbation to a Confefion of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachers -,
and composed, as might be expeaued from such a
performance at that junaure, on purpose to ex-
pose the absurd tenets and praaices of the Romish
church. By another acd, the jurifdicaion of the
ecclesiastical courts was abolished, and the causes,
which formerly came under their cognizance,
were transferred to the decision of civil judges $.
By a third statute, the exercise of religious
worihip, according to the rites of the Romish
church, was prohibited. The manner in which
the Parliament enforced the observation of this
law discovers the zeal of that assembly; the first
transgression fubje6aed the offender to the for-
feiture of his goods, and to a corporal punish-
ment, at the discretion of the judge; banish-
ment was the penalty of a second violation of
the law; and a third at of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital §. Such fitrangers were men,

* Knox, 253. j' Id. ibid. 7 Keith, i52. § Knox, 254.

Qt that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the B o 0 K
laws of humanity; and with such indecent hafFe III.
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri- L
gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate
those examples of severity, of which they them-
selves had fojuifly complained.

THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturn- with regard

,~~t , C e reves

ed, in a few days, the ancient fyfiem of religion, nueS of the
which had been established so many ages. In re- church.
forming the dotrine and discipline of the church,
the nobles kept pace with the ardour and expelta-
tions even of Knox himself. But their proceed-
ings, with refpea to these, were not more rapid
.and impetuous than they were flow and dilatory,
when they entered on the consideration of eccle-
iialtical revenues. Among the lay members, some
were already enriched with the spoils of the church,
and others devoured in expe~tation the wealthy
benefices which still remained untouched. The al-
teration in religion had afforded many of the dig-
nified ecclefialtics themselves an opportunity of
gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demo-
lition of the monasteries having set the Monks at
liberty from their confinement, they instantly dif-
perfed all over the kingdom, and commonly be-
took themselves to some secular employment.
The Abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to em-
brace the principles of the Reformation from con-
vidtion, or so cunning as to espouse them out of
policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity,
and, except what he allowed for the flubiffence of
a few superannuated Monks *, applied them en-

I r Keith, 496. Append. 190, 19,.

VOL. I. R tirely

B o o K tirely to his own use. The proposal made by the

III. Reformed teachers, for applying these revenues
"~ towards the maintenance of Minjifers, the edu-

r560. cation of youth, and the support of the poor, was

equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They
opposed it with the utmost warmth, and by their
numbers and authority, easily prevailed on the
Parliament to give no ear to ulich a disagreeable
demand *. Zealous as the firit Reformers were,
and animated with a spirit superior to the low con-
fiderations of interef1, they beheld these early
fymptomns of felfifhnefs and avarice among their
adherents with indignation ; and we find Knox ex-
pressing the utmost sensibility of that contempt,
with which they were treated by many, from whom
he expe6ted a more generous concern for the success
of religion, and the honour of its Ministers t.

The va1adity A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to
of this Par-
1 -amemear the aas of this Parliament, concerning religion.
.d in que.- This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this difL

tance of time of no importance, is founded on the
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the
Parliament was permitted to take into confidera-
tion the state of religion, and to signify their fen-
timents of it to the King and Queen. But, instead
of presenting their delires to their Sovereigns,
in the hurmible form of a supplication or address,
the Parliament converted them into so many aas;
which, although they never received the royal
assent) obtained, all over the kingdom, the
weight and authority of laws. In compliance
with their injunaions, the eftablitled system of

See Append. No. IV. t Knox, 239. 256.

religion

rdCgion was every where overthrown, and that B o o u
recormmended by the Reformers introduced in its 'II.
place. The partiality and zeal of the people '6
overlooked or supplied any defeat in the form of
these ats of Parliament, and rendered the ob-
fervance of them more universal than ever had
been yielded to the statutes of the most regular
or conifitutional assembly. By those proceedings,
it muff, however, be confefled that the Par-
liament, or rather the nation, violated the last ar-
ticle in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceed-
ed the powers which belong to fubjeats. But
when once men have been accufromed to break
through the common boundaries of fubjeLtion
and their minds are inflamed with the panions
which civil war inspires; it is mere pedantry or
ignorance to measure their conduCt by those rules,
which can be applied only where government is
in a Rate of order and tranquillity. A nation,
when obliged to employ such extraordinary es-
forts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of
every thing which can promote this great end;
and the necenity of the cafe, and the importance
of the objeat, justify any departure from the com-
mon and established forms of the constitution.

1w consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Ambaffa-

dors sent

well as by the ordinary forms of business, it be- by the Par-
came necessary to lay the proceedings of Parlia- lame"nt tO
ment before the King and Queen. For this pur-
pose, Sir James Sandilands of Calder Lord St.
John, was appointed to repair to the court of
France. After holding a course so irregular, the
nobles had no reason to flatter themselves that

R 2 Francis

B o 0 K Francis and Mary would ever approve their con-

lII. du61, or confirm it by their royal assent. The
i560. reception of their Ambassador was no other than

they might have expeded. le was treated by
the King and Queen with the utmoff coldness,
and dismissed without obtaining the ratification
of the Parliament's proceedings. From the
Princes of Lorrain, and their partisans, he en-
dured all the scorn and insult which it was na-
tural for them to pour upon the party he repre-
fented *.

ti. THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and

Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of the
Parliament to Elizabeth their Protearefs, met
with a very different reception; they were not
more fuccefsful in one part of the negotiation
intrufled to their care. The Scots, sensible of
the security which they derived from their union
with England, were desirous of rendering it in-
.dissoluble. With this view, they empowered
these eminent leaders of their party to testify to
Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable and
effectual aid which ihe had afforded them, and
at the fame time, to beseech her to render the
friendihip between the nations perpetual, by con-
defceriding to marry the Earl of Arran, who,
though a fubjea, was nearly allied to the royal
family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Eli-

zabeth liflened with the utmost fatisfaaion, and
cncouraged the Scots, in any future exigency, to

t Knox, 255. Bich. 327.

2ope:

hope for the continuance of her good offices; Booi
with regard to the latter, the discovered those III.
sentiments to which the adhered throughout her i560,
whole reign. Averse from marriage, as some
pretend through choice, but more probably out
of policy, that ambitious Princess would never
admit any partner to the throne; but delighted
with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of power,
the sacrificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes
of rranfmitting her Crown to her own pollerity.
The marriage with the Earl of Arran could not
be attended with any such extraordinary advan-
tage, as to shake this resolution; the declined it
therefore, but with many expreflions of good
will towards the Scottish nation, and of refpeRt
for Arran himself*.

TOWARDS the concluflion of this year, diftin- The death

guifhed by so many remarkable events, there II.
happened one of great importance. On the 4th
of December, died Francis II. a Prince of a
feeble c tihutiton, and of a mean understanding.
As he did not leave any iiTue by the Queen, no
incident could have been more fortunate to those,
who, during the late commotions in Scotland,
had taken part with the Congregation. Mary,
by the charms of her beauty, had acquired an
entire ascendant over her huiband; and as the
transferred all her influence to her uncles the
Princes of Lorrain, Francis followed them im-
plicitly in whatever track they were pleased to
lead him. The power of France, under such
direftion, alarmed the Scottish malecontents witlh

t Burn. 3. Append. 30Q. Keith, 154, &c.

R3 a3Ppr

B o O K apprehensions of danger, no less formidable than

III. well founded. The intestine disorders which raged

L in France, and the seasonable interposition of Eng-
i56o. land in behalf of the Congregation, had hitherto

prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carrying
their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impollible that the commotions in France
could be of long continuance, and many things
might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for
the future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either
of these events, the Scots would stand exposed to
all the vengeance, which the resentment of the
French court could inflit. The blow, however
long suspended, was unavoidable, and must fall at
last with redoubled weight, From this profpet and
expectation of danger, the Scots were delivered by
the death of Francis; the ancient confederacy of
the two kingdoms had already been broken, and
by this event, the only bond of union which re-
mained was dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who,
during the minority of Charles IX. her second son,
engrossed the entire dire~tion of the French coun-
cils, was far from any thoughts of vindicating the
Scottish Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary
had been rivals in power during the reign of Fran-
cis II. and had contended for the government of
that weak and unexperienced Prince; but as the
charms of the wife easily triumphed over the au-
thority of the mother, Catherine could never for-
give Duch a disappointment in her favourite paflnon,
and beheld now, with secret pleasure, the difficult
and perplexing scene, on which her daughter-in-

law

law was about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed B o o c
with all the sorrow which so fad a reverse of for- *-'L
tune could occasion; slighted by the Queen-mo- 6o.
ther*; and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who Mary re-

. . tires from

appear only in the sunshine of prosperity, retired the courtdf
to.Rheims, and there, in solitude, indulged her France.
grief, or hid her indignation. Even the Princes
of Lorrain were obliged to contrat their views;
to turn them from foreign to domestic objeas;
and initead of forming vafl projeas with regard
to Britain, found it necessary to think of ac-
quiring and eftablilhing an interest with the new
adminifiration.

IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,

which, on all these accounts, the death of the
French Monarch excited among the Scots. They
regarded it as the only event which could give
firmness and stability to that system of religioniand
government, which was now introduced; and it
is no wonder cotemporary historians mhould ascribe
it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and
happiness of kingdoms, in those situations, where
human prudence and invention would utterly de-
fpair t.

AnOUT this time, the Protefiant church of Scot- Elhabli~h-

ment of

land began to assume a regular form. Its princi- Presbyterian
ples had obtained the fan~tion of public authority, ve"jn t
and some fixed external policy became necelfary for ·
the government and preservation of the infant so-
ciety. The model introduced by the Reformers

* Henault, 340. Caftlen. 454. ( Knox, 259.

R 4 differed

B o o K differed extremely from that, which had been f@

III. long eftabliihed. The motives, which induced

them to depart so far from the ancient fyfitem, de-
serve to be explained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at firit, excited

the indignation of mankind, and roused that spirit
of inquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
Popith system: As this disgust at the vices of ec-
clefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons,
and, thifting from them, by no violent transition,
fettled at last on the offices which they enjoyed;
the effeas of the Reformation would n~turally
have extended not only to the doarine, but to
the government of the Popish church; and the,
fame spirit which abolished the former, would
have overturned the latter. But, in a great part
of Germany, in England, and in the northern
kingdoms, its operations were checked by the
power and policy of their Princes: and the ancient
Episcopal jurifdiaion, under . few limitations,
was fill continued in those churches. The epif-
copal hierarchy appears to be more conformable
to the pradice of the church, since Christianity
became the established religion of the Roman em-
pire. The ecclelialtical government was, at that
time, plainly copied from the civil; the first not
only borrowed its form, but derived its authority
from the latter; and the diocefes and jurifdiaions
ofPatriarchs, Archbifhops, and l3ifhops, corre-
fponded with the division and constitution of the
empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries,
the nature of the government allowing full fEope
fq the genius of the Reformation, all pre-emi-

nence

pience of order in the church was deffroyed, and B o o ie
an equality established more suitable to the fpirir III.
of republican policy. The situation of the pri- r560,
mitive church fuggefited the idea, and furnished
the model of the latter system, which has since
been called PreJ1iyterian. The firit Christians,
oppressed by continual perfecutions, and obliged
to hold their religious aflemblies by stealth, and
in corners, were contented with a form of govern-
ment extremely simple. The influence of religion
concurred, with the sense of danger, in extin-
guilhing among them the spirit of ambition, and
in preserving a parity of rank, the effe6 of their
fuiTerings, and the cause of many of their vir-
tues. Calvin, whose decisions were received,
among the Protestants of that age, with incredible
fubmimion, was the patron and restorer of this
scheme of ecclesiastical policy. The church of
Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his di-
tedtiax, was esteemed the most perfea model of
this government; and Knox, who, during his
residence in that city, had studied and admired
it, warmly recommeqded it to the imitation of
his countrymen.

AMONG the Scottish nobility, some hated the

persons, and others coveted the wealth of the dig-
nified clergy; and by abolishing that order of
men, the former indulged their resentment, and
the latter hoped to gratify their avarice. The
people, inflamed with the most violent aversion
of Popery, and approving of every scheme that
departed farthest from the prac5ice of the Romilh
church, were delighted with a fyflem so admi-

rably

B o o a rably suited to their predominant passion. While

III. the friends of civil liberty beheld, with pleasure,
Cr the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their
i560. own hands, that fabric of ecclefialtical power,

which their predecessors had reared with so much
art and industry; and flattered themselves, that
by lending their aid to firip churchmen of their
dignity and wealth, they might entirely deliver
the nation from their exorbitant and opprellive ju-
rifdiaion. The new mode of government cafily
made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interests and passions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his fyfiem,

Knox did not deem it expedient to depart alto-
gether from the ancient form *. Infiead of Bi-
Ihops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Su-
perintendants in different parts of the kingdom.
These, as the name implies, were empowered to
inspect the life and doctrine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the
church, and performed several other parts of the
Episcopal fun~tion. Their jurifdition, however,
extended to sacred things only; they claimed no
feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the
dignity or revenues of the former Bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the

care of parochial duty could be committed, was
still extremely fnall; they had embraced the prin-
ciples of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commo-
tions, they were scattered, merely by chance,
over the different provinces of the kingdom;

* Spotfwood, ij2.

and,

and, in a few places only, were formed into re- B o o a
gular classes or societies. The firfi general as- III,
fembly of the church, which was held this year, i56o.
bears all the marks of an infant and unformed Decem.za.
society. The members were but few in number,
and of no considerable rank; no uniform or con-
fiftent rule seems to have been observed in eieaing
them. From a great part of the kingdom, no
representatives appeared. In the name of some
entire counties, but one person was present; while,
in other places, a single town or church sent fe-
veral members. A convention, so feeble and ir-
regular, could poffcfs no great authority; and
conscious of their own weakness, the members
put an end to their debates, without venturing
upon any decilion of much importance '

IN order to give greater fitrength and consistence I56I.

to the Presbyterian plan, Knox, with the assistance
of his brethren, composed the firit book of difci-
pline, which contains the model or platform of
the intended policy t. They presented it to a
convention of eftaces, which was held in the be-
ginning of this year. Whatever regulations were Jan. Is
proposed with regard to ecclesiastical discipline
and jurifdialion, would have easily obtained the
Ihncion of that affeembly; but a design to recover
the patrimony of the church, which is there in-
finuated, met with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages

which would accrue to the public, by a proper
application of eccefiaftical revenues. In vain

K Keitli, 498. j Sjpotf. 152.

B o O K did they propose, by an impartial distribution of

III. this fund, to promote true religion, to encourage
L61. learning, and to support the poor. In vain did

they even intermingle threatenings of the divine
displeasure against the unjust detainers of what
was appropriated to a sacred use. The nobles
held fast the prey, which they had seized; and
beftowing upon the proposal the name of a de-
vout imagination, they affe6ted to confider it as a
projeat altogether vilionary, and treated it with
the utmost scorn O.

The Queen THIS Convention appointed the Prior of St.
invited to
return into Andrew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite
ScoJand. her to return into her ve country, and to al-

fume the reins of government, which had been
too long committed to other hands. And though
some of her fubjeas dreaded her return, and
others foresaw dangerous consequences with which
it might be attended t, the bulik of them desired
it with so much ardour, that the invitation was
given with the greatest appearance of unanimity.
But the zeal of the Roman Catholics got the start
of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards Bishop of Ross, who was commiflioned
by them, arrived before him at the place of her
residence $. Lefly endeavoured to infuse intq
the Qjeen's mind suspicions of her Protestant
fubje~ts, and to persuade her to throw herself en-
tirely into the arms of those who adhered to her
own religion. For this purpose, he insisted that
she mhould land at Aberdeen; and as the Pro-

* Knox, zj5. - See Append. No. V. I Lefly, 227.

teftant

tefiant doarines had made no considerable pro- 13 o o re
grefs in that part of the kingdom, he gave her III.
assurance of being joined, in a few days, by
20,000 men; and flattered her, that with such an
army, encouraged by her presence and autho-
rity, fhie might easily overturn the Reformed
church, before it was firmly fettled on its found-
ations.

BUT at this junaure, the Princes of Lorrain

were not disposed to lirfen to this extravagant and
dangerous proposal. Intent on defending them-
selves against Catherine of Medicis, whose in-
fidious policy was employed in undermining their
exorbitant power, they had no leisure to attend to
the affairs of Scotland, and wished their niece to
take pofelfion of her kingdom, with as little dif-
turbance as possible. The French officers, toot
who had served in Scotland, difiuaded Mary from
aR kiolent meafroes; and, by representing the
power and number of the Prore(dants to be irre-
filtible, determined her to court them by every
art; and rather to employ the leading men of that
party as her ministers, than to provoke them, by
a fruitless opposition, to become her enemies t
Weace proceeded the confidenxce and affea ion,
with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was received
by the Queen. His representation of the slate of
the kingdom gained great credit; and Lefly be-
held, with regret, the new channel in which court
favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Efrates was held in

May. The arrival of an Ambassador froni

* Melv. 6i.

France,

B o o K France, seems to have been the occasion of thh

III. meeting. He was inifrueed to solicit the Scots
i56I. to renew their ancient alliance with France, to
15 1.

break their new confederacy with England, and
to restore the Popish ecclefiaftics to the poffetlion
of their revenues, and the exercise of their func-
tions. It is no easy matter to form any conje~ture
concerning the intentions of the French court, in
making these extraordinary and ill-timed pro-
positions. They were rejecled with that scorn,
which might well have been expeded from the
temper of the nation *.

TN this Convention, the Proteflant clergy did

not obtain a more favourable audience than for-
inerly, and their profpet of recovering the pa-
trimony of the church (till remained as difitant
and uncertain as ever. But, with regard to ano-
ther point, they found the zeal of the nobles in
no degree abated. The book of discipline seem-
ed to require that the monuments of Popery,
which (till remained in the kingdom, mhould be
demolifhedt; and, though neither the fame pre·
tence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage
of the people, remained to justify or excule this
barbarous havoc, the Convention, considering
every religious fabric as a reliat of idolatry, passed
sentence upon them by an act in form; and per-
sons, the moit remarkable for the aativity of
their zeal, were appointed to put it in execution.
Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records,
and even the sepulchres of the dead, perilhed
in one common ruin. The florm of popular in-

K Knox, z69. 273. t Spotfwood, 153.

furre~tion,

furreaion, though impetuous and irresistible, had B o o xo
extended only to a few counties, and soon spent III.
its rage; but now a deliberate and universal ra- i56i.
pine completed the devastation of every thing,
venerable and magnificent, which had escaped its

violence .

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re- Mary begpnw

to prepare

turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, for it.
splendour, and gaiety of a polite court, she still
fondly lingered in France, the scene of all these
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the
barbarifn of her own country, and the turbulence
of her fubjeas, which presented her with a very
different face of things. The impatience, how-
ever, of her people, the persuasions of her un-
cles, but above all, the fludied and mortifying
neglea, with which she was treated by the Queen-
mother, forced her to think of beginning this
disagreeable voyaget. But while Ihe was pre-
paring for it, there were sown between her and
Elizabeth the feeds of that personal jealousy and
discord, which embittered the life, and ihortened
the days of the Scottish Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh Origin of

. . the discord

was the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; betwen her
the true causes of it lay much deeper. Almost Efldh~liza.
every article, in that treaty, had been executed by
both parties with a scrupulous exaftnefs. The
fortifications of Leith were dernolifhed, and the
armies of France and England withdrawn within
the appointed time. The grievances of the Scot-

*Spotiwood, i74. j- Brantome, Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

]3 o o K tifh malecontents were redressed, and they had

III. obtained whatever they could demand for their
r future security. With regard to all these, Mary
q56i. could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth

to urge, the ratification of the treaty.

THE siXth article remained the only source of

contest and difficulty. No Minister ever entered
more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign, of
pursued them with more dexterity aid succesS
than Cecil. In the condua of the negotiation
at Edinburgh, the found understanding of this
able politician had proved greatly an overmatch
for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had
artfully induced the French Ambassadors, not
only to acknowledge that the Crowns of England
and Ireland did of right belong to Elizabeth alone,
but also to promise, that in all times to come,
Mary mhould abifain from using the titles, or
bearing the arms of those kringdoms.

THE ratification of this article would have

been of the most fatal consequence to Mary.
The Crown of England was an objeat worthy
of her ambition. Her pretenfrons to it gave her
great dignity and importance in the eyes of all
Europe. By many, her title was esteemed pre-
ferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the English
themselves, the Roman Catholics, who formed,.
at that time, a numerous and acive party, open-
ly espoused this opinion; and even the Protest-
ants, who supported Elizabeth's throne, could
not deny the Queen of Scots to be her immediate
heir. A proper opportunity to avail herself of
all these advantages, could not, in the course of

8 things,

things, be far difiant, and many incidents mighlt B o o K
fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was I*
expeted. In these circumstances, Mary, byra- i56i.
tifying the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which she had hithei-to held among neigh-
bouring Princes; the zeal of her adherents must
have gradually cooled; and fie might have re-
nounced, from that moment3 all hopes of ever
wearing the English Crown.

NONE Of these beneficial consequences ef'caped

the penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this
reason, had recourse to every thing, by which she
could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottilh
Queen into a compliance with her demands; and
if that Princess had been so unadvised as to ratify
the rash conceflions of her Ambafadors, Eliza-
beth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, which, under her management, mufi
have turned to great account. By such a renun-
ciation, the question, with regard to the right of
succession, would have been left altogether open
and undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth
might either have kept her rival in perpetual
anxiety and dependance, or, by the authority of
her Parliament, ihe might have broken in upon
the order of lineal fuccefifon, and transferred the
Crown to some other descendant of the royal
blood. The former conduat ihe observed to-
wards James VI. whom, during his whole reign,
ihe held in perpetual fear and fubjeation. The
latter, and more rigorous method of proceeding,
would, in all probability, have been employed

VOL. I. S againit

B o O K against Mary, whom, for many reasons, ffhe both

III. envied and hated.

.i6I. NOR was this itep beyond her power, unprece-

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the
constitution of England. Though fuccernon by
hereditary right be an idea so natural and lb popu-
lar, that it has been established in almost every
civilized nation, yet England affords many me-
morable instances of deviations from that rule.
The Crown of that kingdom having once been
seized by the hand of a conqueror, this invited
the bold and enterprising in every age to imitate
such an illuffrious example of fortunate ambition.
From the time of William the Norman, the re-
gular co'drfe of descent had seldom continued
through three successive reigns. Those Princes,
whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way
to the throne, called in the authority of the great
council of the nation to confirm their dubious
titles. Hence, parliamentary and hereditary right
became in England of equal consideration. That
great assembly claimed and actually poffeffed a
power of altering the order of regal fucceiffon; and
even so late as Henry VIII. an adt of Parliament
had authorised that capricious Monarch to fettle
the order of Luccefion at his pleasure. The Eng-
lifh, jealous of their religious liberty, and averse
from the dominion of ifrangers, would have ea-
gerly adopted the paflions of their sovereign, and
might have been easily induced to exclude the
Scottish line from the right of ficceeding to the
Crown. These seem to have been the views of both

r .Queens,

Queens, and these were the difficulties which re- B o o iK
tarded the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. 111.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be x561.

traced no higher than this treaty, an inconfider-
able alteration in the words of it, might have
brought the present question to an amicable issue.
The indefinite and ambiguous expression, which
Cecil had inserted into the treaty, might have
been changed into one more limited, but more
precise; and Mary, inifead of promising to ab-
slain from bearing the title of Queen of England
in all times to come, might have engaged not to
assume that title, during the life of Elizabeth, or
the lives of her lawful pofterityh

SUcH an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for some time, the profecu-
tion of her title to the Engliflh crown, she had
not however relinquished it. She determined to
revive her claim, on the first profpeat of success,
and was unwilling to bind herself, by a positive
engagement, not to take advantage of any fich
fortunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration
have been more acceptable to Elizabeth, who,
by agreeing to it, would have tacitly recognised
the right of her rival to ascend the throne after
her decease. But neither the Scottish nor English
Queen durit avow these secret sentiments of their
hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to
diffurb the tranquillity of England, or to wrefi
the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands, might have
proved fatal to Mary. Any suspicion of a design
to alter the order of fuccefflon, and to set aside

Sa the

B o opK the claim of the Scottish Queen, would have ex·

III. posed Elizabeth to much and deserved censure,
C and have raised up against her many and danger-
5 61. ous enemies. These, however carefully conceal-

ed, or artfully disguised, were, in all probability,
the real motives which determined the one Queen
to solicit, and the other to refuse the ratification
of the treaty, in its original form ; while neither
had recourse to that explication of it, which to
an heart unwarped by political interest, and fin-
cerely desirous of union and concord, would have
appeared so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest firfi occa-

fioned this rupture between the British Queens,
rivalihip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities, by which (he equalled or
surpassed such of her sex as have merited the
greatest renown, discovered an admiration of her
own person, to a degree, which women of ordi-
nary understandings either do not entertain, or
prudently endeavour to conceal. Her attention
to dress, her solicitude to display her charms, her
love of flattery, were all excessive. Nor were
these weakneltes confined to that period of life,
when they are more pardonable. Even in very
advanced years, the wisest woman of that, or
perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, and
affeated the manners of a girl *. Though Eliza-
beth was as much inferior to Mary, in beauty,

* Johnilon Hist. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iij. 699.

Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors. Article Fx.

and gracefulness of person, as (he excelled her in B o o K
political abilities, and in the arts of government, III.
she was weak enough to compare herself with the ·
Scottish Queen *; and as it was impomble (he i56i.
could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the comparison, the envied and hated
her as a rival, by whom the was eclipsed. In
judging of the condua of Princes, we are apt
to ascribe too much to political motives, and too
little to the pafiions which they feel in common
with the reft of mankind. In order to account
for Elizabeth's present, as well as her subsequent
conduct towards Mary, we must not always con-.
fider her as a Queen, we must sometimes regard
her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no itranger to Mary's dif-

ficulties with respect to the treaty, continued to
urge her, by repeated applications, to ratify it f.
Mary, under various pretences, f6ill contrived to
gain time, and to elude the request. But while
the one Queen solicited with persevering impor-
tunity, and the other evaded with artful delay,
they both ifudied an extreme politeness of beha-
viour, and loaded each other with profeflions of
fifferly love, with reciprocal declarations of un-
changeable esteem and amity.

IT was not long before IMiary was convinced, Elizabeth

refures Mary

that, among Princes, these expressions of friend- a fae.con.
(hip are commonly far difiant from the heart. In dua.
failing from France to Scotland, the course lies
along the English <oaft. In order to be safe from

r (5elvil, 98t h

Keith, 57. 60, &c.

S 3 the

B o o K the insults of the English fleet, or, in cafe of tem-

III. pefluous weather, to secure a retreat in the har-

·'' bours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel

i96 . to demand of Elizabeth a fafe-condua during

her voyage. This request, which decency alone
obliged one Prince to grant to another, Elizabeth
rejeaed, in such a manner, as gave rife to no flight
suspicion of a design, either to obftrua the pas-
sage, or to intercept the person of the Scottifli
Qu!een *

Mary be- THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled
gins her
voyage. Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de-

parture from France. She was accompanied to
Calais, the place where (he embarked, in a man-
ner suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two
powerful kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her
uncles, with many of the most eminent among
the French nobles, were in her retinue. Cathe-
rine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure,
graced it with every circumItance of magnificence
and refpeC. After bidding adieu to her mourn-
ing attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed
in tears, Mary left that kingdom, the short but
only scene of her life in which fortune smiled
upon her. While the French coast continued in
fight, she intently gazed upon it, and musing, in
a thoughtful posture, on that height of fortune
whence (he had fallen, and presaging, perhaps,
the disasters and calamities which embittered the
remainder of her days, (he sighed often, and cried
out, " Farewel France! Farewel beloved coun-
"C try, which I mhall never more behold !" Even

*Keifh, i7i. Camden. See Appendix, No. VI.

when

when the darkness of the night had hid the land B o o K
from her view, ihe would neither retire to the ca- 111.
bin, nor taste food, but commanding a couch to
be placed on the deck, she there waited the return
of day, with the utmost impatience. Fortune
soothed her on this occasion; the galley made
little way during the night. In the morning, the
coast of France was still within fight, and ihe
continued to feed her melancholy with the pro-
fpe5I; and as long as her eyes could distinguish
it, to utter the fame tender expreflions of regret *,
At last a brisk gale arose, by the favour of which
for some days, and afterwards under the covert
of a thick fog, Mary escaped the English fleet,
which lay in wait to intercept her t; and on the
i9th of August, after an absence of near thirteen Arrives in
years, landed safely at Leith in her native king- scot1hd.
dom.

MARY was received by her fubjeas with shouts

and acclamations of joy, and with every dcmon=
firation of welcome and regard. But as her ar-
rival was unexpeaed, and no suitable preparation
had been made for it, they could not, with all
their efforts, hide from her the poverty of the
country, and were obliged to condua her to the
palace of H-lolyrood-houfe with little pomp. The
Queen, accustomed from her infancy to fplen-
dour and magnificence, and fond of them, as was
natural at her age, could not help observing the
change in her situation, and fcemed to be deeply
affeaed with it 4.

* Brantome, 423. He himfelfwas in the fame galley wi:h the

Queen. f Goodal, vol. i. 75. Calcn. 45. I Brant. 84.

S 4 NEVER

B O O K NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a

III. junaure which called for more wisdom in council,
i56i. or more courage and fleadinefs in aaion. The
State of the rage of religious controversy was still unabated.
kigd, "a The memory of past oppression exasperated the

Proteflants; the smart of recent injuries rendered
the Papifts desperate; both were zealous, fierce,
and irreconcilable. The absence of their Sove-
reign had accustomed the nobles to independ-
ence; and during the late commotions, they had
acquired such an increase of wealth, as threw
great weight into the scale of the aristocracy,
which flood not in need of any accefion of power.
The kingdom had long been under the govern-
ment of Regents, who exercised a delegated
jurifdiation, attended with little authority, and
vrhich inspired no reverence. A slate of pure
anarchy had prevailed for the two last years,
without a Regent, without a supreme council,
without the power, or even the form of a regular
government ". A licentious spirit, unacquainted
with fiubordination, and disdaining the reitraints
of law and juflice, had spread among all ranks
of men. The influence of France, the ancient
ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn or despised.
The English, of enemies become confederates,
had grown into confidence with the nation, and
had gained an ascendant over all its councils.
The Scottish Monarchs did not derive more fplen-
dour or power from the friendihip of the former,
than they had reason to dread injury and diminu-

* Jeith, Appendix 9Z.

tion from the interposition of the latter. Every B o o K
consideration, whether of interefc, or of self- III.
preservation, obliged Elizabeth to depress the '3
royal authority in Scotland, and to create the
Prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the
spirit of diffatisfaaion among the people.

IN this poffure were the affairs of Scotland, when

the administration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a
sTranger to her fubjeas, without experience, with-
put allies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find

some circumstances, which, though they did not
balance these disadvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them; and, with fiilful management,
might have produced great effeas. Her fubjeas,
unaccustomed so long to the residence of their
Prince, were not only dazzled by the novelty and
splendour of the royal presence, but inspired with
awe and reverence. Besides the places of power
and profit bellowed by the favour of a Prince,
his proteaion, his familiarity, and even his smiles,
confer honour and win the hearts of men. From
all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded
to teffify their duty and affection to their fove-
reign, and ifudied, by every art, to wipe out the
memory of palt mifcondu&L, and to lay in a stock
of future merit. The amusements and gaiety of
her court, which was filled with the most accom-
plifhed of the French nobility, who had attended
her, began to soften and to polish the rude man-
pers of the nation. Mary herself poffeffed many

of

B o o K of these qualifications, which raise aff'ecion, and

111. procure eileem. The beauty and gracefulness of

her person drew universal admiration, the ele-

I46I. gance and politeness of her manners commanded

general refpea. To all the charms of her own
lex, ihe added many of the accomplishments of
the other. The progress Ihe had made in all the
Arts and Sciences, which were then esteemed
necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is
commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour-
teous affability, which, without lessening the dig-
nity of a Prince, ifeals on the hearts of fubjeas
with a bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumitances, notwithficanding the

threatening afpe~t of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithifanding the clouds which ga-
thered on every hand, a political observer would
have predialed a very different ifrue of her reign;
and whatever sudden gusts of faaiion he might
have expeded, he would never have dreaded the
deftruaive violence of that florm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who mhould

discover the most dutiful attachment to the Queen,
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable inflance. On the Sunday
after her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to
be celebrated in the chapel of her palace. The
first rumour of this occasioned a secret murmur-
ing among the Protestants who attended the
court; complaints and threatenings soon fol-
lowed; the servants belonging to the chapel were
insulted and abused; and, if the Prior of St. An-

drew's

drew's had not seasonably interposed, the rioters B o o K
might have proceeded to the utmost excesses *. III.

IT is impossible, at this difFance of time, and 2562.

under circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal againit Popery, which
then poffeffed the nation. Every inifance of con-
descension to the Papilts was esteemed an a6t of
apoitacy, and the toleration of a single mass pro-
nounced to be more formidable to the nation than
the invasion of ten thousand armed men t. Un-
ler the influence of there opinions, many Pro-
teftants would have ventured to go dangerous
lengths; and, without attempting to convince
their Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her
by indulgence, would have abruptly denied her
the liberty of worthipping God in that manner,
which alone she thought acceptable to him. But
the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of
the party, not only reifrained this impetuous fpi-
rit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained
for the Queen and her domeftics the undisturbed
exercise of the Catholic religion. Near an hun-
dred years after this period, when the violence of
religious animofities had begun to subside, when
time and the progress of learning had enlarged
the views of the human mind, an Englilh House
of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their
Sovereign in the private use of the mass. The
Protefitant leaders deserve, on this occasion, the
praise both of wisdom and of moderation for con-

SKnox, 284. -f Ibidi. 287.

dua

B o o K duCt so different. But, at the fame time, who.

III. ever refleats upon the encroaching and sanguinary
' -spirit of Popery, will be far from treating the

fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers
as altogether imaginary and destitute of any real
foundation.

THE Protefitants, however, by this compliance

with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Re-
formed doctrine, though eflablifhed all over the
kingdom, had never received the countenance or

.Aug. 25. fantion of royal authority. On this occasion, the

Queen declared any attempt towards an alteration
or fubverflon of it, to be a capital caime *.

she em- THE Qleen, conformable to the plan which had
ploys only
Protenants been concerted in France, committed the admini-
minaf"d ftration of affairs entirely to Protestants. Her
tion. council was filled with the most eminent persons

of that party; not a single Papist was admitted
into any degree of confidence t. The Prior of
St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lethington feermed
to hold the firit place in the Queen's affeAion,
and poffeffed all the power and reputation of fa-
vourite Ministers. Her choice could not have
fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people;
and, by their prudent advice, Mary conduAed
herself with so much moderation, and deference
to the sentiments of the nation, as could not fail
of gaining the affeAion of her fubjeats 5, the firm-
eft foundation of a Prince's power, and the only
genuine source of his happiness and glory.

* Keithe 504. t -Knox, zS9. : Lefly, 235.

. A CORa

A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was B o O K
another objea of great importance to Mary; and III.
though she seems to have had it much at heart, in
the beginning of her adminiffration, to accompliih Att,,mr to
fitch a desirable conjunaion, yet many events oc- sf.4E -
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach. your.
The formal offces of friendship, however, are fel-
dom negle&ed among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obitrul the Queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratulate
her safe return. Mary, that me might be on equal
terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court,
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for
Elizabeth *. Both the Ambassadors were received
with the utmost civility; and, on each fide, the
profeffions of kindness, as they were made with
little sincerity, were listened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intruffed, however, with something
more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with fresh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amule Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
condua of his Mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival
in Scotland, the importance of the question in
dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
whom the was obliged in decency to consult, were
the pretences offered in excuse for her condua;
the real causes of it were those, which have al-

* Keith, ISI, &c.

ready

B o 0 K ready been mentioned. But, in ordet to extricate

III. herself out of there difficulties, into which the

treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary was

156?. brought to yield a point, which formerly Ihe

seemed determined never to give up. She in-
ftruc6ed Maitland to signify her willingness to dif-
claim any right to the crown of England, during
the life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her pofte-
rity; if, in failure of these, she were declared
next heir by a&t of Parliament *

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from dfcurb-
ing Elizabeth's poffeffion of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's inte-
reft, or more contradiaory to a paflion, which
predominated in the chara~er of that Princess.
Notwithstanding all the great qualities which
threw such lustre on her reign, we may observe,
that ihe was tinaured with a jealousy of her right
to the Crown, which often betrayed her into mean
and ungenerous adions. The peculiarity of her
situation heightened, no doubt, and increased,
but did not infuse this pafion. It descended to
her from Henry VII. her grandfather, whom, in
several features of his charader, lhe nearly re-
fembled. Like him, she fuffered the title by
which ihe held the Crown to remain ambiguous
and controverted, rather than submit it to parlia-
mentary difcuflion, or derive any addition to her
right, from such authority. Like him, she ob-
served every pretender to the f'uccemion, not only

C Camden, 387. Buch. 3Z9. i

with

with that attention, which prudence prescribes; B oo K
but with that aversion, which suspicion inspires. III.
The present uncertainty with regard to the right 15[
of succession, operated for Elizabeth's advantage,
both on her fubjeats, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded
her life as the great security of the national tran-
quillity j and chose rather to acknowledge a title
which was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was
decided, were held in dependence, and obliged
to court her. The manner in which she received
this ill-timed proposal of the Scottilh Queen, was
no other than might have been expeled. She
rejeaed it in a peremptory tone, with many ex-
preflions of a resolution never to permit a point of
so much delicacy to be touched.

AnouT this time, the Queen made her public sept. x.

entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was negleaed, which could express the duty and
affecion of the citizens towards their Sovereign.
But am idft these demon irations of regard, the
genius and sentiments of the nation discovered
themselves, in a circumitance, which, though
inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As
it was the mode of the times to exhibit many pa-
geants at every public solemnity; most of these,
on this occasion, were contrived to be represent-
ations of the vengeance which the Almighty had
infli6aed upon idolaters*. Even while they tiudied
to amuse and to flatter the Queen, her subjects

' Keith, 189,

could

B o O K could not refrain from teffifying their abhorrenice

III. of that religion which the profeffed.

- To restore the regular adminiflration of juffices

nexai and to reform the interrial policy of the country,
theblichnce became the next obje& of the Queen's care. The
derers. laws enated for preservation of public order, and

the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized
country. But the nature of the Scottilh confti-
tution, the impotence of regal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of
faAion, and the fierce manners of the people, ren-
dered the execution of there laws feeble, irregular,
and partial. In the counties which border on
England, this defeat was most apparent; and the
consequences of it most sensibly felt. The inha-
bitants, firangers to indufiry, averse from labour,
and unacquainted with the arts of peace, sub-
sifted entirely by spoil and pillage, and, being
confederated in fepts or clans, committed these
excesses not only with impunity, but even with
honour. During the unsettled slate of the king-
dom from the death of James V. this dangerous
licence had grown to an unusual height; and the
inroads and rapine of those freebooters were be-
come no less intolerable to their own countrymen,
than to the Englifhi. To refirain and punish these
outrages, was an a~tion equally popular in both
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was the
person chosen for this important service, and ex-
traordinary powers, together with the title of the
Queen's lieutenant, were veited in him for this
pu rpofe.

NOT HINO

NoTrmIN can be more surprising to men ac- B o o It

cuffto nd 'o regular gcov rnment, than the pre- III.
parations made on this occasion. They were such 56 x.
as might be cxpeaed in the rudest and mo im-
perfeft fate of society. Ths frecholders of eleven
several counties, with all their followers com-
pletely armed, were summoned to aflift the Lieu-
tenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
refeltmbled a military expedition, rather than the
progress of a court of justice '. The Prior ex-
ecuted his commifiron with such vigour and pru-
dence, as acquired him a great increase of re-
putation and popularity among his countrymen.
Numbers of the banditti iuffered the puniflhment
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and
rigorous adminiffration of justice, order and tran-
quillity were reffored to that part of the kingdoms

DURING the absence of the Prior of St. An- The Papis

attempt, in

drew's, the leaders of the Popish facaion seem to vain, to ept

. into favour

have taken fomne freps towards insinuating them- with her.
selves into the Queen's favour and confidence t.
But the Archbiihop of St. Andrew's, the most
remarkable person in the party for abilities and
political address, was received with little favour
at court; and whatever secret partiality the Qucen
might have towards those who profeffed the time
Heligion with herself, (he difiovered no iiiclina-
tion, at that time, to take the adminifiration of
affairs out of the hands to w hich (he had alreadv
corn ritted it.

THE cold receotion of the Archbilhop of St.

Andrew's was o' ag to his connexion with the

* Keith, 193. t 1bid. 203.

VOL. I. T house

B o o K house of Hamilton; from which the Queen was

III. much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car-

dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the
Duke of Chatelherault, and his son the Earl of
Arran, had efpoured the cause of the Congrega-
tion. Princes seldom view their successors without
jealousy and distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
perhaps, dreaded the Duke as a rival in power.
All there causes concurred in infusing into the
Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The
Duke indulging his love of retirement, lived at a
distance from court, without taking pains to in-
sinuate himself into favour; and though the Earl
of Arran openly afpircd to marry the Queen, he,
by a most unpardonable a61 of imprudence, was
the only nobleman of diflinetion who opposed
Mary's enjoying the exercise of her religion; and
by rashly entering a public protestation againit it,
entirely forfeited her favour *. At the fame time,
the sordid parsimony of his father obliged him
either to hide himself in fame retirement, or to
appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as
firfi Prince of the blood, or his hiPg' prtenlons
as suitor to the Queen t. His love, indlamed by
difappoiltrent, and his impatience exafpriated
by negleft, preyed gradually on his reason; and,
after maniy extravagancies, broke out ac l1ft in
ungove nable frenzy.

Dec. 20. TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention

of Estates was held, chiefly on account of eccle-
fiafcical affairs. The afli'emb'ly of the church,
which fat at the fame time, presented a petition,

* Keith, l20. zo4. Knox, 236. f Keith, 196.

con-

tontaining many demands with refpecl to the sup- B o o K
pressing of Popery, the encouraging the Protest- III.
ant religion, and the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy *. The last was a matter
of great importance, and the fleps taken towards
it deserve to be traced.

THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers A new re.

was now considerably increased, many more were concerning
flill wanted, in every corner of the kingdom. No tnhsrof the
legal provision having been made for them, they church.
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsist-
ence from the benevolence of their people. To
fuffer the Ministers of an eflablifhed church to con-
tinue in this state of indigence and dependence, was
an indecency equally repugnant to the principles
of religion, and to the maxims of found policy;
and would have justified all the imputations of
avarice, with which the Reformation was then
loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popish
church were the only fund which could be employ-
ed for their relief; but during the three last years,
the slate of these was greatly altered. A great
majority of Abbots, Priors, and other heads of
religious houses, had, either from a sense of duty,
or from views of interest, renounced the errors
of Popery; and notwithitanding this change in
their fcntiments, they retained their ancient re-
venues. Almoa the whole order of Biihops, and
several of the other dignitaries, Plill adhered to the
Romilh superstition: And though debarred from
every spiritual func~ion, continued to enjoy the
temporalities of their benefices. Some laymen,

* Keith, 210.

T z especially

B o o K especially those who had been aaive in promoting

III. the Reformation, had, under various pretences,
''cJ and amidst the licence of civil wars, got into their
I 6x. hands poffeffions which belonged to the church.

And thus, before any part of the ancient eccle-
fiaftical revenues could be applied towards the
maintenance of the Protellant miniffers, many
different intereffs were to be adjufled; many
claims to be examined; and the prejudices and
pafimons of the two contending parties required the
application of a delicate hand. After much con-
tention, the following plan was approved by a
majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by the
Popish clergy themselves. An exaa account of
the value of ecclesiastical benefices throughout the
kingdom was appointed to be taken. The 'refent
incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, were
allowed to keep poffefion: Two-thirds of their
whole revenue were reierved for their own use, the
remainder was annexed to the Crown; and out of
that, the Queen undertook to assign a fuficient
maintenance for the Protelfant clergy *.

As most of the Bifiops and several of the other

dignitaries were frill firmly attached to the Popish
religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an at of such extraordinary indulgence,
might have been expeaed from the zeal of the
preachers, and from the spirit which had hitherto
animated the nation. But, on this occasion, other
principles obftruaed the operations of such as
were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the
love of wealth, two passions extremely opposite,

* Keith, Append. 175. Knox, 919.

concurred

concurred in determining the Protestant leaders to B o O K
fall in with this plan, which deviated so manifestly III.
from the maxims by which they had hithcrto re-
gulated their condu&.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to aA with-

out controul, and to level all diltinajons in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclefi-
aitical dignities could not, with any colour of
justice, have been retained by those in whose hands
they now were; but must either have been dif-
tributed amongit the Proteffant clergy, who per-
formed all religious offices, or must have fallen to
the Queen, from the bounty of xvhofe ancestors,
the greater part of them was originally derived.
The former scheme, however suitable to the reli-
gious spirit of many among the people, was at-
tended with manifold danger. The Popish eccle-
fiaftics had acquired a ihare in the national pro-
perty, which far exceeded the proportion that was
consistent with the happiness of the kingdom;
and the nobles were determined to guard againftc
this evil, by preventing the return of those vast
poffefifons into the hands of the church. Nor was
the latter, which exposed the conltitution to more
imminent hazard, to be avoided with less care.
Evin that circumscribed prerogative, which the
Scottifhi Kings poffefiTd, was the objea of jealousy
to the nobles. IF they hid allowed the Crown to
seize the spoils of the church, such an increase of
power must have followed that acceflion of rao-
perty, as would have raised the royal authority
above con:roul, and have rendered Lhe moit li-
mited Prince in Europe the most absolute dud in-

T 3 dependent.

B o o K dependent. The reign of Henry VIII. presented

III. a recent and alarming example of this nature.
'6T The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince,

from the fiupprefilon of the monasteries, not only
chang5d the maxims of his government, but the
temper of his mind; and he who had formerly
submitted to his Parliaments, and courted his peo-
ple, diAated, from that time, to the former with
intolerable insolence, and ryrannized over the
latter with unprecedented icverity: .And if his
policy had not been extremely ihort-fighted, if he
hAd not squandered what he acquired, with a pro-
fulon equal to his rapaciousness, and which de-
feaced his ambition, he might have established
defpotifin in England, on a basis so broad and
frr'ng, as all the efforts of the fubje(as would ne-
ver have been able to fhake.' In Scotland, where
the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion
to tile wealth of the kingdom, the acquisition of
church-lands would have been of no less im-
portance to the Crown, and no less fatal to the
ari-ocracv. The nobles, for this reason, guarded
agai;n:i such an increase of the royal power, and
thereby secured their own independence.

AvAnIce mingled itself with their concern for

the interest of t!le:r order. The re-uniting the
poifHions of the cihurch to the Crown, or the
bellowing them on the Proteflant clergy, would
lave been a fatal blow, both to those nobles, who
hal, by fraud or violence, seized part of these re-
vernies, a:nd to those Abbots and Priors who had
totaly rerounced their ecclefiaflical charadier.
But as the plan, which was proposed, gave some

fan ion

fanalon to their ufurpations, they promoted it B o o K
with their utmott influence. The Popih eccle- 1U1-
fialics, though the lopping ofi- a third of their re- r6i
venues was by no means agreeable to them, con-
fented, under their present circumstances, to fa-
crifice a part of their pofifetions, in order to pur-
chafe the secure enjoyment of the remainder; and
after deeming the whole irrecoverably loft, they
considered whatever they could retrieve as so much
gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were men
of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained
hopes of restoring the Popish religion, they wished
their own relations, rather than the Crown, or the
Protefant clergy, to be enriched with the spoils
of the church. They connived, for this reason,
at the encroachments of the nobles; they even
aided their avarice and violence; they dealt out
the patrimony of the church among their own re-
lations, anJ by granting/feus and perpetual leases
of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmoR. of their
power, some colour of legIl poffcflon, to what
w&as formerly mere ufulrpat on. Many vefliges of
foch alienatr.ns frill remain *. The nobles, with
the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended
their enci oachments, and gradually ifripped :lie
ecclefiaftics of their richest and most valuable pof-
feflions. Even that third part, which was given up
in order to fience the clamours of the Prortetant
clcrgy, and to be some equivalent to the Crown
for its claims, amounted to no conGderabie fum.
The thirds due by the more powerful nobles, es-
pecially by such as had embraced the Reformation,

* Keith, 507. Spotfiv. 175.

T 4 wvere

B O 0 K were almost tiniverfally remitted. Others, by

III. producing fraudulent rentals by eltimating the
1561. corn, and other payments in kind, at an under-

value; and by the connivance of colle~tors, great-
ly diminithed the charge againt tchemfelves*:
And the nobles had much rcafon to be satisfied
with a device which, at so fmnall expence, secured
to them fiuch vast poffeffions.

TheProreft- NoR were the Protefitant clergy considerable
sat c.Irgy.

gn gu. gainers by this new regulation ; thty found it to

by t. be a more efy matter to kindle zeal, than to ex-

tinguifh avarice. Those very men, whom former-
ly they had fivayed with abiolute authority, were
now deaf to all their remonifrances. The Prior
of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, the Earl of
Morton, and Maitland, all the most zealous lead-
ers of the Congregation, were appointed to afign,
or, as it was called, to mncdify their ifipends. An
hundred merks Scottish wxas the allowance which
their liberality aifirded to the yenerality of Mi-
niters. To a few three huvmicd merks were
granted J. About twer.y -four thousand pounds
Scottish appears to haje bKen the whole fum al-
lotted for the malbnenaance of a national church
efablifhed by law, and efleemed, throughout the
kingdom, the true church of GoA 2. Even this
hilm was paid with little exaLners, and the Mi-
nklers wtre kept in the faime poverty and depend-
ance as formerly.

i 6:. THE gentlencfs of the CQ0en's adininifIration,

n n''! anc!ad the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in

Keith, Append. ISR. Spotri. i53. ( Knox, 301.

.( Keith, Append. 188.

some

forme degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac- B o o K
cuftomed them to greater mildness and humanity; III.
while, at the fame time, her presence and autho- ' '
rity were a check to their fa~tious and tumultuary
spirit. But, as a itate of order and tranquillity
was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became
remarkable for the most violent eruptions of in-
teftine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could poffers little autho-
rity, and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurif-
dition. The interfering of interest, the unsettled
fiate of property, the frequency of public com-
motions, and the fierceness of their own manners,
fowed, among the great families, the feeds of
many quarrels and contentions. These, as we
have already observed, were decided not by law,
but by violence. The offended Baron, without
having recourse to the Monarch, or acknowledging
his superior authority, assembled his own follow-
ers, and invaded the lands of his rival in an hostile
manner. Together with his estate and honours,
every nobleman tranfinitted some hereditary feud
to his poflerity, who were bound in honour to
adopt and to prosecute it with the fame inveterate

rancour.

Sucri a dissension had fublifled between the

house of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and
was hcigh1ened by mutual injuries during the late
commotions ". Both the Earl of Arran and Both-
weil happnicng to be in waiting at the fame time,

SKeith, 215. their

B o o K their followers quarrelled frequently in the Pcreets

* of Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in

Sthat city. At lass, the mediation of their friends,

156 t.

Februa y. particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcile-

ment, but an unfortunate one to both these no-
blemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and,

with the utmost terror and confusion, confeffed
first to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's,
that, in order to obotain the (ole diretion of siRairs,
Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had
conarired to murder the Prior, MAlhilkan'd, and clie
other favourites of the Queen. The Duke of
Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who
had supplanted him in the QOeen's favour, and
who filled that place at the helm, which he ima-
gined to be due to himfclf, as first Prince of the
blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal in-
juries which he had received from the Prior during
the late commotions, was no less exasperated
against him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance with the
blood of their common enemy, or whether the
conspiracy existed only in the frantic and disorder-
ed imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impof-
fible, amidst the contradition of historians and
the defeaivenefs of records, positively to deter-
mine. Among men inflamed with refcntment,
and impatient for revenge, rash expressions might
be uttered, and violent and criminal expedients
proposed; and on that foundation, Arran's dif-
tempered fancy might rear the whole fuperftruc-

* Knox, 305.

ture

ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, B o 0 K
denied their guilt with the utmofi confidence. ILL,
But the known chara&ers of the men, and the I562.
violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the pro-
bability of the accusation, and abundantly jus-
tify the condua of the Queen's ministers, who
confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the Itrong castle of Dumbarton, which
he had held ever fnce the time of his resigning
the office of Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly againif the The aiof

3 Huntly's

Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro- enmily to

the· (-en's

duced more memorable and more tragical events. Miwiters.
George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one
of the nobles who conspired againit James III.
and who raised his son James IV. to the throne,
enjoyed a great share in the confidence of that ge-
nerous Prince t. By his bounty, great accessions
of wealth and power were added to a family al-
ready opulent and powerful. On the death of that
Monarch, Alexander the next Earl, being ap-
pointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties be-
yond Forth, left tre other nobles to contend for
offces at court; and retiring to the north, where
his estate and influence lay, resided there in a kind
of princely independence. The Chieftains in that
part of the kingLdom dreaded the growing domi-
nion of fiuch a dangerous neighbour, but werc un-
able to prevent his encroachments. Some of his
rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued

#knox, 307, 308. Keith, zoz. t Crawf. Oficers

pl Sta:te, j6.

$ o o K by open force. His effate far exceeded that of

III. any other fubje&, and his fuperiorilies and jurif-

'"~J ditions extended over many of the northern

562. counties. With power and poffeffions so immense,

under two long and feeble minorities, and amidat
the (hock of civil commotions, the Earls of
Hluntly might have indulged the most elevated
hopes. But happily for the Crown, an aaive and
enterpriling spirit was not the charaEteriftic of that
family, and whatever objea their ambition might
have in view, they chose rather to acquire it by
political address, than to seize it openly, and by
force of arms.

THE condua of George the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfealy suitable
to the chara&er of the family, in that age, du-
bious, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
assisted the Queen Regent in her attempts to crush
them. When their affairs put on a better afpe&,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared
by each of the contending parties; both connived
at his encroachments in the north; and, by at-
tifice and force, which he well knew how to em-
ploy alternately, and in their proper places, he
added every day to the exorbitant power and
wealth which he poffeffed.

HE observed the growing reputation and autho-

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the greateRt
jealousy and concern, and considered him as a ri-
val who had engrossed that (hare in the QOeen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popilh

religion

religion seemed to give him a preferable title. B O O K
Personal injuries soon increased the mifunder- III.
standing occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The L
Qtueen having determined to reward the services
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an
Earl, the made choice of Mar, as the place whence
he (hould take his title; and, that he might be
better able to support his new honour, beflowed
upon him, at the fame time, the lands of that Feb. ,o.
name. These were part of the royal demefnes *,
but the Earls of IHuntly had been permitted, for
several years, to keep poffeflion of them t. On
this occasion, the Earl not only complained, with
some reason, of the loss which he lutfained, but
had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of
a formidable neighbour into the heart of his
territories, who might be able to rival his power,
and excite his oppressed vassals to (hake off his
yoke.

AN incident, which happened soon after, in- June 7.

creased and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie
had a dispute about the property of an estate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened, unfortunately, to meet in the ifreets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a fcuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie
was dangerously wounded by Sir John. The Ma-
giftrates seized both the offenders, and the Queen
commanded them to be fitric'ly confined. Under
any regular government, such a breach of public

* Crawf. Peer. 297. j Euch. 334.

peace

B o o K peace and order would expose the person offend4

III. ing to certain punishment. At this time, some

' ifeverity was necessary, in order to vindicate the

rS62. Queen's authority from an insult, the most heinous

which had been offered to it since her return into
Scotland. But, in an age accustomed to licence
and anarchy, even this moderate exercise of her
power, in ordering them to be kept in custody,
was deemed an a& of intolerable rigour; and the
friends of each party began to convene the&t v&s-
fals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to
fruifrate the decisions ofjuftice *. Mean while,
Gordon made his escape out of prison, and flying
into Aberdeenfhire, complained loudly of the in-
dignity with which he had been treated; and as
all the Queen's aaions were, at this junaure,
imputed to the Earl of Mar, this added not a
little to the resentment which Hluntly had con-
ceived against that nobleman.

August. AT the very time when these paflions ferment-

ed, with the utmofit violence, in the minds of the
Earl of Huntly and his family, the Queen hap-
pened to set out on a progress into the northern
parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the
Earls of Mar and Morton, Mairland, and other
leaders of that party. The presence of the Queen,
in a country where no name greater than the Earl
of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power
superior to his had been exercised, for many
years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while
the Queen was entirely unier the direfion of

* Keith, zz2.

Mar,

Mar, all her ac~ions were more apt to be mif- B o a R
represented, and conilrued into injuries; and a ILI.
thoufind circumstan~ces could not but occur to I562.
awaken Huntiy's jealousy, to offend his pride, and
to inflame his resentment. Amidat the agitations
of so many violunt paffons, some eruption was
unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the North, Huntly em-

ployed his wife, a woman capable of executing
the commiffaon with abundance of dexterity, to
sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to
their son. But the Q(ueen peremptorily required
that he (hould again deliver himfeilf into the
hands of juffice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined
by the Qjeen to enter himself prisoner in the
cafie of Stirling, he promised likewise to obey
that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle,
was, at that time, Governor of this fort. The
QOeen's severity, and the place in which she ap-
pointed Gordon vo be con'aned, were interpreted
to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and aug-
rrented the hatred of the Gordons against him.

MEAN time, SCr John Gordon set out towards sept. I.

Stirling; but infeead of performing his promise
to the Queen, mIade his cicape from his guards,
and returned to take the command of his follow-
ers, who were rising in arr's all over the north.
These were deftiiied to second and improve the
blow, by which his father propofecd, secretly, and
at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland,
his principal adverfarics. The time and place

r for

2. fully prevented, by fame of those unforeseen ac-

cidents, which so often occur to disconcert the
schemes, and to intimidate the hearts of affaflins ".
His own house at Strathbogie was the last and
most convenient scene appointed for committing
the intended violence. But, oh her journey thi-
ther, the Qgeen heard of young Gordon's flight
and rebellion, and refusing, in the first transports
of her indignations to enter under the father's roof,
by that fortunate expression of her resentment, sav-
ed her Ministers from unavoidable deftru6Lion t.

Take arms THE ill suCcesS Of these efforts of private re-
aga& the venge precipitated Huntly into open rebellion.

As the Qieen was entirely under the dire~tion
of his rivals, it was impossible to work their
ruin, without violating the allegiance which he
owed his Sovereign. On her arrival at Inver-
ness, the commanding officer in the caffle, by
Huntly's orders, ihut the gates against her. Mary
was obliged to lodge in the town, which was open
and defenceless; but this too was quickly fur-
rounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers ).
The utmost consternation seized the Queen, who
was attended by a very slender train. She every
moment expeaed the approach of the rebels, and
fame ships were already ordered into the river to
secure her escape. The loyalty of the Monroes,
Frazers, Mackintofhes, and some neighbour-

* Keith, 230. 1- Knox, 3s8· t Crawf. Officers

of State, 87, 88.

ag clans, who took arms in her defence, saved B o o K
her from this danger. By their aflfirance, she III.
even forced the caffle to surrender, and inflited - 1562*
on the Governor the punishment which his info-
lence deserved.

THIs open aa of disobedience was the occasion
of a mealiure more galling to Huntly than any the
Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erfikine, having
pretended a right to the Earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time
Mary conferred upon him the title of Earl of
Murray, with the estate annexed to that dignity,
which had been in the poffeflion of the Earl of
Huntly since the year 1548 *. From this he
concluded that his family was devoted to deftruc-
tion; and dreading to be stripped, gradually, of
those pofiEffions, which, in reward of their ser-
vices, the gratitude of the Crown had bellowed
on'himfelf, or his anceflors, he no longer disguised
his intentions, but, in defiance of the Queen's
proclamation, openly took arms. Initead of yield-
ing those places of strength, which Mary required
him to surrender, his followers dispersed or, cut
in pieces the parties which ihe dispatched to take
poffellion of them t; and he himself advancing
wich a considerable body of meo towards Aber-
deen, to which place the Queen was now return-
ed, filled her small court with consternation.
Murray had only a handful of men in whom he
could confide j. In order to form the appearance
of an army, he was obliged to call in the assistance
of the neighbouring barons; but as molt of thlee

* Crawf. Peer. 359. t Knox, 319. f Keith, 230.
VoL. I. U either

B O O K either favoured Iluntly's designs, or flood in awe

III. of his power, from them no cordial or effeatual

- service could be expeaed.
1562.
Odob.zS. \Vi'rmi these troops, however, Murray, who

could gain nothing by delay, marched brifikly to-
wards the enemy. He found them at Corrichie,
pofred to great advantage he commanded his
northern associates inflantly to begin the attack;
but on the sirs: motion of the enemy, they treache-
roufly turned their backs; and H-luntly's followers,
throwing aside their spears, and breaking their
ranks, urew their swords, and rushed forward to

tt s de- the pursuit. It was then, that MIurray gave proof
: Lfor both of flcady courage, and of prudent conduA.

""' He flood immovable on a rising ground, with the

small but trusty body of his adherents, who pre-
fenting their spears to the enemy, received them
with a determined resolution, which they little
expeEcd. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon hir to encounter the Scortz3i spear. In
every civil commotion, the fluperiority of the lat-
ter has been evident, and has always decided the
contest. On this occasion the irregular attack of
Iluntly's troops was cafily repulsed by Murray's
firm battalion. Ecfore they recovered from the
confusion cecafioned by this unforeseen resistance,
those who had begun the flight, willin- to regain
their credit with the victorious party, fell upon
them, and completed the rout. IHuntly himrfelf,
who was extremely corpu!ent, vwas trodden to
death in the puriuit. H-fis sons, Sir John and
Adam, were taken, and Murray returned in tri-
umph to Aberdeen ith his prisoners.

I Tax

THE trial of men taken in aatual rebellion B oo 0K

againit theirSovereign was extremely short. Three III.
days after the battle, Sir John Gordon was be- ~'T '

1562.

headed at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was
pardoned on account of his youth. Lord Gor-
don, who had been privy to his father's designs,
was seized in the south, and upon trial found
guilty of treason; but, through the Queen's cle-
mency, the punifhtment was remitted. The firit
Parliament proceeded againit this great family,
with the utmost rigour of law, and reduced their
power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

As

+ This conspiracy of the Earl of' Huntly is one of the most

intricate and myflerious passages in the Scottish hiflory. As it
was a tranfadion purely domeflic, and in whsich the English
were little interefled, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Colledion, the great florehoue of evi-
dence and information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about
this time of defrroying Murray, and of employing the power
of the Earl of Huntly for this purpore. But his eccount of
this whole tranfadion appears to be so xoid of truth, and even
ofprobability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that
time, Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no incli-
nation to commit any ad of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypothefcs have been advanced, in order to ex-

plain this matter; but they appear to be equally removecd f;ro
truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journc) to
the north was a scheme concerted hy Murray, in or Ier to rein
the Earl of Iluntly. x. Iluntly ha.td Seisdcd at court almoit
ever since the Qoeer's return. Keith, 198. Apperd. s75
&c. This was the proper place in xvhith to hsve seized him.
To attack him in Ab-rdeenn:ire, the feat of his pnsxer, and
in the midst of uis vaidhl , vas a pr j J ecquallv ahfurd and
hazardous. a. The Queen was not :.

acc p-niWd witha body

of troops, czFab!e of attemptirg .jy tkl.g egainlt Hluntly by

Ut violence;

B o a K As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the mofh

III. important event of this year, it would have been
3562. improper to interrupt the narrative by taking no-

tice of lesser transactions, which may now be re-
lated with equal propriety.

violence; her train was not more numerous, than was usual
in times of greatest trtnqiuillity, Keith, 230. 3. There remain
two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one.from
Randolph the English Resident, and another from Maitland,
both direaed to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as
notoriously treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated
attempts to affaslinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any
previous resolution, formed by Mary's Miniffers, to ruin
H-luntly and his family. Had any such design ever exifled, it
was Randolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would Mait-
land have laboured to conceal it from the English recretary.
Keith, 229. 232.

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan

for seizing the Queen, and her Ministers, seems to be no less
improbable. I. On the Queen's arrival in the horth, he ia-
boured, in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a
pardon for his son. Knox, 318. ·2. He met the Queen, first
at Aber-dcen, and then at Rothemay, whither he would not
have ventured to come, had he harboured any such treason-
able resolution. Knox, 358. 3. His condua was irresolute
and wavering, like that of a man disconcerted by an unfore-
seen danger, not like one executing a concerted plan. 4. The
most considerable persons of his clan submitted to the Queen,
and found surety to obey her commands. keith, 226. Had
the Earl been previously determined to rife in aims against the
Queen, or to seize her Minifers, it is probable he would have
imparted it to his principal followers, nor would they have
deserted him in this manner.

For there reasons, we have, on the one hand, vindicated

the Earl of Murray from any deliberate intention of ruining
the family of Gordon; and on the other hand, we have im-
puted the violent condua of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden
f1art of rcfcntmernt, without charging him with any preme-
ditated purpose of rebellion.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was B o o K

desirous of entering into a more intimate corre- III.
~iondence and familiarity with Elizabeth, em- 156Q
ployed Maitland to desire a personal interview with An inte-
her, somewhere in the north of England. As tweenbe-
this proposal could not be rejeCted with decency, May pisn.
the time, the place, and the circumstances of.the puiea.
meeting were inflantly agreed upon. But Eliza-
beth was prudent enough not to admit into her
kingdom, a rival, who outshone herself, so far,
in beauty, and gracefulness of person; and who
excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of infinu-
ation and address. Under pretence of being
confined to London, by the attention which she
was obliged to give to the civil wars in France,
Ihe put off the interview for that season *, and
prevented her fubjeas from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whose appearance and be-
haviour ihe envied, and had some reason to dread.

DURING this year, the Affemblv of the church June i.

.Decem. 25.

met twice. In both these meetings, were exhi-
bited many complaints of the poverty and de-
pendence of the church; and many murmurs
against the negligence or avarice of those, who
had been appointed to colle&, and to distribute
the finall fund, appropriated for the maintenanze
ofpreachers t. A petition, craving redress of their
grievances, was presented to the Queen ; but
without any efe§a. There was no reason to ex-
pest that Mary would discover any forwardiiefs
So grant the requrcfis of such supplicants. And

t Knox, 3"* 323.

* Kecith, zi6.

B O O K as her Ministers, though all most zealous Protest-

III. ants, were themselves growing rich on the inhe-
'~' ritance of the church, they were equally regardless

of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

1563. MARY had now continued above two years in

a slate of widowhood. Her gentle adminifrration

regard to the had secured the hearts of her fubjeas, who were
Queen's marriage. impatient for her marriage, and wilhed the Crown

to dcfcend in the right line from their ancient
Monarchs. She herself was the most amiable
woman of the age, and the fame of her accom-
plifhments, together with the favourable cir-
cumitance of her having one kingdom already in
her poffefiaon, and the profpet of mounting the
throne of another, prompted many different
Princes to solicit an alliance so illustrious. Scot-
land, by its situation, threw so much weight and
power into whatever scale it fell, that all Europe
waited with solicitude for Mary's determination;
and no event in that age excited fitronger political
fears and jealousies ; none interested more deeply
the passions of several Princes, or gave rife to
more contradiaory intrigues, than the marriage
of the Scottili Queen.

sheuro'i- THE Princes of the House of Austria remem-

c bered what vast proje(as the French had founded

princes. on their former alliance with the Queen of Scots;

and though the unexpeAed death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered there from
taking effecl, yet if Mary should again make
choice of a husband among the French Princes,
the fame dcfigns might be revived and prosecuted
with ber:er success.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered B o o K

into a negotiation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, III.
who had proposed to marry the Scottish Qpeeii to 1563.
the Archduke Charles,` Ferdinand's third son. n,.nr
The matter was communicated to M ury; and gIf1"Jj~
Melvil, who at that time attended the Elecaor
Palatine, was commanded to inquire into the cha-
racter and situation of the Archduke *

PHILIP II. though no less apprthenyive of Ma- Ev CDn"er-

ry's falling once more into the hands of France, CSsofn
envied his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of si
important a prize; and as his own insatiable amii-
bition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he
employed his ambassador at the French court, to
solicit the Princes of Lorrain in behalf of his son
Don Carlos, at that time the heir of all the ex-
tensive dominions which belonged to the Spanifl
monarchy I-.

CATIIERINE Of MNedicis, on the other hand, Bvthefuke

dreaded the marria'e of the Scottih Queen with
any cf the Aufirian PrInces, which would have
addied so much to the power and pretenfons of
that ambitious race. Her jeilonfy of the Princes
of Lorrain rendered her no iefs averse from an
alliance, which, by focuring them the proteifion
of the Emperor or King oi S ain, Would give
new boldness to their enterprifng zpirit, and en-
able them to fit the power of the Crown, which
they already rivalled, at open defknce: And as
fne was afraid that these ipicndid prgpofis of tL.

* Mly. 63. 63. Keith, 239. See Xppend. N3. Yil.
t CI~ein. 46i. Addir. a Labour. 5eL. 503.

U 4 AJfrUcn

B O O K Auffrian family would dazzle the young Queen,

III. she instantly dispatched Caftelnau into Scotland,
563. to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou, the

brother of her former husband, who soon after
mounted the throne of France .

MaerY'sc*- MARY attentively weighed the pretenfxons osso
liberaticns
concermng many rivals. The Archduke had little to recom-

. tend him, but his high birth. The example of
Henry VIII. was a warning a2ainft contraling
a marriage with the brother of her former hus-
band; nor could she bear the thoughts of appear-
ing in France, in a rank inferior to that which
the had formerly held in that kingdom. She
listened, therefore, with partiality, to the Spanish
propositions, and the profpeat of such vast power
and dominions flattered the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princess.

THREE several circumifances, however, con-

curred to divert Mary from any thoughts of a
foreign alliance.

THE firtf of these was the murder of her uncle

the Duke of Guise. The violence and ambition
of that nobleman had involved his country in a
civil war; which was condu~ted with furious ani-
mofity, and various success. At last the Duke
laid siege to Orleans, the bulwark of the Pro-
teftant cause; and he had reduced that city to
the last extremity, wvhen he was affamnated by
the frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved
fatal to the Queen of Scots. The young Duke
was a minor; and the Cardinal of Lorrain, though

* Caftelrau, 461.

Subtle

ftbtle and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and B o o K
enterprising courage, which rendered the ambi- III.
tion of his brother so formidable. Catherine, in-
fRead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering
the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took plea-
sure in mortifying the one, and in disappointing
the other. In this ftuation, and without such a
proteaor, it became necessary for Mary to con,
tra& her views, and to proceed with caution;
and whatever profpeal of advantage might allure
her, she could venture upon no dangerous or
doubtful measure.

THE second circumifance which weighed with Theviews

Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England. beth.
The marriage of the Scottish Oueen interested
Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and (he observed all her deliberations concerning
it with the most anxious attention. She herself
seems early to have formed a resolution of living
unmarried, and (he discovered no frnall inclina-
tion to impose the fame law on the Queen of
Scots. She had already experienced what use
might be made of Mary's power and pretensions,
tvo hvadeher dominions, and to diflurb her pof-
fefmion of the Crown. The death of Francis II.
had happily delivered her from this danger, which
she determined to guard against for the future,
with the utmost care. As the restless ambition
of the Aufrian Princes, the avowed and bigotted
patrons of the Catholic fuperifition, made her, in
a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood,
(he inftruated Randolph to remonfirate, in the
Etrongeft terms, against any alliance with them;

S and

B o o K and to acquaint Mary, that as she herself would

111. confider such a match to be a breach of the per-

~T fonal friendship, in which they were so happily

united; so the English nation would regard it, as
the dissolution of that confederacy which now
fublifted between the two kingdoms: That, in
order to preserve their own religion and liberties,
they would, in all probability, take some itep
prejudicial to her right of succession, which, as
Ihe well knew, they neither wanted power nor
pretences to invalidate and let aside. This threat-
ening was accompanied with a promre, but ex-
pressed in very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's
choice of a husband ihould prove agreeable to the
Englilh nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper
persons to examine her title to the fuccemion, and,
if well founded, command it to be publicly re-
cognised. She observed, hoxrever, a myfteri-
ous silence concerning the person, on whom
the wished the choice of the Scottiih Queen to
fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved
for some future negotiation. Mean white (he
threw out some obscure hints, that a native of
Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be
her fafeft and molt inoffenfive choice *. An ad-
vice offered with such an air of superiority and
command, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the
Scottish Queen. But, under her present circum-
flances, (he was obliged to bear this indignity.
Destitute of all foreign alalftance, and intent upon
the English succession, the great object of her

* Keith, 242. z !.

wishes

wishes and ambition, it became necessary to court Bs o o K
a rival, whom, without manifest imprudence, Ihe III.
could not venture to offend. I563.

THE inclination of her own fubjeEas was ano- The reni-

ther, and not the least considerable circumitance, own'" ber
which called for Mary's attention at this conjunc- jeas.
ture. They had been taught, by the fatal expe-
riment of her former marriage, to dread an union
with any great Prince, whose power might be
employed to oppress their religion and liberties.
They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown mhould be firength-
ened by new dominions or alliances, they forelaw
that the royal prerogative would soon be firetched
beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing
them into the arms of England. Elizabeth would
be ready to afford& them her aid, towards obitru&t-
ing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas
easy for them to seize the person of the Sovereign.
By the affitiance of the English fleet, they could
render it difficult for any foreign Prince to land
in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an in-
considerable party in the kingdom, and dispirited
by the loss of the Earl of Huntly, could give no
obllruEfion to their designs. To what violent
extremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign
yoke might have been carried, is manifelt from
the.tranfaRions, both previous and subsequent to
the prefcnt period.

Foa these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed wil-
ling to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to

remove

B o o K remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet

I II. the fears of her own fubjeats.

THE Parliament met this year, for the first

1563. time since the Queen's return into Scotland.
mihld, Mary's adminif ration had hitherto been extremely

popular. Her Ministers poffeffed the confidence
of the nation; and, by consequence, the proceed-
ings of that assembly were condualed with per-
fe3 unanimity. The grant of the earldom of
Murray to the Prior of Sr. Andrew's was con-
firmed: The Earl of Huntly, and several of his
vassals and dependants, were attainted: The at-
tainder againit Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of
his accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Bea-
toun, was reversed * : The a~t of oblivion, men-
tioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the
royal fanaion. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify that treaty, took care that this
fanAion mhould not be deemed any acknowledg-
ment of its validity; mhe granted her consent
merely in condescension to the Lords in Parlia-
ment, who, on their knees, besought her to allay
the jealousies and apprehensions of her fubjecs,
by such a gracious law t.

Nothpng ee- No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to
termined
with r-gard procure the Q(ueen's assent to the laws establishing

reli''"' the Proteflant religion. Her Ministers, though

zealous Protefiants themselves, were aware that
this could not be urged without manifest danger
and imprudence. She had consented, through
their influence, to tolerate and prote& the re-
formed doarine. They had even prevailed on

*Knox, 330. t Spotfiv. ISS.

her to imprison and prosecute the Archbimop of B o O K
St. Andrew's, and Prior of Whithorn, for cele- III.
brating mass contrary to her proclamation.
Mary, however, was fiill panionately devoted to
the Romish fuperf'ition; and though, from po-
litical motives, she had granted a temporary pro-
te~tion of opinions, which she disapproved, there
were no grounds to hope that she would agree to
eflablilh them for perpetuity. The moderation
of those who profeffed it, was the bell method for
reconciling the Queen to the Protefiant religion.
Time might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at last ihe might
yield to the wishes of her people, what their im-
portunity or their violence could never have ex-
torted. Many laws of importance were to be
proposed in Parliament; and to defeat all these,
by such a fruitless and ill-timed application to
the Queen, would have been equally injurious to
individuals, and detrimental to the public.

THE zeal of the Protefitant clergy was deaf to which or-

all these considerations of policy. Eager and im- c ery.
patient, it brooked no delay: Severe and inflex-
ible, it would condescend to no compliances.
The leading men of that order insisted, that this
opportunity of establishing religion by law, was
not to be negleated. They pronounced the mo-
deration of the courtiers, apoftacy; and their en-
deavours to gain the Queen, they reckoned cri-
minal and servile. Knox solemnly renounced the
friendihip of the Earl of Murray, as a man de-

*Keith, 239.

voted

B o o K voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her

III. service, as to become regardless of those objeas
L,~ which he had hitherto esteemed moss sacred.
1563. This rupture, which is a firong proof of Mur-

ray's sincere attachment to the Queen at that pe-
riod, continued above a year and an half *.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men

in whom they placed the greateff confidence,
gave vent to their indignation in their pulpits.
These echoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with dismal presages
concerning the Queen's marriage with a foreign-
er; and with bitter reproaches against those, who,
from interested motives, had deserted that cause,
which they once reckoned it their honour to sup.

andoccafces port. The people, inflamed by such vehement
a turnul a
iong th' declamations, which were ditated by a zeal more
people. sincere than prudent, proceeded to ralh and un-

justifiable ats of violence. During the Queen's
absence, on a progress into the weft, mass conti-
nued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy-rood

AuguR. house. The multitude of those who openly re-

sorted thither, gave great offence to the citizens
of Edinburgh, who, being free from the re-
ifraint which the royal presence imposed, as-
fembled in a riotous manner, interrupted the
service, and filled fluch as were present, with the
utmost conifernation. Two of the ringleaders
in this tumult were seized, and a day appointed
for their trial j.

* KLnox, 331. t~ Ibid. 33j*

KNox, who efteerned the zeal of there persons B o o K

laudable, and their condua meritorious, con- III.
fidered them as fumerers in a good cause; and in 6
order to screen them from danger, he ifiued cir- Knot tred
cular letters, requiring all who profeffed the true cotun, 1bu
religion, or were concerned for the preferva- "
tion of it, to assemble at Edinburgh on the day
of trial, that, by their presence, they might com-
fort and afait their distressed brethren t. One of
these letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
assemble the fubjeAs without the authority of
the Sovereign, was conit rued to be treason, and
a resolution was taken to prosecute Knox for that
crime, before the Privy Council. Happily for Decem. 1.
him, his judges were not only zealous Protest-
ants, but the very men, who, during the late
commotions, had openly refilted and set at de-
fiance the QOeen's authority. It was under pre-
cedents, drawn from their .own conduCt, that
Knex endeavoured to fnelter himself. Nor would
it have been an easy matter for these Counsellors
to have found out a diffinRion, by which they
could cenfuire him, without condemning them-
selves. After a long hearing, he was unani-
moufly acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and
President of the Court of Session, a zealous Pa-
pift, heartily concurred with the other Counsel-
lors in this decision " ; a remarkable sac, which
mhows the unfcttlkd frate of government in that

t Knox, 336* Ibid. 343.

age;

B o O K age; the low condition to which regal authority

III. was then funk; and the impunity with which sub-
LV jeas might invade those rights of the Crown,

which are now held sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottish Queen conti-

o nued still to be the obje~t of attention and in-

regard t trigue. Though Elizabeth, even while (he wish-
mnarriage. ed to direa Mary, treated her with a difgufl-

ful reserve; though (he kept her, without necef-
fity, in a state of fufpence ; and hinted often at
the person whom (he destined to be her hus-
band, without direaly mentioning his narne;
yet Mary framed all her aaions to express such
a prudent refpeLt for the English Queen, that
foreign Princes began to imagine (he had given
herself up implicitly to her dire~tion *. The
profpedt of this union alarmed Catherine of Me-
dicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure,
all along, in doing ill offices to the Queen of
Scots; though, soon after the Duke of Guife's
death, (he had put upon her a mola mortifying
indignity, by flopping the payment of her dowry,
by depriving her subject the Duke of Chatel-
herault of his pension, and by beftowing the
command of the Scottish Guards on a French-
man t; (he resolved, however, to prevent this
dangerous conjunaion of the British Queens.
For this purpose, (he now employed all her art to
appease Mary f, to whom she had given so many

* Keith, z4. t Id. 244.. t See Appendix, No.VIII.

causes

causes of offence. The arrears of her dowry B o o K
were instantly paid; more pun~tual remittances III.
were promised for the future; and offers made, 164
not only to restore, but to extend the privileges
of the Scottith nation in France. It was easy for
Mary to penetrate into the motives of this sudden
change; she well knew the charaater of her mo-
ther-in-law, and laid little ifrefs upon profefifons
of friendship, which came from a Princess of
such a false and unfeeling heart.

THE negotiation with England, relative to the

marriage, fuffered no interruption from this ap-
plication of the French Queen. As Mary, in
compliance to her fubjeats, and pressed by the
firongeft motives of interest, determined speedily
to marry, Elizabeth was obliged to break that
unaccountable silence, which fle had hitherto as-
fe6ted. The secret was disclosed, and her fa- 1Mfarch.
vourite Lord Robert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Elizabet
Leicester, was declared to be the happy man, LAcefer a
whom she had chosen to be the husband of a humand.
Queen courted by so many Princes *.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-

tnarkable in the choice of her Miniffers; in dif-
tinguifhing her favourites, those great qualities
were less conspicuous. She was influenced in
two cafes so opposite, by merit of very different
kinds. Their caipacity for business, their know-
ledge, their prudence, were the talents to which
alone she attended, in chufing her Miniffers;

#Keith, 251.

YoL. I. whereas

B o o K whereas beauty and gracefulness of person, po-

1"'- lilhed manners, and courtly address, were the

accomplifme nts on which she beflowed her fa-

Il64. vour. She aded in the one cafe with the wisdom

of a QOeen, in the other, fle discovered the
weakness of a woman. To this Leicefler owed
his grandeur. Though remarkable neither for
eminence in virtue, nor fluperiority of abilities,
the Queen's partiality diainguifhed him on every
occasion. She raised him to the highest honours,
the bestowed on him the most important employ-
ments, and manifefled an affec'tion so difpropor-
tionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that
age, it could be accounted for only by the power
of planetary infuence *.

Mory . THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could

~ed at not well bear the first overture of a match with a

fubjea. Her own rank, the splendour of her
former marriage, and the folicitations, at this
time, of so many powerful Princes, crowded into
her thoughts, and made her fen~bly feel how
humbling and di3JfrefpeQfJed E)2zabecz 's pnoal
was. She dhXembled, however, with theEngHS
Resident; and though she declared, in strong
terms, what a degradation she would deem this
alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage, that could juffify such neglet of her own
dignity, [he mentioned the Earl of Leicefier,
nQtwithitanding, in terms fuil of refpe t .

ilizabeth's LLIZADETH, we may prefumne, did not wiih
views in re-
commend- that the proposal should be received in any other
ing him,

Camden, 549*

manner.

t Keith, 2,2

manner. After the extraordinary marks she had B o o K
given of her own attachment to Leiceffer, and III.
while he was flill in the very height of favour, it 'C4
is not probable ihe could think seriously of be-
flowing him upon another. 'Twas not her aim
to peribade, but only to amuse Mary m. Almost
three years were elapfcd since her return into
Scotland; and though solicited by her fibjeats,
and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe,
she had hitherto been prevented from marrying,
chiefly by the artifices of Elizabeth. And if, at
this time, the English QOeen could have engaged
Mary to listen to her proposal in favour of Lei-
cesser, her power over this creature of her own
would have enabled her to protrac? the nego-
tiation at pleasure; and by~keeping her rival un-
married, lhe would have rendcrcd the profpe2 ofP
her succession less acceptable to the English.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely de-

licate, and embarrafing. To gain poffefon of
the most amiable woman of the age, to carry
away this prize from l0 many contending Princes,
to mount the throne of an ancient kingdom,
might have flattered the ambition of a fubje&
much more considerable than him. He saw all
these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they
made their full :Imprcmon on him, But, without
offending Elizabeth, he durst not venture on the
most dittant difmovery of his sentiments, or ta-:e
any ifep towards facilitating his aiquiiLion of ob-
jests lb worthy of delire.

"Xcli·. Izq, to;.

B o o K ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality to-

III. wards him, which she was at no pains to conceal *,

. -might inspire him with hopes of attaining the fu-

1564. preme rank in a kingdom, more illuifrious than

Scotland. Elizabeth had often declared, that.
nothing but her resolution to lead a single life,
and his being born her own fubjea, would have
hindered her from chufing the Earl of Leicefler
for a husband. Such considerations of prudence
are, however, often surmounted by love; and.
Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence
of her affec'tion would at length triumph both
over the maxims of policy, and the scruples of
pride. These hopes induced him, now and then,
to conclude the proposal of his marriage with the
Scottish Queen to be a proje6t for his deftruc-
tion; and he imputed it to the malice of Cecil,
who, under the specious pretence of doing him
honour, intended to ruin him in the good opi-
nion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one

Queen, who dreaded its success; OJifened to by
another, who was secretly determined againit it;
and scarce desired by the man himself, whose in-
terest and reputation it was calculated, in appear-
ance, to promote; could not, under so many un-
favourable circumitances, be brought to a for-
tunate issue. sloth Elizabeth and Mary con-
tinued, however, to aa with equal dissimulation.
The former, notwithitanding her fears of losing
Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The

SMelv. 93, 4. t- Ibid. 1o01

latter,

latter, though ihe began about this time to cast B o o i
her eyes upon another subject of England, did III.
not, at once, venture finally to rejeat Elizabeth's L
favourite.

TIE person towards whom Mary began to turn Mary en-

terlarns

her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, thoughts of
eldest son of the Earl of Lennox. That noble- moarryna
man, having been driven out of Scotland under 1Y*
the regency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had
lived in banishment for twenty years. His wife,
Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most dan-
gerous rival in her claim upon the English fuc-
cefion. She was the daughter of Margaret, the
eldest sifter of Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus,
whom that Queen married after the death of her
husband James IV. In that age, the right and
order of fuccefilion was not fettled with the fame
accuracy, as at present. Time, and the decilion
of almost every cafe that can pombly happen,
have at last introduced certainty into a matter,
which, naturally, is subject to all the variety
arising from the caprice of lawyers, guided by
obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady
Lennox, though born of a second marriage, was
one degree nearer the royal blood of England
than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grand-daughter of Margaret. This was not
the only advantage over Mary which Lady Len-
nox enjoyed. She was born in England, and by
a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, C whoever is not born in
England, or at least of parents, who, at the time

X 3 of

o o Kr of his birth, were in the obedience of the Kinng
II. of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the
~ kingdom* ." This maxim, Hales, an Engliflh

Iaw';er, produced in a treatise, which he publish-
ed at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to
the right of fucceflion to the Crown. In a pri-
vate cause, these pretexts might have given rife
to a long anol Iloubtful litigation; where a Crown
was at stake, such nice disputes and fubtilties
were to be avoided wkih the utmoit care. If
Darnly should happen to contract an alliance with
any of the powerful feaillies in England, or should
publicly profess the Protestant religion, these plau-
fible and popular topice might be so urged, as to
prove fiattal to the preteof ans of a foreigner, and
of a Papist.

1ARY WaS aware of all this; and in order to

prevent any danger fioin that quarter, had early
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correspond-
ence with the family of Lennox. In the year
1562 t, both the Earl and the Lady Margaret
were taken into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on
account of their holding a secret correspondence
with the Scattifh Queen.

v-i:J5rh FRoMt the time that Mary became sensible of
vIeare~ Hith the diiculties, which would attend her marrying
tIs". a foreign Prince, {he entered into a fill closer

connexion with the Earl of Lennoxt, and in-
vited him to return into Scotland. This Ihe en-

" Carte, Hifi. of Eng. vol. iii. 4.2z. - Camd. 389.
.t Id. 39).

deavoured

deavoured to conceal from Elizabeth; but a tranf- B o o K
aaion of so much importance did not escape the III.
notice of that discerning Princcs. She observed, '
but did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in 15 4.
more perfealy with her views, concerning Scot-
tifh affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of
the Scottish Queen sloop, at labt, to the thoughts
of taking a fubjeft to her bcd. Darnly was in
no situation to excite her jealoufv, or her fears.
His father's cfate lay in England, and by means
of this pledge, she hoped to keep the negotiation
entirely in her own hands, to play the fame game
of artifice and delay, w·hich hfie had planned out,
if her recommendation of Leicelter had been
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no

fubjet of one kingdom could pass into the other
without the permission of both iovereigns; no
sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, ap-
ply to Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scot-
land, than he obtained it. Together with it, fne
gave him letters, warmly recommending his per-
son and cause to Mary's friendship and protec-
tion *. But at the fame time, as it was her man-
ner to involve all her trafaiations with regard to
Scotland in some degree of perplexity and con-
tradiaion; f he warned Mary, that this indul-
gence of Lennox might prove f atal to herself, as
his return could not fail of reviving the ancient
animosity between him and the house of Ha-
milton,

* leith, 255. z63.

X 4 THIS

B o O K THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

III. drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,

6'J for fame time, a total interruption of all corre-

I 564. fpondence between the two Queens *. Mary was

not a little alarmed at this; ihe both dreaded the
effeats of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly
the disadvantage of being excluded from a free
intercourse with England, where her Ambassadors
had all along carried on, with some success, fe-
cret negotiations, which increased the number of
her partisans, and paved her way towards the
throne. In order to remove the causes of the
present difficulty, Melvil was sent express to the
court of England. He found it no dificult mat-
ter to bring about a reconcilement; and soon
re-eflablifhed the appearance, but not the con-
fidence of friendship, which was all that had
fibbiffed, for fame time, between the two
Queens.

DURING this negotiation, Elizabeth's profef-

fions of love- to Mary, and Melvil's replies in
name of his Miflrefs, were made in the language
of the warmest and most cordial friendship. But
what Melvil truly observes, with respect to Eli-
zabeth, may be extended, without injustice, to
both Queens. " There was neither plain deal-
ing, nor upright meaning, but great diffimula-
lion, envy, and fear t."

r -nexIn LENNOx, however, in consequence of the li-
S.Ltand cence which he had qbtained, set out for Scot-

land, and was received by the Queen, not only

SKeith, 253. Mclv. S3( - Melv. 104.

with

with the refpea due to a nobleman so nearly al- B o o (
lied to the royal family, but treated with a dif- III.
tinguifihed familiarity which could not fail of in- C
spiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru- !564.
mour of his fon's marriage to the Queen began
to spread over the kingdom; and the eyes of all
Scotland were turned upon him as the father of
their future Master. The Duke of Chatelherault
was the first to take the alarm. He considered
Lennox as the ancient and hereditary enemy of
the house of Hamilton; and, in his grandeur,
saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the
Queen interposed her authority to prevent any
violent rupture, and employed all her influence
to bring about an accommodation of the differ-
ences *

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread-

ed Lennox's return, from an apprehension that be
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it woukl be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER these preliminary fleps, Mary ventured cembir,

to call a meeting of parliament. The aa of for-
feiture, passed against Lennox in the year. 1545)
was repealed, and he was publicly restored to the
honours and estate of his anceflors $.

THE ecclesiastical tranfations of this year were Lune 25.

not considerable. In the assemblies of the church, ecrtm. 25*

C Keith, 259. 1 Id. 268. Note (A)
Z See Appendix, No. IX.

B o o K the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry,

IIJ. the fame representations concerning the poverty

1564 of the clergy, were renewed. The reply which
The Clergy the Queen made to these, and her promises of
1ufpkcious of
the queen's redress, were more satisfying to the Protefiants
zealor Po- than any they had hitherto obtained *. But, not-
pery.

withstanding her declarations in their favour, they
could not help harbouring many suspicions con-
cerning Mary's designs againif their religion. She
had never once consented to hear any preacher of
the reformed doarine. She had abated nothing
of her bigotted attachment to the Romish faith.
The genius of that fuperfilition, averse, at all
times, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce
and unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on
the continent repeated affiurances of her resolution
to re-.itablilh the Catholic church t. She had
industriously avoided every opportunity of ratify-
ing the aas of Parliament I960, in favour of the
Reformation. Even the proteaion, which, ever
since her return, ihe had afforded the Protefant
religion, was merely temporary, and declared,
by her own proclamation, to be of force only
CC till she ihould take some final order in the mat-
ter of religion P." The vigilant zeal of the
preachers was inattentive to none of these cir-
cumifances. The coldness of their principal
leaders, who were, at this time, entirely devoted
to the court, added to their jealousies and fears.
These they uttered to the people, in language
which they esteemed suitable to the necessity of

K Keith, 533. 539. t Carte, vol. iii. 415.
- Keith, 504. 510.

the times, and which the Queen reckoned dif- B o o K
reipelful and insolent. In a meeting of the Ge- III.
neral Assembly, Maitland publicly accused Knox Y
of teaching seditious do&frine, concerning the 1564.
right of fubjets to resist those Sovereigns, who
trespass againf: the duty which they owe to the
people. Knox was not backward to juffify what
he had taught. And upon this general do&rine
of resistance, so jull in its own nature, but so de-
licate in its application to particular cafes, there
ensued a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
lents and charaater of both the difputants; the
acuteness of the former, embclifihed with learn-
ing, but prone to subtlety; the vigorous under-
flanding of the latter, delighting in bold fen-
timents, and fiuperior to all scar ".

Two years had already been consumed in fruit- I565.

less negotiations concerning the marriage of the tion both of
Scottish Qpeen. Mary had full leisure and op- EIJzdet
portunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all with regard
Elizabeth's proceedings with refpedt to that as- riage.
fair. But, in order to set the real intentions of
the English Queen in a clear light, and to bring
her to some explicit declaration of her sentiments,
Mary, at last, intimated to Randolph, that, on Feb.5*
condition her right of fuccefifon to the Crown of
England were publicly acknowliedged, she was
ready to yield to the folicitations of his Mistress
in behalf of Leicester -. Nothing could be far-
ther than this from the mind and intention of
Elizabeth. The right of fuccefiion was a myf-
tery, which, during her whole reign, her jealousy

' Knox, 3{9. '- Keith, 269.

preserved

13 o o K preserved untouched, and unexplained. She had

III. promised, however, when she firlt began to in-
'"* terest herself in the marriage of the Scottdih

I565* Queen, all that was now demanded. How to re-

treat with decency, how to elude her former offer,
was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darniiy obtained

permifflion to visit the court of Scotland, was ow-
ing, in all probability, to that embarrassment.
From the time of Melvii's embassy, Lady Len-
nox had warmly solicited this liberty for her son,
Elizabeth was no stranger to the ambitious hopes
with which that young nobleman flattered him-
self. She had received repeated advices from her
Ministers of the sentiments which Mary began to
entertain in his favour *. It was entirely in her
power to prevent his ifirring out of London. In
the present conjunaure, however, nothing could
be of more advantage to her, than Darnly's jour-
ney into Scotland. She had already brought one
ador upon the flage, who, under her manage-
ment, had, for a long time, amused the Scottilth
Qu~een. She hoped, no less absolutely, to dire6t
the motions of Darnly, who was likewise her sub-
jeat; and again to involve Mary in all the tedious
intricacies of negotiation. These motives deter-
mined Elizabeth and her Ministers to yield to the
folicitations of Lady Lennox.

Dranly ai. BUT this deep-laid scheme was in a moment
( , disconcerted. Such unexpedted events, as the

fancy of poets arcribes to love, are, at some times,
really produced by that passion. An affair, which

* Keith, 259. 261. z66.

had been the obje at of so many political intrigues, B o o k
and had moved and interested so many Princes, III.
was at lass decided by the sudden liking of the ''?*~ 2565*
two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this
time, in the firit bloom and vigour of youth. In
beauty and gracefulness of person, he surpassed
all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in
such arts, as add ease and elegance to external
form, and which enable it not only to dazzle, but
to please. Mary was of an age, and of a tem- Gains the
per, to feel the full power of these accomplilh- $a
ments. The impression which Lord Darnly made
upon her was visible from the time of their first
interview. The whole business of the court wvas Feb. zs,
to amuse, and entertain this illuifrious guest*;
and in all those scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose
qualifications were altogether foperficial and
ihowy, appeared to great advantage. His con-
quelt of the Queen's heart became complete; and
inclination now prompted her to conclude a mar-
riage, the first thoughts of which had been fug-
gefled by conflderations merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with-

out design, to increase the violence of this pafion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, she, in
return to that message, whereby Mary had fig-
.nified her willingness to accept of Leiceffer, gave
an answer, in such terms, as plainly unravelled
her original intention in that intrigue t. She.
promised, if the Scottish QVueen's marriage with
Leicefler should take place, to advance him to

* Knox, 369. j- Keith, 270. Append. 18.

great

B o o K great honours; but with regard to her title to the

III. Englilh fuccetion, (he would neither fuffer any

Lx6 legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor per-
1565. ob tl h

mit it to be publicly recogrnized, till she herself
fhouid declare her resolution never to marry.
Notwithifanding Elizabeth's former promises,
Mary had reason to expea every thing contained
in this reply; her high spirit, however, could not
bear, with patience, such a cruel discovery of
the contempt, the artifice, and mockery with
which, under the veil of friendship, (he had been
so long abused. She burst into tears of indigna-
tion, and expressed, with the utmost bitterness,
her sense of that disingenuous craft, which had
been employed to deceive her*.

THE natural effeR of this indignation was to

add to the impetuoflty with which (he pursued her
own scheme. Blinded by refetnment, as well as
by love, (he observed no defeLas in the man whom
ihe had chosen; and began to take the necessary
steps towards accomplishing her design, with all
the impatience natural to those palfions.

As Darnly was lb nearly related to the Queen,

the canon law made it necessary to obtain the
Pope's dispensation before the cekbratron of the
marriage. For this purpose, (he early ift on foot
a negotiation with the court of Rome t.

The French SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring
"i'or" the cofent of the French King and his mother.
thema1chl Having communicated her design, and the mo-

tives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau

* Keith, Append. 159. t Camd. 396.

the French Ambassador, ihe employed him, as B o o K
the most proper person, to bring his court to fall in III
with her views. Among other arguments to this C

I565-

purpose, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he represented to be so violent
and deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her own
power to break off the match *. Nor were the
French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's
paflion. Her pride would never stoop to an al-
liance with a fubje2 of France. By this choice,
they were delivered from the apprehension of a
match with any of the Aufirian Princes, as well as
the danrrer of too close an union with Elizabeth;
and as Darnly profeiTed the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, this suited the bigotted schemes which
that court had adopted.

WVHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile so- Dimly dir.

reign courts to a measure which she had so much f the oe:l
at heart; Darnly, and his father, by their be- bles,
haviour, were railing up enemies at home to ob-
ftru& it. Lennox had, during the former part of
his life, discovered no great compass of abilities,
or political wisdom; and appears to have been a
man of a weak underitanding, and violent pas-
fions. Darnly was not superior to his father in
underifanding, and 11 his pafions were fuill more
impetuous t. To these, he added that insolence,
which the advantage of external form, when ac-
companied with no quality more valuable, is
apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the Qujeen's
favour, he began already to assume the haugh-

fCafteln. 464. t Keith, zz, 273.

tinefs

B o o iC tinefs of a King, and to put on that imperious

III. air, which majesty itself can scarce render to-

6y lerable.

rarticularly IT was by the advice, or at least with the con-
Murray. sent of Murray, and his party, that Lennox had

been invited into Scotland*; and yet no sooner
did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom,
than he began to enter into secret cabals with
those noblemen, who were known to be avowed
enemies to Murray, and, with regard to religion,
to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery j.
Darnly1 still more imprudent, allowed some rash
£xpreffions concerning those favours which the
Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to
escape him $.

BUT, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust
of the nobles.

The rife of
Rizio'a fa- THE low birth and indigent condition of this
'or man, placed him in a station in which he ought

naturally to have remained unknown to pofte-
rity. But what fortune called him to a&, and
to fuffer in Scotland, obliges hiffory to de-
scend from its dignity, and to record his ad-
ventures. He was the fbn of a musician in
Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmon-
tefe Ambassador into Scotland, gained admif-
lion into the Queen's family by his skill in
music. His servile condition had taught him
suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.

*Knox, 367. Keith, 274. t Keith, 272. T Id. 274.

He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and B o o K
her Frqnch Secretary happening to return at that III.
time into his own country, was preferred by her I565*
to that office. He now began to make a figure
in court, and to appear as a man of weight and
consequence. The whole train of fuiitors and ex-
peaants, who have an extreme sagacity in dif-
covering the paths which lead molt diretly to
fluccefs, applied to him. His recommendations
Were observed to have great influence over the
Queen, and he grew to be considered not only as
a favourite, but as a Miniffer. Nor was Rizio
careful to abate that envy, which always attends
libch an extraordinary and rapid change of for-
tune. He studied, on the contrary, to display
the whole extent of his favour. He affected to
talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in
public. He equalled the greatest and moss opu-
lent subjects, in richness of dress, and in the num-
ber of his attendants. He discovered, in all his
behaviour, that assuming insolence, with which
unmerited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind.
It was with the utmost indignation that the nobles
beheld the power ; it was with the utmanl difi-
culty, that they tolerated the arrogance, of this
unworthy mninion. Even in the Queen's presence
they could not forbear treating him with marks
of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power
alone, which exasperated the Scots. They con-
fidered him, and not without reason, as a dan-
gerous enemy to the Protestant religion, and sus-
pected that he held, for this purpose, a secret cor-
refpondence with the court of Rome *.

* Buchan. 340. Melv. 107.

VOL. I Y Ir

B o o K IT Was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the

III. management of this man, who, by flattery and
'~c*' assiduity, easily gained on his vanity and unexpe-
P.~n.y rience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was
Oith him. employed in his behalf, and contributed, without

doubt, towards eftabliihing him more firmly in
her affecIions *. But whatever benefit he might
reap from his patronage, it did not counterba-
lance the contempt, and even infamy, to which
he was exposed, on account of his familiarity with
such an upitart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affeclions, she conducted herkelf, how-
ever, with fiuch prudent reserve, as to impose on
Randolph the Englifhi Resident, a man otherwise
shrewd and penetrating. It appears from his let-
ters at this period, that he entertained not the
least suspicion of the intrigue which was carrying
on; and gave his couvt repeated afifrances, thar
the Scottish Queen had no dcfign of marrying
Darnly t. In the midst of this security, Mary
dirpatched Maitland to signify her intention to
Elizabeth, and to solicit her consent to the mar-
riage, with Darnly. This embassy was the firfi
thing which opened the eyes of Randolph.

AprU is. ELIZABETII alfeLded the greatest surprise at this
Eiabeth fidden resolution of the Scottish Queen, but with-
againI the out rcafon. The train was laid by herself, and
mamrage she had no caufl to wonder when it took effed.
U'ith Darll

)." She exprei'ed, at the fame time, her difapproba-

tion of the match, in the firongefi terms; and
pretended to foresee many dangers and inconve-

SMdelv. III. f Keith, 273. and Append. 159.

niencies

niencies arising from it, to both kingdoms, But 1 o o ic
this, too, was mere affedation. Mary had often III.
and plainly declared her resolution to marry. It 156
was impoflible Ihe could make any choice more
inoffenfive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interest into Britain, which Elizabeth had fojufily
dreaded, was entirely avoided. Darnly, though
allied to both Crowns, and poffeffed of lands in
both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident from all there circumifances, that
Elizabeth's apprehensions of danger could not
pollibly be serious; and that, in all her violent
declarations against Darnly, there was much more
of grimace than of reality .

THERE were not wanting, however, political

motives of such weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great displeasure.
Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to ob-
strut with a weakness that little suited the dig-
nity of her mind and the elevation of her charac-
ter. Besides, the tranquillity of her own king-
dom was the great objeat of Elizabeth's policy;
and by declaring her diffatisfation with Mary's
condua, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-

Even the Historians of that age ackncwledge, that the

mefriage of the Scottish Queen with a fobjet was far from
being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369. 373. Bu-
chan. 339. Caftelnau, who at that time was well acquainted
with the intrigues of both the Britiih ccurts, asserts, upon
grounds of great probability, that the match was wholly Eli-
zabeth's own work: Cafteln. 462. and that she rcjoiced at
the accomplishment of it, appears from the letters of her own
Ambassadors. Keith, 280. 288.

Y 2 land,

B o o K land, which was attached to the English intereh,

IIL and to encourage such of the nobles, as secretly

disapproved the match, openly to oppose it. The
feeds of discord would, by this means, be scat-
tered through that kingdom. Inteffine commo-
tions might arise. Amidit these Mary could form
none of those dangerous schemes, to which the
union of her people might have prompted her.
Elizabeth would become the umpire between the
Scottifn Queen and her contending fubjeats. And
England might look on, with security, while a
iform, which she had raised, waited the only king-
dom, which could possibly dicturb its peace.

MHy z. IN prosecution of this scheme, £he laid before

her Privy Council the message from the Scottilh
Queen, and consulted them with regard to the
answer she mhould return. Their determination,
it is easy to conceive, was perfccly conformable
to her secret views. They drew up a remonfirance
againit the intended match, full of the imaginary
dangers with which that event threatened the

sends kingdom * Nor did ihe think it enough, to fig-
'iogrnflr nify her disapprobation of the measure, either by
hraUC . Maitland, Mary's Ambaifador, or by Randolph,

her own Resident in Scotland; in order to add
more dignity to the farce which mhe chose to a6,
mhe appointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Am-
baffador Extraordinary. She commanded himwio
declare, in the firongeft terms, her diffatisfaciion
with the itep which Mary proposed to take; andi,
at the fame time, to produce the determination
of the Privy Council, as an evidence that the

* Keith, 274. See Append. No. X.

Sifentimeents

sentiments of the nation were not different from B o O K
her own. Not long after, she confined Lady Iii*
Lennox as a prisoner, firit in her own house, and

2 1565·

then sint her to the Tower *.

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, be-

fore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In
the firlt transports of her indignation, Mary re-
solved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eli-
zabeth; and sent orders to Maitland, who ac-
companied Throgmorton, to return inifantly to
the Englilh court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so
long to so little purpose; after having been fool-
ed, and imposed on so grossly by her artifices;
mhe was now resolved to gratify her own inclina-
tion, and to ask no other consent, but that of her
own fubjeds, in the choice of an husband. Mait-
1axd, wki his uCual sagacity, foresaw all the es-
feats of such a rash and angry message, and ven-
tured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mif-
trers, by disobeying her commands, than to be
made the inifrument of tearing asunder, To vio-
lently, the few remaining ties, which still linked
together the two Queens t.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error.

She received the Englilh ambassador with re-
ipea ; juffified her own condua with decency;
and though unalterable in her resolution, Ihe as-
feaed a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Eliza-
beth to the measure; and even pretended, out of
complaisance towards her, to put off the confum-

* Keith, Append. 16z. "- Id. 160.

Y 3 mation

B o 0 K mation of the marriage for some months *. It is

I!I. probable, however, that the want of the Pope's
r565- dispensation, and the profpea of gaining the con-

sent of her own fubjeas, were the real motives
of this delay.

M v's TIIIs consent Mary laboured with the utmost
aver ion to
DUrnmy. industry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the

person in the kingdom, whole concurrence was
of the greateff importance; but she had reason to
fear that it would not be procured without ex-
treme difficulty. From the time of Lennox's re-
turn into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
Queen's afieftions began gradually to be effranged
from him. Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court
favourites, combined against him. His ambi-
tious spirit could not brook this diminution of his
power, which his former services had so little
merited. He retired into the country, and gave
way to rivals, with whom he was unable to con,
tend t. The return of the Ea~rl of Bothwell, his
avowed enemy, who had been accused of a design
upon his life, and who had refuded for some time
in foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his
own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could per-
fuade him to a reconcilement with that nobleman,
He insisted on having him brought to a public
trial, and prevailed, by his importunity, to have
a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not appear in
opposition to a man, who came to the place of
trial, attended by Scoo of his followers on horse,
back. He was once more confirained to leave

* J(cith, Append. 278. t Id. 27z. 274. Append. 159.

4 the

the kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, B o o K
the sentence of outlawry, which is incurred by non- III.
appearance, was not pronounced againf[ him * 6

MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much May 8.

importance it was, to gain a fubjeR so powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited
him back to court, and received him with many
demonstrations of refpeat and confidence. At last
she desired him to fee an example to her other sub-
jeds by subscribing a paper, containing a formal
approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Mur-
ray had many reasons to hesitate, and even to with-
hold his assent. Darnly -had not only undermined
his credit with the Queen, but discovered, on
every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person.
By confenring to his elevation to the throne, he
would give him such an acceflion of dignity and
power, as no man wilingly beitows on an enemy.
The unhappy consequences which might follow
upon a breach with England were, likewise, of
considerable weight with Murray. He had al-
ways openly preferred a confederacy with Eng-
land, before the ancient alliance with France.
By his means chiefly, this change in the system
of national politics had been brought about. A
league with England had been established; and
he could not think of sacrificing, to a rash and
youthful pafion, an alliance of so much utility to
the kingdom; and which he and the other nobles
were bound, by every obligation, to maintain }.
Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this

* leith, ibid. 160. t Keith, 169.

Y 4 occaionw.

B o o K occaflon. Mary, though surrounded by Proteff-

III. ant Counsellors, had found means to hold a dark
1565. gerous correIpondence with foreign Catholis.

She had even courted the Pope's protealion, who
had Lent her a subsidy of 8coo crowns *. Though
Murray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the
zeal of the reformed clergy, and to set the Queen's
conduct in the most favourable light, yet her ob-
Linate adherence to her own religion, could not
fail of alarming him, and by her resolution to
marry a papist, the only hope of reclaiming her,
which remained, was for ever cut off. Each of
these considerations had its influence on Murray,
and all of them deternmined him to decline com-
pli;ng, at that time, with the Queen's request.

May J4. THE Convention of nobles, which was affem-
A cnvfn-

tton o bled a few days after, discovered a greater difpo-
o of fition to gratify the Queen. Many of them, with-

mr out heiltation, expressed their approbation of the

intended match; but as others were startled at
the fame dangers which had alarmed Murray, or
were influenced by his example, to refuse their
consent, another Convention was appointed at
Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concern-
ing this matter J.

MTEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
tit1es of honour peculiar to the royal family. The
oppoftion she had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwaart and difap-
point her inclination, produced their usual efFtee

* Kei:h, Z95. Medv. r14. f Keith, 283. Knox, 373.

04

on her heart, they confirmed her paflion, and in- 'B o o K
creased its violence. The simplicity of that age III.
imputed an affeaion, so excetive, to the influence
of witchcraft *. It was owing, however, to no
other charm, than the irresistible power of youth
and beauty over a young and tender heart. Darnly
grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattered by the
love of a Queen, and the applause of many among
her fubjeAs, his natural haughtiness and insolence
became insupportable, and he could no longer
bear advice, far leis contradidion. Lord Ruth-
ven, happening to be the firit person who in-
formed him that Mary, in order to sooth Eliza-
beth, had delayed, for some time, creating him
Duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, drew
his dagger and attempted to flab him 4-. It re-
quired all Mary's attention, to prevent his falling
under that contempt, to which flich behaviour
deservedly expo1ed him.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own Mary'sad-

address more remarkably displayed. Love sharp- 'i her
ened her invention, and made her fludy every fuJe&5.
method of gaining her fubjeas. Many of the
nobles (he won by her address, and more by her
promi1es. On some (he beffowed lands, to others
Ihe gave new titles of honour $. She even con-
descended to court the Protefiant clergy; and
ljaving invited three of their fuperintendants to
Stirling, (he declared, in (krong terms, her refo-
lution to prote& their religion, expressed her wil-
JIngnels to be present at a conference upon the

* Xcith, zS3. t Ibid. Append. x60. t Ibid. 283.

points

B o o K points in doatrine which were disputed between

Iii. the Protestants and Papifts, and went so far as

'" to show some desire to hear such of their preachers

1565. as were most remarkable for moderation . By

there arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon the
people, who, unless their jealousy be raised by
repeated injuries, are always ready to view the
ations of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
talked in so high a firain, of her displeasure at the
intended match; (he treated Lady Lennox with
so much rigour; (he wrote to the Scottish Queen
in such firong terms; she recalled the Earl of Len-
nox and his son, in such a peremptory manner, and
with such severe denunciations of her vengeance,
if they thould presume to disobey t; that all
there exprefiions of aversion fullly perfiuaded them
of her sincerity. This belief fortified their scruples
with refpeat to the match, and encouraged them
to oppose it. They began with forming among
themselves bonds of confederacy and mutual de-
fence; they entered into a secret correspondence
with the English Ref:dent, in order to secure Eli-
zabeth's alfiftance when it (hould become need-
ful f; they endeavoured to fill the nation with
such apprehensions of danger, as might counter-
balance the infuence of those arts, which the
Queen had employed.

Schemes of BESIDES there intrigues, there were secretly
Darnly a·nd
yaUrray= - carried on, by both parties, dark designs of a
gainfi each
other.

* Knox, 373. t Keith, z2g, z86.
t Ibid. z89. z92. z98.

more

more criminal nature, and more suitable to the B a a h=
spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that op- III.
position, which he imputed wholly to Murray,
and resolving at any rate to get rid of such a power-
ful enemy, formed a plot to alfailinate him, du-
ring the meeting of the Convention at Perth.
Murray, on his part, despairing of preventing
the marriage by any other means, had, together
with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of
Argyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly,
and carrying him a prisoner into England.

Ir either of there conspiracies had taken effe&,

this convention might have been attended with
consequences extremely tragical; but both were
rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good for-
tune of those against whom they were formed.
Murray, being warned of his danger by some re-
tainers to the court, who 1till favoured his in-
terest, avoided the blow by not going to Perth.
Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enter-
prise, retired with the utmost expedition, along
with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth. Con-
fcious, on both sides, of guilt, and inflamed with
resentment, it was impossible they could either
forget the violence, which themselves had me-
ditated, or forgive the injuries intended against
them. From that moment, all hope of recon-
cilement was at an end, and their mutual enmity
burst out with every symptom of implacable
hatred *,

ON

* The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given

occasion to many disputes and much contradidion. Some deny
that any design was formed against the life of Murray; others.

call

B o a K ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, ihe summoned

III. her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by

her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-

T156S.
Mary Ctm. te~tion of her perfqr againlt her foreign and do-
mon her metic
vaffakls to
take arms
arai' call in question the truth of the conspiracy againll Darnly.

There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both;
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added to
each many exaggerated circumstances. The following argu-
ments render it probable, that some violence was intended
against Murray.

I. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 34f. 2. The

English Resident writes to Cecil, that Murray was afluredly
informed that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and
defribes the manner in which this plot was to have been ex-
ecuted. Keith, 287. 3. Murray' himself conitantly and pub-
licly affirmed, that such a design was formed againd his life.
Keith, Anp. i0S. And though he was called upon by the
Queen to bring legal es idence of his assertion, and a safe con-
duA offered him, while he came to court for that purpose;
ibid. yet whoever considers Murray's situation, and the spirit
of those who ruled in court at that time, will fearce deem it
any proof of his guilt, that he did not clhufe to'ri&k his person
on such security. 4. The furious paflions of Darnly, the
fierceness of his refcntment, which ferupled at no violence,
and the manners of the age, render the imputation of such a
crime less improbablc.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize

Darnly's person, appears with itill greater certainty; I. From
the express testimony of Melvil, tIz. although Buchanan,
p. 341. and Knor, p. 377. afreA, vwithcut any reason, to re-
present this as an iole rumour. 2. The question was put to
Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwvick would receive
Lennox and his fen, if they were carried prisoners to that
place. This plainly shews, that fume such design was in hand,
and Randolph did not discourage it by the auifer which he
gave. Keith, 290. ;. The precipitation, with which the
Qjeen retired, and the reason Ihe gave for this sudden flight,
are mentioned by R;andolph. Keith, 291. 4. A great part
of the Scottith nobles, and among there the Earls of Argyll

and

mneftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the B o o K
promptness and alacrity, with which fubjeas run III.
to defend a mild and popular adminifrration. This
popularity, however, (he owed in a great measure
to Murray, who had directed her adminifiration

and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the design, afTert
the realityof the conspiracy. Good. vol.ii. 358.

All these circumitances leave little room to doubt of the

truth of both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this
proof, though drawn from public records, falls short, on both
sides, of legal and formal evidence. fBuchanan and Ran-
dolph, in their accounts of the conspiracy againfc Murray,
differ widely in almofl every circumitance. The accounts of
the attempt upon Darnly, are not more confifdent. Melvil
alleges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly
a prisoner into England; the proposal made to Randolph
agrees with this. Randolph says, that they intended to carry
the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Cafle Campbell.
The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the
conspirators to have been to murder Darnly and his father,
to confine the Queen in Lochleven during life, and to ufirp
the government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find
in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are ex-
tremely prone. Antient papers, however, often contain no-
thing more than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the
day. The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this
kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of
fadion. Many things asserted in it, are evidently false or ex-
aggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitions
as we can suppose, they mull have had some pretences, and
plausible ones too, before they conld venture to imprison their
Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of government;
but, at that time, the Queen's condud had afforded no co-
lourable excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is,
likewise, remarkable, that in all the proclamations against
Murray, of which so many are published in Keith, Appendix
lo8, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that
which he is alleged to have formed against the Queen herself,
are ever once mentioned.

*Keith, 298.

'vi d

B o o K with great prudence. But the crime of opposing

III. her marriage, obliterated the memory of his former
'J services; and Mary, impatient of contradiaion,
1565. and apt to confider those who disputed her will,

as enemies to her person, determined to let him
feel the whole weight of her vengeance. For this
purpose ihe summoned him to appear before her
upon a short warning, to answer to such things as
lhould be laid to his charge t. At this very
time, Murray, and the Lords who adhered to
him, were assembled at Stirling, to deliberate
what course they mhould hold, in such a difficult
conjunAure. But the current of popular favour
ran so firongly againit them, and, notwithfland-
ing some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in
the nation such a general disposition to gratify the
Queen, in a matter which so nearly concerned
her, that, without coming to any other conclu-
lion, than to implore the Queen of England's
proteation, they put an end to their ineffeatual
consultations, and returned every man to his own
house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of her fubjeats
from all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary
an agreeable proof of her own fitrength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous situation, she
determined to bring to a period, an affair, which
had so long engrossed her heart, and occupied her

Celebrates attention. On the 29th of July, the married
he Lord Darnly. The ceremony was performed in
Darncy. the Queen's Chapel, according to the rites of

t Keith, Append. io8.

the Romish church; the Pope's bull dispensing B o o K
with their marriage, having been previously ob- III.
tained *. She issued, at the fame time, procla- L
mations, conferring the title of King of Scots
upon her husband, and commanding that hence-
forth all writs at law Ihould run in the joint names
of King and Queen t. Nothing can be a ifronger
proof of the violence of Mary's love, or the weak-
ness of her councils, than this lass flep. Whe-
ther she had any right to chufe a husband, with-
nut consent of Parliament, was, in that age, a
matter of some dispute 4; that fle had no right
to confer upon him, by her private authority,
the title and dignity of King; or, by a simple
proclamation, to raiie her husband to be the maf-
ter of her people, seems to be beyond all doubt.
Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was
not, however, the gift of the Queen, but of the
nation; and the consent of Parliament was ob-
tained, before he ventured to assume it. Darn-
ly's condition, as a fiubject, rendered it ifill more
necessary to have the concurrence of the supreme
Council in his favour. Such a violent and un-
precedented Itretch of prerogative as the fubiti-
tuting a proclamation in place of an at of par-
liament, might have juifly alarmed the nation.
But the Queen poffeffed so entirely the confidence
of her flujeas, that, notwithifanding all the cla-
mours of the malecontents, no symptoms of ge-
neral discontent appeared on that account.

* Keith, 307. t Anderson, i. 33. See Append.No. XI.
f Buchan. 341. EVEN

B o o K EVEN amidit that scene of joy, which alway3

IIl. accompanies fuccefsful love, Mary did not fuffer

G " the course of her vengeance against the malecon-

15 65. tent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after

the marriage, Murray was again summoned to
court, under the ievereft penalties, and upon his
non-appearance, the rigour of justice took place,
and he was declared an out-law *. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon,
who, ever since his father's infurreation in the
year 1562, had been detained a prisoner; fIhe re-
called the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account
of his concern in that conspiracy, had fled into
Slanders; and she permitted Bothwell to return
again into Scotland. The firit, and last of these,
were among the most powerful subjects in the
kingdom, and all of them animated with impla-
cable hatred to Murray, whom they efleemed the
enemy of their families, and the author of their
own fufferings. This common hatred became
the foundation of the firicieft union with the
Queen, and gained them an ascendant over all
her councils. Murray himself considered this
confederacy with his avowed enemies, as a more
certain indication than any measure mhe had yet
taken, of her inexorable resentment.

Marchesa. THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up
gainft Mur-
ray and s 3arms t. But the Queen having ordered her sub-
associates. al~u~rrca.jears

* Keith, 309, 310.
t After their fruitless consultation in Stirling, the Lords re*

tired to theirown houses. Keith, 304. Murray was still at St.
Andrew's on July zz. Keith, 306. By the places of rendez-

vous

jeAs to march against them, they were driven to B O O K
the last extremity. They found themfclves un- III
able to make head against the numerous forces 1565*
which Mary had afrembled; and fled into Ar-
gylefhire, in expedation of aid from Elizabeth,
to whom they had secretly dispatched a mef-
fenger, in order to implore her immediate as-
fifiance *.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embar.· Elizabeth

interposes in

rafs Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her theirfavour.
conduat. She blamed both her choice of Lord
Darnly, and the precipitation with which he had
concluded the marriage. She required Lennox
and Darnly, whom (he still called her fubjeas, to
return into England; and, at the fame time, she
warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour (he represented to be not only innocent,
but laudable. This melfage, so mortifying to
the pride of the Queen, and so full of contempt
for her husband, was rendered still more infup-
portable by the petulant and saucy demeanour of
Tamworth, the person who delivered it t. Mary
vindicated her own condu& with warmth, but
with great fitrength of reason; and rejeaed the
intercelfion in behalf of Murray, not without

vous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
Augual 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to match
into Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaidy, and
other chiefs of the malecontents resided. Keith, 310. Their
flight into the we{1, Keith, 35z, prevented this expedition,
and the former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 310.

* Keith, 312. Knox, 380. -t Camd. 398.

VOL. I. Z iigns

B o o K signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pretending to

III. intermeddle in the internal government of her
v kingdom *.

B565· SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

least the ardour with which Ihe pursued Murray
and his adherents t. They now appeared openly
in arms; and having received a finall supply in
money from Elizabeth $, were endeavouring to
raise their followers in the weflern counties. But
Mary's vigilance hindered them from assembling
in any considerable body. All her military ope-
rations, at that time, were concerted with wis-
dom, executed with vigour, and attended with
uccefs. In order to encourage her troops, mhe
herself marched along with them, rode with
loaded piffols \\, and endured all the fatigues of
war with admirable fortitude. Her alacrity in-
Tpired her forces with an invincible resolution,
which, together with their superiority in number,
deterred the malecontents from facing them in
the field; but having artfully pafftd the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edin-
burgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants

aun ps of that city to arms. The Queen did not fuffer

them to remain long unmolefied ; and, on her

* Keith, Append. 99.
t- The most considerable person.s who joined Murray, were

the Duke of Chatelherault, the Earls ofArgyll, Glencairn,
Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawcrs, Bar, Dreg-
horn, Pittarrowv, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur.
Knox, 382,

J Knox, 380. Keith, Append. z6{.

approach,

approach, they were forced to abandon that B o o K
place, and retire in confuflon towards the western III.
borders .

As it was uncertain, fir some time, what route Th'y afy

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in ,e t'iWn2
proxiding for the 1ecurity of the counties in the Enigl"d.
heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
fIrength which belonged to the rebels; and ob-
liged the conflderable Barons in those mires, which
Ihe most fufpcJced, to join in associations for her
defence t. Having thus left all the country be-
hind her in tranquillity, Ihe, with an army i,0ooo
firong, marched towards Dumfries, where the
rebels then were. During their retreat, they had
sent letters to the Oueen, from almost every place
where they halted, full of fubmifion, and con-
taining various overtures towards an accommo-
dation. But Mary, who determined not to let
flip such a favourable opportunity of cruihing
the mutinous spirit of her fubjeds, rejeced them
with disdain. As she advanced, the malecon-
tents retired. And, having received no effctual
aid from Elizabeth f, they despaired of any other
means of safety, fled into England, and put oaob. 20.
themselves under the proteaion of the Earl of
Bedford, Warden of the marches.

NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendh!iip They ee

for Murray could supply, was wanting to reader r ac i
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself "r""1.
treated them with extreme neglea. She had behX
fully gained her end, and, by their means, had

* Keith, Append. 313. t Id. i3·. S See Appendix,

No. Xli. XIII.

Z 2 exciteid

B o o i excited such discord and jealoufles among the

III. Scots, as would, in all probability, long diffrat
L~ and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now
1565. was to save appearances, and tojuflify herfelfto

the Miniflers of France and Spain, who accused
her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland by her
intrigues. The expedient she contrived for her
vindication firongly diIplays her own charaaer,
and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Murray
and Ihamilton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being ap-
pointed by the other fugitives to wait on Eliza-
beth, instead of meeting with that welcome re-
ception which was due to men, who, out of con-
fidence in her promises, had hazarded their lives
and fortunes, could not even obtain the favour
of an audience, until they had meanly consented
to acknowledge, in the presence of the French
and Spanilh Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had
given them no encouragement to take arms. No
sooner did they make this declaration, than she
altonifhed them with this reply, cc You have de-
clared the truth; I am far from setting an exam-
ple of rebellion to my own fubjets, by counte-
nancing those who rebel against their lawful Prince.
Thle treason, of which you have been guilty, is
dcteftable ; and as traitors I banish you from my
presence f." Notwithifancing this scene of farce
and of falsehood, so dishonourable to all the per-
sons who afted a part in it, Elizabeth permitted
the malecontents peaceably to reside in her do-
minions, supplied them secretly with money, and

*Mely. xiz.

renewed

renewed her intercession with the Scottish Queen B o O K
in their favour *. III.

THE advantage (he had gained over them did I565-

not satisfy Mary; (he resolved to follow the blow,
and to prevent a party, which she dreaded, from
ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, (he called a meeting of Parliament;
and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might
be legally pronouticed againit the banished Lords,
Ihe summoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it t. Decermn, x.

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as the King violently opposed
it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king-
dom, and to reside for some time in France *.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into

the field, the vigour with which the a6ted, and
the length of time Tbe kept them in arms, refem-
ble the efforts of a Prince with revenues much
more considerable than those which (he poffeffed.
But armies were then levied and maintained by
Princes at small charge. The vassal followed his
superior, and the superior attended the Monarch,
at his own expence. Six hundred horsemen, how-
ever, and three companies of foot, besides her
guards, received regular pay from the Queen.
This extraordinary charge, together with the de-
burfements occasioned by her marriage, exhaufled
a treasury, which was far from being rich. In
this exigency, many devices were fallen upon for

K Knox, 389. (- Keith, 320. ( Knox, 339.

Z 3 raising

B o o a raising money. Fines were levied on the towns

11I. of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were
j65 fofpeAed of favouring tLe maleLontents. An un-

usual tax was impoi id on the boroughs through-
out the kingdom ; and a great Linm was demand-
ed of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.
This unprecedented c, ilion dlarmed the citizens.
They had recourse to diPly , and fiarted diffi-
cu!ties in order to evade it. These MaRiy con-
f1rued to be a-ts 01 avoxved diibbedience, and in-
flantly committed several of them ta prison. But
this severity did not ifbdue the undaunted spirit
of liberty, wh ch prevailed among the inhabit-
ants. The Qpcn was obliged to mortgage to
the city the /fperiori'y of the town of Leith, by
which she obtained a considerable fum of money .
The thirds of ecciefiaftical benefices proved ano-
ther source, whence the Queen derived some
supply. About this time, we find the Protestant
clergy complaining more bitterly than ever of
their poverty. The army, it is probable, ex-
hauffed a great part of that fund, which was ap-
propniated Ior their maintenance J.

C¼'t h f. THE af:embhes of the church were not uncon-

' cerned i'cLators of the commotions of this tur-

bulent year. In the meeting June 24, several of
the malecontent nobles were present, and seem to
have had great influence on their decisions. The
high flrain in which the a!Tembly addressed the
Q:een, can be imputed only to those fears and
icaloufles, with regard to religion, which they

KIalox, 383. 386. t ?v;izl. Hi?. of Elinburgh, 27.

3 endea-

cndeavoured to infuse into the nation. The as- B o o K
fembly complained, with some bitterness, of the H*I.

atop which had been put to the progress of the c
Reformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland;
they required not only the total fupprefimon of the
Popilh worship throughout the kingdom, but
even in the Queen's own chapel; and besides the
legal eftablilhment of the Protertant religion, they
demanded that Mary herself thould publicly em-
brace it. The Queen, after fame deliberation,
replied, that neither her conscience, nor her in-
terest, would permit her to take such a fRep. The
former would for ever reproach her for a change,
which proceeded from no inward convidion ; the
latter would fuffer by the offence, which her
apoftacy muff give to the King of France, and
her other allies on the continent *

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation

of the Queen's affairs, during this year, began
to work some change in favour of her religion.
The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Calis, openly
attended mass; she herself afforded the Catholics
a more avowed proteaion than formerly; and, by
her permission, fame of the ancient Monks ven-
tired to preach publicly to the people t.

Knox, 374. 376. + id. 389, 390.

Z4

# BOOK IV.

HISTORY

oIp

SCOTLA ND,

BOOK IV.

AS the day appointed for the meeting of Par- B o o K

liament approached, Mary and her Mi-. IV.

nifiers were employed in deliberating concerning 1566.
the course which it was most proper to hold with Mary's de-

liberations

regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives concernin
prompted her to set no bounds to the rigour of the ex'd
justice. The malecontents had laboured to de-
feat a scheme, which her interest conspired with
her passions in rendering dear to her; they were
the leaders of a party, whose friendlhip ihe had
been obliged to court, while she held their prin-
ciples in abhorrence; and they were firmly at-
tached to a rival, whom lhe had good reason both
so fear and to hate.

B o o K BUT, On the other hand, several weighty con-

IV. fiderations might be urged. The noblemen,
1566. whose fate was in suspense, were among the most

powerful fubjeas in the kingdom; their wealth
great, their connexions extensive, and their ad-
herents numerous. They were now at mercy,
the objeas of compassion, and suing for pardon
with the moss humble fubmiflion.

IN those circumstances, an at of clemency

would exalt the Queen's character, and appear no
less splendid among foreigners, than acceptable to
her own fubjeAs. Mary herfeilf, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage
was implacable and unrelenting. They were so-
licited in behalf of the fugitives from various
quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all
who had been members of the Congregation, were
not forgetful of their ancient union with Murray,
and his fellow-fufferers; nor negleaful of their
fifety, which they esteemed of great importance
to the kingdom. Mclvil, who at that time pof-
sessed the Queen's cons dence, seconded their so-
licitations. And Murray, having ifooped so low
as to co'rt Rizio, that favourite, who was de-
firous of ,.uring his prote6Lion against the King,
whose displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded
the intercefimons of his 'other friends with the
whole of his influence *. The interposition of Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton, who had lately been Eli-
zabeth's Ambassador in Scotland, in behalf of the
exiles, was of more weight than all there, and
attendcd with more success. Throgmorton, out

* Melv. 125.

of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply in all B o o K
the intrigues which were carried bn at the Eng- IV.
lifh court, in order to undermine the power and i566.
credit of that miniiter. He espoused, for this
reason, the cause of the Scottish Queen, towards
whose title and pretensions the other ·was known
to bear little favour; and ventured, in the present
critical junature, to write a letter to Mary, con-
*taining the most salutary advices with regard to
her conduct. He recommended the pardoning
of the Earl of Murray, and his associates, as a
measure no less prudent than popular. An aAion
of this nature, says he, the pure effect of your
Majefty's generosity, will spread the fame of your
lenity and moderation, and engage the English to
look towards your accession to the throne, not only
without prejudice, but with desire. By the fame
means, a perfecT harmony will be restored among
your own fubjecis, who, if any rupture should
happen with England, will serve you with that
grateful zeal, which your clemency cannot fail of
inspiring *.

THESE prudent remonfitrances of Throgmorton, she rero!ves

to which his reputation for wisdom, and known thpm with
attachment to the Queen, added great authority, ckmency.
made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevail-
ed on her, notwithflanding the King's inflexible
temper, to sacrifice her own private resentment to
the intercession of her fubje6ts, and the wishes of
her friends t. With this view, the Parliament,
which had been called to meet on the 4th of Fe-

* Mel*. 119. 1- Id. 125.

bruary,

B o o K bruary, was prorogued to the 7th of April *; and

IV. in the mean time, (he was busy in considering the

manner and form in which (he Ihould extend her

1566. favour to the Lords who were under disgrace.
Is diverted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a
from this.
%erution mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable
bytheou of forgivino, (he wanted firmness, however, to
Fran c, and resist the influence, which was fatally employed
Popery. to disappoint the effeAs of this amiable difpofi-

tion. About this time, and at no great distance
from each other, two envoys arrived from the

February 3* French King. The former was intrufted with

matters of mere ceremony alone; he congratu-
lated the Queen on her marriage, and invefied
the King with the enflgns of the order of St. Mi-
chael. The infitruaions of the latter related to
matters of more importance, and produced great-
er effeas t.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his

Sifter the Queen of Spain had been often pro-
posed; and after many obitacles arising from the
opposition of political interest, was at last ap-
pointed at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis ac-
companied her son; the Duke of Alva attended
his Mittrefs. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which fcemed to be the sole occu-
pation of both courts, a scheme was formed, and
measures concerted, for exterminating the Hu-
gonots in France, the Protestants in the Low
Countries, and for fupprefmng the Reformation
throughout all Europe i. The aJtive policy of

# Good. vol. i. 224. ( Keith, 3'5. Append. 167.
f Thuan. lib. 37.

Pope

Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of B o o K
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, IV.
so suitable to the genius of the Romith religion, T6
and so beneficial to their own order.

IT was on account of this holy league which
the second French envoy brought to Mary, con-
juring her, at the fame time, in the name of the
King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain,
not to restore the leaders of the Protefitants in
her kingdom to power and favour, at the very
time when the Catholic Princes were combined
to deitroy that fe& in all the countries of Eu-
rope *.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remark-

able for the fitrong poffef~ion it takes of the heart.
Contrived by men of deep infight in the human
charaaer, and improved by the experience and
observation of many successive ages; it arrived at
last to a degree of perfe&ion, which no former
system of fuperitition had ever attained. There
is no power in the understanding, and no paflion
in the heart, to which it does not present objeais,
adapted to rouse, and to interest them. Neither
the love of pleasure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of
ambition which occupied the court of Spain, had
secured them from the dominion of bigotry. Lay-
men and courtiers were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly considered
as peculiar to ecclefiaftics; and Kings and Miniflers
thought themselves bound, in conscience, to ex-
tirpate the Proteltant doarine. Mary herself was

* MelW. jz6.

deeply

B o O K deeply tinaured with all the prejudices of Popery;

IV. a paflionate attachment to that superstition is vi-

6 ible in every part of her charaEter, and runs

1566. through all the scenes of her life : She was de-

voted, too, with the utmost fubmilflon to the
Princes of Lorrain, her uncles ; and had been ac-
cuftomed, from her infancy, to liflen to all their
advices with a filial refpea. The profpeCd of re-
storing the public exercise of her own religion,
the pleasure of complying with her uncles, and
the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch,
whom the present situation of her affairs in Eng-
land made it necefrary to court, counterbalanced
all the prudent considerations which had formerly
weighed with her. She inflantly joined the con-
federacy, which had been formed for the de-
ftruation of the Proteffants, and altered the whole
plan of her condua with regard to Murray and
his adherents .

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

subsequent calamities of IMiary's life. Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great
height, it had, however, fuffered no considerable
interruption. A thick and fettled cloud of ad-
verfity, with few gleams of hope, and none of
real enjoyment, covers the remainder of her days.

AParlna- THE effeis of the new system, which Mdary had
niet called h ii c l So
toatraintihe adopted, were soon visible. The time of the pro-
exid no- rogation of Parliament was fnortened; and by a

new proclamation, the I2:h of March was fixed

" See Append. No, XIV.

for its meeting ". Mary resolved, without any B o a K
further delay, to proceed to the attainder of the TV.
rebel Lords, and, at the fame time, determined
to take some iteps towards the re-eRlablifhment of
the Romish religion in Scotland j-. The Lords
of the Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare
the bufsnefs which was to come before the Par-
liament. They were all persons in whom the
Queen could confide, and bent to promote her
designs. The ruin of Murray and his party
seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the
Reformed Church imminent, when an event un-
expeaedly happened, which saved both. If we
regard either the barbarity of that age, when
such aas of violence were common, or the mean

* Keith, 3z6.
jt It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of re-establishing the Roman Ca-
tholic religion. He, indeed, asserts that the aitars, which
Thould have been ereted in the church of St. Giles, were al-
ready provided, 394. i. Mary herself, in a letter to the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow, her Ambassador in France, acknowledges,
'that in that Parliament flhe intended to have done some
good, with refpea to refroring the old religion." Keith, 331.
2. The Spiritual Lords, i. e. the Popith ecclefiaftics, had; by
her authority, resumed their ancient place in that alfembly.
Ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith,
Append. 167. 4. She allowed mass to be celebrated in dif-
fereit parts of the kingdom, ibid. and declared that the
would have masfs free for all men xwho would hear it. Good.
vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who wva furnirhed by the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Mareye a':
Marie, afifrms that the Queen intecrded to have procured, in
this Parliament, if not the re-ediabiiihment of the Catholic
reiigion, at least fonmethivz for the ease of Catholics. Jebb,
vol. ii. 204.

condition

B o o it condition of the unhappy person who fuffered, the

IV. event is little remarkable; but if we reflect upon

the circumifances with which it was attended, or

Aed pre- upon the consequences which followed it, it ap-
'ented by. pears extremely memorable ' and the rife and
the conipi- eteeyadterf n
racyaga:nft progress of it deserve to be traced with great
Rizio.

care.

Darely lores DARNLY'S external accomplithments had ex-
the Q"CC'" cited that sudden and violent pafion which raised

him to the throne. But the qualities of his
mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his
person. Of a weak underfianding, and with-
out experience, conceited, at the fame time, of
his own abilities, and aferibing his extraordinary
success entirely to his diftinguilhed merit. All
the Queen's favour made no imprefion on such
a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her
attention to place about him persons capable
of direcing his condua, could not preserve him
from rash and imprudent aetions ". Fond of all
the amusements, and even prone to all the vices
of youth, he became, by degrees, careless of
her person, and a firanger to her company. To
a woman, and a QVueen, fiuch behaviour was
intolerable. The lower hfie had flooped in order
to raise him, his behaviour appeared the more
ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion
to the fitrength of her firit affe6ion, was the
violence with which her disappointed passion now
operated. A few months after the marriage,

b Good. vol. i. Iz.

their

their domeflic quarrels began to be observed. The B o o K
extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to IV.
there. Iniead of being satisfied with a (hare in the L'~'

1566,

adminiffration of government, or with the title of
King, which Mary, by an unprecedented firetch
of power, had conferred on him, he demanded
the Crown Matrimonial with most insolent im-
portunity *. And though Mary alleged that
this gift was beyond her power, and that the au-
thority of Parliament must be interposed to be-
flow it, he wanted either underifanding to com-
prehend, or temper to admit, so jult a defence;
and often renewed and urged his requefi.

RIzio, whom the King had at firif taken into Surrea.

great confidence, did not humour him in these the ouse
follies. By this, he incurred Henry's displeasure ; orit.
and as it was impoflible for Mary to behave to-
wards her husband with the fame assertion which
diftinguiihed the firit and happy days of their
union, he imputed this coldness, not to his own
behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to
the insinuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduft
confirmed and flrengthened these suspicions. She
treated this ifranger with a familiarity, and ad-
mitted him to a (hare in her confidence, to which
neither his first condition, nor the office (he had
lately beffowed on him, gave him any title. He
was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled in
every business, and, together with a few favour-
ites, was the companion of all her private amuse-
ments. The haughty spirit of Darnly could not
bear the intrusion of such an upitart; and impa-

* Keith, 329. Knox, 404.

Vol.. I. tient

B o O K tient of any delay, and unreflrained by any

IV. feruple, he instantly resolved to get rid of him by

violence.

1566.
Rizio hated AT the fame time, another design, which took
rens its rife from very different motives, was carrying
the exiled on against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven,
nobles.

Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it.
In all former commotions they had been ftrialy
united with Murray, though in the late infur-
reaion they had deserted him, for various reasons.
Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,
and, during the minorityof the prefentEarl, ated
as chief of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was
married to the King's aunt. Lindfay's wife was
of the fame blood. All there had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage
which did so much honour to the house of Dou-
glas, and naturally expected, that, under a King
of their own blood, the chief management of
affairs would be committed to them. Maitland,
with his usual sagacity, foresaw that Murray's op-
polition to the match would prove dangerous and
ineffeaual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped,
by his dexterity and talents, to render himself ne-
ceffary and of importance. They were all equally
disappointed in their expeatations. The King's
headitrong temper rendered him incapable of ad-
vice. The Queen could not help diftrufling men
who had been so long and so intimately conneted
with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to such
Counsellors as complied with all her inclinations.
The return of that nobleman and his followers
was therefore the only event which could reflore

Morton,

Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their B o o Kc
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For IV.
this reason, nothing could be more mortifying to
them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Mur-
ray with all his interest, was now the most aative
inifrument in promoting the measures which were
concerted for the ruin of that nobleman. This
officious zeal completed the disgust which they
had conceived against him, and inspired them
with thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable
tojuftice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their They com

scheme, the King communicated his resolution to derto mur.

der him,

be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and im-
plored his assistance, and that of his friends, to-
wards the execution of this design. Nothing
could be more acceptable to them than this over-
ture. They saw at once all the advantages they
would reap, by the concurrence of such an affo-
ciate. Their own private revenge upon Rizio
would pass, they hoped, for an aa of obedience
to the King; and they did not despair of obtain-
ing the restoration of their banished friends, and
security for the Protefiant religion, as the price of
their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle than rash,

they hesitated for fame time, and determined to
advance no farther, without taking every possible
precaution for their own safety. They did not, in
the mean time, fuffer the King's resentment to
abate. Morton, who was inferior to no man of

Aa2 that

B o O K that intriguing age, in all the arts of insinuation

IV. and address, took the young Prince under his
i66. managenent. e wrought upon his ruling pas-

sion, ambition to obtain the Matrimonial Crown.
He represented Rizio's credit with the Queen to
be the chief and only obstacle to his success in
that demand. This minion, alone, he said, pof-
sessed her confidence; and out of complaisance to
him, her fubjeats, her nobility, and even her hus-
band, were excluded from any participation of
her secret councils. Under the appearance of a
confidence merely political, he insinuated, and
the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of
quite a different and of a very criminal nature
might be concealed *. Such various and compli-

cated

Of all our historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio, 340. 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that such a tfopicion was entertained, 391. Mei-
vil, in a conversation with the Queen, intimates that he was
afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to Inifcon-
ftruaion, Ic0. The King himself seems, both by Melvil's
account, and by his expofiulation with the Queen, which
Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to there suspicions.
Mclv. 5z7. Keith, Append. 123, I24. That the King's sus-
picions were firong, is likewise evident from thle paper pub-
lilhed Append. No. XV. But, in opposition to these fuspi-
cions, and they are nothing more, we may observe that Rau-
let, the Queen's French Secretary, was dismissed from her
service, and Rizio advanced to that office in December 1564.
Keith, z6S. It was in consequence of this preferment, that
he acquired his great credit with the Queen. Melv. 107.
Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months after. Keith,
269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a paflion,
which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent love.
Rizio aided this passion, and promoted the marriage with all
his interest, Melv. I1i. During some months after the mar-
riage, the Queen's fondness for Darnly continued. She soon

proved

cated pafflons raged in the King's bosom, with B o o x
the utmost fury. He became more impatient IV.
than ever of any delay, and even threatened to
strike the intended blow with his own hand. At
last, preliminaries were fettled on both sides, and
articles for their mutual security agreed upon.
The King engaged to prevent the attainder of
the banished Lords, to consent to their return in-
to Scotland, to obtain for them an ample remif-
sion of all their crimes, and to support to the ut-
most of his power, the religion which was now
established in the kingdom. On their parts, they
undertook to procure the Crown Matrimonial for
Henry, to secure his right of fuccefimon, if the
Queen flhould die before him, and to defend that
right to the uttermost, againit whatever person
ihould presume to dispute it; and if either Rizio,
or any other person, mhould happen to be killed
in prosecuting of the design, the King promised
to acknowledge himself to be the author of the
enterprise, and to prote~t those who were em-
barked in it *

NOTHING now remained but to concert the Perpetrate

that crime

plan of operation, to chufe the a~tors, and to afifgn in the
them their parts in perpetrating this detefiable Qg*

proved with child. From this enumeration of circumflances,
it appears almoit impofible that the Queen, unless we suppose
her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry on
any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Ran-
dolph, the English Resident, a man abundantly ready to
mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not
once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing
Friminal, is in itself a fufficient vindication of her innocence,

* Good. vol. i. 266.

crime.

A a 3

B O O K crime. Every circumifance here paints and cha-

IV. raaterizes the manners and men of that age, and
i566. fills us with horror at both. The place chosen for

committing such a deed, was the Queen's bed-
chamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth
month of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might
have been seized eifeiwhere without any difficulty,
the King pitched upon this place, that he might
enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio
with his crimes before the Queen's face. The
Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of
the kingdom, undertook to direQt an enterprde,
carried on in defiance of all the laws of which he
was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruth-
ven, who had been confined to his bed for three
months, by a very dangerous distemper, and who
was still so feeble that he could scarce walk, or
bear the weight of his own armour, was intrufted
with the executive part; and while he himself need-
ed to be supported by two men, he came abroad to
commit a murder in the presence of his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court

of the palace with an hundred and sixty men;
and without noise, or meeting with any refiflance,
seized all the gates. W\'hile the Queen was at
supper with the Counters ofArgyff, Rizio, anda
few domeftics, the King fiuddenly entered the
apartment, by a private patfage. At his back
was Ruth .en, clad in complete armour, and with
that ghaffly and horrid look which long sickness
had given him. Three or four of his most trusty
accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-
pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio

instantly

infcantly apprehended that he was the viftim at B o 0 K
whom the blow was aimed; and in the utmost IV.
conirernation retired behind the Qu!een, of whom
he laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to
her person might prove some protection to him.
The conspirators had proceeded too far to be re-
firained by any consideration of that kind. Num-
bers of armed men rushed into the chamber.
Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a furious
mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary employed tears,
and entreaties, and threatenings, to save her fa-
vourite. But, notwithfranding all these, he was
torn from her by violence, and before he could
be dragged through the next apartment, the rage
of his enemies put an end to his life, piercing his
body with fifty-fix wounds .

ATHoL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confi-
dents of the Queen who lodged in the palace,
were alarmed at the uproar, and filled with the
utmost terror on their own account; but either
no violence was intended againit them, or the
conspirators durst not shed the noblest blood in
the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a
fitranger. Some of them were dismissed, and
others made their escape.

THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof- They con-

session of the palace, and guarded the Queen with Oueen her-
the utmoff care. A proclamation was published by fs
phe King, prohibiting the parliament to meet on

* See Appendix, No. XV.

Aa 4 the

B o o K the day appointed; and mealures were taken by

IV. him for preventing any tumult in the city *. Mur-
xL66 ray, Rothes, and their followers being informed

of every ifep taken againit Rizio, arrived at Edin-
burgh next evening. Murray was graciously re-
ceived both by the King and Queen. By the
former, on account of the articles which had been
agreed upon between them; by the latter, be-
cause she hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio.
Their power she still felt, and dreaded; and the
insult which they had oifered to her auchoriry,
and even to her person, so far exceeded any crime
fne could impute to Murray, that in hopes of
wreaking her vengeance on them, the becwme ex-
tremely willing to be reconciled to him. The
obligations, however, which Murray lay under
to men, who had hazarded their lives on his ac-
count, engaged him to labour for their safety.
The Queen, who scarce had the liberty of choice
left, was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruth-
ven into her presence, and to grant them the pro-
mise of pardon in whatever terms they should
deem necessary for their own security.

Rut The THE King, mean while, flood astonished at the
(inge,d boldness and success of his own enterprise, and un-

kesaher certain what course to hold. The Queen observed

his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She em9
ployed all her art to disengage him from his new
aflociates. His consciousness of the insult which he
Lad offered to so illustrious a benefadrefs, inspired
him with uncommon facility and complaisance. in

P Keith. Append. Iz6,

spite of all the warnings he received to diftruit the B o 0 K
Queen's artifices, (he prevailed on him to difinifs IV.
the guards which the conspirators had placed on
her person; and that fame night he made his
escape along with her, attended by three persons
only, and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of Mtrchre
their flight had been communicated to Huntly
and Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by
them, and several other of the nobles. Both-
well's effate lay in that corner of the kingdom,
and his followers crowded to their Chief in such
numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the
powver of the conspirators at defiance.

THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible is recon-

c led t, the

coniternation. They had obtained a promise of eild no-
pardon ; and it now appeared from the Queen's bles.
condudt, that nothing more was intended by this
promise tlhan Co amuse them, and to gain time,
They ventured, however, to demand the accom-
plilhment of it ; but their messenger was detained
a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards
Edinburgh, at the head of 8000 men, talked in
the higheff itrain of resentment and revenge. She
had the address, at the fame time, to separate
Murray and his associates from the conspirators
againit Rizio. Sensible that the union of these
parties would form a confederacy, which might
prove formidable to the Crown, hfie expressed
great willingness to receive the former into fa-
vour; towards the latter (he declared herfeilf in-
exorable. Murray and his followers were no less March v9.

. ~The confpt-

willing to accept a pardon, on her terms. The r.orsagainft
conspirators againit Rizio, deprived of every re-

Cource, land.

E O O K source, and incapable of resistance, fled precipi-

IV. tately to Newcastle, having thus changed situ-
z566. ations with Murray and his party, who left that

place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for

cunning, as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a
more unfortunate enterprise. Deserted basely by
the King, who now denied his knowledge of the
conspiracy, by public proclamations, and aban-
doned ungenerously by Murrry and his paty ",
he was obliged to fly from his native country, to
reign the highest office, and to part with one of
the most opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinbu'gh, Mary b'ean to

proceed against those concerned in the murder of
Rizio, with the utmoit rigour of law. But, in
praise of her clemency, it mult be observed, that
only two persons, and these of no coanlderable
rank, fuffered for this crime .

IN this conspiracy there is one circumifance,

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not
to be forgotten. In the conftderacy between the
King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was affaf~ination, the preserving of the Re-
formed Church is, nevertheless, ooe of the most
confderable artilcls; and the fame men who were
preparing to violate on- es F ·r r l'uties of mo-
rality, affecteu ttei iughan i daJ mor icligion. His-
tory relates these extravagances of the human
mmid, without pretending to jufify, or even to
account for them; and regulating her own opi-
nions by the eternal and immutable laws ofjuftice

M Melv. 130. t Keith, Appendix, 130. 334.

and of virtue, points out such inconGfitencies, as B o o it
features of the age which she describes, and re- IV.
cords them for the inifruaion of ages to come. 5

As this is the second inilance of deliberate affaf- An account

fination which has occurred, and as we shall here- "ofthefr
after meet with many other initances of the fame aIfala-
crime, the causes which gave rife to a praaice so that age.
shocking to humanity, deserve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea-
sons, one of the firongeft pafions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that
the person who feels the injury mhould himself in-
flia the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftruc-
tive to society; and punishment would have known
no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For
this reason, in the very infancy of the social state,
the sword was taken out of private hands, and
committed to the Magiffrate. But at firit, while
laws aimed at restraining, they really fitrengthened
the principle of revenge. The earliest and molts
simple punishment for crimes was retaliation; the
offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infli-
tution. In both these, the gratification of private
revenge was the obj eE of law ; and he who fuffer-
ed the wrong, was the only person who had a right
to pursue, to exaE, or to remit the punishment.
While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge
of one party, the intereffs of the other were not
negleEted. If the evidence of his guilt did not
amount to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself

to

B oo K to be unjufily accused, the person to whom a

IV. crime was imputed had a right to challenge his
i66. adversary to single combat, and, on obtaining the

vidtory, vindicated his own honour. In almoll
every considerable caufi, whether civil or crimi-
nal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of
the innocence, or the property of the parties.
Juffice had seldom occasion to use her balance;
the sword alone decided every contest. The pas-
fron of revenge was nourilhed by all these means,
and grew, by daily indulgence, to be incredibly
fitrong. Mankind became habituated to Mood,
not only in times of war, but of peace ; and from
this, as well as other causes, contradedt as sax-
ing ferocity of temper and of manners. This fe-
rocity, however, made it necessary to discourage
the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of
compensations in criminal cafes; and to think of
some milder merhod of terminuting difpuces coar-
cerning civil rights. The punishments far cdtmes
became more severe, and the regulations con-
cerning property more fixed; but the Princes,
whose province it was to infiicht the one, and to
enforce the other, poffeffed little power. Great
offenders despised their authority; smaller ones
sheltered themselves under thej urifdiction of those,
from whose protection they expe6ted impunity.
The adminifiration ofjuflice was extremely feeble
and dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes
of a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often ex-
cited rebellions and civil wa'rs. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the causes
of discord were many and unavoidable, who were

quick

quick in discerning an injury, and impatient to B oo K
revenge it; who efleemed it infamous to submit IV.
to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him ; who "566
considered the right of punishing those who had
injured them, as a privilege of their order, and a
mark of independence; fuich flow proceedings
were extremely unfatisfacory. The blood of
their adversary was, in their opinion, the only
thing which could walh away an affront; where
that was not (hed, their revenge was disappoint-
ed, their courage became fufpeded, and a slain
was left on their honour. That vengeance, which
the impotent hand of the Magiffrate could not in-
flia, their own could ealily execute; under go-
vernments so feeble, men affuimed, as in a (tate
of nature, the right ofjudging, and redressing their
own wrongs. And thus affaflination, a crime of
all others the most deftruc'ive to society, came not
only to be allowed, but to be deemed honouirable.

THE history of Europe, during the 14th and
i5th centuries, abounds with detefiable initances
of this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the
French and Scots, between whom there was a
close intercourse at that time, and a fulrprifing re-
semblance in their national charafers. In 1407,
the only brother of the King of France was mur-
dered publicly in the fitreets of Paris; and so far
was this horrible aaion from meeting with proper
punishment, that an eminent lawyer was allowed
to plead in defence of it before the Peers of
France, and avowedly to maintain the lawfulness
of affaflination. In 1417, it required all the elo-
quence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to

prevail

B o o K prevail on the Council of Constance to condemn

IV. this propofltion, " That there are some cafes in
iL66 which affafiination is a virtue more meritorious in

a Knight than in a Squire, and more meritorious
in a King than in a Knight *." The number of
eminent persons who were murdered in France and
Scotland, on account either of private, or political,
or religious quarrels, during the ISth and i6th
centuries, is almost incredible. Even after those
causes, which first gave rife to this barbarous prac-
tice, were removed; after the juriifdiElion of Ma-
giftrates, and the authority of laws, were better
eftablilhed, and become more universal; after
the progress of learning and philosophy had po-
lifhed the manners, and humanized the minds of
men, this crime continued in some degree. It
was towards the close of the i7th century before
it disappeared in France. The addjrjona vj).gov,
which the royal authority acquired by the accef-
sion of James VI. to the throne of England, seems
to have put a flop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national cuf-

tom, both on the understanding and on the heart,
and how far it may go towards perverting or ex-
tinguifhing moral principles of the greatest im-
portance, is remarkable. The authors of those
ages have perfeAly imbibed the sentiments of
their cotemporaries, with regard to affaffination;
and they, who had leisure to reflet, and to judge,
appear to be no more mhocked at this crime, than
the persons who committed it during the heat
and impetuosity of passion. Buchanan relates the

* L'Enfant, Hilt. Conc. de Conlt.

murder

murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, with- B o o .
out exprefing those feelings which are natural to IV.
a man, or that indignation which became an his- 6
torian ". Knox, whose mind was fiercer and
more unpolified, talks of the death of Beatoun and
of the Duke of Guise, not only without censure,
but with the utmost exultation t. On the other
hand, the Bishop of Ross mentions the affaffina-
tion of the Earl of Murray, with some degree of
applause . Blackwood dwells upon it with the
most indecent triumph, and ascribes it direa1ly
to the hand of God I!. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal aaor in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote
an account of it some short time before his own
death, and in all his long narrative there is not
one exprellion of regret, or one symptom of com-
punaion, for a crime no less dishonourable than
barbarous **. Morton, equally guilty of the
fame crime, entertained the fame sentiments con-
cerning it; and in his last moments, neither he
himself, nor the Ministers who attended him,
seem to have considered it as an a&tion which
called for repentance; even then he talks of Da-
vid's faught'er as coolly, as if it had been an inno-
cent or commendable deed it. The vices of
another age afronith and flhock us; the vices of
our own become familiar, and excite little horror.
I return from this digrefifon to the course of the
history.

* Buchan. 295. 345* t Knox, 334. 1 Andcrfl

p. S4. II Jebb, 2. 263. *" Keith, Append. Iix.
tt Crawf. Mern. Append.

THE

B o 0 r THE charm, which had at firit attached the

IV. Quen to Darnly, and held them for some time
x566. in an happy union, was now entirely diifulved,
Trnqueen's and love no longer covering his follies and vices
pate'",_ with its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in
.eae4. their full dimension and deformity *. Though

Henry published a proclamation, disclaiming
any knowledge of the conlpiracy againfi Rizio,
the Queen was fully convinced, that he was not
only accessory to the contrivance, but to the com-
mififon of that odious crime t. That very power
which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness,
lthe had conferred upon him, he had employed
to insult her authority, to limit her prerogative,
and to endanger her person. Such an outrage,
it was impossible any woman could bear or for-
give. Cold civilities, secret difitruft, frequent
quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of
affe~tion and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands.
The crowd of expeatants ceased to court his
patronage, which they found to avail so little.
Among the nobles, iome dreaded his furious
temper, others complained of his perfidious-
ness; and all of them despised the weakness
of his understanding, and the inconitancy of
his heart. The people themselves observed
some parts of his conduI, which little suited
the dignity of a King. Addited to drunken-
ness, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular passions, which even

See Appendix, No. XVI. t-j Keith, 330.

the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, B o o K
by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to IV.
the utmost; and the pafions which it occasioned, Ig''
often forced tears from her eyes, both in public and
in private *. Her averlion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with lit-
tle splendour, and was trusted with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to
please the Queen, who favoured Morton and his
associates, or who adhered to the house of Ha-
milton; he was left almost alone in a negle&ed
e.ntd capitLed 5o)rvde }-.

ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great The rife of

B >thwell's

credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascend- fvour.
a~t over her heart, which encouraged his enter-
prifing genius to form designs that proved fatal to
him [elf, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent
misfortunes. This was James Hepburn, Earl of
Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and, by
his extensive pofeftions and numerous vassals, one
of the molt powerful noblemen in the kingdom.
Even in that turbulent age, when so many vait
projeas were laid open to an aspiring mind, and
invited it to aaiion, no man's ambition was more
daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder
or more singular expedients for obtaining power.
When almost every person of diftinaion in the
kingdom, whether Papist or Proreftant, had join-
ed the Congregation in opposing the dangerous
encroachments of the French upon the liberties
of the nation, he, though an avowed Proteltant,

* Keith, 329. t Melv. 131, &c.

B b adhered

VoL. I.

B O O K adhered to the Queen Regent, and aaed with vi-

IV. gour on her fide. The success which attended the
i566. arms of the Congregation having obliged him to

retire into France, he was taken into the Queen's
service, and continued with her till the time of
her return into Scotland *. From that period,
every flep of his conduat towards Mary was re-
markably dutiful; and amidst all the (hiftings of
famtion, we scarcely ever find him holding any
course which could be offenfive to her. When
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umbrage to the Queen, (he recalled Both-
well from that banilhment into which (he had with
reluctance driven him, and considered his zeal and
abilities as the most powerful supports of her au-
thority. When the conspirators against Rizio
seized her person, he became the chief inctrument
of recovering her liberty, and served her, on that
occasion, with so much fidelity and success, as
made the deepest impression on her mind, and
greatly increased the confidence which ihe had hi.
therto placed in him -. Her gratitude loaded him
with marks of her bounty; (he raised him to offices
of prohit and of trust, and tranfadted no matter of
importance without his advice t. By complaisance
and afiiduity, he confirmed and fortified these dif-
poftions of the Queen in his favour, and infen-
sibly paved the way towards that vast proje6a,
which his immodcrate ambition had perhaps al-
ready conceived, and which, in spite of many
difficulties, and at the expence of many crimes,
he at las accomplished.

* Anders. i. 90. f Ib. i. 9:, 93. $ Melv. 133. Knox, 396.

THE

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now ap- B o0o K

proached. As her palace was defended only by a 1V.
slender guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her
person, at this time, to the insults (he might sus-
ser in a kingdom torn by fa6tions, and prone to
mutiny. For this reason, the Privy Council ad-
vised the Oueen to fix her residence in the caffle
of Edinburgh, the fitrongeft fortress in the king-
dom, and the most proper place for the security
of her person *. In order to render this security
more perfect, Mary laboured to extinguish the do-
mefihc feuds which divided some of the principal
nobles. *Murray and Argyll were exasperated
against Huntly and Bothwell, by reciprocal and
repeated injuries. The Queen, by her authority
and entreaties, effeated a reconcilement among
them, and drew from them a promise to bury
their discords in everlasting oblivion. This re-
concilement Mary had so much at heart, that (he
made it the condition on which (he again received
Murray into favour t.

ON the I9th of June, Mary was delivered of het Birth of

James VI.

only son James, a Prince whole .birth was happy
for the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His acceflion to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and established the power of Great Britain on a firnr
foundation. While (he, torn early from her son
by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to
indulge those tender passions, nor to taste those
joys which fill the heart of a mother.

* Keith, 33S. t- Ibid. 336. Append. 139.

Bb b2 MEL-

B o o K MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London

IV. with an account of this event. It firuck Eliza-
16 beth, at first, in a sensible manner; and the ad-

vantage and superiority which her rival had ac-
quired by the birth of a son, forced tears from
her eyes. But before Melvil was admitted to au-
dience, the had so far recovered the command of
herself, as to receive him not only with decency,
but with excefive cheerfulness; and willingly ac-
cepted the invitation which Mary gave her, to
frand godmother to her son *.

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, the

resolved to celebrate the baptifin of the young
Prince with great pomp; and for that purpose
sent invitations of the fame kind to the French
King, and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of
her former husband.

The Qwn THE ( een, on her recovery, discovered no
contabl~e5 to
ues nmly change in her sentiments with refpeat to the
fjrtirdif, King -t. The death of Rizio, and the counte-
negieR. nance he had given to an ac~ion so insolent and

unjuffifiable, were flill fresh in her memory. She
was frequently pensive and dejeaed $. And
though Henry sometimes attended at court, and
accompanied her in her progreifes through differ-
ent parts of the lingdom, he met with little re-
verence from the nobles, xwhbile Mary treated him
with the greatest reserve, and did not fiuffer him
so possess any authority B. The breach between
them became every day more apparent §. At-
tempts were made towards a reconcilement, par-

Melv. 138. t See Append. No. XVII. f Ibid. 148.

II Keith, 350. Melv. 132. § Keith, Append. 169.

ticularly

ticularly by Caftelnau the French Ambassador; B o O K
but after such a violent rupture, it was found no IV.
easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and L566.
though he prevailed on the King and Queen to
pass two nights together *, we may, with great
probability, pronounce this appearance of union,
to which Caftelnau trufled, not to have been in-
cere; we know with certainty that it was not
lating.

BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's Herattach.

prime confident. Without his participation no BothweI1

increases.

business was concluded, and no favour bestowed.
Together with this ascendant over her councils,
Bothwell, if we may believe the cotemporary his-
torians, acquired no less sway over her heart.
But, at what precise time this ambitious Lord first
allowed the fentimeats of a lover to occupy the
place of that duty and refped which a fubje(t
owes his Sovereign; or when Mary, instead of
gratitude for his faithful fbrvices, felt a pafflon of
another nature riling in her bosom, it is no easy
matter to determine. Such delicate transitions of
paffon can be discerned only by those, who are
admitted near the persons of the parties, and who
can view the secret workings of the heart with
calm and acute observation. Neither Knox nor
Buchanan enjoyed there advantages. Their hum-
ble station allowed them only a difitant access to
the Queen and her favourite. And the ardour of
their zeal, and the violence of their prejudices,
rendered their opinions rash, precipitate, and in-
accurate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal

* Keith, Append. 169.

B b 3 pafifon,

B o K t pafinon, rather than by their accounts of it, that

I'. subsequent hillorians canjudge of its reality.
566. ADVENTROus as Bothweil's projea to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary was
young, gay, and affable. She poffeffed great fen·
libility of temper, and was capable of the utmof
tcndcrnefs of affedion. She had placed her love
on a very unworthy objel, who requited it with
ingratitude, and treated her with neglel, with
ninoience, and with brutality. All these she felt,
and refenred. In this situation, the attention and
complaisance of a man, who had vindicated her
authority, and proteated her person; who entered
into ail her views, who soothed all her passions,
whQ watched and improved every opportunity of
insinuating his design, and recommending his
paffionr ", could fearce fail of making an imprest
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

TheTKing THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in
retol~es to
leve soc flattery, and accultomed to command, could nox

!d bear the contempt under which he had now fall,

en, and the (late of infgnificance to which he
saw himself reduced. But in a country, where he
was universally hated or derpifed, he could never
hope to form a party, which would second any
attempt he might make to recover power. He
addressed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to
the Icings of France and Spain, with many pro.
fefTions of his own zeal for the Catholic religion,
and with bitter complaints against the Queen, for
regleaing to promote that interest t; And fooi

* Andcrf. 1. 93, 94* j' (lox, 399w

9 after3

after, he took a resolution, equally wild and B o o K
desperate, of embarking on board a ship, which IV.
he provided, and of flying into foreign parts. L.
It is almost impoflible to form any fatisfac~ory 5 6
conjecdure concerning the motives which influence
a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards
reinffating him in the poffeftion of that power
which he had loft. Perhaps, he expeded nothing
more than the comfort of hiding the disgrace
under which he was now fallen, among 1'rrangers,
who had never been witnesses of ~his former pro-
fperity.

HE communicated the design to the French Wis ,cap4

ciouls behra-

Ambassador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl veour.
of Lennox. They both endeavoured to diflilade
him from it, but without ficcefs. Lennox, who
seems, as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's
confidence, and who, about this time, was fel-
dom at court, instantly communicated the matter
to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to
accompany the Queen from Stirling to Edin-
burgh, was likewise absent from court. He ar-
rived there, however, on the fame day she re-
ceived the account of his intended flight. But
he was more than usually wayward and peevish;
and scrupling to enter the palace unless certain
Lords who attended the Queen were dismissed,
Mary was obliged to meet him without the gates.
At last he fuffered her to conduca him into her
own apartment! She endeavoured to draw from

Bb4 him

B o O K him the reasons of the ifrange resolution which

IV. he had taken, and to divert him from it. In
566 Ijpite however of all her arguments and intreaties,

he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the
Privy Council, by her direction, expoftulated
with him on the fame head. He perfifled, not-
withflanding, in his sullenness and obflinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of his
condua, nor signified any intention of altering
it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards
the Queen, and told her, that he thould not fee
his face again for a long time. A few days after,
he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as
grounds of his difguff. She herfeif, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and
had deprived him of all power; and the nobles,
after her example, treated him with open neg-
leca, so that he appeared in every place without
the dignity and splendour of a King.

nren- NoTmING could be more mortifying to Mary,
prevnithis than this intended flight of the King's, which

enied would have spread the infamy of their domestic

quarrel all over Europe. Compassion for a Mo-
narch who would then appear to be forced into
exilc by her n ge!t and ill usage, might have
disposed mankind to entertain sentiments con-
crrning the causes of their discord, little to her
aclvantaee. In order, therefore, to prepossess
the minds of her allies, and to fereen her reputa-
tion from any censure with which Darnly might
endeavour to load it, the Privy Council tranf-
miz:ed a narrative of this whole tranfaaion, both
to the King, and to the Queen Mother of

France.

France. It is drawn with great art, and sets B o o K.
Mary's condua in the most favourable point of IV.
light *. I566,

ABOUT this time, the license of the borderers

called for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a
court of justice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of
several adjacent counties were summoned to at-
tend their Sovereign in arms, according to cuf-
tom t. Bothwell was, at that time, Lieutenant
or Warden of all the marches, an office among
the most important in the kingdom; and though
ufally divided into three diftin& governments,
bestowed by the Qyeen's favour upon him alone.
In order to display his own valour and aaivity in
the discharge of this trust, he attempted to seize
a gang of banditti, who, lurking among the
marshes of Liddefdale, infested the reft of the
country. But while he was laying hold of one
of those desperadoes, he was wounded by him in Oaober is.
several places, so that his followers were obliged
to carry him to Hermitage caffle. Mary instant-
ly flew thither, with an impatience which firong-
ly marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited
the dignity of a Queen $. Finding that Both-
well was threatened with no dangerous symptom,

ihe

*Keith, 345. 347. t Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.
f The diilance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is 18

Scottilh miles, through a country almoff impassable. The
season of the year was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have
been wounded in a fcufllc, occasioned by the despair of a in-
gle man, rather than any open infurreaion of the borderers.
It does not appear that the Queen was attended thither by any
considerable traini. Ihad any military operation been necerf

fary,

B o 0 Khe returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The

IV. fatigue of such a journey, added to the anguish
'~' of mind mhe had fuffered on Bothwell's account,

threw her next morning into a violent fever*.
Her life was despaired of, but her youth, and
the vigour of her conifitution, resifted the ma-
lignity of her disease. During the continuance
of the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at
Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t ; and when

Novemb. s. he afterwards thought fit to make his appearance

there, he met with ibch a cold reception, as did
not encourage him to make any long flay J.
Mary ibon recovered firength enough to return
along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

WHILE mhe resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, not-
withstanding her promise, and even proclamations
to the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged
Morton and his associates to remain in England II.
Mary, on the other hand, afforded her proteaion
to several English fugitives. Each Qjeen watch-
ed the motions of the other with a jealous at-
tention, and secretly countenanced the pradices
which were carrying on to disturb the adminiftra-
tion of her rival.

fary, as is supposed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been
extremely improper to rifque the Queen's person in an expe-
dition againt thieves. So soon as the Queen found Bothwell
to be in no danger, ihe infantly returned, and after this we
hear no more of the infurreaion, nor have we any proof that
the rioteis took refuge in England. No other reason but that
which we have produced, seems fufficient to account for the
Queen's condua.

a Keith, 35', 352, *F Ibid. Append. 133.
4 Knox, 400, II Qald. vol. ii. p. i5.

FOR this purpore, Mary's Ambassador, Robert B o o i

Melvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely IV.
a6ive and fuccefsful. We may impute, in a 1566.
good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which The Englifl
appeared in the Parliament of England, and favoursMj-
which ilefcd a storm that threatened Elizabeth's ry's Preen-
dom:' c tranquillity more than any other event fucdiin.
of her reign, and required all her art and del-
terity to allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years with-

out discovering the least intention to marry. A
violent difiemper, with which she had lately been
seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profpe6t of all those calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious
fuccellion; a motion was made, and eagerly lif-
tened to in both houses, for addressing the Queen,
to provide againit any Ifch danger in times to
come, either by signifying her own resolution to
marry, or by consenting to an a&c, establishing
the order of fucceflion to the Crown *. Her
love to her fubjeds, her duty to the public, her
concern for posterity, it was pretended, not only
called upon, but obliged her to take one of these
iteps. The insuperable aversion which she had
all along discovered for marriage, made it im-
probable that she would chufe the former; and
if ihe complied with the latter request, no title to
the crown could, with any colour of justice, be
set in opposition to that of the Scottish Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the remotest
consequences of this motion, and observed them

*'Ewes Journ. of Parl. ioj.

with

B o o K with the greatet anxiety. Mary, by refusing {o

IV. often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly
'" intimated a design of embracing the firit promising

i566. opportunity for prosecuting her right to the Eng-.

lifh Crown; and by her secret negotiations, she
had gained many to favour her title *. .All the
Roman Catholics ardently wished for her fuccef-
son. Her gentlene1s and humanity had removed
many of those apprehensions which the Protestants
entertained on account of her religion. The
court fation, which envied the power of Cecil,
and endeavoured to wrest the administration out
of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the
Scottish Queen in oppetition to him. The union
of the two kingdoms was a defireable cbjeR to
all wife men in both nations; and the birth of the
young Prince was a security for the continuance
of this bleming, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

lizabeth's UNDER these circumitances, and while the na-
ferp1txi. tion was in such a temper, a parliamentary decla-
count. ration of Mary's title would have been highly de-

trimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled
state of the fuccefimon left much in her power.
Her resentment alone might have gone far to-
wards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto re-
firained, and overawed the ambition of the Scot-
tifh QOeen. But if this check should be removed
by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary
would be at fuail liberty to pursue her dangerous
designs, and to act without fear or reserve. Her
partisans were already meditating schemes for in-

* Melv. 136.

furretions

furre6ions in different parts of the kingdom*; B o 0 re
and an a2 of Parliament, recognising the rights IV.
of that Princess, whose pretensions they favoured, I566r
would have been nothing less than a Cignal to
arms; and notwithitanding Elizabeth's just title
to the affeclions of her fubjets, might have
Ihaken and endangered her throne.

WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in Maryen-

deavours to

both houses, an account of it was tranfinitted to improvethis
Mary by Melvil her Ambassador. As ihe did not oppoUOnty.
want advocates for her right, even among those
who were near Elizabeth's person, (he endeavour-
ed to cultivate the disposition which appeared to-
wards fettling the right of fucceflion in her favour,
by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England.
She expressed in it a grateful fcnfe of Elizabeth's
friendship, which (he ascribes chiefly to their good
offices with their Sovereign in her behalf. 'She
declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity
with England, without urging or pursuing her
claim upon the Crown, any farther than should
be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the fame
time, as her right of succession was undoubted,
(he hoped it would be examined with candour,
and judged of with impartiality. The nobles
who attended her, wrote to the English Privy
Council in the fame itrain . Mary artfully gave
these letters the air of being nothing more than a
declaration of her own, and of her fubjeas gra-
titude towards Elizabeth. But as (he could not
be ignorant of the jealousy and fear with which
Elizabeth observed the proceedings of Parliament,

* Melv. 147. t- Keith, 354. Append, 136.

6 a f'tep

B o c 4t a step so uncommon as this, of one Prince's en-

lV. tering into public correspondence with the Privy
iL66. Counsellors of another, could not be otherwise

conifrued than as taken with an intention to en-
courage the spirit which had already been raised
among the English. In this light it seems to have
appeared to Elizabeth herself*. But the difpo-
fition of her people rendering it necessary to treat
Mary's person with great decency, and her title
with much regard, ihe mentioned it to her only
in the fofteft language.

tulzabeth NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor-
loo~tha and
gains her tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's charaaer,
rliarnemnt. than the temper which both houses of Parliament

discovered on this occasion. She bent all her po-
licy to defeat or elude the motion. After allow-
ing the first heat of their zeal to evaporate, she
called into her presence a certain number of each
house. She soothed and caressed them; mhe
threatened and promised; she remitted subsidies
which were due; and refused those which were
offered; and in the end prevailed to have this
formidable motion put off for that fefilon. Hap-.
pily for her, the condual of the Scottish Queen,
and the misfortunes which befel her, prevented
the revival of such a motion in any future Par-
liament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation

of impartiality, and that mhe might not drive
Mary into any desperate measure, ihe committed

* Keith, 357*
- D'E' es Joirn. o0-I30. Camd. 399. Melv. H19.

Haynes, 446.

to the Tower one Thornton, who had published B o o i
something derogatory to the right of the Scottifl IV.
line*; and signified her displeasure againat a Mem- - ·
ber of the House of Commons, who seemed, by i566.
some words in a speech, to glance at Mary t.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever soli- An extra-

. . . ordinary itep

citous to promote the interest of that religion ofMadiryfs
which Ihe profeffed. The re-establishment of the ravour of
Romish doarine seems to have been her favourite
paflion; and though the design was concealed
with care, and conduCted with caution, she pur-
sued it with a persevering zeal. At this time, lhe
ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual re-
serve; and the aid which she expeaed from the
Popish Princes, who had engaged in the league
of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a step, which,
if we confider the temper of the nation, appears to
be extremely bold. Having formerly held a fe-
cret correspondence with the court of Rome, Ihe
now resolved to allow a Nuncio from the Pope
publicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea,
at that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the person
on whom Pius V. conferred this office, and along
with him he sent the Queen a present of 20,000
crowns i. It is not the charader of the Papal
court to open its treasury upon difitant or ima-
ginary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in
Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a
reconciliation of that kingdom to the Romish
fee. Thus Mary herself underitood it; and in
her answer to a letter which she received from

* Camd. 40i. -f- Haynes, 449.
t Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. p. 325.

B a 0 K the Pope, after expressing her grateful sense of

IV. his paternal care and liberality, she promises that

mhe would bend her whole fitrength towards the
re-eftablilhment and propagation of the Catholic
faith; that ihe would receive the Nuncio with
every possible demonfiration of respect, and con-
cur, with the utmost vigour, in all his designs to-
wards promoting the honour of God, and restoring
peace to the kingdom ; that she would celebrate
the baptism of the Prince according to the cere-
monies which the Romish ritual prercribes, hoping
that her flbjecs would be taught, by this exam-
ple, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with con-
tempt; and that she would be careful to initil
early into her son the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith*. But
though the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris,
and had sent over one of his attendants with part
of the money, the Qu2een did not think thejunc-
ture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre-
paring to fend a magnificent embassy into Scot-
land, against the time of the Prince's baptism,
and as it would have been improper to offend
her, she wifely contrived, under various pretences,
to detain Laurea at Paris -. The convullione
into which the kingdom was thrown soon after,
made it impofiible for him to pursue his journey
any farther.

AT thevery time that Mary was secretly carrying

on these negotiations for fnbverting the Reform-

* Conai Vita Marie ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 5z.
1- Keith, Append. 135.

ed Church, she did not scruple publicly to em- B o o K
ploy her authority towards obtaining for its Mi- IV.
nifters a more certain and comfortable fubfiul- - i566.
ence *. During this year, she issued several pro-
clamations and aa1s of council for that purpose,
and readily approved of every scheme which was
proposed for the more effeatual payment of their
flipends. This part of her condua does little ho-
nour to Mary's integrity: and though juffified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon
falsehood and deceit among the necessary arts of
government, and even authorised by the perni-
cious cafuiltry of the Roman Church, which
transfers breach of faith to heretics from the lift
ofcrimes, to that of duties, such diffimulatior1,
however, must be numbered among those ble-
miuhes which never ifain a truly great and gene-
rous charaaer.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Am- December.

baffadors were yet arrived, the baptifin of the for the ing
Prince was put off from time to time. Mean exceIve.
while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar t.
Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the present
temper of her mind, and induced her to prefer
it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
Her averflion for the King grew every day more
confirmed, and was become altogether incurable.
A deep melancholy succeeded to that gaiety of
spirit, which was natural to her. The rashness
and levity of her own choice, and the King's in-
gratitude and obitinacy, filled her with flame and
with despair. A variety of painons preyed at

* Keith, 56i, 562. Knox, 401. f Keith, 3j55
VOL. I. C c once

B o o K once on a mind, all whole sensations were exqui-

IV. site, and all its emotions firong, and often ex-
i466 torted from her, the last wilh of the unfortunate,

that life itself would come to an end *

A divorce MURRAY and Maitland observed all those
between
them pro- workings of pafion in the breast of the Queen,
posed, and conceived hopes of turning them to the ad-

vantage of their ancient associates, Morton, and
the other conspirators against Rizio. They were
still in banishment, and the Queen's resentment
againit them continued unabated. Murray and
the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that
her inclination to be separated from Darnly would
surmount this deep-rooted averflion, and that the
hopes of an event so desirable might induce her to
be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to
find reasons, in the King's behaviour, on which
to found a sentence of divorce. This sentence
they had interest enough to obtain, and to pro-
cure the ratification of it in Parliament. In re-
turn for this service, they proposed to flipulate
with the Queen to grant a pardon to Morton and
his followers. The design was firit of all com-
municated to Argyll, who, as well as Murray,
owed his return into Scotland to the conspiracy
against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who at that
time dire6ted all Mary's councils, were likewise
admitted into the concert. They joined together
in making the overture to the Queen, and en-
forced it with all Maitland's eloquence f. But
Mary, however desirous of obtaining that de-
liverance from Darnly's caprices, with which they

* Xeith, Pref. vii. j- Anders. vol. iv. Part ii, 1S8.

endeavourcd

endeavoured to allure her, had nevertheless good B o O K
reasons for rejeaing the method, by which they IV.
proposed to accomplish it. The birth of her son
had greatly fitrengthened her claim upon the Eng-
lilh fuccefion, and encouraged the abettors of it
to appear with greater boldness, and to a6t with
more vigour. She could scarce hope to be di-
vorced from her husband, without throwing some
imputation on her son. This might open a new
dispute with regard to the succession, and put it
in the power of Elizabeth and her Miniffers to
call in question the Prince's legitimacy, or at
least to fubjea it to all the delays and cavils of a
judicial inquiry. The fear of these inconveniences
weighed with Mary, and determined her rather to
endure her hard fate, than to seek relief, by ven-
turing on such a dangerous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Bri-

enne, the English and French Ambassadors, being
arrived, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the
baptism of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought pre-
fents from Elizabeth, suitable to her own dignity,
and the refpee with which flhe affeled, at that
time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great pre-
parations had been made by Mary, and the mag-
nificence displayed by her on this occaflon, exceed-
ed whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
The ceremony itself was performed according to Decem, x7.
the rites of the Romish Church. But neither
Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles who pro-
sessed the Protefiant religion, entered within the
gates of the chapel *. The spirit of that age,

' Keith, 360.

Ccz firm

B o o K firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-

IV. ducement, condescend to witness an acaion, which
L it esteemed idolatrous.
1566.
The King'a HENRY'S behaviours at this juncaure, perfcaly
f" s discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of
atthe p his folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but con-
Prince, fined himself to his own apartment; and as the

Queen difirufted every nobleman who ventured to
converse with him, he was left in absolute soli-
tude. Nothing could be more singular, or was
less expeaed, than his chufing to appear in a
manner, that both published the contempt under
which he had fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's
domeffic unhappiness to the observation of so
many foreigners, looked like a flep taken on pur-
pose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this
insult sensibly; and notwithstanding all her efforts
to assume the gaiety which suited the occasion,
and which was necessary for the polite reception of
her guests, ihe was sometimes obliged to retire,
in order to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow,
and give vent to her tears *. The King still per-
Lifted in his design of retiring into foreign parts,
and daily threatened to put it in execution t.

TIHE

*Keith, Pref. vii.
j- Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this was
an indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her husband,
it hath been asserted to be the cause of the King's absence from
the ceremony of his fon's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319.
But, I. No such thing is to be found among Bedford's infiruc-
tions, the original of which ltill remains. Keith, 356. z. Bed-
ford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent
with Camden's assertion. Melv. 13. Melvil's account is
confirmed by Elizabeth's initrutions to Sir I-Ienry Norris,

wvhere

THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's hap- B o o K.

tifin was not the sole business of Bedford's embaf- IV.
fy. His inffru~tions contained an overture, which e566.
ought to have gone far towards extinguihing Elizabeth
those jealousies which had To long subsisted be- C"'d"d~""a
tween the two Queens. The treaty of Edin- m;odate Ler
burgh, which has been so often mentioned, was was Mary,
the principal occasion of these. The fpirir, how-
ever, which had risen to such an height in the late
Parliament, the power of the party which fa-
voured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
and a~tivity of her agents in different parts of the
kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to
forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and
artful exprefimons in that treaty might afford her.
Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but to re-

rjs, where mhe affirms that lhe commanded Bedford to employ
his bell offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband,
which mhe had attempted to no purpose. Digges's Compl.
Ambaf. p. 13. A paper pubiiihed Append. No. XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident men-
tions the King's absence, but without giving that reason for
it, which has been founded on Camden's words, though, if
that had been the real one, he would scarce have failed to
mention it. His account of this matter is that which I have
followed. Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his court, that
on account of the difference betwixt the King and the Queen,
he had refused to hold any further correspondence with the
former, though he appears, in many inflances, to have been
his great confident. Ibid. 5. As the King was not present at
the baptifim, he seems to have been excluded from any share in
the ordinary adminifiration of business. Two ads of Privy
Council, one on the zoth, and the other on the zift of De-
cember, are found in Keith, 562. They both run in the
Qujeen's name alone. The King seems not to have been
present. This could not be owing to Elizabeth's inlfuidions
to Bedrord.

C c 3 noulnce

B o o K nounce any title to the crown of England during

IV. Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;
1566 who, on the other hand, engaged to take no iep,

which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon
the fuccemion *.

MARY could not, with decency, rejea a pro-

position so equitable; she insisted, however, that
Elizabeth should order the right upon which mhe
claimed to be legally examined, and publicly re-
cognised, and particularly that the testament of
Henry VIII. whereby he had excluded the de-
fccndants of his eldert lifter the Queen of Scot-
land, from the place due to them in the order of
fucceflon, might be produced, and considered by
the Englilh nobility. Mary's Miniflers had cre-
duloufly embraced an opinion, that this testament,
which they so julfly conceived to be injurious to
their mistress, was a mere forgery; and on dif-
ferent occasions had urged Elizabeth to produce
it. Mary would have fuffered considerably by
gaining this point. The original tefitament is

1till extant, and not the least doubt can be enter-

tained of its genuineness and authenticity. But
it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to
set aside the title of the house of Steware. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the question
concerning the fuccerion perplexed and unde-
cided, and by induifrioufly eluding this request,
(he did real service to Mary's cause t.

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince,

Morton and all the other conspirators againftRizio
obtained their pardon, and leave to return into

*Keith, 356. - Ibid. 36i. 358. Note (c) Murdin, 368.

Scotland.

Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued B o o K
inexorable to every entreaty in their behalf, yield- IV.
ed at last to the folicitations of Bothwell *. He C'p '
could hope for no success in those bold designs on 1566.
which his ambition resolved to venture, without
drawing aid from every quarter, By procuring a
favour for Morton and his associates, of which
they had good reason to despair, he expeaed to
secure a band of faithful and determined ad-
Jierents.

THE King still remained at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt, His impatience in this situ-
ation, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumour of a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison , was the occasion of his leav-
ing that place in an abrupt mnanner, and retiring
to his father at Glasgow.

Two assemblies of the church were held during June s-

De'eem. zg.

this year. New complaints were made, and upon Church as-
good grounds, of the poverty and contempt un- fain.
der which the Protestant clergy were fuffered to
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their
fubflflence was, they had not received the leafl
part of what was due for the preceding year J.
Nothing ]efs than a zeal, ready to endure and to
fuffer every thing for a good cause, could have
persuaded men to adhere to a church, so indigent
and so negleated. The extraordinary expences,
occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had exhausted
the Queen's treasury, and the sums appropriated
for the subsistence of the clergy were diverted into

* Good. vol. i. i40. Mclv. i54. t Keith, Pref. vill.
T Ibid. 562.

C c 4 other

B o 0 K Other channels. The Queen was therefore obliged

IV. to prevent the just remonfirances of the assembly,

by falling on some new method for the relief of
the church. Some symptoms of liberality, some
firetch towards munificence, might have been ex-
peaed in an afignment which was made with an
intention of soothing and silencing the clergy.
But both the Queen and the nobles held fast the
riches of the church which they had seized. A
fum, which, at the highest computation, can
scarce be reckoned equal to 90001. fierling*,
was deemed fufficient for the maintenance of a
whole national church, by men who had lately
seen single monasteries poffeffed of revenues far
superior in value.

THE ecclefiaftics in that age bore the griev-

ances which affeated themselves alone with aflo-
nifhing patience; but wherever the reformed
religion was threatened, they were extremely
apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the
loudest manner, their apprehensions ofdanger.
A just occasion of this kind was given them, a
short time before the meeting of the assembly.
The usurped and oppreffivejurifdi'tion of the fpi-
ritual court had been abolished by the Parliament
i560, and commiffaries were appointed to hear
and determine the causes which formerly came
under their cognizance t. Among the few acts
of that Parliament, to which Mary had paid any
regard, this was one. She had confirmed the
authority of the Commiffaries, and had given
them infitruions for directing their proceed-

* Keith, 56z. t Id. i52.

Ings,

ings *, which are (till of great authority in that B o o K
court. From that time these judges had conti- IV.
nued in the uninterrupted exercise of their func- '"'
tion, when of a sudden· the Queen issued a pro- i566.
clamation, refforing the Archbishop of St. An-
drew's to his ancient jurifdiation, and depriving
the Commiffaries of all authority t.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered

-the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this rash
action. She had been contriving, for some time,
how to re-efitablifh the Popish religion; and the
restoring the ancient ecclefiaftics to their former
jurifdiation, seemed to be a considerable fRep to-
wards that end. The motive which prompted
Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen this
a~tion muff be chiefly imputed f, was (till more
criminal. His enterprising ambition had already
formed that bold design, which he soon after put
in execution; and the use which we shall hereafter
find him making of that authority, which the Po-
pilh ecclefiaftics regained, discovers the reasons
of his present condua, in contributing to revive
their power. The Protestant clergy were not un-
concerned fpetators of an event, which threat-
ened their religion with unavoidable defitruaion;
but as they despaired of obtaining the proper re-
medy from the Queen herself, they addressed a
remonifrance to the whole body of the Protefiant
nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion,
which the danger to which it was exposed at that
time, seemed to require i|. What effeLVs this ve-
hement exhortation might have produced, we

* Keith, 251. j Knox, 403. f Id. ibid. II Keith, 567.

have

B o o K have no opportunity of judging, the attention of

IV. the nation being quickly turned towards events of
t another, and more tragical nature.
The King IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stfiring,
falls lick at
Golqw. and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
£567. with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which

attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effe~ls of
poison *. It is impoflible, amidit the contradic-
tions of hiflorians, to decide with certainty con-
cerning its nature, or its cause t-. His life was
in the utmost danger; but after languishing for
some weeks, the vigour of his constitution fur-
mnounted the malignity of the disease,

* Melv. Ix4. Knox, 401.
t Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been

poisoned. They mention the black and putrid puiules which
broke out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's phvf'cian uiainlv declared that poison was the cause
of there f~lmptoms, and tuat the Queen refused to allow her
own phyfilan to attend him. Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Black-
wood, Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 24. 59. aflert, that the frnall-
pox was the disease with which the King was seized. He is
cslled a P ncsi a

man in the Queen's letter. Good. vol. ii. IS.

The reason given by Frr tnc Paris for lodging the King at the
Kirk of Field, viz. icu the young Prince faould catch the
isfction if h Ii .id in the pal-ice, Learms to favour this opi-
nion. Anders. vol.ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of
Iariy's tenderness to her hufmand, that though lhe never had
the fuallO-POX herfolf, she ventured to attend him, vol iii.
446. This, if it had been true, would hwve afforded a good
pretence for not visiting him iLoner; but M0ary had the small-
pox in her intphcy. S..ier's Letters. 3. Eifhop Lefly as-
firms, that the K ng's disease was the French pox. Keith,
364. Note (b). In that age, this disease was efleemed so
contagious, that persons infedced with it were removed with-
out the walls of cities.

6 MARY'S

MARY'S negle& of the King, on this occasion, B O O K

was equal to that with which he had treated her IV.
during her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer 1567.
felt that warmth of conjugal affection which Negleaed
prompts to sympathy, and delights in all those by Mary.
tender offices which sooth and alleviate sickness
and pain. At this jun<dure, ihe did not even put
on the appearance of this pamion. Notwithifand-
ing the King's danger, she amused herself with
excurflions to difterent parts of the country, and
fuffered near a month to elapse before flhe visited
him at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of
the distemper was over, and the King, though
weak and languilhing, was out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her husband The breach

between

was not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts, them irre.
which interrupt the domeflic union, without dif- parable.
solving it altogether. Almofit all the passions,
which operate with greatest violence on a female
mind, and drive it to the moat dangerous ex-
tremes, concurred in raising and fomenting this
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours mhe
had bestowed, contempt of her person, violations
of the marriage-vow, encroachments on her power,
conspiracies againit her favourites, jealousy, info-
lence, apd obitinacy, were the injuries of which
Mary had great reason to complain. She felt
them with the utmost sensibility; and added to
the anguish of disappointed love, they produced
those symptoms of despair which we have already
described. Her resentment againit the King
seems not to have abated from the time of his

leaving

B o O K leaving Stirling. In a letter written with her

IV. own hand to her Ambassador in France, just be-

fore me set out for Giafgow, no tokens of fud-
den reconcilement appear. On the contrary, flhe

Jan. 20. mentions, with some bitterness, the King's in-

gratitude, the jealousy with which he obfirved
her aIions, and the inclination he discovered to
diflurb her government, and at the fame time
talks of all his attemnpts with the utmost scorn ".

VETh the AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it
Glasgow. was scarce to be expeded that (he would viflt the

King, or that any thing but marks ofjealoufy and
difiruff should appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; (ne not
only visited H-lenry, but, by all her words and
actions, endeavoured to expicfs an uncommon
affeation for him: And thoutgh this made im-
preflion on the credulous spirit of her husband,
no less flexible, on some occasions, than obfti-
nate on others; yet, to those who are acquainted
with the human heart, and who know how fel-
dom and how slowly such wounds in domeflic
happiness are healed, this fiudden transition will
appear with a very fuilpicious air, and will be
considered by them as the effed of artifice.

Hcr adifi- Bur it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is
icujtion. charged with dilliniulation in this part of her

conduut. T wo of her famous letters to Both-
well were w!vitten during her (tay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had
so fur succeeded in his ambitious and criminal

*Keith, Pref. viii.

deflgn,

design, as to gain an absolute ascendant over the B o o K
Queen; and in a situation, such as Mary's, me- IV.
rit not so conspicuous, services of far inferior im- ·''
portance, and address much less insinuating than 1567.
Bothwell's, may be supposed to steal impercep-
tibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome
it. Among those in the higher ranks of life,
cruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are, un-
happily, neither many, nor firong: Nor did the
manners of that court, in which Mary had been
educated, contribute to increase or to fortify
them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and
Henry II. the wildness of the military chara6ter
in that age, and the liberty of appearing in all
companies, which began to be allowed to women,
who had not yet acquired that delicacy of senti-
ment, and thoie poiifhed manners, which alone
can render this liberty innocent, had introduced,
amonp the French, a licentiousness of morals that*
rose to an astonishing height. Such examples,
which were familiar to Mary from her infancy,
could hardly fail of diminishing that horror of vice
which is natural to a virtuous mind. The King's
behaviour would render the first approach of for-
bidden fenriments less shocking; resentment, and
disappointed love, would be apt to represent
whatever soothed her revenge, as justifiable on
that account; and so many concurring causes
might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new passion
in her heart.

EUT wvhatever opinion we may form vwith re- The wouves

gard to the rife and progress of this panlion, the of it.
letters themselves breathe all the arlour and ten-

derneft

B o o K derners of love. The affeaion which Mary there

IV. expresses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every
7L'' ifubfequent part of her conduEt; which, without
467 admitting this circumniance, appears altogether

mysterious, inconfiflent, and inexplicable. That
reconcilement with her husband, of which, if we
allow it to be genuine, it is impossible to give
any plausible account, is discovered, by the
Queen's own confefiron, to have been mere arti-
~fice and deceit. As her aversion for her husband,
and the suspicious attention with which (he ob-
served his conduc&, became universally known,
her ears were oflicioufly filled, as is usual in such
cafes, with groundless or aggravated accounts of
his aaions. By some, (he was told, that the
King intended to seize the person of the Prince
his son, and in his name to usurp the govern-
ment; by others (he was afrured, that he resolved
*instantly to leave the kingdom ; that a vessel was
hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde
ready to receive him *. The last was what Mary
chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring into a foreign
country must have been highly dishonourable to
the Oueen, and would have entirely disconcerted
Bothwell's measures. While he resided at Glaf-
gow, at a difitance from her, and in that part of
the kingdom where the interest of his family was
greateff, he might, with more facility, accmplifh
his designs. In order, therefore, to prevent his
executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary to
bring him to some place where he would be more
immediately under her own eye. For this pur-

* Keith, Pref. viii.

pOre, she firit employed all her art to regain his B o o K
confidence, and then proposed to remove him to IV.
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pre- '- '
tence, that there he would have easier access to ,Prets
the advice of physicians, and that she herself him to

Co eto

could attend him without being absent from her Edinburgh.
son *. The King was weak enough to fulTer him-
seif to be persuaded; and being itill feeble, and
Incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a
litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a

house belonging to the Provost of a collegiate
church, called Kirk of Field. It stood almost
upon the fame spot where the house belonging to
the Principal of the university now flands. Such
a situation, on a rising ground, and at that time
in an open field, had all the advantages of health-
ful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand,
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely
proper for the comrmiifion of that crime, with a
view to which, it seems manifestly to have been
chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the nesmor-

dercd there,

most afliduous care. She seldom was absent from
him through the day; The slept several nights in
the chamber under his apartment. She heaped
on him so many marks of tenderness and confi-
dence, as, in a great measure, quieted those sus-
picions which had so long disturbed him. But
while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the

* Good. vol. ii. 8.

return

B o o K return of his former happiness, he flood on the

IV. very brink of deflruaion. On Sunday the ninth

of February, about eleven at night, the Queen

1567. ,r h

·~e

left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at
a masque in the palace. At two next morning,
the house in which the King lay was blown up
with gunpowder. The noise and ihock, which
this sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the
whole city. The inhabitants ran to the place
whence it came. The dead body of the King,
with that of a servant who slept in the fame room,
were found lying in an adjacent garden, without
the city wall, untouched by fire, and with no
bruise or mark of violence.

l1ischarac. SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart
ter. Lord Darnly, in the twenty-firft year of his age.

The indulgence of fortune, and his own exter-
nal accomplishments, without any other merit,
had raised him to an height of dignity, of which
he was altogether unworthy. By his folly and
ingratitude, he loft the heart of a woman who
doated on him to diftracion. His insolence
and inconstancy alienated from him such of the
nobles as had contributed molt zealously to-
wards his elevation. His levity and caprice ex-
posed him to the scorn of the people, who once
revered him as the descendant of their ancient
Kings and heroes. Had he died a natural death,
his end would have been unlamented, and his
memory have been forgotten; but the cruel
circumifances of his murder, and the remifnefs
with which it was afterwards avenged, have made
his name to be remembered with regret, and

have

have rendered him the objet of pity, to which he B o o io
had otherwise no title. 1V.

EVERY One'S imagination was at work to guess 1567.

who had contrived and executed this execrable Bo bwen

and the

deed. The suspicion fell, with almost a general zueenfuf..
consent, on Bothwell'; and some refleaions were the murderd
thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no
firanger to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there
remains the fullest evidence that the nature of the
action will admit. The Queen's known senti-
ments with regard to her husband, gave a great
appearance of probability to the imputation with
which she was loaded J.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation

was issued by the Queen, offering a coniiderable
reward to any person who flhould discover those
who had been guilty of such a horrid and detef't-
able crime ]; and though Bothwell was now one
of the greareft fubjeals in the kingdom, formi-
dable on account of his own power, and protea-
ed by the Queen's favour, it was impossible to
suppress the sentiments and indignation of the
people. Papers were affixed to the most public
places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; piaures appeared
to the fame purpose, and voices were heard in
the middle of the night, charging him with that
barbarous action. But the authors of these ru-
mours did not confine their accusations to Both-

* Melv. j59. Andert. vol. i. 156.
* See Dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Darnty,

and the genuineness of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

( Anders. vol. i. 36.
VOL. I. D d

B O O K well alone, they inflnuated that the Queen her.

* self was accessary to the crime ". This bold ac-

J567. cufation, which so direAly attacked Mary's re-

putation, drew the attention of her council; and
by engaging them in an inquiry afcer the authors
of theie libels, diverted them from searching for
the murderers of the King t. It could fearce be
expec~ed that Mary herself would be extremely
solicitous to discover those who had rid her of an
husband, whom mhe had so violently hated. It
was Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme di-
rection of this, as well as of all other affairs, to
fiifie and suppress whatever evidence mhould be
offered, and to cover, if pofmble, the whole tranf-
ac~ion under the veil of darkness and of silence.
Some inquiry, however, was made, and some
persons called before the council; but the ex-
amination was conduaed with the most indecent
remififefs, and in such a manner, as to let in no
light upon that scene of guilt J.

IT was not her own fubjec's alone who fufpe6ted

Mary of having been accessary to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, so dishonourable to
her charaaer, owe its rife and progress to the
jealoury and malice of her fa(ious nobles. The
report of the manner and circumifances of the
King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accustomed to
deeds of violence, it excited universal horror. As
her unhappy breach with her huiband had long
been matter of public discourse, the first con-

* Anders. vol. ii, I36. j- Id. vol. i. 33. T Id. vol.

jecahures

jeaures which were formed with regard to his B O O K
death, were extremely to her disadvantage. Her IV*
friends, at a loss what apology to offer for her L 1567.
condua, called on her to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost diligence, and expeated that the
rigour of her proceedings would prove the best
and fullest vindication of her innocence *

LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to tennr oc.

c'.es Bothb

vengeance with incessant importunity. This no- well of the
bleman had (ha-red in his fon's disgrace, and being Keg'smur-
treated by Mary with negleO, usually resided at
a distance from court. Roused, however, by an
event no less shocking to the heart of a father,
than fatal to all his schemes of ambition, he ven-
tured to write to the Q(ueen, and to offer his ad- Feb. ii,
vice with respect to the moss effeatual method
for discovering and convicting those who had so
cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of a
husband. He urged her to prosecute those who
were guilty with vigour, and to bring them to a
speedy trial; he declared his own suspicion of
Bothw ell, and of those who were named as his
accomplices; he required that, out of regard to
decency, and in order to encourage evidence to
appear against them, the persons accused of ibch
an atrocious crime (hould be committed to cuf-
tody, or at leafs excluded from her court and
presence t.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither (he had re-

tired after the burial of the King, whose body
was deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland,

* Ieiih, ires. i'. t I4. 269.

Dd2 in

B o o K in a private but decent manner . The former

IV. part of the Earl's demand could not, on any pre-

tence, be eluded; and it was resolved to bring
Bothwell immediately to trial. But, inifead of

krary con- confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him
;meZbt into all her councils, and allowed a person, uni-

verfally reputed a murderer of her husband, to
enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favourite t. The offices which Bothwell al-
ready poffeffed, gave him the command of all the
south of Scotland. The cafile of Edinburgh,
however, was a place of too much consequence
not to wish it in his own power. The Qujeen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mvlar to fulrrender
it, consented to put the person of the young

March 19. Prince in his hands, and immediately beflowed

the government of that important fortress upon
Bothwell . So many fieps in her conduci, in-
confifent with all the rules of prudence, and of
decency, must be imputed to an excess either of
folly or of love. Mary's known charaaer fully
vindicates her from the former; of the latter,
many and firiking proofs soon appeared.

Hawos on No direa evidence had yet appeared against
sLiniai. Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the

circumifances of a crime, in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great im-
portance to hurry over the trial, while nothing
more than general suspicions, and uncertain fur-
mises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held

# Anders. vol. i. 23. t Id. ibid. 40, &c. $ Id.

ibid. Pref. 64. Keith, 3:9-

on the 2Sth of March, the 12th of April was ap- B o o K
pointed for the day of trial. And though the IV.
law allowed, and the manner in which criminal

. Ij467.

causes were carried on in that age required, a
much longer interval, it appears, from several
circumstances, that this short space was confider-
ably contrated, and that Lennox had only eleven
days warning to prepare for accusing a person, so
far superior to himself, both in power and in fa-
vour ". No man could be less in a condition to
contend with an antagonist who was thus support-
ed. Though Lennox's paternal eflate had been
restored to him, when he was recalled into Scot-
land, it seems to have been considerably impaired
during his baniihment. His vassals, while he re-
sided in England, had been accufromed to fame

* The a& of Privy Council, appointing the day of Both-

well's trial, bears date March the z8th, which happened on a
TI'hurfday, Anders. vol. i. 5c. '1he Queen's warrant to the
tIrEy7ngers, impowering them to summon Lennox to be present,
is dated on the z9th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was fommoned
by public proclamation at the Cross of Edinburgh on the fame
say. Ibid. sco. He was summoned at his dwelling-houfesin
Glasgow and Dombarton the 3oth of March, the ift and 2d
days of Aplil. hlbid. so0. He was fammoned at Perth, April
IP. Ibid. xo:. T'hough Lennox resided at that time40miles
from Edinburgh, the citation might have been given him
sooner. Such an unnecessary delay affords some cause for sus-
picion. 'Tis true, Mary in her letter, March 24th, invited
Lennox to come to Edinburgh the ensuing week; this gave
him warning some days sooner, that she intended to bring on
the trial without delay. But the precise time could not be le-
gally or certainly known to Lennox sooner than Is or az days
before the day on which he was required to appear. By the
law and practice of Scotland, at that time, parties were lm
moned, in cafes of treason, 40 days previou· to the trial,

D d 3 degree

O O K degree of independence, and he had not recover-
IV. ed that absolute ascendant over them, which a
l567. feudal chief usually poffeffed. He had no reason

to expe& the concurrence of any of those faations
into which the nobles were divided. During the
short period of his fon's prosperity, he had taken
such fleps as gave rife to an open breach with
Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of
the house of Hamilton were his hereditary and
mortal enemies. Huntly was linked in the closest
confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to the
disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a
cause, where both honour and humanity called so
loudly on his countrymen to second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself

was present, and fat as a member in that meeting
of Privy Council, which gave direftions with re-
gard to the time and manner of his trial; and he
still enjoyed not only full liberty, but was re-
ceived into the Queen's presence with the fame
diffinguifhed familiarity as formerly *.

Lennox NOTHING could be a more cruel disappoint-
CrdaVS a de.
sy. ment to the wishes and resentment of a father,

than such a premature trial; every flep towards
which seemed to be taken by directions from the
peribn who was himfeilf accused of the crime, and
calculated on purpoie to conceal rather than to
deteL his guilt. Lennox foresaw what would be
the ifue of this mock inquiry, and with how
little safety to himself, or success to his cause, he
could venture to appear on the day prefixed. In
his former letters, though under expremons the

* Anders. vol. i. 50. 52.

most refpeLtful, some symptoms of his diflruaing B o o Ko
the Queen may be discovered. He spoke out IV.
now in plain language. He complained of the 1567.
injury done him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. He represented once
more the indecency of allowing Bothwell, not
only to enjoy personal liberty, but to retain his
former influence over her councils. He again
required her, as (he regarded her own honour, to
give some evidence of her sincerity in prosecuting
the murder, by confining the person who was, on
good grounds, fuiipe6ted to be the author of it;
and, till that were done, he signified his own re-
solution not to be present at a trial, the manner
and circumstances of which were so irregular and
unfatisfaEtory ".

HE seems, however, to have expeaed little ApAues ror

success from this application to Mary; and there- to Elia!>
fore, at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to beth.
interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he
demanded t. Nothing can be a fironger proof
how violently he fufpeaed the one Queen, than
his submitting to implore the aid of the other,
who had treated his son with the utmost con-
tempt, and himself and family with the greatest
rigour. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to
interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote in-
flantly to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for
some time, and urged, in fiich firong term1si, th;e
fame arguments which Lennox had used, as Et
have convinced her to what an uta.y

*Anders. vol. i. S2. j- Good. vol. ii. 3

D d 4 J! .

1 o o K conifrution her condu& would be liable, if she

IV. persisted in her present method of proceeding *
1567. NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of
nhe tiii Lennox, could prevail to have the trial put off.
pro"crds. On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but

with sech a formidable retinue, that it would
have been dangerous to condemn, and impossible
to punish him. Besides a numerous body of his
friends and vassals assembled, according to cuf-
torn, from different parts of the kingdom, he
was attended by a band of hired soldiers, who
marched with flying colours along the ifreets of
Edinburgh t. A court of justice was held with
the accustomed formalities. An indiament was
presented againif Bothwell, and Lennox was call-
ed upon to make good his accusation. In his
name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his
dependants. He excused his Mafter's absence,
on account of the shortness of the time, which
prevented his assembling his friends and vassals,
without whose arlinaance he could not, with safe-
ty, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired
the court to flop proceeding, and protested, that
any sentence which should be passed at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell,
on the other hand, insisted that the court (hould
inflantly oroceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to pro-
fecute the murderers without delay, was pro-
duced. Cunningham's objeaions were over-

A Anders. Pref. 60. See Appendix, No. XIX.

t Anders. vol. i. 135.

ruled;

ruled; and the jury, confiffing of Peers and Ba- B o o x
rons of the first rank, found Bothwell not guilty IV.
of the crime. I567.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single Bothwell is

acquitted.

witners was examined, nor any evidence produced
againfl him. The jury, under these circum-
frances, could do nothing else but acquit him.
Their verdia, however, was far from gratifying
the wilhes, or silencing the murmurs of the peo-
ple. Every circumifance in the trial gave grounds
for suspicion, and excited indignation; and the
judgment pronounced, initead of being a proof
of Bothwell's innocence, was esteemed an ar-
gument of his guilt. Pafquinades and libels
were affixed to different places, exprefimng the
sentiments of the public with the utmost virulence
of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware

of the censure to which their proceedings would
be exposed; and, at the fame time, that they
returned their verdici acquitting Bothwell, the
Earl of Caithness protefled, in their name, that
no crime mhould be imputed to them on that ac-
count, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indiatment. He took
potice, likewise, that the ninth inicead of the
tenth of February was mentioned in the indiat-
ment, as the day on which the murder had been
committed. A circumitance, which discovers
the extreme inaccuracy of those who prepared
the indiarment; and at a time when men were
difpofid, and not without reason, to be suspicious

of

B o o K of every thing; this finall matter contributed to

IV. confirm and to increase their fulpicions *.
1567. EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the

judgment which he had obtained in his favour, as
a full vindication of his innocence. Immediate-
ly after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a
custom which was not then obsolete, published a
writing, in which he offered to fight, in single
conibat, any Gentleman of good fame, who
thould presume to accuse him of being accessary
to the murder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and fatisfaaory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox,
who could not expe& that his own person would
be safe in a country where the murder' of his son
had been absolved, without regard to jufbce;
and loaded with honours, in contempt of de-
cency; fled with precipitation towards Eng.
land t.

A Parlia; Two days after the trial, a Parliament was
ment held, held, at the opening of which the Queen diftin-

guifhed Bothwell, by appointing him to carry
the sceptre before her $. Molt of the ats passed
in this Assembly were calculated on purpose to
irengthen his party, and to promote his designs.
He obtained the ratification of all the poffeffions
and honours which the partiality of the Queen

* Bothw. Trial, Anders. vol. i. 97, &c. t Keith, 37S,

Note (d>. Id. ibid.

had conferred upon him; and the a& to that B o O K
effe contained the firongeft declarations of his IV.
faithful services to the Crown in all times past.
The surrender of the camtle of Edinburgh by
Mar was confirmed. The law of attainder against
Huntly was repealed, and he, and his adherents,
were restored to the estates and honours of their
anceflors. Several of those who had been on the
jury which acquitted him, obtained ratifications
of the grants made in their favour; and as pas-
quinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby
those, into whole hands any paper of that kind
fell, were commanded instantly to defcroy it;
and if, through their negleat, it Thould be altow-
ed to spread, they were fubjeated to a capital pu-
nifhment, in the fame manner as if they had been
the original authors *.

But the absolute dominion which Bothwell had Remarkable

Ii In Ia-

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clear- vour of the

Reforma-

eft manner, by an a~t in favour of the Protefiant non.
religion, to which, at this time, she gave her as-
sent. Mary's attachment to the Romish faith
was uniform and superstitious; she had never laid
aside the design, nor loft the hopes of restoring
it. She had, of late, come under new engage-
ments to that purpose, and, in consequence of
these, had ventured upon some ifeps more public
and vigorous than any lhe had formerly taken.
But Bothwell was prompted, by powerful mo-
tives, to promote this law. He had been guilty
of crimes, which rendered him the objec ofjuft
and universal detestation. He was meditating

* Keith, 289,

othcrs,

B o o K others, which he easily foresaw would heighten the

IV. public indignation againtf him. By this popular

' law, he might hope to divert, or to delay the re-

1567. fntment of the nation, and flattered himself, that

the obtaining this unexpeaed and legal security
for the Protestant religion would atone for much
guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy, and in-
duce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his
crimes. The a6t itfolf was so favourable, to the
doarine of the Reformers, that the Parliament,
which met next year, under very different leaders,
could fubltitute nothing filronger or more explicit
in its place; and thought it fufficient to ratify it
worfd for word *. To pass such an act was utterly
inconfiltent with all the maxims whir h Mary fol-
lowed in every other period of her life; but what
could never be extorted from her by the folicita-
tions of the Assemblies of the church, or by the
intreaties of the people, the more powerful influr
ence of Bothwcll now obtained t.

*Parl. I Jac. VI. c. 31.
t Buchn in, Hiift 355, not Cn!V Omits taking any notice

of this Inw, huo asserts that the OQuen, thoigh (he had given
promiles in fawoor of thr Reform'd r !igion, refused to per-
rfit any act to pa(s in support of it, at.d even difmniffed the de-
potics of the cho:rch with co.;tcrnpt. Spotfivood, 202. and
Colderwood, vol. iii. 41. both afrin the ifme thing. It would
not have bLen aece11ary to oblerv'e this inlf ance of Buchanan's
inaccuracy, but that an author so conversant in our laws as
Spotifood, and one so indu~lrious as CJ11erwood, ,hould com-
mit uclh an error, when not only the original statute was ex-
tant in the recrds of Mary's P..rliament, but even when the
printed a of Man ay's Parliament was before their eyes, is
remarkaloe. Even Buchanan hirmnlf has taken notice of this
aa. Dete~io, p. 8.

yEVERY

EVERY itep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been B o o xe

attended with all the success which his most fan- IV.
guine wishes could expea. He had entirely gained
the Qgi1'e 'r 'r aert; the murder of the King had ex- Bs ahuI
cited no pubiic crvrmotion; he had been acquitted 2VRIIC
by his Peers of any I:h.= :i that crime ; and their re17
decision had been, in fame fort, ratified in Parlia- asan ha4

band to the

moent. But in a kingdom, here the regal autho- qWeen.
rity was fh extremely limited, and the power of the
nobles so formidable, he durit not venture on the
lalt adion, towards which all his ambitious projecs
tended, without their approbation. In order to fe-
cure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of April x.
Parliament, invited all the nobles who were present
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose confcnm, he told
them, he had already obtained; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
less acceptable to their Sovereign, than honourable
to himnfelft. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with
the utmolt zeal; the Popish ecclefiatlics, who were
absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth
all her pamons, instantly declared their fatisfadtion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded
the exorbitant power which Bothweil had acquired,
and observed the Queen's growing aff'eRion to-
wards him in all her aaions, ware wilihng to make
a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could
neither oppose nor defeat. Some few were con-

SGood. vol. ii. 14i. t Anders. vol. i. 94.

6 founded

B o O K founded and enraged. But, in the end, Bothwell,

IV. partly by promnifes and flattery, partly by terror
'-v' and force, prevailed on all who iwere present to
1567. subscribe a paper, which leaves a deeper stain

than any occurrence in that age, on the honour
and charaEtcr of the nation.

THIs paper contained the ifrongeft declarations

of Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac-
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future accusation should be brought againit
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub-
fcribers promised to stand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen as the most
proper person (he could chufe for a husband; and if
ihe could condescend to beflow on him that mark
of her regard, they undertook to promote the mar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces in op-
posing any person who endeavoured to obffruc· it*.
Among the subscribers of this paper, we find some
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who
were fcrangers to her councils, and obnoxious to
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to her
through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and
others who became the principal authors of her
fu~ferings; some passionately attached to the Ro-
mifh superstition, and others zealous advocates for
the Protestant faith t. No common interest can
be supposed to have united men of such opposite
principles and parties, in recommending to their
Sovereign a flep so injurious to her honour, and
so fatal to her peace. This firange coalition was

* Arderf. vol. i. 177 1t -Keith, 382.

the effeQt of much artifice, and muff be considered B o o ie
as the boldest and most masterly ifroke of Both- IV.
well's address. It is observable, that amidst all the '- 1567.
altercations and mutual reproaches of the two par-
ties which arose in the kingdom, this unworthy
tranfachion is seldom mentioned. Conscious on
both sides, that in this particular their conduct
could ill bear examination, and would redound lit-
tie to their fame, they always touch upon it unwil-
lingly, and feiem desirous that it should remain in
darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many
persons, who, both at that time, and ever after,
poffefWed the Queen's favour, subscribed this paper,
the suspicion becomes strong that Bothwell's am-
bitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor.
difapprovedby her *.

TIrESE

* Of all the diferent fyfiems with regard to this tranfaimon,

that of Camden seems to be the least accurate, and the world
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at
the fame time, that the fnbfcriptions to this paper were obtained
by them out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody secret, 404. But besides the absurdity
of supposing that any man's enemies would contribute towards
railing him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of as-
terwards depriving him of it; besides the impossibility of ac.
complifhing fiuch a marriage, if it had been either unknown to
the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this
supposition is destroyed by the direa reflimony of the Queen
herself, who ascribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's
artifices, 'who purchajed It 4y giving them to underf and that 'we
'were content thercqvith. Anders. vol. i. 94. It would have been
no small advantage to Mary, if she could have reprefenteed the
consent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed.
It is frill more furrriling to find Lily aferibing this paper to

B o O K THESE furpicions are confirmed by the most

IV. direat proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a
''' considerable ihare in her favour. He, as well
1567. as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in

England with those who favoured her preten-
flions to that Crown. The rumour of her intend-
ed marriage with Bothweil having spread early
in that kingdom, excited universal indignation;
and Melvil received a letter from thence, which
represented, in the ifrongeft terms, what would
be the fatal effeSts of such an imprudent flep.
Ile put this letter into the Queen's hands, and
enforced it with the utmost warmth. She not
only disregarded these remonftrances, but com-
municated the matter to Bothwell ; and Mel-
vil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly
from court, whither he durst not return till the
Earl's rage began to abate *. At the fame time,

Eli-

Murray and his faaion. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bishop him-
seif was one of the persons who subscribed it, Keith, 383.
The King's commiflioners, at the conference held at York
i568, pretended that none of the nobles, except the Earl of
Huntly, would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the
Queen was produced, by which they were allowed to do so:
this warrant they had in their cuflody, and exhibited. An-
derf. vol. iv. Part z. 5. This differs from Buchanan's ac-
count, who fiuppofes that all the nobles present subscribed the
paper on the i9th, and that next day they obtained the appro
bation of what they had done, by way of security to them-
selves, 355*

*Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herries like-

wife remonstrated againit the marriage, and conjured the
Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dif-
honourable alliance, i56. But it has been observed, that Her-
ries is one of the nobles who subscribed the bond, April r9.

Keith,

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy E o o 1a
to which (he would expose herself, by such an in- IV.
decent choice : but an advice from her met with 1567.
itill less regard *

THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Bthwell

carries tp~e

Mary went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order Qcen by
to visit the Prince her son. Bothwell had now 'g'",
brought his schemes to full maturity, and every
precaution being taken which could render it
safe to enter on the laa and decisive fiep, the na-
tural impetuosity of his spirit did not fuffer him
to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an
expedition against the freebooters on the borders,
he assembled his followers; and marching out of
Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned iuddenly
towards Linlithgow', met the Queen on her return Arli 24.
near that place, dispersed her slender train witha-
out resistance, seized on her person, and conduc2-
ed her, together with a few of her courtiers, as a

lKeith, 383. 2. That he is one of the witnesses to the mar-
riage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May s4.
Good. vol. ii. 61. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell,
May 17. Keith, 386. But this remonfitrance of Lord Herries
againit the marriage happened before these, made by Melvil
himself, 157. Melvil's remonfirance muff have happened
some time before the meeting of Parliament; for after offend-
ing Bothwell, he retired from court; he allowed his raga
time to subside, and had again joined the Queen, when fne
was seized, April 24, 158. The time which muff have elapsed,
by this account of the matter, was perhaps fufficient to have
gained Herries from being an opposer to become a promoter
of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have committed some
mifitake with regard to this faS, so far as relates to Lord Het-
ries. He could not well be mistaken with regard to what
himself did.

*Anders. vol. i. xo5.
VOL. I. E e prisoner

B o O K prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She exprefred

*V. neither surprise, nor terror, nor indignation, at

such an outrage committed on her person, and
such an insult offered to her authority, but seemed
to yield without firuggle or regret *. Melvil
was, at that time, one of her attendants; and the
officer by whom he was seized, informed him, that
nothing was done without the Queen's own con-
sent t. If we may rely on the letters published
in Mary's name, the scheme had been communi.
cated to her, and every ifep towards it was taken
with her participation and advice $.

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of

advantage to employ this appearance of violence.
It afforded her a decent excuse for her condu&;
and while ihe could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, she hoped that her re-
putation, among foreigners at least, would escape
without censure, or be exposed to less reproach.
Bothwell could not help diftrufting all the me-
thods which had hitherto been used, for vindi-
cating him from any concern in the murder of
the King. Something was still wanting for his
security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This
was a pardon under the Great Seal. By the laws
of Scotland, the most heinous crime must be
mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all
lesser offences are deemed to be included under
the general clause, and all other crimes whatfo-
ever II. To seize the person of the Prince, is
high treason; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon

* Keith, 383. t Melv. 5S8. t Good. vol. ii. 37-
1p Parl. 6 Jac. IV. c. 62. obtained

obtained for this, would extend to every thing of B o o K
which he had been accused *. IV.

BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's per- 1567.

son into his hands, it would have been unbe- Isdivorced

from his

coming either a politician or a man of gallantry ownwue
to have delayed consummating his schemes. For
this purpose, he instantly commenced a suit, in
order so obtain a sentence of divorce from his wife
Lady Jane Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's lifter.
This .process was carried on, at the fame time, Aprul29;
before Protefitant and Popish judges; before the
former, in the court of Commiffaries; and be-
fore the latter, in the spiritual court of the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's, whose jurifdiaion the
Queen had lately restored. The pretexts which
he pleaded were trivial, or scandalous. But his
authority had greater weight than the justice of
his cause; and in both courts, sentence of di-
vorce was pronounced with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy t.

WHILE this infamous tranfa&ion was carrying

on, the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as
a prisoner, but treated with the greatest refpeEt.
Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of May 3
his dependants, conduEted her tf Edinburgh;
but, initead of lodging her in the Palace of Holy-
rood-houfe, he conveyed her to the caffle, of
which he was governor. The discontent of the
nation rendered this precaution necessary. In an
house unfortified, and of easy access, the Queen
might have been rescued without difficulty out of

* Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 6i. t And. i. 132.

Ee2 his

B o o K his hands. In a place of firength, she was fe-

IV. cured from all the attempts of his enemies.
1567. ONE fimall difrculty still remained to be fur-

mounted. As the Queen was kept in a fort of
captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in
that condition might be imputed to force, and be

Mly 12. held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary ap-

peared in the Court of Seflion, and, in presence
of the Chancellor, and other judges, and several
of the nobility, declared that fihe was now at full
liberty; and though Bothwell's violence in seizing
her person had, at first, excited her indignation,
yet his refpe~tful behaviour flnce that time, had
not only appeased her resentment, but determined
her to raise him to higher honours *.

1 0

rn~rd XVHAT these were, soon became public. The

to the
&een. title of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Both-

well; and on the x 5th of May, his marriage with
the Queen, which had so long been the obje& of
his wishes, and the motive of his crimes, was so-
lemnized. The ceremony was performed, in
public, according to the rites of the Protestant
Church, by Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney,
one of the few Prelates who had embraced the Re-
formation, and on the fame day was celebrated
in private, according to the forms prescribed by
the Popish religion i. The boldness with which
Craig, the Minister who was commanded to pub-
lifh the banns, teffified againit the design; the
finall number of the nobles, who were present at
the marriage; and the sullen and difrefpeaful

* And.i. 87. f Id. 136. ii. 276.

silence

fllence of the people, when the Queen appeared B a o Kc
in public; were manifest fymnptoms of the vio- IV.
lent and general diffatisfa5ion of her own sub- "

1567.

jets. The refusal of Du Croc the French am-
baffador to be present at the nuptial ceremony or
entertainment, discovers the sentiments of her al-
lies, with regard to this part of her condua ; and
although every other ation in Mary's life could be
justified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled
to the principles of virtue, this fatal marriage
would remain an inconteftible proof of her rafih-
ness, if not of her guilt.

MARY'S f1lrt care was to offer fame apology

for her conduEl, to the courts of France and
England. The inftrucions to her ambassadors
still remain, and are drawn by a masterly hand.
But under all the artificial and false colouring she
employs, it is easy to discover not only that many
of the fleps ihfe had taken were unjuflifiable, but
that she herself was conscious that they could not
be justified ".

THE title of King was the only thing which

was not bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwithfcand-
ing her attachment to him, Mary remembered
the inconveniences which had arisen from the rash
advancement of her former husband to that ho-
nour. She agreed, however, that he (hould sign,
in token of consent, all the public writs issued in
her name $. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he poffeffed all the
reality of power. The Queen's person was in his
hands; she was surrounded more closely than ever

* And. i. 89. -I- Good. ii. 60.

Ee3 by

B o O K by his creatures; none of her fubjeEts could ob-

lV. tam audience without his permiflion; and, unless
567. in his own presence, none but his confidents were

permitted to converse with her *. The Scottish
Monarchs were accustomed to live among their
fubjecds as fathers or as equals, without diftrufl,
and with little fhate; armed guards itanding at
the doors of the royal apartment, diffculty of ac-
cess, distance and retirement, were things un-
known, and unpopular.

,EraorSs THESE precautions were neceflary for securing

or~~~: ~ ,to Bothwell the power which he had acquired.

pelron. But, without being maiter of the person of the

young Prince, he efleemed all that he had gained
to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had
committed her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were
too well known to exped that he would be wil-
ling to put the Prince into the hands of the man
who was so violently fufpeted of having mur-
dered his father. Bothwell, however, laboured
to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety
which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All
his address, as well as authority, were employed
to persuade, or to force Mar, into a compliance
with his demands t. And it is no flight proof,
both of the firmness and dexterity of that noble-
man, that he preserved a life of so much import-
ance to the nation, from lying at the mercy of a
man, whom fear or ambition might have prompt-
ed to violent attempts againit it.

* And. i. 136. t Melv. 160. Buch. 361.

THE

THE eyes of the neighbouring nations were B o o

fixed, at that time, upon the great events, which IV.
had happened in Scotland, during three months. 167.
.A King murdered with the utmost cruelty, in the Gerneran1
prime of his days, and in his capital city; the $a io
person fuipeded of that odious crime luffered not Qeen's
only to appear publicly in every place, but ad- cited,
mitted into the presence of the Queen, diftin-
guilhed by her favour, and intruffed with the
chief direAion of her affairs; fubjecaed to a trial
which was carried on with moat shameless par-
tiality, agd acquitted by a sentence, which served
only to confirm the suspicions of his guilt ; di-
vorced from his wife, on pretences frivolous, or
indecent; and after all this, initead of meeting
with the ignominy due to his aEtions, or the pu-
nifhment merited by his crimes, permitted openly,
and without oppolition, to marry a Queen, the
wife of the Prince whom he had affaffinated, and
the guardian of those laws which he had been
guilty of violating. Such a quick succession of
incidents, so singular and so detestable, is not to
be found in any other history. They left, in the
opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the
chara~ter of the nation. The Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durfi scarce
appear any where in public; and after fuffering
so many atrocious deeds to pass with impunity,
they were universally reproached as men void of
courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless
of the reputation of their Queen, and the honour
of their country *.

* Anders. vol, i. 128. 134. Mely. 163. See Appendix,

No. XX.

T`HESE

E e 4

B o 0 K THESE reproaches roused the nobles, who had

IV. been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or

6c intimidated by his power. The manner in which

Thn no he exercised the authority which he had acquired,
:~Xeh~r his repeated attempts to become mafler of the
" Prince's person, together with some rash threat-

enings againit him, which he let fall , added to
the violence and promptness of their resolutions.
A considerable body of them assembled at Stir-
ling, and entered into an association for the de-
fence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar,
Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Mur-
ray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and
Maitland the Secretary, were the heads of this
confederacy -. Stewart Earl of Athol was re-
markable for an uniform and bigotted attachment
to popery; but his indignation on account of the
murder of the King, to whom he was nearly al-
lied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of
rel9ion, arid united him with the most zealous
PFotefiants. Several of the other nobles aded,
v ithout queflion, from a laudable concern for the
Ialcty of the Prince, and the honour of their
country. But the spirit which some of them dif-
coveted, during the subsequent revolutions,
leaves little room to doubt, that ambition or re-
fentment were the real motives of their condu&;
arnd that, on many occasions, while they were pur-
sing ends just and necessary, they were a6tuated
by principles and paftions altogether unjustifiable.

'THE firf' accounts of this league filled the

Qjen and Bothwell with great coniternation,

Mely i6 . 6t Keith, 394. They

They were no firangers to the sentiments of the B o O K
nation, with refpe& to their condua3; and though IV.
their marriage had not met with public oppofi- I567.
tion, they knew that it had not been carried on
without the secret disgust and murmurings of all
ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with
which this indignation would burst out, after
having been so long suppressed; and in order to
prepare for the liorm, MJ1ary ififed a proclama- May as.
tion, requiring her fubjeas to take arms, and to
attend her husband by a day appointed. At the
fame time, the published a Ibrt of manifeflo, in
which she laboured to vindicate her government
from those imputations with which it had been
loaded, and employed the ifrongeft terms to ex-
press her concern for the safety and welfare of the
Prince her son. Neither of these produced any
considerable effea. Her proclamation was ill
obeyed, and her manifesto met with little credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their prepa- The Qeen

. and Both-

rations with no less adtivity, and with much more well retire
success. Among a warlik;e people, men of so to Dunbar,
much power and popularity found it an easy mat-
ter to raise an army. They were ready to march
before the Queen and Bothwell were in a condi-
tion to refilt them. The castle of Edinburgh was
the place whither the Queen ought naturally to
bave retired, and there her person might have been
perfeatly safe. But the confederates had fallen
on means to thake, or corrupt the fidelity of Sir
James Balfour, the deputy governor, and Both-

* Keith, 337. 395, 39g.

well

ZB o o K well durlt not commit to him such an import-

IV. ant truit. He condudled the Queen to the cafmle

of Brothwick, and on the appearance of Lord

June 6. Home, with a body of his followers, before that

place, he fled with precipitation to Dunbar, and
was followed by the Queen disguised in men's
clothes. The confederates advanced towards
Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
againit them. They entered without opposition,
and were inifantly joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmeRt support of their
cause *.

IN order to set their own condu& in the most

favourable light, and to rouse the public indig-
nation againit Bothwell, the nobles publilhed a
declaration of the motives which had induced
them to take arms. All Bothwell's pait crimes
were enumerated, all his wicked intentions dif-
played and aggravated, and every true Scotsman
was called upon to join them in avenging the one,
and in preventing the other t.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he soon gathered such strength, that he
ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness
and secrecy of their enterprise gave their friends
at a distance no time to join them ; and as it does
not appear that they were supported either with
money or fed with hopes by the Queen of Eng-

* Geithl, !98. 2` Andlerf, vol. i. r28-

lInOc.

land, they could not have kept long in a body. B o o K
But on the other hand, Bothwell durst not risk a IV.
delay *, His army followed him with reluaance L
in this quarrel, and served him with no cordial 1567.
affetion; so that his only hope of success was in
surprising the enemy, or in itriking the blow be-
fore his own troops had leisure to recolle& them-
selves, or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opi-
nion of his a~tions, which had spread over the
reft of the nation. These motives determined the
Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate
and fatal speed.

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the The noles

confederates advanced to meet her. They found gains them.
her forces drawn up upon the fame ground which July 15.
the English had occupied before the battle of
Pinkie. The numbers on both sides were nearly
equal; but there was no equality in point of dif-
cipline. The Queen's army consisted chiefly of
a multitude, hastily assembled, without courage
or experience in war. The troops of the confe-
derates were composed of Gentlemen of rank and
reputation, followed by their most trusty depend-
ants, who were no less brave than zealous t.

Du CRoc the French Ambassador, who was in Anaccam-

modation

the field, laboured, by negotiating both with the atempted.
Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quar-
rcl without the effufion of blood. He represented
to the confederates the Queen's inclinations to-
wards peace, and her willingness to pardon the
offences which they had committed. Morton re-

* Keith, 401. t Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49.

plied

B o O K plied with warmth, that they had taken arms not

IV. against the Queen, but against the murderer of
J her husband; and if he were given up to justice,

or banished from her presence, the should find
them ready to yield the obedience which is due
from fubjeats to their Sovereign. Glencairn add-
ed, that they did not come to ask pardon for any
offence, bt~t to punilh those who had offended.
Such haughty answers convinced the ambassador,
that his mediation would be ineffedual, and that
their pallions were too high to allow them toliften
to any pacific propositions, or to think of re-
treating after having proceeded so far *.

THE Queen's army was poffed to advantage, on

a rising ground. The confederates advanced to
the attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the
caution which was natural on that unhappy field.
Her troops were alarmed at their approach, and
discovered no inclination to fight. Mary endea-
voured to animate them; (he wept, the threat-
ened, (he reproached them with cowardice, but
all in vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate at-
tendants were eager for the encounter; the reft
fwood wavering and irresolute, and some began to
ileal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to in-
spirit them, by offering to decide the quarrel,
and to vindicate his own innocence in single com-
~bat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of
Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lind-
fay contended for the honour of entering the lifts
a.gainst him. But this challenge proved to be a

* Keith, 401.

rmere

mere bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt B o o K
deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the IV.
Queen, by her authority, forbad the combat * 5

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcusable,
had she hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which she stood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impraaicable. In this fltuation,
the was under the cruel necernty of putting her-
self into the hands of those fubjeas who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview
with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who
commanded an advanced body of the enemy.
He, with the consent and in the name of the
leaders of the party, promised that, on condition
the would dismiss Bothwell from her presence,
and govern the kingdom by the advice of her
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their
Sovereign t.

DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last flthwdn

obliged to

farewell of the Queen, and rode off the field with by.
a few followers. This difinal reverse happened
exa2tly one month after that marriage, which had
colt him so many crimes to accomplish, and which
leaves so foul a slain on Mary's memory.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered Maryrur-

rende ' r0

to Kirkaldy, who conduaed her toward the con- th nobcs,.
federate army, the leaders of which received her
with much refpeEt; and Morton, in their name,
made ample profeffions of their future loyalty and

* Cald. vol. ii. 50. t Good. vol. ii. 164. Melv. 16;.

obedience.

B o o K obedience *. But ihe was treated by the common

IV. soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity.
1567. As mhe marched along, they poured upon her all

the opprobrious names, which are bellowed only
on the lowelt and moll infamous criminals. Where-
ever Ihe turned her eyes, they. held up before her
a ifandard, on which was painted the dead body
of the late King, ifretched on the ground, and
the young Prince kneeling before it, and utter-
ing these words, "' Judge and revenge my cause,
" O Lord !" Mary turned with horror from such
a ihocking fight. She began already to feel the
wretched condition to which a captive Prince is
reduced. She uttered the moss bitter complaints,
she melted into tears, and could scarce be kept
from sinking to the ground. The confederates
carried her towards Edinburgh; and in spite of
many delays, and after looking with the fondness
and credulity natural to the unfortunate, for some
extraordinary relief, ihe arrived there. The fitreets
were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or cu-
riofity had drawn together, to behold such an un-
usual scene. The Queen, worn out with fatigue,
covered with duff, and bedewed with tears, was
exposed as a fpetacle to her own flubjeas, and led
to the Provoft's house. Notwithstanding all her
arguments and intreaties, the fame itandard was
carried before her, and the fame insults and re-
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beauti-
ful, and in dillrefs, is naturally the objea of
compassion. The comparison of their present

* Good. vol. i. x6g.

5 misery

misery with their former splendour, usually softens B o a K
us in favour of illufirious fufferers. But the IV.
people beheld the deplorable situation of their So-'7` 7
vereign with insensibility; and so firong was their
persuasion of her guilt, and Lo great the violence
of their indignation, that the fufferings of their
Queen did not, in any degree, mitigate their re-
fentment, or procure her that sympathy, which is
seldom denied to unfortunate Princes .

* Melvil, 166. Buch. 3G4.

# BOOK V.

HISTORY

OF

S C O T L A N D.

BOOK V.

T HE confederate Lords had proceeded to iuch B O O K<

extremities against their Sovereign, that it V.

now became almost impossible for them either to
fLop thort, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- De5e6a
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them tenor t
in their enterprise; others openly condemned it. mnng the
A small circumstance might abate that indignation
with which the multitude were, at present, ani-
mated againit the Qgeen, and deprive them of
that popular applause which was the chief founda-
tion of their power. These considerations in-
clined some of them to treat the Queen with
great lenity.

orVL. I. F f Bur

B o o K BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affeation for

V. Bothwell continued as violent as ever; ihe obfti-
567 nately refused to hearken to any proposal for dif-

solving their marriage, and determined not to
abandon a man, for whole love she had already
sacrificed so much*. If they should allow her to
recover the fiupreme power, the first exertion of it
would be to recal Bothwell; and they had reason,
both from his refcntment, from her condu6a, and
from their own, to expea the severest effefs of
her vengeance. These considerations surmounted
every other motive; and reckoning themselves ab-
solved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Both-
well, from the engagements which they had come
under when she yielded herself a prisoner, they,
without regarding the duty which they owed her as
their Queen, and without confilting the reff of
the nobles, carried her next evening, under a

Thr ;m- ifrong guard, to the caffle of Lochlevin, and sign-
OC'Cf ed a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it,

to detain her as a prisoner. This cafmle is situated
in a small island, in the middle of a lake. Dou-
glas, to whom it belonged, was a near relation of
Morton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's
mother. In this place, under firia custody, with
a few attendants, and fubjeated to the insults of
a haughty woman, who boasted daily of being
the lawful wife of James V. Mary fuffered all the
rigour and miseries of captivityt.

* Keith, 419. 446. 449. Meiv. 167. See Append. No. XXI.
-j- Keith, 403. Note (b).

IMME-

IMMEDIATELY after the Oieen's imprisonment, B O O K

the confederates were at the utmost pains to V.
irengthen their parry; they entered into newv 1567.
bonds of association; they afifmed the title of
Lords of the fI'cret Council, and without any other
right, arrogated to themselves the whole regal au-
thority. One of their firlt aats of power was to
search the city of Edinburgh for those who were
concerned in the murder of the King. This show
of zeal gained reputation to themselves, and threw
an oblique refetion ofl the Queen for heir re-
miffnefs. Several fufpeated persons were seized.
Captain Blackadder and three others were con-
demned and executed. But no discovery of im-
portance was made. If we believe some historians,
they were conviAed by fufficient evidence. If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjufi, and
they denied, with their lass breath, any knowledge
of the crime for which they fuffered *.

AN unexpeated accident, however, put into the

hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the
fullifi evidence of her guilt. Bothweil having
left in the castle of Edinburgh a casket, contain-
ing several sonnets and letters written with the
Queen's dwn hand; he now sent one of his con-
fidents to bring to him this precious depofite.
But as his messenger returned, he was intercepted,
and the casket seized by Morton ti The contents
of it were always produced by the party, as the
molt ample jufification of their own conduc^a,
and the most unanswerable proof of their not

Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.

j- Anders. vol. ii. 92. Good. 0ol. ii. 90.

F f 2 having

B o O K having loaded their Sovereign with the imptita-

V. tion of imaginary crimes ".
67~ BUT the confederates, notwithfl-anding their

Sroe of the extraordinary fluccefs, were itill far from being
nobjes fa-
voU, to perfe6lv at ease. That so finall a part of the nobles
~een. should pretend to dilpofe of the person of their So-

vereign, or to afiume the authority which belong-
ed to her, without the concurrence of the reff, ap-
p eared to many of that body to be unprecedented
and presumptuous. Several of these were now
assembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate
what course they fihould hold in this difficult con-
junature. The con federates made some attempts
towards a coalition with them, but without effe&.
'They employed the mediation of the Assembly of
the Church, to draw them to a perlonal interview
at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That
party, however, though its numbers were formi-
dable, and the power of its leaders great, soon loft
reput ation by the want of unanimity and vigour;
all its confultarions cvauorated in murmurs and
comploints, aid no scheme was concerted for ob-
firuding the progress of the confederates t.

Elizabeth rfIERE appeared some profpea of danger from
interpofcs in
her wher. another quarter. This great revolution in Scot-

land had been carried on without any aid from
Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge (.
And though (he was far from being displeased to
fee the affatirs of that kingdom embroiled, or a
rival, whom (he hated, reducc to distress; ,he
neither wished that it should be in the power of the

* See Dilffrtation at the end of the Appendix.
t- K~eith,, 407. · ~Iti. 4'5-

one fa&ion entirely to suppress the other, nor B o o Kc
could the view the steps taken by the confederates V.
without great offence. Notwithstanding the po- I$67.
pular maxims by which she governed her own
fubjeas, her notions of royal prerogative were
very exalted. The confederates bad, in her opi-
nion, encroached on the authority of their Sove-
reign, which they had no right to controul, and
had offered violence to her person, which it was
their duty to esteem sacred. They had set a dan-
gerous example to other fubjecas, and Mary's cause
became the common cause of Princes X. If ever
Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the affairs
of Scotland by the feelings of her heart, rather
than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton June so.
into Scotland, with power to negotiate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his in-
firu&ions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation 1.
And the choice of an Ambassador, so devoted to
the interest of the Scottish Queen, proves this ob-
licitude to have been sincere. But neither Eliza-
beth's friendship, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were
of much avail to Mary. The confederates sorer
saw what would be the eirccts of these good oc-
fices; and that the Queen, elated by the profped
of protecLion, would rejecR with scorn the overtures
which they were about to make her. They, for
that reason, peremptorily denied Throgmorton
gccefs to their prisoner; and what propolitions he

Keith, 412* 415. t Id. 4iii

Fs,3 wmeds

B o o K made to them in her behalf they either r.efused,

V. or eluded ".
1567. vIEAN while they deliberated with the utmost
Schen.coF anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation,
tue (onto-

&at~o- and the future disposal of the Qeen's person.
t Elizabeth, uobi.i.: h .r. i i'hrogmorton made no

progress in his negotiations with them, and that
they would listen to none of his demands in Mary's
favour, turned towards that party of the nobles
who were affemiLled at Hamilton, incited them
to take arms in order to restore their Queen to
liberty, and promised to assist them in such an at-
tempt to the utmot of her power t. But they
difovered no greater union and vigour than for-
mnerly, and, behaving like men who had given up
all concern eiTher for their Queen or their coun-
try, tamely allowed an inconGderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with re1pec? to
numbers, or to power, to fettle the government
of the kingdom, and to dispose of the Queen's
person at pleasure. Mvlany consultations were held,
and various opinions arose with regard to each of
there. Some seemed desirous of adhering to the
plan on which the confederacy was at first form-
ed; and after puniihing the murderers of the
King, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell;
after providing for the safety of the young Prince,
and the security of the Protestant religion; they
proposed to re-establish the Queen in the poffeffion
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired others

"Kzith, 47. 427. -j- See Appendix, No. XXII.

with

with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no- B o 0 K
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the V.
condemnation and puniflhment of the Queen her-
self, as the principal conspirator againif the life of
her husband, and the safety of her son*: the for-
mer was Maitland's system, and breathed too
much of a pacific and moderate spirit, to be
agreeable to the temper or wishes of the party.
The latter was recommended by the clergy, and
warmly adopted by many laics ; but the nobles
durit not, or would not venture on such an un-
precedented and audacious deed t.

BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, They obigo

the Queen

neither so moderate as the one, nor so daring as to relUn the
the other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to governmen:.
refgn the Crown; the young Prince was to be
proclaimed King, and the Earl of Murray was
to be appointed to govern the kingdom, during
his minority, wich the name and authority of
Regent. With regard to the Queen's own per-
son, nothing was determined. It seems to have
been the intention of the confederates to keep
her in perpetual imprisonment but in order to
intimidate herself, and to overawe her partisans,
they iftill reserved to themselves the power of pro-
ceeding to more violent extremes.

* Keith, 420, 42), 42z. 5SZ.
9 The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to

have been carried on by some of her fobjets: At this time we
often find Elizabeth boafihng that M'ry owed her life to her
interposition. Digges's Compl. Armb. 14, &c. See Append,
No, XVIII.

F f4

V. cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
6 high-fpirited, and accustomed to command. To

induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power
which she was born to enjoy, to become depend-
ant on her own flubjeas, to consent to her own
bondage, and to invest those persons, whom she
considered as the authors of all her calamities,
with that honour and authority of which ihe her-
self was ifripped, were points hard to be gained.
These, however, the confederates attempted,
and they did not want means to insure success.
M1ary had endured, for several weeks, all the hard-
ships and terror of a prison; no profpea of liberty
appeared; none of her fibjeds had either taken
arms, or so much as folicimed her relief~ ; no per-
son, in whom she could confide, was admitted into
her presence; even the Ambafladors of the French
King, and Queen of England, were refused ac-
cess to her. In this solitary slate, without a coun-
fellor or a friend, under the prefhlre of distress,
and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for
a woman to hearken almost to any overtures. The
confederates took advantage of her condition, and
of her fears. They employed Lord Lindsay, the
fiercest zealot in the party, to communicate their
scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her fubfcrip-
tion to those papers which were necessary for ren-
dering it effeaual. He executed his commiflon
with harshness and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes if ihe refifed to comply with

* Keith, 42C.

his demands. At the fame time, she was inform- B o o i.
ed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of Athol, V.
Maitiand, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the 1567.
confederates who were most attentive to her in-
terest, that a resignation extorted by fear, and
granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked so soon as the reco-
vered liberty. Throgmorton, by a note whichhe
found means to convey to her, suggested the fame
thing ". Deference to their opinion, as well as
concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield
to every thing which was required, and to sign
all the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By
one of these, she resigned the Crown, renounced
all share in the government of the kingdom, and
consented to the coronation of the young King.
By another, fne appointed the Earl of Murray July u4.
Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers
and privileges of that high office. By a third,
the fubfcituted some other nobleman in Murray's
place, if he should refuse the honour which was
designed for him. Mary, when the subscribed
there deeds, was bathed in tears; and while (he
gave away, as it were with her own hands, the
sceptre which she had fivayed so long, the felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest,
perhaps, which can touch the human heart t.

THE confederates encleavoured to give this re- James VI.

. crowned,

fignation all the weight and validity in their power, and Murray
by proceeding without delay to crown the young f" Re.
Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

* Keith, 4Z9. Note (b). Melv. 169.
t Ibid. 430. Crawf. Mem. 38.

B o O K on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in

V. presence of all the nobles of the party, a confi-

L tderable number of lesser barons, and a great as-
1567. fembly of the people. From that time, all pub-

lic writs were idiled, and the government carried
on in name of James VI. *

No revolution so great was ever effe61ed with

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,
a part of the nobles, who neither poffeffed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the na-
tion, and who never brought 3000 men into the
field, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned their
Queen, and without shedding a single drop of
blood, set her son, an infant of a year old, on
the throne.

Reaannings DURING this rapid progress of the confederates,

a the eyes of all the nation were turned on them,

with astonishment; and various and contradictory
opinions were formed concerning the extraordi-
nary steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

ment, which prevails. in Scotland, said the favour-
ers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the ex-
orbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince pof-
feffes considerable power, and his person is treated
with great veneration. No encroachments should
be made on the former, and no injury offered to
the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and hap-
pinefs of the nation cannot be secured by any
other means. Such cafes seldom exifl, and it be-
longs not to any part, but to the whole, or at leatf

* Keith, 437*

to a majority of the society to judge of their ex- B o o K
iftence. By what aation could it be pretended V.
that Mary had invaded the rights or property of '" '
her fubje~ts, or what scheme had ihe formed against 1567.
the liberty and conifitution of the kingdom?
'Were fears, and suspicions, and surmises, enough
to juffify the imprisoning, and the deposing a
Queen, to whom the Crown descended from so
long a race of Monarchs ? The principal author
of whatever was reckoned culpable in her con-
ducT, was now driven from her presence. The
murderers of the King might have been brought
to condign punishment, the safety of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have
been eflablifhed, without wresting the sceptre out
of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual im-
prifonment. Whatever right a free Parliament
might have had to proceed to such a rigorous con-
clufion, or whatever name its determinations might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, passed by
a few nobles, without acknowledging or consulting
the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against
the person of their Sovereign.

TwE partisans of the confederates reasoned very

differently. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave consent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid ac-
tion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers
and honours with which (he loaded him, the man-
ner in which (he fuffered his trial to be carried on,
and the indecent speed with which (he married a
man, flained with so many crimes, raise fitrong

Sfufpicions

B o o K suspicions of the former, and put the latter be-

V. yond all doubt. To have fuffered the supreme
567 power to continue in the hands of an ambitious

man, capable of the most atrocious and desperate
aaions, would have been disgraceful to the na-
tion, dishonourable to the Queen, and dangerous
to the Prince. Recourse was, therefore, had to
arms. The Queen had been compelled to aban-
don a husband, so unworthy of herself. But her
affeaion toward him still continuing unabated;
her indignation againit the authors of this fepara-
tion being visible, and often expressed in the
firongeft terms; they, by refforing her to her an-
cient authority, would have armed her with power
to destroy themselves, have enabled her to recall
Bothwell, and have afforded her an opportunity
of pursuing fchernes fatal to the nation with great-
er eagerness, and with more success. Nothing,
therefore, remained, but by one bold aaion to
deliver themselves and their country from all fu-
ture fears. The expedient they had chosen was
no le5s refpecful to the royal blood, than necessary
for the public safety. While one Prince was set
aside as incapable of governing, the Crown was
placed on his head who was the undoubted repre-
fentative of their ancient Kings.

WH ATEVER opinion poftericy may form on com-

paring the arguments of the two contending par-
ties, whatever sentiments we may entertain con-
cerning the justice or neceflity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied
that their condua, so far as regarded themselves,
was extremely prudent. Otaer expedients, less

rigorous

rigorous towards Mary, might have been found B o o K
for fettling the nation; but, after the injuries V.
they had already offered the Queen, there was 1567*
none so effeaual for securing their own safety, or
perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the condu6a of

the confederates appeared not only wife, but juff.
The King's acceliion to the throne was every
where proclaimed, and his authority submitted to
without opposition. And though several of the
nobles were still assembled at Hamilton, and seem-
ed to be entering into some combination against
his government, an afiociation for supporting it
was formed, and signed by so many persons of
power and influence throughout the nation, as en-
tirely discouraged the attempt *.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murrayaf.

fames the

time, added firength to the party, and gave it a government.
regular and finimhed form. Soon after the mur-
der of the King, this nobleman had retired into
France, upon what pretence hiltorians do not
mention. During his relidence there, he had
held a close correspondence with the chiefs of the
confederacy, and, at their desire, he now return-
edl. He seemed, at firit, unwilling to accept the
offce of Regent. This hesitation cannot be as-
cribed to the scruples either of diffidence, or of
duty. Murray wanted neither abilities to entitle
him, nor ambition to aspire to this high dignity.
HIe had received the first accounts of his promo-
tion with the utmost fatisfaaion; but by appear-

A Anders vcl. ii. 23z.

V. gained time to view with attention the ground on
T1567 which he was to aa; to balance the fitrength and

resources of the two contending fa~tions, and
to examine whether the foundation on which
his future fame and success must reft, were found
and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a fiffer,
and a Queen, in a prison, from which he had
neither any intention to relieve her, nor to mi-
tigate the rigour of her confinement, may be
mentioned among the circumflances which dif-
cover the great want of delicacy and refinement
in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough
and uncourtly in his manner *, expoflulated so
warmly with the Queen concerning her past con-
dud, and charged her faults so home upon her,
that Mary, who had flattered herself with more
gentle and brotherly treatment from him, melted
into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to de-
fpair t. This interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein
he discovered a spirit so severe and unrelentingj
may be reckoned among the most bitter circum-
Itances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the
most unjuffifiable in his conduat.

SooN after his return from Lochlevin, Murray

Auguf n2. accepted the office of Regent, and began to a&

in that chara6er without opposition.

Fate of AMIDST so many great and unexpe6ted events,
ow. Bothwell

Sthe fate of Bothwell, the chief catife of them all,

K Ibid. 44S, 446. hath

* Keith, 96.

hath been almost forgotten. After his flight B o o a
from the confederates, he lurked for some time V.
among his valrals in the neighbourhood of Dun- L

1567.

bar. But finding it impolfible for him to make
head, in that country, againlt his enemies, or
even to secure himself from their pursuit, he
Red for fhielter to his kinsman the Bilhop of
Murray; and when he, overawed by the confe-
derates, was obliged to abandon him, he retired
to the Orkney Ifls. Hunted from place to place,
deserted by his friends, and accompanied by a
few retainers, as desperate as himself, he fuffered
at once the miseries of infamy, and of want.
His indigence forced him upon a course which
added to his infamy. He armed a few small ships,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, en-
deavoured to procure fubfiffence for himself and
his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray
of Tullibardin were sent out againfe him by the
confederates; and surprising him while he rode
at anchor, scattered his fluall fleet, took a part
of it, and obliged him to fly with a single ship
towards Norway. On that coast, he fell in with
a vessel richly laden, and immediately attacked
it; the Norwegians failed with armed boats to
its afflitance, and after a desperate fight, Both-
well and all his crew were taken prisoners. His
name and quality were both unknown, and he
was treated at first with all the indignity and ri-
gour which the odious crime of piracy merited.
His real character was soon discovered, and
though it saved him from the infamous death to

. vwhich

B o 0 K which his associates were condemned, it could

V. neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the
1567 hardihips of his imprisonment. He languished

ten years in this unhappy condition ; melancholy
and despair deprived him of reason, and at last
he ended his days, unpitied by his countrymen,
and unaffnited by firangers*. Few men ever ac-
complilhed their ambitious projeas by worse
means, or reaped from them less fatisfaltion.
The early part of his life was reftle{s and enter-
prifing, full of danger and of vicissitudes. His
enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained
by so many crimes, was extremely ihort; imbit-
tered by much anxiety, and difquieted by many
fears. In his latter years, he fuffered the molt in-
tolerable calamities, to which the wretched are
fubje&, and from which persons who have moved
in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.

Succers of THE good effecs of Murray's accefilon to
tii~egnt'sb the Regency were quickly felt. The party form-
Zion. ing for the Queen was weak, irresolute, and difT-

united; and no sooner was the government of
the kingdom in the hands of a man, so remark-
able both for his abilities and popularity, than
the nobles, of whom it was composed, loft all
hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat fe-
parately with the Regent. So many of them were
brought to acknowledge the King's authority, that
fearce any appearance of opposition to the establish-
ed government was left in the kingdom. Had they
adhered to the Queen with any firmness, it is proba-
ble, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that

* M~ely. 168.

fihe would have afforded them such aliftance as B o O K
might have enabled them to face their enemies V.
in the field. But there appeared so little vigour
or harmony in their councils, that she was dif-
couraged from espousing their cause; and the
Regent, takingadvantage of their situation, obliged
them to submit to his government, without grant-
ing any terms, either to themselves, or to the
Queen *.

THE Regent was no less fuccefsful in his at-

tempt to get into his hands the places of firength
in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor,
surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the
reward of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell
his patron, obtained terms of great advantage to
himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who dif-
covered more fidelity, was soon forced to capi-
tulate; some other fnall forts furrendcred without
resistance.

THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encou- A PriaU-

ment,

raged the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. Decem. i5(
Nothing was wanting to confirm the King's au-
thority, and the proceedings of the confederates,
except the approbation of this supreme court;
and after the success which had attended all their
meafiures, there could be little doubt of obtain-
ing it. The numnbers that resorted to an Affem-
bly which was called to deliberate on matters of
so much importance, were great. The meeting
was opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its
a~cs passed with much unanimity. Many, how-

* Kehh, 417. 450. 463.

VOL. 1. G g ever,

B o o K ever, of the Lords who had discovered the warm-

V. eit attachment to the Queen, were present. But
C they had made their peace with the Regent.

Argyll, Huntly, and Herries acknowledged,
openly in Parliament, that their behaviour to-
wards the King had been undutiful and crimi-
nal*. Their compliance, in this manner, with
the measures of the Regent's party, was either
the condition on which they were admitted into
favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of
their reconcilement.

C'nsrmc THE Parliament granted every thing the con-
the pro-

oeals of federates could demand, either for the safety of

tne confe-
Serat. their own persons, or the security of that form of

government which they had eftablifled in the
kingdom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was
accepted, and declarcd to be valid. The King's
authority, and Murray's ele~ion, were recognised,
and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and
all the other proceedings of the confederates, were
pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary had
written to Bothwell were produced, and she was
declared to be accessary to the murder of the
Kingt. At the fame time, all the aas of Par-
liament 1560, in favour of the Protestant reli-
gion, were publickly ratified; new statutes to
the fame purpose were enated. And nothing
that could contribute to root out the remains of
Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was negle6led.

Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Appendi\, No. XXIII.

I- Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 206.

IT is observable, however, that the fame par- B a 0 K

fimonious spirit prevailed in this Parliament, as V.
in that of IS60. The Proteffant clergy, not- 1567
withifanding many difcouragements, and their
extreme poverty, had, for seven years, performed
all religious offices in the kingdom. The expe-
dients fallen upon for their subsistence had hitherto
proved ineffeaual, or were intended to be so.
But notwithstanding their known indigence, and
the warm remonftrances of the Assembly of the
church, which met this year, the Parliament did
nothing more for their relief, than prescribe some
new regulations concerning the payment of the
thirds of benefices, which did not produce any
considerable change in the situation of the clergy.

A P2W days after the dissolution of Parliament, i568,

four of Bothwell's dependants were conviaed of J·fliry 3.
being guilty of the King's murder, and fuffered
death as traitors. Their confeflions brought to
light many cireumitances relative to the manner
of committing that barbarous crime; but they
wvere persons of low rank, and seem not to have
been admitted into the secrets of the confpi-
racy *.

NOTWrIltHSTANDING the universal submission to

the Regent's authority, there still abounded in the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatel-
herault, who, as firif Prince of the blood, had, in
their opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent.

* Anders. vol. ii. 165.

The

G g 2

B O O K The length and rigour of Mary's fufferings began

V. to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who
158 leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded

the effeas of Murray's zeal. And he, though
his abilities were great, did not possess the talents
requisite for soothing the rage or removing the
jealousies of the different faRions. By infinua-
tion, or address, he might have gained or softened
many, who had opposed him; but he was a ifran-
ger to these gentle arts. His virtues were severe;
and his deportment towards his equals, especially
after his elevation to the Regency, difiant and
haughty. This behaviour offended some of the
nobles, and alarmed others. The Queen's faaion,
which had been so easily dispersed, began again to
gather, and to unite, and was secretly favoured
by some who had hitherto zealously concurred
with the confederates *.

Mary SUCH was the favourable difpolition of the na-
escapes
from Loch- tion towards the Queen, when ihe recovered her
Ievin. liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her

friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an op-
portunity of escaping, which some unforeseen
accident, or the vigilance of her keepers, had
hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employed
all her art to gain George Douglas her keeper's
brother, a youth of eighteen. As her manners
were naturally affable and insinuating, she treated
him with the most flattering diftmn~ion; ibte even
allowed him to entertain the most ambitious hopes,
by letting fall some expressions, as if she would

* Melv. 179. chufe

chufe him for her husband *. At his age, and in B o o K
such circumstances, it was impotfible to refit V.
such a temptation. iHe yielded, and drew others
into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of May, while
his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his ac-
complices found means to ifeal the keys out of his
brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the
Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary
ran with precipitation to the boat which was pre-
pared for her, and on reaching the ihore, was re-
ceived with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord
Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a
few attendants, waited for her. She instantly
mounted on horseback, and rode full speed to-
wards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in WVeft-
Lothian. She arrived there that night, without
being pursued, or interrupted, After halting
three hours, she set out for Hamilton; and tra-
velling at the fame pace, Ihe reached it next
morning.

ON the firfr news of Mary's efape, her friends, Arriv"e (a

whom, in their present disposition, a much smaller and raires a
accident would have roused, ran to arms. In afew army.
days, her court was filled with a great and splendid
train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of
followers, as formed an army above 6000 strong.
In their presence she declared that the resignation
of the Crown, and other deeds she had signed
~hring her imprisonment, were extorted from her

* Keith, 469.

G g 3 by

o o K by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her de-
V. claration ; and on that, as well as on other ac-

counts, a council of the nobles and chief men of

568. her party pronounced all these tranfadtions void

May 8. and illegal. At the fame time, an association

was formed for the defence of her person and au-
thority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bi-
shops, eighteen Lords, and many gentlemen of
difcinaion *. Among them, we find several
who had been present in the last Parliament, and
who had signed the counter-affociation in defence
of the King's government; but such sudden
changes were then so common, as to be no mat-
ter of reproach.

cornerna- AT the time when the Queen made her escape,
lionl cJ the
Re'ent's the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of
adelcnsts. justice. An event so contrary to their expe&ations,

and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great ihock to
his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering
and irresolute; others began to carry on private
negotiations with the Queen; and some openly
revolted to her fide. In so difficult a juna1ure,
where his own fame, and the being of the party
depended on his choice, the Regent's most faith-
tul associates were divided in opinion. Some ad-
vised him to retire, without loss of time, to
Stirling. The Queen's army was already firong,
and only eight miles difitant; the adjacent coun-
try was full of the friends and dependents of the
house of Hamilton, and other Lords of the
Queen's fadion; Glafgowv was a large and un-
fortified town; his own train consisted of no greaer

SKeith, 475.

number

number than was usual in times of peace; all B o o K
these reasons pleaded for a retreat. But on the V.
other hand, arguments were urged of no incon-
fiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were
well affeaed to the cause; the vassals of Glen-
cairn, Lennox, and Semple lay near at hand,
and were both numerous, and fill of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, success depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained or loft, by the first Itep one takes; in
his circumifances, a retreat would be attended
with all the ignominy of a flight, and would at
once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies
with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as HTs prudent
this, the superiority of Murray's genius appeared,
and enabled him both to chufe with wildom, and
to a& with vigour. He declared againif retreat-
ing, and fixed his head-quarters at Glasgow. And
while he amused the Queen for fonme days, by
pretending to hearken to some overtures, which
he made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost indufiry, in
drawing together his adherents, from different
parts of the kingdom. He was soon in a condi-
tion to take the field; and though far inferior to
the enemy in number, he confided so much in
the valour of his troops, and the experience of
his oflicers, that he broke off the negotiation, and
determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had May zj.

commanded her army to move. Their intentioI

*Buchan. 369.

Gg4 was,

B o o K was, to condua her to Dunbarton-cafile, a place of

V. great firength, which the Regent had not been able

to wrefi out of the hands of Lord Fleming the go-
vernor; but if the enemy should endeavour to
interrupt their march, they resolved not to decline
an engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her
forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the
northern clans were soon expecded; her fufferings
had removed, or diminished the prejudices of
many among her fubjeds; the address with which
she surmounted the dangers that obitructed her
efcnpe, dazzled and interested the people; the
sudden confluence of so many nobles added luifre
to her cause; ihe might afruredly depend on the
friendflhip and countenance of France; she had
reason to exped the protetion of England; her
enemies could not possibly look for support from
that quarter. She had much to hope from pur-
suing flow and cautious measures; they had every
thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine,
and her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her
sudden transition from the depth of diffrefs, to such
an unusual appearance of prosperity, that she never
doubted of success. Her army, which was almost
double to the enemy in number, confifled chiefly
of the Hamiltons, and their dependants. Of these
the Archbiflhop of St. Andrew's had the chief di-
retion, and hoped, by a viatory, not only to crush
Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to
get the person of the Queen into his hands, and to
oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's sons,

or

or at leafs to commit the chief direaion of her B o o Ko
affairs to himself. His ambition proved fatal to V.
the Queen, to himself, and to his family *5

MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was Battle of

not greater than the ill condut of her generals in Langfide.
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and posted his troops in a
finall village, and among some gardens and in-
closures adjacent. In this advantageous situation
he waited the approach of the enemy, whose fu-
periority in cavalry could be of no benefit to
them, on such broken ground. The Hamiltons,
who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
the attack, that they put themselves out of breath,
and left the main battle far behind. The en-
counter of the fpearmen was fierce and desperate;
but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed,
on the one flank, to a continued fire from a body
of mufqueteers, attacked on the other by the Re-
gent's most choice troops, and not supported by
the reft of the Queen's army, they were Loon TheQueen'a
obliged to give ground, and the rout immedi- arnyde-
ately became universal. Few viaories, in a civil
war, and among a barbarous people, have been
puriued with less violence, or attended with less
bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field: In
the flight scarce any were killed. The Regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching
the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The num-
ber of prisoners was great, and among them

* Anders. vol. iv. 32. Melv. i8i.

many

B o O K many persons of diftinaion. The Regent march-

V. ed back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks

to God for this great, and, on his fide, almost
bloodless vialory ".

Her fight. DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that passed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When ihe saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable con-
fusion, her spirit, which all her past misfor-
tunes had not been able entirely to subdue, funk
altogether. In the utmost conifernation, {he be-
gan her flight, and so lively were her impressions
of fear, that The never closed her eyes till The
reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full
sixty Scottish miles from the place of battle t.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid than singular. In the thort space of
eleven days, The had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies; The had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a nu-
Inerous train of nobles at her devotion: And now
The was obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of
her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a
corner of her kingdom. Not thinking herself
ltfe, even in that retreat; her fears impelled her
to an acmhon, the mofi unadvised, as well as the
most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her
retiring into England, a flep, which, on many
accounts, ought to have appeared to her rash and
:langerous.

* crith, 47; t Id. 481.

BEFORE

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- B o o c

trult and jealousies had arisen between her and Eli- V.
zabeth. All their subsequent tranfaiions had ' '

'568.

contributed to exasperate and inflame these pas- ReToves
fi0ns. She had endeavoured, by secret negoti- ,?n n
ations and intrigues to disturb the tranquillity of Iand.
Elizabeth's government, and to advance her own
pretensions to the Engliflh Crown. Elizabeth,
who poffeffed great power, and aaed with less re-
serve, had openly supported Mary's rebellious
fubjeas, and fomented all the dissensions and
troubles in which her reign had been involved.
The maxims of policy Still authorized that Queen
to pursue the fame course; as by keeping Scot-
land in confusion, ihe effeaually secured the peace
of her own kingdom. The Regent, after his vic-
tory, had marched to Edinburgh, and not know-
ing what course the Queen had taken, it was fe-
veral days before he thought of pursuing her *.
She might have been concealed in that retired
corner, among fubjeats devoted to her interest,
till her party, which was dispersed rather than
broken by the late defeat, should gather such
1Irength, that Ihe could again appear with safety
at their head. There was not any danger, which
ihe ought not to have run, rather than throw her-
self into the hands of an enemy, from whom he
had already fuffered so many injuries, and who
was prompted both by inclination, and by interest,
to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's con-

flnement, Elizabeth had declared againit the pro-

* Crawf. Mem. c9n ceedings

1o o ro ceedings of her fubjec's, and solicited for her

V. liberty, with a warmth which had all the appear-

ance of sincerity. She had invited her ri take

868. refuge in England, and had promied m meet her

in person, and to give her such a reception as was
due to a Queen, and an ally *. Whatever ap-
prehension Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's
dcfigns, while £he had power in her hands, he
was, at present, the objeA, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would
be both ungenerous and inhuman. The horrors
of a prison were fresh in Mary's memory, and if
mhe Ihould fall a second time into the hands of her
fubjeas, there was no injury to which the pre-
fumption of success might not embolden them to
proceed. To attempt escaping into France, was
dangerous; and, in her situation, almost impof-
fible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appear-
ing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that kingdom,
where she had once enjoyed all the splendour of
a Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the entreaies of Lord Herries,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, tven on their knees, not to ccnfde in Eliza-
beth's prorifes or generosity, her infatuation was
invincible, and she resolved to fly thither. Herries,

Her recep- by' her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy-
tion at Car-
iiie. governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his anf'ver could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were so great, that

May i6. Ihe got into a flfher-boat, and with about twenty

* Camb. 4S9. Anders. vol.iv. 99. lao. Murdin, 369.

6 attendants,

attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, B o 0 K
and thence she was conducted with many marks V.
of refpedt to Carlisle *. I568.

So soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote Elizabeth

a long letter to the Queen, representing, in the denberate,
firongeit terms, the injuries which ihe had fuffered thexnanner
from her own fubjeats, and imploring that pity her.
and affiafance which her present situation demand-
ed J-. An event so extraordinary, and the con-
dufL which might be proper in consequence of it,
drew the attention, and employed the thoughts,
of Elizabeth and her council. If their delibera-
tions had been iniluenced by considerations of
justice or generosity alone, they would not have
found them long or intricate. A Queen, van-
quifhed by her own flubjeats, and threatened by
them with the loss of her liberty, or of her life,
had fled from their violence, and thrown herself
into the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally,
from whom she had received repeated affirances
of friendship and proteAion. These circum-
stances entitled her to refpet and to compassion,
and required that ihe should either be reflored to
her own kingdom, or at lealt bL left at full liberty
to seek aid from any other quarter. But with Eli-
zabeth and her counsellors, the queffion was not,
what was most just or generous, but what was
molt beneficial to herself, and to the Engiifh na-
tion. Three different resolutions might have
been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots.
To re-inifate her in her throne, was one; to al-
low her to retire into France, was another; to de-

SKeith, 483. Andcrf. vol.iv. 2. - Jd. 2.

B o O K tain her in England, was a third. Each of these

V. drew consequences after it, of the utmost im-
ic68 portance, which were examined, as appears from

papers still extant *, with that minute accuracy,
which Elizabeth's Ministers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To reffore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the Engliih interest
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re-
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom ifrong or lasting, regard to her own interest
might soon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance
of the Scottish nation with France, and revive
her own pretensions to the Engliih Crown. Nor
was it poiible to fetter and circumscribe the Scot-
tifh Queen, by any conditions that would pre-
vent these dangers. 'Her party in Scotland was
numerous and powerful. Her return, even with-
out any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a single vic-
tory might give them the superiority, which they
had loft by a single defeat, and render Mary a
more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth4

THE dangers arising from fuffering Mary to

return into France, were no less obvious. The
French King could not refuse his affiffance to-
wards restoring his lifter and ally to her throne.
Elizabeth would, once more, fee a foreign army
in the island, overawing the Scots, and ready to

*Anders. vol. iv. 34. 99. 1oz.

enter

enter her kingdom; and if the commotions in B o O K
France, on account of religion, were fettled, the V.
Princes of Lorrain might resume their ambitious
projefts, and the united forces of France and
Scotland might invade England, where it is weak-
elt and most defenceless.

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her ReroIes to

. . detain her

in England; and to permit her either to live at inEnglend.
liberty there, or to confine her in a prison. The
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the difaffe~c~ed, and to the lovers of
innovation. Though Elizabeth affeaed to repre-
sent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, she was
not ignorant that they did not appear in that light
to the nation, and that many thought them pre-
ferable even to her own title. If the activity ot
her emissaries had gained her so many abettors,
her own personal influence was much more to be
dreaded; her beauty, her address, her fufferings,
by the admiration and pity which they would ex-
cite, could not fail of making many converts to
her party *.

IT was indeed to be apprehended, that the treat-

ing Mary as a prisoner would excite universal in-
dignation againit Elizabeth, and that by this unex-
ampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom ihe had promised her proteaion, ihe
would forfeit the praise of juflice and humanity,
which was hitherto due to her administration. But

* Anders. vol. ii'. 36. G0.

B o O K the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to

V. secure their kingdom againit the Scots, as to be
i56S. little scrupulous about the means which they em-

ployed for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized
the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced,
by the violence of a florm, to take refugein one of
the ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of
the rights of hospitality, without regarding his
tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his fa-
ther, detained him a prisoner for many years.
This aation, though detested by pofferity, Eliza-
beth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was
not more proof than Henry's had been, against
the temptations of interest; and the poffeflion of
a present advantage was preferred to the profpec2
of future fame. The fatisfaation which ihe felt
in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accom-
plifhments ihe envied, had, perhaps, no less in-
fluence than political considerations, in bringing
her to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in
order to screen herself from the censure which
this conduc& merited, and to make her treatment of
the Scottish Queen look like the effeCt of necessity,
rather than of choice, (he determined to put on
the appearance of concern for her interest, and of
deep sympathy with her fufferings.

May so. WTITH this view, she inifantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her vice-chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of exprefons of kindness
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private inftruftions towatch all her motions, and to
take care that (he ihould not escape into her own

king-

kingdomr*. On their arrival, Mary demanded a B O K
personal interview with the Queen, that (he might V.
lay before her the injuries which (he had fu~fered, c
and receive from her those friendly offices which M~ ae-
(he had been encouraged to expe6a. They answer- "
ed, that it was with relucance this honour was at C
present denied her; that while (he lay under the fence.
imputation of a crime so horrid as the murder of
her husband, their Mistress, to whom he was so
nearly allied, could not, without bringing a ifain
upon her own reputation, admit her into her pre-
fence; but as soon as Ihe had cleared herself from
that aspersion, they promised her a reception suit-
able to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her
diffref's t.

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this Sh1eofmr.tc

vindicate her

pretence. It was the occasion, however, of leading condua.
the Queen of Scots into the snare in which Eliza-
beth and her Ministers wished to entangle her.
Mary expressed the utmost furprize at this unex-
peaed manner of evading her request; but as mhe
could not believe so many profeflions of friendship
to be void of sincerity, (he frankly offered to sub-
mit her cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and
undertook to produce such proofs of her own in-
nocence, and of the falsehood of the accusations
brought against her, as (hould fully remove the
scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of tU' English
Queen. This was the very point to which Eliza- Elizibeth
beth laboured to bring the matter. By this appeal vantafejf
of the Scottish Queen, (he became the umpire be- thisoffer.
tween her and her fubjecJs, and had it entirely in

*Anders. vol. iv, 36. 70. 9z. tj Ibid. vol, iv. 8. 55.
VOL. I. II h her

B o O K her own power to protra& the inquiry to anylength,

V. and to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties.
i568. In the mean time, she was furnished with a plauli-

ble pretence for keeping her at a diffance from
court, and for refusing to contribute towards re-
placing her on the throne. As Mary's condua had
been extremely incautious, and the presumptions
of her guilt were many and irong, it was not im-
pollible her fubjeas might make good their charge
againif her; and if this fihould be the result of the
inquiry, she would, thenceforth, cease to be the
objea of regard, or of compassion, and the treat-
ing her with coldness and negleEt would merit lit-
tle censure. In a matter so dark and mysterious,
there was no probability that Mary could bring
proofs of her innocence, so incontefited, as to ren-
der the condual of the Englilh Queen altogether
culpable. And perhaps, her impatience under re-
fcraint, her fufitcion of Elizabeth's partiality, or
her discovery of her artifices, might engage her
in such cabals, as would justify the using her with
greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages,

which would arise from an inquiry into the con-
dut of the Scottish Qucen, carried on under her
direcion. There was some danger, however, that
Mviary might discover her secret intentions too soon,
and by receding from the o!Thr w~ hich she had made,
endeavour to difappornt them. But even in that
event, The determined not to drop the inquiry, and
had thought of several different expedients for car-
iying it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced
that Mary was accessary to the murder of her son,

and

and thirfting for that vengeance which it was natu- B o o 1
ral for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza- V.
beth's juflice, and solicited her, with many tears, i56S1
in her own name, and in her hufband's, to bring
the Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime *. The
parents of the unhappy Prince had ajuft right to
prefer this accusation; nor could she, who was
their nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listen-
ing to so equitable a demand. Besides, as the Scot-
tifh nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by fufficient proof, it would be no difficult matter
to prevail on them to petition the Queen of Eng-
land to take cognizanceof their proceedings against
their Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the
English council, that it would be reasonable to
comply with the request t. At the fame time, the
obsolete claim of the fiperiority of England over
Scotland began to be talked of; and, on that ac-
count, it was pretended that the decision of the
contest between Mary and her fubje~ts belonged
of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth re-
volved all these expedients in her mind, and kept
them in reserve to be made use of as occasion might
require, she wished that the inquiry into Mary's
condu&t should appear to be undertaken purely in
compliance with her own demand, and in order to
vindicate her innocence; and so long as that ap-
pearance could be preserved, none of the other
expedients were to be employeJ.

* Camd. 412. IHaynes, 469. t And.vol.iv. 37.

Hh

B O O K THEN Mary consented to submit her cause to

V. Elizabeth, the was far from fufpeaing that any bad

T6T consequences could follow, or that any dangerous

pretenfians could be founded on her offer. She
expeahed that ElizabeLh herself would receive, and
examine her Ceflnccsi ; P e mcant to confider her
as an equ 1, for whose fatKL uon she was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure, not to acknowedIge her as a superior,
before whom The was bound to plead her cause.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's
offer. She considered herself as chosen to bejudge
in the controverly between the Scottish Queen and
her fubjecs) and began to a8 in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commifnioners to hear the
pleadings of both parties, and wrote to the Re-
gent of Scotland to impower proper persons to
appear before them, in his name, and to produce
what he could allege in vindication of his pro-
ceedings againfi his Sovereign.

MArymeatljy MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable
oticoded at
Eirabeth's credulity on Elizabeth's profefflons of rcgard, and
conadn. expeced that so many kind speeches would, atl

laif, be accompanied with fume fiuitable acions.
Eut this proposal entirely undeceived her. She
plainly perceived .the artifice of Elizabeth's con-
duct, and saw what a diminution it would be to
her own honour, to appear on a level with her re-
brllious fubjecs, and to Rtand together with them
at the bar of a fiuperior, and a judge. She re-
tracted the offer which {he had made, and which
Lad been perverted to a purpole so contrary to her

* Anders. vol. iv. io.

intention.

intention. Shedemanded,withmoreearnelfnefsthan B o o K
ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and V.
wrote to her in a firain very different from what I568.
she had formerly used, and which fully discovers Juue 30.
the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart.
(c In my present situation, says she, I neither will,
(( nor can reply to the accusations of my fubjeds.
"cI am ready, of my own accord, and out of
a friendship to you, to satisfy your scruples, and
<< to vindicate my own condu&. My fubje~s are
(( not my equals; nor will I, by submitting my
c cause to a judicial trial, acknowledge them to
(< be so. I fled into your arms, as into those of
<< my nearest relation, and most perfet friend. I
"( did you honour, as I imagined, in chufing you,
a preferably to any other Prince, to be the re-

fc ftorer of an injured Queen. Was it ever known
(c that a Prince was blamed for hearing, in per-
cc son, the complaints of those who appealed to
(( his justice, against the false accusations of their
cc enemies ? You admitted into your presence my
(( baffard brother, who had been guilty of rebel-
<< lion; and you deny me that honour ! God for-
cc bid that I should be the occasion of bringing
" any (lain upon your reputation ! I expec'led that
'C your manner of treating me would have added
c luflre to it. Suffer me either to implore the aid
c< of other Princes, whose delicacy on this head
"C will be less, and their resentment of my wrongs
cc greater; or let me receive from your hands
c that amarance, which it becomes you, more
" than any othCr Prince, to grant; and by that

II h 2 " bencint

B O O K " benefit bind me to yourself in the indissoluble

V. "( ties of gratitude s."
1563. THIs letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
J'ne 20. plan, but did not divert her from the piofecution
Elizabeth's precautons ofit. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun-
3kn ". cil, and it was there determined, notwithstanding

the intreaties and remonfirances of the Scottiflh
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her condu&,
and till that were fiifhed, it was agreed that Eli-
zabeth could not, consistently with her own ho-
nour, or with the safety of her government, either
give her the afliflance which she demanded, or
permit her to retire out of the kingdom. And
1lfi she mould have an opportunity of escaping,
while she resided so near Scotland, it was thought
advhfeable to remove her to some place at a
greater distance from the borders t.

Prored'gs HI-IlLE the Engiifh ccurt was occipied in these
of the Re.
Scntsa~nn deliberations, the Regcnt did not reglect to im-
the QuCeen's .

prove the viaory at Lan iide. That event was
of the utmost impurtance to him. It not only
drove the QOeen herself out of the kingdom, but
left her adherents difperred, and without a leader,
at his mercy. Hte sei emed rcflv ed, at firit, to
proceed against them with the utmofi rigour. Six
persons of some diftinition, who had been taken
prisoners in the battle, were tried and condemned
to death, as rebels againfi the King's government.
They were led to the place of execution, but by
the powerful intercession of Knox they obtained
a pardon. Ihamilton of Bothweilhaugh was one

Snfdrf. vol. iv. 9{. -) Id. ibid. ioz.

of the number, who lived to give both the Regent B O O K
and Knox reason to repent this commendable at V.

o eruy . 568.

SooN after, the Regent marched with an army,

consisting of 4000 horse and 0ooo foot, towards
the welt borders. The nobles in this part of the
kingdom were all of the Queen's fadion; but as
they had not force fufficient to obflrua his pro-
grefs, he mult either have obliged them to sub-
mit to the .King, or would have laid walte their
lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose
interest it was to keep Scotland in confuflon, by
preserving the balance between the two parties,
and who was endeavouring to sooth the Scottish
Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her de-
fire. After keeping the field two weeks, the
Regent, in compliance to the English Ambaiah-
dor, difniffed his forces ; and an expedition,
which might have proved fatal to his opponeiits,
ended with a few aas of severity t.

THE resolution of the English Privy Council MirycardE

. . .to B~olton,

with regard to Mary's peribn, was soon carried
into execution; and, without regarding her re-
monfirances or complaints, (he was conducaed to
Bolton, a camle of Lord Scroop's, on the bor- y 3.
ders of Yorkshire $. In this place, her corre-
fpondence with her friends in Scotland became
more difficult, and any profpea of making her
escape was entirely cut off. She now felt hcrfelf
to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though
treated as yet with the refpe& due to a Qiueen,

* Cald. vol. ii. 99. ? Ibid. t And. v,1. iv. 14.

Hi b4 her

B o o Ic her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary

V. knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
6'' dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the re-

i 63. membrance of her late imprisonment was itill

lively, and the terror of a new one filled her
mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper junaure to

July z8. renew her former proposition, that she would sus-

ser the Regent and his adherents to be called into
England, and consent to their being heard in de-
fence of their own conduar. And on her part me
promised, whatever should be the issue of this in-
quiry, to employ all her power and influence to-
wards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few
limitations, which were far from being unreason-

A?-ees that able. Fear, impatience, despair, as well as this
an ince iry
be -nade ino soothing promise, with which the propoTftion was
her conutt, accompanied, induced the Scottish Queen to com-

ply *.

Hor 'Aimu. IN order to persuade Elizabeth that foe desired
lation with
reanl tore. nothing so much as to render the union between
l"ion. them as ciofe as pomble, she fhewed a disposition

to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to
which, during all her past and ibbfequent misfor-
tunes, she was uniformly inflexible. She expressed
a great veneration for the liturgy of the Church
of England; m te was often present at religious
worihip, according to the rites of the Reformed
Church; made choice of a Protestant clergyman
to be her chlaplain; heard him preach againfi the
errors of Popery with attehtion and seeming piea-
sure; and discovered ail the symptoms of an ap-

r vol.. 1) . H ncC4'3

proaching

proaching conversion *. Such was Mary's known B o o K
and bigotted attachment to the Popilh religion, V.
that it is impoflible to believe her sincere in this 6
part of her condua; nor can any thing mark more
strongly the wretchedness of her condition, and
the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed
her into dillimulation, in a matter concerning
which her sentiments were, at all other times,
scrupulously delicate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Augeaf Is.

A Parlia-

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- Aent in
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The Scotiand.
Queen's famion was alarmed, and Argyll and
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieute-
nants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to assemble forces to
obftruc& this meeting. Compassion for the Queen,
and envy at those who governed in the Kirg's
name, had added so much fitrength to the party,
that the Regent would have found it difficult to
withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted
her cause to Elizabeth, she could not refuse, at her
deGre, to command her friends to lay down their
arms, and to wait patiently till matters were
brought to a decision in England. By procuring
this ceffiation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as sea-
fonable relief to the Regent's facion, as she had
formerly given to the Queen's t.

THE Regent, however, would not consent, even

at Elizabeth's reque, to put off the meeting of
Parliament. But we may ascribe to her infuenc2,

Anders. vol. iv. 113. Haynes, 509.

B o o K as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-

V. boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
868. from exterminating the other, any appearances of

moderation which this Parliament discovered in
its proceedings. The moss violent opponents of
the King's government were forfeited; the ret
were allowed flill to hope for favour ".

Eflzabeth No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her
requires the
Regent to cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
co dud hgent to fend to York deputies properly :nffruaed

for vindicating his conduE, in presence of her
commissioners. It was not without heirtation and
anxiety, that the Regent consented to this mea-
sure. His authority was already efrablifhed in
Scotland, and confirmed by Parliament. To sis-
ser its validity now to be called in queflion, and
fubjeaed to a foreign jurifdiiftion, was extremely
mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign before
firangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish
name, was an odious talk. To fail in' this ac-
cufation was dangerous; t3 succeed in it was dif-
graceful. But the strength of the adverse faaion
daily increased. He dreaded the interposition of
the French King in its behalf. In his situation,
and in a matter which Eliz'beth had so much at
heart, her commands were neither to be dif-
puted, nor disobeyed t.

Both the THE necCffity of repairing in CerfOn to York
Qaeen and
he appoint added to the ignominy of the Prep which he was
comm;lion- ..
nm. obliged to take. All his aiaciates declined the

office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to
expose themselves to the odium and danger with

*Buch. 3,i. *- Buch. 372. See Append. No. XXV.

whic!~

which it was easy to foresee that the discharge of B 0 0 K
it would be attended, unless he himself consented V.
to mhare these in common with them. The Earl c

1568.

of Morton, Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Pircairn Sept. 8s.
Commendator of Dunfermling, and Lord Lind-
fay, were joined with him in commifion. Mac-
gill of Rankeilor, and Balnaves of Hlihill, two
eminent Civilians, George BuJhanan his faithful
adherent, a man whose genius did honour to the
age, Maitland, and several others, were appoint-
ed to attend them as affiffants. Maitland owed
this diftin~tion to tde Regent's fear, rather than
to his affeaion. He had warmly remonifrated
againit this measure. He wifihed his country to
continue in friendihip with England, but not to
become dependant on that nation. He was de-
firous of re-establishing the Queen in some de-
gree of power, not inconiflent with that which
the King poffeffed; and the Regent could not,
with safety, leave behind him a man, whose views
were so contrary to his own, and who, 6y his fu-
perior abilties, had acquired an infuence in the
nation, equal to that which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families ".

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop ofRofs, Lord

Livingiton, Lord Boyd, Lord Herries, Gavin
Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name t.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex, and

*Buch. 371. Arnderf. vol. iv. 35. Melv. i86. I8S.
-b Anders. vol. iv. 33.

B o o K Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commiiffoners to hear

V. both parties.
iG68. THE fourth of Oaober was the day fixed for

C opening the Conference. The great abilities of

YVrk, the deputies on both sides, the dignity of the

judges before whom they were to appear, the
high rank of the persons whose cause was to be
heard, and the importance of the points in dif-
pute, rendered the whole tranifaton no ]efs il-
luffrious, than it was singular. The situation in
which Elizabeth appeared, on this occasion,
frikes us with an air of magnificence. Her ri-
val, an independant Queen, and the heir of an
ancient race of Monarchs, was a prisoner in her
hands, and appeared, by her Ambassadors, be-
fore her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
represented the majesty, and poffeffed the autho-
rity of a King, flood in person at her bar. And
the fate of a kingdom, whose power her anceflors
had often dreaded, but could never subdue, was
now absolutely at her disposal.

Views or THE Views, however, with which the several
the amiierent
parues, parties consented to this Conference, and the ifue

to which they expefled to bring it, were extreme-
ly different.

MIARY's chief obje6a was the recovering her

former authority. This induced her to consent
to a measure againit which she had long firug-
gled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for
entertaining hopes of being restored to her king-
dom; in order to which, she would have willing-
ly made many conceffons to the King's party;
and the induence of the English Queen, and

her

her own impatience under her present situation, B o o K
might have led her to many more *. The Re- V.
gent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
protetion to his party, and seems not to have
had the most distant thoughts of coming to any
composition with Mary. Elizabeth's views were
more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's ho-
nour, and solicitous that she should wipe off the
aspersions which blemished her charaaer. This
ihe pretended to be the intention of the Con-
ference; amusing Mary, and eluding the soli-
citations of the French and Spanish Ambassadors
in her behalf, by repeated promises of.afifting
her, as soon as ihe could venture to do so, with-
out bringing difg race on herself. But, under this
veil of friendship and generosity, Elizabeth con-
cealed sentiments of a different nature. She ex-
peaed that the Regent would accuse Mary of
being accessory to the murder of her husband.
She encouraged him, as far as decency would
permit, to take this desperate fitep t. And as
this accusation might terminate two different
ways, she had concerted measures for her future
condua suitable to each of these. If the charge
againfr Mary thould appear to be well founded,
lhe resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wear-
ing a Crown, and to declare that mhe would never
burden her own conscience with the guilt of an
adtion so detestable, as the restoring her to her

* Anders. vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337*
I Anders. vol. iv. I1. 4g. Iiaynes, 437.

king-

B o o K kingdom . If it (hould happen, that what her

V. accusers alleged did not amount to a proof of
i~68 guilt, but only of mal-adminiltration, (he deter-

mined to set on fbot a treaty for refforing her,
but on such conditions, as would render her for
ever dependant on England, and the slave of
her own fubjeAs J. And as every fiep in the
progress of the Conference, as well as the final
tefult of it, was in her own power, (he would
still be at liberty to chufe which of these courses
(he would hold; or if there appeared to be any
danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of
them, (he might protra& the whole cause by
endless delays, and involve it in inextricable per-
plexity.

Conplaint THE Conference, however, was opened with
gaces's much solemnity. But the very first flep discover-
ccmmdficn-
ersajinft ed it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, ra-
the Regent. ther than to extinguilh the dissensions and ani-

mofities among the Scots. No endeavours were
used to reconcile the contending parties, or to
mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bringing
the Queen to offer pardon for what was palt, or
her fubjecds to promise more dutiful obedience
for the future. On the contrary, Mary's com-
mifioners were permitted to prefer a complaint

oaober s. againlf the Regent and his party, containing an

enumeration of their treasonable aaions, of their
seizing her person by force of arms, committing
her to prison, compelling her to resign the
Crown, and making use of her foni's name to co-
lour their usurpation of the whole royal authority.

* Anders. vol. iv. I1. j- Id. ibid. 16.

And

And of all these enormities, they required such B o o K
speedy and effeaual redress, as the injuries of one V.
Queen demanded from the justice of another *. c

i568.

IT was then expeaed that the Regent would

have disclosed the whole circumitances of that un-
natural crime, to which he pretended the Queen
had been accessory, and would have produced evi-
dence in support of his charge. But far from ac-
cufing Mary, the Regent did not even answer the
complaints brought againit himself. He discover-
ed a relutance at the undertaking that office, and
started many doubts and scruples, with regard to
which, he demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth
herfelft. His reserve and hesitation were no less
surprising to the greater part of the English com-
miffioners than to his own associates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own condua with-
out charging the murder upon the Queen, and he
had not hitherto shown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly car-
ried on, since his arrival at York, which explains
this mystery.

THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the Intrigues of

most powerful and most popular man in England. wish the
His wife was lately dead; and he began already Rgent.
to form a projeat, which he afterwards more open-
ly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland,
by a marriage with the Queen of Scots. He saw
the infamy which would be the consequence of a
public accusation against Mary, and how preju-
dicial it might be to her pretensions to the Englifn
fuccemlon. In order to save her this cruel morti-

* Anders. vol. iv. 52. j- Hayncs, 47g.

fication,

B o O K fication, he applied to Maitland, and exprefecd

V. his astonishment at fceing a man of so much re-
6T" putation for wisdom, concurring with the Regent

in a measure so dishonourable to themselves, to
their Queen, and to their country; submitting
the public tranfaaions of the nation to the judg-
ment of foreigners; and publishing the igno-
miny, and exposing the faults of their Sovereign,
which they were bound, in good policy, as well
as in duty, to conceal and to cover. It was easy
for Maitland, whose sentiments were the fame with
the Duke's, to vindicate his own condu(. He
assured him, that he had employed all his credit
to dissuade his countrymen from this measure; and
would ftil contribute, to the utmost of his pow.
er, to divert them from it. This encouraged
Norfolk to communicate the matter to the Re-
gent. He repeated and enforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warn-
ed him of the danger to which he mufV expose him-
seif by such a violent aEdion as the public accula-
tion of his Sovereign. Mary would never forgive
a man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand
of infamy on her charaaer. If she ever recovered
any degree of power, his deftruAion would be
inevitable, and he would jully merit it at her
hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from
this, by a public approbation of his condu6.
For whatever evidence of Mary's guilt he might
produce, she was resolved to give no definitive
sentence in the cause. Let him only demand
that the m'tter mould be brought to decision im-
mediately after hearing the proof, and he would

be

he fully convinced how false and insidious her in- B o O K
tentions were, and, by consequence, how improper V.
it would be for him to appear as the accuser es his I568.
own Sovereign . The candour which Norfolk
seemed to discover in there renionifrances, as well
as the truth which they contained, made a deep im-
prerlnon on the Regent. He daily received the
fitrongeft assurances of Mary's willingness to be re-
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her
of such an odious crime, together with the de-
nunciations of her irreconcilable hatred, if he
a&ed a contrary part t All there considerations
concurred in determining him to alter his purpose,
and to make trial of the expedient which the Duke
had fuggefited.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, be- Oaober .

fore he proceeded farther, whether the English coma
millioners were empowered to declare the Qjeen
guilty, by a judicial aCt; whether they would
promise to pass sentence, without delay; whether
the Queen ihould be kept under such restraint,
as to prevent her from diffurbing the government
now established in Scotland; and whether Eliza-
beth, if she approved of the proceedings of the
King's party, would engage to proted it for the
future J. The paper containing these demands
was signed by hinfelf alone, without communi-
cating it to any of his attendants, except Mait-
land and Melvil 5. Nothing could appear more
natural than the RejEnt's solicitude, to know on

* Melv. 187. Haynes, 573. t- Anders. vol. iv. 77.

Good. vol.ii. 57. See Append. No. XXVI.

T Anders. vol. iv. 55. E Ibid. 56. Melv. 190.
VOL. I. Ii what

B o O K what footing he flood. To have ventured on a

V. itep so uncommon and dangerous, as the accusing

t his Sovereign, without previously aieertaining that

he might take it with safety, would have been
unpardonable imprudence. But Eli2abeth, who
did not expea that he would have moved any such
diffculty, had not empowered her commilioners
to give him that fatisfadion which he demanded.
It became necessary to transmit the articles to
herfeilf, and by the light in which Norfolk placed
them, it is easy tofee that he wished that they mhould
make no flight imprellion on Elizabeth and her
ministers. " Think not the Scots, said he, over-
CC scrupulous or precise. Let us view their con-
CC dua as we would wish our own to be viewed in
"c a like situation. The game they play is deep;
Cc their estates, their lives, their honour are at
"* flake. It is now in their own power to be re-
c conciled to their Queen, or to offend her irre-
<C coverably, and in a matter of so much im-
** portance, the utmost degree of caution is not
CC excessive *."

WHILE the Englimh commifioners waited for

fuller infitruaions with regard to the Regent's de-
mands, he gave in an answer to the complaint, which
had been offered in name of the Scottish Queen.
It was expressed in terms perfetly conformable to
the fyfiem which he had at that time adopted.
It contained no insinuation of the Queen's being
accessory to the murder of her husband; the bit-
ternefs of style peculiar to the age was considerably
abated; and though he pleaded, that the infamy

* Anders. vol. iv. 71.

of the marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary B O o K
to take arms in order to dissolve it; though Ma- V.
ry's attachment to a man Lo odious jufified the i"68.
keeping her for some time under reffraint; yet
nothing more was iFid on there fubje5ts than was
barely requisite in his own defence. The QBneen's
commissioners did not fail to reply *. But while Oaober x7.
the article with regard to the murder remained
untouched, thef'e were only skirmishes at a dif-
tance, of no consequence towards ending the con-
test, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her
cominifironers.

THE conference had, hitherto, been condu~eed The confe-

in a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, le-
and produced none of these discoveries which mhe amin-
had expeced. The diflance between York and
London, and the necessity of consulting her upon
every difficulty which occurred, consumed much
time. Norfolk's negotiation with the Scottish
Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in
all probability, unknown to a princess so remark-
able for her sagacity in penetrating the designs of
her enemies, and feeing through their deepest
schemes t. Initead, therefore, of returning any
answer to the Regent's demands, mhe resolved to
remove the conference to Westminster, and to
appoint new commiflioners, in whom the could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Queen
and the Regent were brought, without difficulty,
to approve of this resolution 1.

WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

of her commissioners during the conference at

Anders. vol. iv. 64. 80. j- Good. vol.ii. 160.

And. vol. iii. 24. t Haynes, 484. Anders. voli. 9v.

I i2 York,

B o o K York, and how, by the strength of their argu-

V. ments, they confounded her adversaries, and
i568. flenced all their cavils *. The dispute flood, at

that time, on a footing which rendered her viaory
not only apparent, but easy. Her participation
of the guilt of the King's murder was the only
circumifance, which could justify the violent pro-
ceedings of her fubjeAs. And while they indus-
trioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained
as much as that of her adversaries loft by suppress-
ing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that MV~ary should not en-

joy the fame advantage in the conference to be
held at Weftminfler. She deliberated with the
utmost anxiety, how mhe might overcome the Re-
gent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the
Queen. She considered of the moit proper me-
thod for bringing Mary's commiffoners to answer
such an accusation; and as she foresaw that the
promises with which it was necessary to allure the
Regent, and which it was impossible to conceal
from the Scottish Queen, would naturally exaf-
perate her to a great degree, mhe determined to
guard her more narrowly than ever; and though
Lord Scroop had given her no reason to distrust
his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he was the
Duke of Noifolk's brother-in-law, ihe thought
it proper to remove the Queen as soon as possible
to Tuthbury in Staffordfhire, and commit her to
the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to whom
that castle belonged t.

* Good. vol. i. 186. 28{. 350. j Haynes, 4 7*

MAR

MARY began to fulpe& the design of this fe- B o o K

cond conference; and notwithstanding the fatif- V.
faaion Ihe expressed at fecing her cause taken d
more immediately under the Queen's own eye *, Mary's fur.
ihe framed her infitruaions to her commiflioners, Eljz'ath',,
in such a manner, as to avoid being brought un- ggg
der the necefity of answering the accusation of
her fiubjefts, if they should be so desperate as to
exhibit one against her -. There fiufpicions were
soon confirmed by a circumstance extremely mor-
tifying. The Regent having arrived at London,
in order to be prefeiit at the conference, was im-
mediately admitted into Elizabeth's presence, and
received by her, not only with refpecl, but with
affeiion. This Mary juffly considered as an open
declaration of that Queen's partiality towards her
adversaries. In the first emotions ofher resentment, Nov. 22.

Claims a

she wrote to her commifioners, and commanded perronal au,
them to complain in the presence of the Englilh (Wi.
nobles, and before the ambassadors of foreign
Princes, of the usage ihe had hitherto met with,
and the additional injuries which she had reason
to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjeas were al-
lowed access to the Queen, flhe was excluded
from her presence; they enjoyed full liberty, she
languished under a long imprisonment; they were
encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself flhe
laboured under every disadvantage. For there
reasons she once more renewed her demand, of
being admitted into the Queen's presence; and if
that were denied, Ihe infiruaed them to declare,

* Anders. vol. iv. 9g.p - Good. vol. ii4.

I i 3 t

B o O K that she recalled the consent (he had given to the

V. conference at *Wefmlninfter, and proteffed, that

whatever was done there, mhould be held to be

r568. null and invalid *.

THIs, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
ihe declined the conference were plausible, and
the junaure for offering them well chosen. But
either the Queen's letter did not reach her com-.
miflioners in due time, or they fuffered them-
selves to be deceived by Elizabeth's profeffions
of regard for their Mistress, and consented to the
opening of the conference t.

Nov. z5. To the commilioners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of
Arundel and Leiceafer, Lord Clinton, and Sir
William Cecil g. The difmculties which ob-
itru~ted the proceedings at York were quickly
removed. A satisfying answer was given to the
Regent's demands; nor was he so much disposed
to hesitate, and raise objeaions as formerly. His
negotiation with Norfolk had been discovered to
Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he had
communicated it to Cecil II. His personal safety,
as well as the continuance of his power, depend-
ed on Elizabeth. By favouring Mary, she might
at any time ruin him, and by a question which
(he artfully itarted, concerning the person who
had a right, by the law of Scotland, to govern
the kingdom during a minority, (he let him fee,

* Good. vol. ii. I3q. t Anders. vol.iii. 2.
3 Id. vol, iv. 99. jI Melv. i9z.

that even without restoring the Queen, it was an B o o 10
easy matter for her to deprive him of the supreme V.
direction of affairs . These considerations, which
were powerfully fcconded by most of his attend-
ants, at length determined the Regent to produce
his accusation against the Oueen.

HE endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with Thenegent

which he was sensible this a~tion would be attend- "cce the
ed, by protesting, that it was with the utmost re- igaccecfory
luatance he undertook this dicagreeable task; that band's mur-
his party had long fuffered their condua to be mif-
conifrued, and had borne the worst imputations
in silence, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of firangers; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse sac-
tion, forced them to publish, what they had hi-
therto, though with loss to themselves, endea-
voured to conceal t. These pretexts are decent;
and, had the party discovered any delicacy or re-
serve, with regard to the Queen's ations, in the
reft of their conduat, might have passed for the
real principles by which they were influenced.
But their former treatment of the Queen renders
it impossible to give any credit to these profeffions.
And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
necessity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices,
into a situation, where no liberty of choice was
left him; and was obliged either to acknowledge
himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge
MVary with having committed murder.

*Iaynes, 4S4. t Anders. vol. iv. I5*

li 4

B o o K THE accusation itself was conceived in the

V. ftrongett terms. Mary was charged, not only
i~68 with having consented to the murder, but with

being accessory to the contrivance and execution
of it. Bothwell, it was pretended, had been
screened from the pursuits of juflice by her fa-
vour; and Iihe had formed designs no less dan-
gerous to the life of the young Prince, than sub.
verfive of the liberties and conflitution of the
kingdom. If any of these crimes (hould be de-
nied, an offer was made to produce the most
ample and undoubted evidence in confirmation
of the charge *.

NThv. 29. AT the next meeting of the commifioners, the

Earl of Lennox appeared before them; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alleged. The entrance of a new aator
on the flage, fb opportunely, and at ajuntcure so
critical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This
contrivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order
to increase, by this additional accusation, the in-
famy of the Scottish Queen t,

Her cm- MARY'S commirlnoners expressed the utmost fur-
rr;iie to prise and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
anher. Deeml'. 4. in loading the Queern with calumnies, which, as they

affirmed, she had so little merited. But, initeadof
attempting to Vindicate her honour, by a reply to

U Anders. vol. iv. 119. t· Id. ibid. lzz.

the charge, they had recourse to an article in their B o 0 K
infitrucions, which they had formerly negleaed to V.
mention in its proper place. They demanded an i568.
audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their
Miflrefs's request, of a personal interview, they
protested, if that were denied her, againit all the
future proceedings of the commissioners . A
proteffation of this nature, offered just at the cri-
tical time, when such a bold accusation had been
preferred againit Mary, and when the proofs in
support of it were ready to be examined, gave
reason to fufped that she dreaded the event of
that examination. This suspicion received the
fitrongeft confirmation from another circumflance;
Ross and Herries, before they were introduced
to Elizabeth, in order to make this proteffation,
privately acquainted Leiceffer and Cecil, that as
their Miffrefs had, from the beginning, disco-
vered an inclination towards bringing the differ-
ences between herself and her fubjeas to an
amicable accommodation, so she was still desirous,
notwithifanding the Regent's audacious accufa-
tion, that they should be terminated in that
manner -.

Suc moderation is scarce compatible with the

firong resentment which calumniated innocence
naturally feels; or with that eagerness to vindi-
cate itself, which it always discovers. In Mary's
ftuation, an offer so ill-timed must be considered
as a confeffion of the~weaknefs of her cause. The
known charader of her commiflioners exempts

* Anderson, vol. iv. 133. x58*
- Ibid iv, 134. Cabbala3 x57,

them

B o O K them from the imputation of folly, or the sus-

V. picion of treachery. Some secret convic'ion,

b~c3 that the condua of their Mifitrefs could not bear
I68. foiric a scrutiny, seems to be the most probable

motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they
endeavoured to avoid it.

Decemb.4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for reje~ting it. She told
Mary's commififoners, that, in the prefentjunc-
ture, nothing could be so dishonourable to their
Mistress, as an accommodation; and that the
matter would seem to be huddled up in this man-
ner, merely to suppress discoveries, and to hide
her (bame; nor was it porinle that she could be
admitted, with any decency, into her presence,
while she lay under the infamy of such a public
accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commiflioners

withdrew; and as they had declined answering,
there seemed now to be no further reason for the
Regent's producing the proofs in support of his
charge. But without getting these into her hands,
Elizabeth's schemes were incomplete; and her
artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as fuc-
cefsful as any lhe had hitherto employed. She
commanded her commissioners to testify her in-
dignation and displeasure at the Regent's pre-
fumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a
fubjed, as to accuse his Sovereign of such atro-
cious crimes. He, in order to regain the good
opinion of such a powerful proteatrefs, offered to
shew that his accusations were not malicious, nor
ill-grounded. Then were produced and delivered

to

to the English commifimoners, the a6Is of the B O O K
Scottilh Parliament in confirmation of the Re- V.
gent's authority, and of the Queen's resignation; *'
the confeflions of the persons executed for the *
King's murder; and the fatal casket which con-
tained the letters, sonnets, and contraas, that
have been already mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her poffeffion, Elizabeth

treats Mary

began to lay aside the exprefimons of frierndfhip with greater
and refpe& which she had hitherto used in all her rigour.
letters to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to
her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her
guilt had amounted almost to certainty; The
blamed her for refusing to vindicate herself from
an accusation which could not be left unanswered,
without a manifest injury to her charater; and
plainly intimated, that unlels that were done,
no change would be made in her present fitua-
tion ". She hoped that fich a discovery of her
sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was
scarce recovered from the mhock of the Regent's
attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm
her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to consent that both her-
seif and her son mhould reside in England, under
her prote~tion. This scheme Elizabeth had much
at heart; he proposed it both to Mary and to her
commiffoners, and negleated no argument, nor
artifice, that could possibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal 4tfety.

' Anderson, vol. iv. 179. 183. Good. vol. ii. 260.

She

B o O K She reje~ted it without hesitation. CC Death, said

V. CC ihe, is less dreadful than such an ignominious

CC flep. Rather than give away, with my own

i6 hands, the Crown, which descended to me
C from my ancestors, I will part with life; but
" the last words I utter, shall be those of a Queen
" of Scotland *."

AT the fame time mhe seems to have been fen-

fible how open her reputation lay to censure, while
ihe fuffered such a public accusation to remain
unanswered; and though the conference was now
dissolved, ihe empowered her commissioners to
present a reply to the allegations of her enemies,
in which The denied, in the ifrongeft terms, the

Decem.24. crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon

the Regent and his party, by accusing them of
having devised and executed the murder of the
King t. The Regent and his associates afrerted
their innocence with great warmth. Mary con-
tinued to insist on a personal interview, a condi-
tion which the knew would never be granted $.
Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own ho-
nour. But it is evident from the delays, the
evasions, and subterfuges, to which both Queens
had recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and
Elizabeth did not desire to miake any further
progress in the inquiry.

I569. THE Regent was now impatient to return into
Qeb.2& Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavour-
the Regent ing, in his absenCe, to raise some commotions.
without ci.
ther ap.
proving or * Haynes, 497. See Appendix, No. XXVII. Good.
condemning -.
his conduet. VO· ii. 274. 301. · Good. ii. 285,

1 Ibid. 283. Cabbala, 157e Before

Before he set out, he was called into the Privy B o o K
Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's V.
sentiments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, 1569
that on one hand nothing had been objeaed to his
condud, which ihe could reckon detrimental to
his honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor
had he, on the other hand, produced any thing
against his Sovereign, on which (he could found
an unfavourable opinion of her adions; and for
this reason, she resolved to leave all the affairs of
Scotland, precisely in the fame situation in which
she had found them at the beginning of the con.
ference. The Queen's commissioners were dif-
miffed much in the fame manner *

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed lb earnestly on this conference upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at firlt fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
her future schemes. Notwithifanding her seem- But secretly

supports his

ing impartiality, ihe had no thoughts of conti- party.
nuing neuter; nor was (he at any loss on whom
to bestow her proteaion. Before the Regent left
London, (he supplied him with a considerable fum
of money, and engaged to support the King's
authority, to the utmost of her power t. Mary,
by her own condua, fortified this resolution.
Enraged at the repeated instances of Elizabeth's
artifice and deceit, which (he had discovered
during the progress of the conference, and de-
fpairing of ever obtaining any succour fromher,
the endeavoured to rouse her own adherents in

* Good. il. 315i 333* - Ibid. 213. Carte, iii. 478.

Scotland

B o o K Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to

V. Elizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to in-
869. spire every Scotchman with indignation. Murray,

she pretended, had agreed to convey the Prince
her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth
the places of greatest strength in the kingdom;
and to acknowledge the dependence of the Scot-
tifh upon the Englith nation. In return for this,
he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown
of Scotland; and, at the fame time, the question
with regard to the English fbcceffion was to be
decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters.
An account of these wild and chimerical projeas
was spread industriously among the Scots. Eli-
zabeth, perceiving it was calculated of purpose to
bring' her government into difreputation, laboured
to defiroy its effeas, by a counter-proclamation,
and became' more disgusted than ever with the
Scottilh Qpeen *.

EFForts of THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
Mary's ad-
herents a- in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
gainft him. Queen's adherents, which had been suspended in

expedation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war. They
were encouraged, too, by the appearance of a
leader, whose high quality and pretensions entitled
him to great authority in the nation. This was
the Duke of Chatelherault, who had resided for
some years in France, and was now sent over by
that court, with a small supply of money, in

*Haynes, 500. 503. See Append. No. XXVIII.

hopes

hopes that the presence of the firfr nobleman in B o o k
the kingdom would fitrengthen the Queen's sac- V.
tion. Elizabeth had detained him in England, r
for some months, under various pretences, but
was obliged at last to fuffer him to proceed on
his journey. Before his departure, Mary inveffed Feb. zs.
him with the high dignity of her Lieutenant Ge-
neral in Scotland, together with the fantastic title
of her adopted father.

THE Regent did not oive him time to form his navigorom

party into any regular body. He assembled an breaks her
army, with his uTial expedition, and marched to Fary.
Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly,
who composed the chief part of the Queen's sac-
tion, lying in very diffant corners of the kingdom,
and many of the Duke's dependants having fallen,
or having been taken in the battle of Langfide,
the spirit and fitrength of his adherents wa's totally
broken, and an accommodation with the Regent
was the only thing which could prevent the de-
firuation of his estate and vaflTals. This was
effeted without difficulty; and on no unreasonable
terms. The Duke promised to acknowledge the
authority both of the King and of the Regent; and
to claim no jurifdition in consequence of the
commission, which he had received from the
Queen. The Regent bound himself to repeal the
act which had pafied for attainting several of the
Queen's adherents; to restore all who would sub-
mit to the King's government, to the pofflefion
of their estates and honours; and to hold a Con-
vention, wherein all the differences between the
two parties fihould be fettled by mutual consent.

3 The

B o o K The Duke gave hostages for his faithful perform-

V. ance of the treaty; and, in token of their since-
59 rity, he and Lord Herries accompanied the Re-

gent to Stirling, and visited the young King.
The Regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at
Langfide *.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negotiation was carrying on,
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better afpeat, and her return into her own king-
dom seemed to be an event not very difiant. The
French King had lately obtained such advantages
over the Hugonots, that the extin~tion of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by
recovering domestic tranquillity, would be no
longer prevented from proteting her friends in
Britain. These circumitances not only influenced
Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impref-
sion on the Duke, that he appeared to be waver-
ing and irresolute, and plainly discovered that he
wiihed to evade the accomplishment of the treaty.
The Regent saw the danger of allowing the Duke
to (hake himself loose, in this manner, from his
engagements; and instantly formed a refolu-
tion equally bold and politic. He commanded
his guards to seize Chatelherault in his own house
in Edinburgh, whither he had come in order to
attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regard-
less either of his dignity as the firit nobleman in the
kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of the
promises of personal security, on which he had

* Cabbala, i6x. Crawf. Mem. 106.

relied,

relied, committed him and Lord Hetries prison- B o o it
ers to the caffle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal V.
and unexpeaed dispirited the party. Argyll sub.
mitted to the King's government, and made his April 16.
peace with the Regent on very easy terms; and
Hluntly, being left alone, was at lalt obliged to
lay down his arms.

SooN after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, 1.1, st.

And brought letters to the Regent, both from the in favour o

Mary re.

English and Scottilh Queens. A Convention was jeeted&
held at Pei-th, in order to confider theml. Eliza-
beth's letter contained three different proposals
with regard to Mary; that she should eithei be
restored to the full poireffion of her former autho-
rity; or be admitted to teign jointly with the
King her son; or at least be allowed to reside in
Scotland, in some decent retirement, without any
share in the adminifiration of government. These
overtures were extorted by the importunity of Fe-
nelon the French Ambassador, and have fortne ap-
pearance of being favourable to the captive Queen.
They were, however, perfealy suitable to Eliza-
beth's general fyatem with regard to Scottish as.
fairs. Among propolitions so unequal and dif-
proportionate, ihe easily i'aw where the choice
would fail. The two former wete rejeied; and
long delays must necessarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every cir-
cumf'rance relative to the last could be finally ad-
jufced t.

*Crawf. Ment. Iii. MelW. 2zo.
·t Spotfw. 230.

IVIARYP

K k

Voz.. I.

B o a K MARY, in her letter, demanded that her mar·

V. riage with Bothwell should be reviewed by the

1569. proper judges, and if found invalid, lhould be

dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This
fatal marriage was the principal source of all the
calamities the had endured two years; a divorce
was the only thing which could repair the injuries
her reputation had fuffered by that ifep. It was
her interest to have proposed it early; and it is
not easy to account for her long silence with refpe&

Norfolk's to this point. Her particular motive for pro-
icheme for
xrarrving posing it, at this time, began to be so well

es Scoknown, that the demand was rejeted by the Con-

vention of estates. They imputed it not so much
to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eager-
ness to conclude a marriage with the Duke of
Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the objear of that secret ne-

gotiation in England, which we have already men-
tioned; but, like all those concerted for the re-
lief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projeccing genius of Maitland firit
conceived this scheme. During the Conference
at York, he communicated it to the Duke him-
self, and to the Bilhop of Ross. The former rea-
dily closed with a scheme so flattexing to his am-
bition. The latter considered it as a probable de-
vice for restoring his Mistress to liberty, and re-
placing her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with
whom Norfolk held a correspondence by means
of his sifter Lady Scroop, averse from a measure,
which would have restored her to her kingdom

with

with so much splendour *. The sudden removal B o o K
of the Conference from York to Weftminfter'fuf- V.
pended, but did not break off this intrigue. Mait- 1569.
land and Ross were flill the Duke's prompters,
and his agents; and many letters and love tokens
were exchanged between him and the Queen of
Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an admi- Conceals i

hiftration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an in- b hz.
trigue could be kept long concealed, he attempt-
ed to deceive her by the appearance of openness
and candour, an artifice which seldom fails of fuc-
cess. He mentioned to her the rumour which
was spread of his marriage with the Scottish
Queen; he complained of it as a groundless ca-
lumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind,
with many exprefflons full of contempt, both for
Mary's characler and dominions. Jealous as Eli-
zabeth was of every thing relative to the Queen
of Scots, she seems to have credited there profef-
fions t. But, instead of discontinuing the nego-
tiation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and
admitted into it new associates. Among these
was the Regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfolk, by his public accufa-
tion of the Queen, in breach of the concert into
which he had entered at York. He was then
ready to return into Scotland. The influence of
the Duke, in the North of England, was great.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland,
the most powerful noblemen in that part of the

* Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, 1. 73.
t- Haynes, 574. State Trials, 1. 79, 80.

Kkz king-

B o o K kingdom, threatened to revenge upon the Regent

V. the injuries which he had done his Sovereign. In
1569. order to secure his safe retreat, he addressed him-

self to Norfolk, and after some apology for his
palt condua, he insinuated that the Duke's scheme
of marrying the Queen his filler was no less ac-
ceptable to him, than beneficial to both king-
doms; and that he would concur with the utmost
ardour in promoting so desirable an event.
Norfolk heard him with the credulity natural to
those who are pafimonately bent upon any design.
He wrote to the two Earls to desist from any hostile
attempt againit Murray, and to that he owed his
passage through the Northern counties without
disturbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re-

a gent, he next attempted to draw the English nobles

nosbes. to approve his design. The nation began to de-

fpair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept
the question with regard to the right of succession
undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century,
on account of the disputed titles of the houses of
York and Lancaster, was still recent. Almost
the whole ancient nobility had perished, and the
nation idtelf had been brought to the brink of de-
itruition in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
Queen, though her right of fuccelfion was ge-
nerally held to be undoubted, might meet with
formidable competitors. She might marry a so-
reign and a Popish Prince, and bring both liberty
and religion into danger. But, by marrying her

* Anders. iii. 34.

to an Englishman, a zealous Protefant, the most B o o K
powerful and most universally beloved of all the V.
pobles, an effeatual remedy seemed to be provided 'y6'7
against all there evils. The greater part of the
Peers, either direatly or tacitly, approved of it,
as a salutary projeat. The Earls of Arundel,
Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley, sub-
fcribed a letter to the Scottiflh Queen, written
with Leicefler's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promise, that ihe should
attempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions
to the English Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth,
or to her posterity; that she ihould consent to a
league, offenfive and defensive, between the two
kingdoms; that the should confirm the present
establishment of religion in Scotland; and receive
into favour such of her fubjeAs as had appeared
in arms againif her. Upon her agreeing to the
marriage, and ratifying these articles, they en-
gaged that the Englith nobles would not only
concur in restoring her immediately to her own
throne, but in securing to her that of England in
reversion. Mary readily consented to all these
proposals, except the second, with regard to which
the demanded some time for consulting her an-
cient ally the French King ".

THE whole of this negotiation was indufirioufly

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish Qujeen was well known, nor could it be
expedted that she would willingly come into a

* Anders. vol. iii. 51. Camd. 420.

K k3 rmeafure,

B o o K measure, which tended so visibly to save the re-

V. putation, and to increase the power of her rival.

But, in a matter of 1f much consequence to the

1569. .

nation, the taking a few fieps without her know-
ledge could scarce be reckoned criminal; and
while every person concerned, even Mary and
Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing should
be concluded without obtaining her consent, the
duty and allegiance of fubjeas seemed to be fully
preserved. The greater part of the nobles re-
garded the matter in this light. Those who con-
duaCed the intrigue, had farther and more danger-
ous views. They saw the advantages which Mary
procured by this treaty, to be present and cer-
tain; and the execution of the promises which (he
came under, to be distant and uncertain. They
had early communicated their scheme to the Kings
of France and Spain, and obtained their appro-
bation *. A treaty concerning which they consult-
ed foreign Princes, while they concealed it from
their own Sovereign, could not be deemed inno-
cent. They hoped, however, that the union of so
many nobles would render it necessary for Eliza-
beth to comply; they flattered themselves that a
combination so ltrong would be altogether irrefift-
ible; and (uch was their confidence of flccefs,
that when a plan was concerted, in the North of
England, for rescuing Mary out of the hands of
her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that if (he
recovered her liberty, her sentiments in his favour
might change, ufied all his interest to dissuade the
conspirators from attempting it t.

* Anders. vol. iii. 63. - Camd. 420.

IN

IN this situation did the afair remain, when B o o K

Lord Boyd arrived from England; and, besides V.
the letters which he produced publicly, brought I569.
others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were
full of the molt sanguine hopes. The whole no-
bles of England concurred, said they, in favour-
ing the design. Every preliminary was adjufled;
nor was it possible that a scheme so deep laid, con-
duated with so much art, and supported both by
power and by numbers, could miscarry, or be de-
seated in the execution. Nothing now was want-
ing, but the concluding ceremony. It depended
on the Regent to hafien that, by procuring a fen-
tence of divorce, which would remove the only
obitacle that flood in the way. This was expeacd
of him, in consequence of his promise to Nor-
folk; and if he regarded either his interest or his
fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to ful-
fil these engagements *,

BUT the Resent was now in very different cir-

cumftances from those which had formerly in*-
duced him to affea an approbation of Norfolk's
schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own
power mull be the first consequence of the Duke's
success. And if the Queen, who considered him
as the chief author of all her misfortunes, should
recover her ancient authority, he could never ex-
pecl favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No
wonder he declined a ifep so fatal to himself, and
which would have established the grandeur of ano-

*Ilaynes, 520. Spots. 230. See Appendix, No, XXIX.

Kk4 th~e;

B o O K ther on the ruins of his own. This refifal occa-

V. fioned a delay. But, as every other circumstance

was fettled, the Bishop of Rqos, in name of his
Miffrefs, and the Duke, in person, declared, in
presence of the French Ambassador, their mutual
consent to the marriage, and a contrad ta this
purppfe was signed, and intrufted to the keeping
of the Ambassador *.

Aueo a0 TxIE intrigue was now in so many hands, that
Elizrbtth diicoversthe it could not long remain a secret. It began to be
7,f ege whispered at court; and Elizabeth calling the
dfcrstiS. Duke into her presence, eupreffed the utmost in-

dignation at his conduc?, and charged him to lay
aside all thoughts of prosecuting such a daugerous
design. Soon after Leiceffer, who perhaps had
countenanced the proje~t with no other intention,
revealed the whole circumstances of it to the
Queen. Pembroke, Arundel, Lymley, and
Thrqgrnorton were confined and examined. Ma-
ry was watched more narrowly than ever; and
Hastings Earl of Huntingdon, who pretended to
dispute with the Scottish Qleen her right to the
succession, being joined in commission with
Shrewsbury, renderpd her imprisonment more in-
tolerable, by the excess of his vigilance and ri-
gour j. The Scottish Regent, threatened with
Elizabeth's displeasure, mpanly betrayed the
Duke; put his letters into her hands; and fur-
nifhed 411 the intrlligence in his power$. The
Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and
then, in contempt of the summons to appear be-

*Carte, vol. iii. 486. 1 Haynes, 525, 526. 530. 53z.
$ See Append. No. XXX.

fore

fore the Privy Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. B o o K
Intimidated by the imprisonment of his associates; V.
coldly received by his friends in that county; un- < I 69,
prepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps
to rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last
obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor.
Be was firit kept as a prisoner in a private house, o&. 3.
and then sent to the 'Tower. After being confined
there upwards of nine months, he was released
upon his humble fubmiflion to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no far-
ther correspondence with the Scottish Queen *.
During the progress of Norfolk's negotiations,
the QCueen's partisans in Scotland, who made no
doubt of their iflizing in her refloration to the
throne, with an increase of authority, were won-
derfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that Mst!and imprisoned
party, and the person whose adivity and ability i theRc-
the Regent chiefly dreaded, He had laid the se"""
plan of that intrigue which had kindled such
combustion in England. Ffe continued to so-
ment the spirit of difaffet6ion in Scotland, and
had seduced from the Regent Lord Home,
Jirkaldy, and several of his former effociates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could noc
reckon his own power secure. For this reason he
employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being accessory to the mirder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. He wbul4 soon have been
brought to trial, but was saved by the friendship
of Kirkaldy, Governor of the camtle, who, by

* Haynes, s5s. 597.

pre-

B o o K pretending a warrant for that purpose from the

V. Regent, got him out of the hands of the person

to whose care he was committed, and conducted

569. him into the caffle, which, from that time, was

entirely under Maitland's command. The loss
of a place of so much importance, and the de-
feation of a man so eminent for military skill as
Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difre-
putation, for which, however, the success of his
ally Elizabeth abundantly compensated.

A rebellion THE intrigue tarried on for refforing the Scot-
aeizn Elib tilh Queen to liberty having been discovered, and
Marys a- disappointed, an attempt was made, to the fame

purpose, by force of arms; but with no better
success. The Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland, though little distinguished by their
personal merit, were two of the most ancient and
powerful of the Englilh Peers. Their estates in
the northern counties were great, and they pof-
sessed that influence over the inhabitants, which
was hereditary in the popular and martial families
of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attach-
ed to the Popish religion, and discontented with
the court, where new men and a new system
prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interest, and zeal
for Popery; opposition to the court, and com-
miferation of her fufferings, had engaged them
in different plots for her relief. Notwithifanding
the vigilance of her keepers, they held a close
correspondence with her, and communicated to
her all their designs *. They were privy to Nor-

*Haynes, 595. Murdin, 44. 6z, &c.

2 folk's

folk's schemes ; but the caution with which he B o o K
proceeded did not suit their ardour and impe- V.
tuofity. The liberty of the Scottish Queen was 1569
not their sole obje&. They aimed at bringing
about a change in the religion, and a revolution
in the government of the kingdom. For this
reason, they solicited the aid of the King of
Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Popery
in that age. Nothing could be more delightful
to the restless spirit of Philip, or more necessary
towards facilitating his schemes in the Nether-
lands, than the involving England in the con-
fusion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his diredion, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, so soon as they either took the
field with their forces, or surprised any place of
flrength, or rescued the Queen of Scots, that he
would supply them both with money and a ifrong
body of troops. La Mothe, the Governor of
Dunkirk, in the disguise of a sailor, founded the
ports where it would be most proper to land. And
Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablell officers, was
dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling
some commercial differences between the two na-
tions; but in reality, that the rebels might be
sure of a leader of experience, as soon as they
ventured to take arms .

THE condua of this negotiation occasioned Defeateda.

many meetings and messages between the two
Earls. Elizabeth was informed of there; and
though she fufpeaed nothing of their real design,

* Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. Camd. 421.

B o o ic she concluded that they were among the number

V. of Norfolk's confidents. They were summoned,

L for this reason, to repair to court. Conscious of

3569. guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giv-

ing obedience. A second, and more peremptory
order was issued. This they could not decline,
without shaking off their allegiance. And as no

Nov. g. time was left for deliberation, they inifantly

ereded their standard against their Sovereign.
The re-establishing the Catholic religion; the
fettling the order of succession to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility; were the
motives they alleged to juffify their rebellion *.
Many of the lower people flocked to them with
such arms as they could procure; and had the
capacity of the leaders been, in any degree, equal
to the enterprise, it must have soon grown to be
extremely formidable. Elizabeth acted with pru-
dence and vigour; and was served by her sub-
jeas with fidelity and ardour. On the firif ru-
mour of an infurreaion, Mary was removed to
Coventry, a place of ffrength, which could not
be taken without a regular siege; a detachment
of the rebels, which was sent to rescue her, re-
turned without success. Troops were assembled
in different parts of the kingdom; as they ad-
vanced, the malecontents retired. In their retreat
their numbers dwindled away, and their spirits
funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to direcd
their flight, kept together for some time a finall
body of them among the mountains of Northum-
berland ; butthey were at length obliged to disperse,

*Strype, vol. i. 547.

and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottifli B o o K
borderers. The two Earls, together with the V.
Countess of Northumberland, wandering for I569.
some days in the wastes of Liddifdale, were De,.ZZ.
plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigour
of the season, and left deflitute of the necessaries
of life. Westmorland was concealed by Scot of
Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherit, and afterwards
conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumber-
land was seized by the Regent, who had marched
with some troops towards the borders, to prevent
any impression the rebels might make on those
mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs Churh as.

of the church, for two years, have almost es- ai.
caped our notice. Its General Assemblies were
held regularly; but no business of much im-
portance employed their attention. As the num-
ber of the Protestant clergy daily increased, the
deficiency of the funds, set apart for their sub-
fiftence, became greater. Many efforts were
made towards recovering the ancient patrimony
of the church, or at least of so much of it as was
poffeffed by the Popish incumbents, a race of
men, who were, now, not only useless, but bur-
denfome to the nation. But though the manner
in which the Regent received their addresses and
complaints, was very different from that to which
they had been accuflomed, no effeatual remedy
was provided; and while they fuffered intolera-
ble oppreflion, and groaned under extreme po-

* Cabbala, 17I. Camd. 422.

verty,

B 0 o K verty, fair words, and liberal promnifes were all

V. they were able to obtain ".

'~' ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping
1570·
Elizabeth such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish Queen.

"trefoesta During the former year, the tranquillity of her

Aary to the government had been disturbed, firit by a secret
Resent. combination of some of her nobles, then by the

rebellion of others; and (he often declared, not
without reason, that Mary was the hidden cause of
both. Many of her own fubjecas favoured, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic
Princes on the continent were warmly interested
in her cause. The detaining her any longer in
England, (he forefiw, would be made the pretext
or occalion of perpetual cabals and infurreaions
among the former; and might expose her to the
hostile attempts of the latter. She resolved, there-
fore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Re-
gent, whose security, no less than her own, de-
pended on preventing her from re-afcending the
throne. The negotiation for this purpose was
carried some length, when it was discovered by
the vigilance of the Bilhop of Ross, who, toge-
ther with the French and Spanish Ambassadors,
remonfirated against the infamy of such an aRion,
and represented the iurrendering the Queen to
her rebellious fubjeats, to be the fame thing, as
if Elizabeth (hould, by her own authority, con-
demn her to instant death. This procured a de-
lay; and the murder of the Regent prevented the
revival of that design t.

* Cald. vol. ii. 80, &c. ' Carte, vol. iii. 49t. An-

derf. vol. iii. 34.

HA-

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person B o o :

who conmnittcd this barbarous action. He had V.
been condemned to death soon after the battle of Lv--
Langfide, as we have already related, and owed But,5h
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of murd"e"d
his estate had been bestowed upon one of the Re-
gent's favourites, who seized his house, and turn-
ed out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the
open fields, where, before next morning, ihe be-
came furiously mad. This injury made a deeper
impreflion on him than the benefit he had receiv-
ed, and from that moment he vowed to be re-
venged upon the Regent. Party- rage firengthened
and inflamed his private resentment. His kinsmen
the Hamiltons applauded the enterprise. The
maxims of that age juflified the most desperate
course he could take to obtain vengeance. He
followed the Regent for some time, and watched
for an opportunity to ifrike the blow. He resolved
at last to wait till his enemy should arrive at Lin-
lithgow, through which he was to pass in his way
from Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his itand it
a wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the ifreet; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to
hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung up a black cloth behind him, that his iha-
dow might not be observed from without; and
after all this preparation, calmly expe~ted the Re-
gent's approach, who had lodged during the night
in a house not far distant. Some indiftinat in-
formation of the danger which threatened him had
been conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so much
regard to it, that he resolved to return by the fame

gare

B o o K gate through which he had entered, and to fetch t

V. compass round the town. But as the crowd about
' - the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted

with fear, he proceeded direCly along the ifreet;
and the throng of the people obliging him to move
very slowly, gave the affaffin time to take so true
an aim, that he shot him with a single buflet
through the lower part of his belly, and killed
the horse of a gentleman who rode on his other
fide. His followers initantly endeavoured to break
into the house whence the blow had come, but
they found the door ifrongly barricaded; and be-
fore it could be forced open, Hamilton had
mounted a fleet horse, which flood ready for him
at a back-paffage, and was got far beyond their
teach. The Regent died the fame night of his
wound*.

His charac- THERE is no person, in that age, about whom
ter. hifforians have been more divided, or whose

charaaer has been drawn with such opposite co-
lours. Personal intrepidity, military skill, fa-
gacity and vigour in the adminifiration of civil
affairs, are virtues, which even his enemies al-
low him to have poffeffed in an eminent degree.
His moral qualities are more dubious, and ought
neither to be praised, nor censured, without
great reserve, and many diftinaions. In a fierce
age, he was capable of using viatory with huma-
nity, and of treating the vanquished with mode-
ration. A patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown, or defpired.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguish.

SBuchan. 3S;. Crawf. Mem. Iz4.

ed him, even at a time when proefelons of that B o o K
kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his V.
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe- " I p0.
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A
disinterested passion for the liberty of his country,
prompted him to oppose the pernicious system,
which the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the
Queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's return into
Scotland, he served her with a zeal and affetion,
to which he sacrificed the friendship of those who
were most attached to his person. But, on the
other hand, his ambition was immoderate ; and
events happened that opened to him vaff projecs,
which allurcd his enterprising genius, and led him
to acions inconfiffent with the duty of a fubjea.
His treatment of the Queen, to whose bounty he
was so much indebted, was unbrotherly and un-
grateful. The dependence on Elizabeth, under
which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to
the nation. He deceived and betraved Norfolk
with a baseness unworthy of a man of honour.
His elevation to such unexpe~led dignity inspired
him with new pallions, with haughtiness and re-
serve; and inficead of his natural manner, which
was blunt and open, he affeated the arts of dimi-
mularion and refinement. Fond, towards the end
of his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice,
his creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him
afiray, while his ancient friends stood at a distance,
and prediated his approaching fall. But, amidst
the turbulence and confusion of that factious pe-
riod, he dispensed justice with so much imparti-
ality, he repref fed the licentious borderers with so

VOL. I. L 1 much

B o00K

V.
J57OJ much courage, and eitablifhed such unco mm

order and tranquillity in the country, that his ad-
munilfration was extremely popular, and he was
long and affeaionately remembered among the
commons, by the name of the Gopd Regent.

rND OF THE FIRST VOLUME,
